MYTHS AND LEGENDS
                                   OF
                              OUR OWN LAND

                                   By
                           Charles M. Skinner

                                Vol. 4. The
land was occupied by a good and happy people who had much faith and few
laws, plenty to eat and drink, no tax collectors nor magistrates, in
brief, a people who were entitled to call themselves Acadians, for they
made their land an Arcady. Upon them swooped the British ships, took them
unarmed and unoffending, crowded them aboard their transports,--often
separating husband and wife, parents and children,--scattered them far
and wide, beyond hope of return, and set up the cross of St. George on
the ruins of prosperity and peace. On the shore of the Basin of Minas can
still be traced the foundations of many homes that were perforce deserted
at that time, and among them are the ruins of Grand Pre.

Here lived Evangeline Bellefontaine and Gabriel Lajeunesse, who were betrothed with the usual
rejoicings just before the coming of the English. They had expected, when their people were
arrested, to be sent away together; but most of the men were kept under guard, and Gabriel
was at sea, bound neither he nor she knew whither, when Evangeline found herself in her father's
house alone, for grief and excitement had been more than her aged parent could bear, and he
was buried at the shore just before the women of the place were crowded on board of a transport.
As the ship set off her sorrowing passengers looked behind them to see their homes going up
in flame and smoke, and Acadia knew them no more. The English had planned well to keep these
people from coming together for conspiracy or revenge: they scattered them over all America,
from Newfoundland to the southern savannas.

Evangeline was not taken far away, only to New England; but without Gabriel all lands were
drear, and she set off in the search for him, working here and there, sometimes looking timidly
at the headstones on new graves, then travelling on. Once she heard that he was a coureur des
bois on the prairies, again that he was a voyageur in the Louisiana lowlands; but those of
his people who kept near her inclined to jest at her faith and urged her to marry Leblanc,
the notary's son, who truly loved her. To these she only replied, "I cannot."

Down the Ohio and Mississippi she went--on a raft--with a little band of those who were seeking
the French settlements, where the language, religion, and simplicity of life recalled Acadia.
They found it on the banks of the Teche, and they reached the house of the herdsman Gabriel
on the day that he had departed for the north to seek Evangeline. She and the good priest who
had been her stay in a year of sorrow turned back in pursuit, and for weary months, over prairie
and through forest, skirting mountain and morass, going freely among savages, they followed
vain clues, and at last arrived in Philadelphia. Broken in spirit then, but not less sweet
of nature for the suffering that she had known, she who had been named for the angels became
a minister of mercy, and in the black robe of a nun went about with comforts to the sick and
poor. A pestilence was sweeping through the city, and those who had no friends nor attendants
were taken to the almshouse, whither, as her way was, Evangeline went on a soft Sabbath morning
to calm the fevered and brighten the hearts of the dying.

Some of the patients of the day before had gone and new were in their places. Suddenly she
turned white and sank on her knees at a bedside, with a cry of "Gabriel, my beloved!" breathed
into the ears of a prematurely aged man who lay gasping in death before her. He came out of
his stupor, slowly, and tried to speak her name. She drew his head to her bosom, kissed him,
and for one moment they were happy. Then the light went out of his eyes and the warmth from
his heart. She pressed his eyelids down and bowed her head, for her way was plainer now, and
she thanked God that it was so.

THE SNORING OF SWUNKSUS

The original proprietor of Deer Isle, off the coast of Maine--at least, the one who was in
possession one hundred and thirty years ago--had the liquid name of Swunksus. His name was
not the only liquid thing in the neighborhood, however, for, wherever Swunksus was, fire-water
was not far. Shortly before the Revolution a renegade from Boston, one Conary, moved up to
the island and helped himself to as much of it as he chose, but the longer he lived there the
more he wanted. Swunksus was willing enough to divide his domain with the white intruder, but
Conary was not satisfied with half. He did not need it all; he just wanted it. Moreover, he
grew quarrelsome and was continually nagging poor Swunksus, until at last he forced the Indian
to accept a challenge, not to immediate combat, but to fight to the death should they meet
thereafter.

The red man retired to his half of the island and hid among the bushes near his home to await
the white man, but in this little fastness he discovered a jug of whiskey that either fate
or Conary had placed there. Before an hour was over he was "as full and mellow as a harvest
moon," and it was then that his enemy appeared. There was no trouble in finding Swunksus, for
he was snoring like a fog horn, and walking boldly up to him, Conary blew his head off with
a load of slugs. Then he took possession of the place and lived happily ever after. Swunksus
takes his deposition easily, for, although he has more than once paraded along the beaches,
his ghost spends most of the time in slumber, and terrific snores have been heard proceeding
from the woods in daylight.

THE LEWISTON HERMIT

On an island above the falls of the Androscoggin, at Lewiston, Maine, lived a white recluse
at the beginning of the eighteenth century. The natives, having had good reason to mistrust
all palefaces, could think no good of the man who lived thus among but not with them. Often
they gathered at the bank and looked across at his solitary candle twinkling among the leaves,
and wondered what manner of evil he could be planning against them. Wherever there are many
conspirators one will be a gabbler or a traitor; so, when the natives had resolved on his murder,
he, somehow, learned of their intent and set himself to thwart it. So great was their fear
of this lonely man, and of the malignant powers he might conjure to his aid, that nearly fifty
Indians joined the expedition, to give each other courage.

Their plan was to go a little distance up the river and come down with the current, thus avoiding
the dip of paddles that he might hear in a direct crossing. When it was quite dark they set
off, and keeping headway on their canoes aimed them toward the light that glimmered above the
water. But the cunning hermit had no fire in his cabin that night. It was burning on a point
below his shelter, and from his hiding-place among the rocks he saw their fleet, as dim and
silent as shadows, go by him on the way to the misguiding beacon.

Presently a cry arose. The savages had passed the point of safe sailing; their boats had become
unmanageable. Forgetting their errand, their only hope now was to save themselves, but in vain
they tried to reach the shore: the current was whirling them to their doom. Cries and death-songs
mingled with the deepening roar of the waters, the light barks reached the cataract and leaped
into the air. Then the night was still again, save for the booming of the flood. Not one of
the Indians who had set out on this errand of death survived the hermit's stratagem.

THE DEAD SHIP OF HARPSWELL

At times the fisher-folk of Maine are startled to see the form of a ship, with gaunt timbers
showing through the planks, like lean limbs through rents in a pauper's garb, float shoreward
in the sunset. She is a ship of ancient build, with tall masts and sails of majestic spread,
all torn; but what is her name, her port, her flag, what harbor she is trying to make, no man
can tell, for on her deck no sailor has ever been seen to run up colors or heard to answer
a hail. Be it in calm or storm, in-come or ebb of tide, the ship holds her way until she almost
touches shore.

There is no creak of spars or whine of cordage, no spray at the bow, no ripple at the stern--no
voice, and no figure to utter one. As she nears the rocks she pauses, then, as if impelled
by a contrary current, floats rudder foremost off to sea, and vanishes in twilight. Harpswell
is her favorite cruising-ground, and her appearance there sets many heads to shaking, for while
it is not inevitable that ill luck follows her visits, it has been seen that burial-boats have
sometimes had occasion to cross the harbor soon after them, and that they were obliged by wind
or tide or current to follow her course on leaving the wharf.

THE SCHOOLMASTER HAD NOT REACHED ORRINGTON.

The quiet town of Orrington, in Maine, was founded by Jesse Atwood, of Wellfleet, Cape Cod,
in 1778, and has become known, since then, as a place where skilful farmers and brave sailors
could always be found. It also kept Maine supplied for years with oldest inhabitants. It is
said that the name was an accident of illiteracy, and that it is the only place in the world
that owes its title to bad spelling. The settlers who followed Atwood there were numerous enough
to form a township after ten years, and the name they decided on for their commonwealth was
Orangetown, so called for a village in Maryland where some of the people had associations,
but the clerk of the town meeting was not a college graduate and his spelling of Orange was
Orring, and of town, ton. His draft of the resolutions went before the legislature, and the
people directly afterward found themselves living in Orrington.

JACK WELCH'S DEATH LIGHT

Pond Cove, Maine, is haunted by a light that on a certain evening, every summer, rises a mile
out at sea, drifts to a spot on shore, then whirls with a buzz and a glare to an old house,
where it vanishes. Its first appearance was simultaneous with the departure of Jack Welch,
a fisherman. He was seen one evening at work on his boat, but in the morning he was gone, nor
has he since shown himself in the flesh.

On the tenth anniversary of this event three fishermen were hurrying up the bay, hoping to
reach home before dark, for they dreaded that uncanny light, but a fog came in and it was late
before they reached the wharf. As they were tying their boat a channel seemed to open through
the mist, and along that path from the deep came a ball of pallid flame with the rush of a
meteor. There was one of the men who cowered at the bottom of the boat with ashen face and
shaking limbs, and did not watch the light, even though it shot above his head, played through
the rigging, and after a wide sweep went shoreward and settled on his house. Next day one of
his comrades called for him, but Tom Wright was gone, gone, his wife said, before the day broke.
Like Jack Welch's disappearance, this departure was unexplained, and in time he was given up
for dead.

Twenty years had passed, when Wright's presumptive widow was startled by the receipt of a letter
in a weak, trembling hand, signed with her husband's name. It was written on his death-bed,
in a distant place, and held a confession. Before their marriage, Jack Welch had been a suitor
for her hand, and had been the favored of the two. To remove his rival and prosper in his place,
Wright stole upon the other at his work, killed him, took his body to sea, and threw it overboard.
Since that time the dead man had pursued him, and he was glad that the end of his days was
come. But, though Tom Wright is no more, his victim's light comes yearly from the sea, above
the spot where his body sank, floats to the scene of the murder on the shore, then flits to
the house where the assassin lived and for years simulated the content that comes of wedded
life. MOGG MEGONE

Hapless daughter of a renegade is Ruth Bonython. Her father is as unfair to his friends as
to his enemies, but to neither of them so merciless as to Ruth. Although he knows that she
loves Master Scammon--in spite of his desertion and would rather die than wed another, he has
promised her to Mogg Megone, the chief who rules the Indians at the Saco mouth. He, blundering
savage, fancies that he sees to the bottom of her grief, and one day, while urging his suit,
he opens his blanket and shows the scalp of Scammon, to prove that he has avenged her. She
looks in horror, but when he flings the bloody trophy at her feet she baptizes it with a forgiving
tear. What villainy may this lead to? Ah, none for him, for Bonython now steps in and plies
him with flattery and drink, gaining from the chief, at last, his signature--the bow totem--to
a transfer of the land for which he is willing to sell his daughter. Ruth, maddened at her
father's meanness and the Indian's brutality, rushes on the imbruted savage, grasps from his
belt the knife that has slain her lover, cleaves his heart in twain, and flies into the wood,
leaving Bonython stupid with amazement.

Father Rasles, in his chapel at Norridgewock, is affecting his Indian converts against the
Puritans, who settled to the southward of him fifty years before. To him comes a woman with
torn garments and frightened face. Her dead mother stood before her last night, she says, and
looked at her reprovingly, for she had killed Mogg Megone. The priest starts back in wrath,
for Mogg was a hopeful agent of the faith, and bids her go, for she can ask no pardon. Brooding
within his chapel, then, he is startled by the sound of shot and hum of arrows. Harmon and
Moulton are advancing with their men and crying, "Down with the beast of Rome! Death to the
Babylonish dog!" Ruth, knowing not what this new misfortune may mean, runs from the church
and disappears.

Some days later, old Baron Castine, going to Norridgewock to bury and revenge the dead, finds
a woman seated on the earth and gazing over a field strewn with ashes and with human bones.
He touches her. She is cold. There has been no life for days. It is Ruth.

THE LADY URSULA

In 1690 a stately house stood in Kittery, Maine, a strongly guarded place with moat and drawbridge
(which was raised at night) and a moated grange adjacent where were cattle, sheep, and horses.
Here, in lonely dignity, lived Lady Ursula, daughter of the lord of Grondale Abbey, across
the water, whose distant grandeurs were in some sort reflected in this manor of the wilderness.
Silver, mahogany, paintings, tapestries, waxed floors, and carven chests of linen represented
wealth; prayers were said by a chaplain every morning and evening in the chapel, and, though
the main hall would accommodate five hundred people, the lady usually sat at meat there with
her thirty servants, her part of the table being raised two feet above theirs.

It was her happiness to believe that Captain Fowler, now absent in conflict with the French,
would return and wed her according to his promise, but one day came a tattered messenger with
bitter news of the captain's death. She made no talk of her grief, and, while her face was
pale and step no longer light, she continued in the work that custom exacted from women of
that time: help for the sick, alms for the poor, teaching for the ignorant, religion for the
savage. Great was her joy, then, when a ship came from England bringing a letter from Captain
Fowler himself, refuting the rumor of defeat and telling of his coming. Now the hall took on
new life, reflecting the pleasure of its mistress; color came back to her cheek and sparkle
to her eye, and she could only control her impatience by more active work and more aggressive
charities. The day was near at hand for the arrival of her lover, when Ursula and her servants
were set upon by Indians, while away from the protection of the manor, and slain. They were
buried where they fell, and Captain Fowler found none to whom his love or sorrow could be told.

FATHER MOODY'S BLACK VEIL

In 1770 the Reverend Joseph Moody died at York, Maine, where he had long held the pastorate
of a church, and where in his later years his face was never seen by friend or relative. At
home, when any one was by, on the street, and in the pulpit his visage was concealed by a double
fold of crape that was knotted above his forehead and fell to his chin, the lower edge of it
being shaken by his breath. When first he presented himself to his congregation with features
masked in black, great was the wonder and long the talk about it. Was he demented? His sermons
were too logical for that. Had he been crossed in love? He could smile, though the smile was
sad. Had he been scarred by accident or illness? If so, no physician knew of it.

After a time it was given out that his eyes were weakened by reading and writing at night,
and the wonder ceased, though the veiled parson was less in demand for weddings, christenings,
and social gatherings, and more besought for funerals than he had been. If asked to take off
his crape he only replied, "We all wear veils of one kind or another, and the heaviest and
darkest are those that hang about our hearts. This is but a material veil. Let it stay until
the hour strikes when all faces shall be seen and all souls reveal their secrets."

Little by little the clergyman felt himself enforced to withdraw from the public gaze. There
were rough people who were impertinent and timid people who turned out of their road to avoid
him, so that he found his out-door walks and meditations almost confined to the night, unless
he chose the grave-yard for its seclusion or strolled on the beach and listened to the wallowing
and grunting of the Black Boars--the rocks off shore that had laughed on the night when the
York witch went up the chimney in a gale. But his life was long and kind and useful, and when
at last the veiled head lay on the pillow it was never to rise from consciously, a fellow-clergyman
came to soothe his dying moments and commend his soul to mercy.

To him, one evening, Father Moody said, "Brother, my hour is come and the veil of eternal darkness
is falling over my eyes. Men have asked me why I wear this piece of crape about my face, as
if it were not for them a reminder and a symbol, and I have borne the reason so long within
me that only now have I resolved to tell it. Do you recall the finding of young Clark beside
the river, years ago? He had been shot through the head. The man who killed him did so by accident,
for he was a bosom friend; yet he could never bring himself to confess the fact, for he dreaded
the blame of his townsmen, the anguish of the dead man's parents, the hate of his betrothed.
It was believed that the killing was a murder, and that some roving Indian had done it. After
years of conscience-darkened life, in which the face of his dead friend often arose accusingly
before him, the unhappy wretch vowed that he would never again look his fellows openly in the
face: he would pay a penalty and conceal his shame. Then it was that I put a veil between myself
and the world."

Joseph Moody passed away and, as he wished, the veil still hid his face in the coffin, but
the clergyman who had raised it for a moment to compose his features, found there a serenity
and a beauty that were majestic.

THE HOME OF THUNDER

Some Indians believe that the Thunder Bird is the agent of storm; that the flashes of his eyes
cause lightning and the flapping of his cloud-vast wings make thunder. Not so the Passamaquoddies,
for they hold that Katahdin's spirit children are Thunders, and in this way an Indian found
them: He had been seeking game along the Penobscot and for weeks had not met one of his fellow
creatures. On a winter day he came on the print of a pair of snow-shoes; next morning the tracks
appeared in another part of the forest, and so for many days he found them.

After a time it occurred to him to see where these tracks went to, and he followed them until
they merged with others in a travelled road, ending at a precipice on the side of Katahdin
(Great Mountain).

While lost in wonder that so many tracks should lead nowhere, he was roused by a footfall,
and a maiden stepped from the precipice to the ledge beside him. Though he said nothing, being
in awe of her stateliness and beauty, she replied in kind words to every unspoken thought and
bade him go with her. He approached the rock with fear, but at a touch from the woman it became
as mist, and they entered it together.

Presently they were in a great cave in the heart of Katahdin, where sat the spirit of the mountain,
who welcomed them and asked the girl if her brothers had come. "I hear them coming," she replied.
A blinding flash, a roar of thunder, and there stepped into the cave two men of giant size
and gravely beautiful faces, hardened at the cheeks and brows to stone. "These," said the girl
to the hunter, "are my brothers, the Thunder and the Lightning. My father sends them forth
whenever there is wrong to redress, that those who love us may not be smitten. When you hear
Thunder, know that they are shooting at our enemies."

At the end of that day the hunter returned to his home, and behold, he had been gone seven
years. Another legend says that the stone-faced sons of the mountain adopted him, and that
for seven years he was a roaming Thunder, but at the end of that time while a storm was raging
he was allowed to fall, unharmed, into his own village.

THE PARTRIDGE WITCH

Two brothers, having hunted at the head of the Penobscot until their snow-shoes and moccasins
gave out, looked at each other ruefully and cried, "Would that there was a woman to help us!"
The younger brother went to the lodge that evening earlier than the elder, in order to prepare
the supper, and great was his surprise on entering the wigwam to find the floor swept, a fire
built, a pot boiling, and their clothing mended. Returning to the wood he watched the place
from a covert until he saw a graceful girl enter the lodge and take up the tasks of housekeeping.

When he entered she was confused, but he treated her with respect, and allowed her to have
her own way so far as possible, so that they became warm friends, sporting together like children
when the work of the day was over. But one evening she said, "Your brother is coming. I fear
him. Farewell." And she slipped into the wood. When the young man told his elder brother what
had happened there--the elder having been detained for a few days in the pursuit of a deer--he
declared that he would wish the woman to come back, and presently, without any summons, she
returned, bringing a toboggan-load of garments and arms. The luck of the hunters improved,
and they remained happily together until spring, when it was time to return with their furs.

They set off down the Penobscot in their canoe and rowed merrily along, but as they neared
the home village the girl became uneasy, and presently "threw out her soul"--became clairvoyant--and
said, "Let me land here. I find that your father would not like me, so do not speak to him
about me." But the elder brother told of her when they reached home, whereon the father exclaimed,
"I had feared this. That woman is a sister of the goblins. She wishes to destroy men."

At this the elder brother was afraid, lest she should cast a spell on him, and rowing up the
river for a distance he came upon her as she was bathing and shot at her. The arrow seemed
to strike, for there was a flutter of feathers and the woman flew away as a partridge. But
the younger did not forget the good she had done and sought her in the wood, where for many
days they played together as of old.

"I do not blame your father: it is an affair of old, this hate he bears me," she said. "He
will choose a wife for you soon, but do not marry her, else all will come to an end for you."
The man could not wed the witch, and he might not disobey his father, in spite of this adjuration;
so when the old man said to him, "I have a wife for you, my son," he answered, "It is well."

They brought the bride to the village, and for four days the wedding-dance was held, with a
feast that lasted four days more. Then said the young man, "Now comes the end," and lying down
on a bear-skin he sighed a few times and his spirit ascended to the Ghosts' road--the milky
way. The father shook his head, for he knew that this was the witch's work, and, liking the
place no longer, he went away and the tribe was scattered.

THE MARRIAGE OF MOUNT KATAHDIN

An Indian girl gathering berries on the side of Mount Katahdin looked up at its peak, rosy
in the afternoon light, and sighed, "I wish that I had a husband. If Katahdin were a man he
might marry me." Her companions laughed at this quaint conceit, and, filled with confusion
at being overheard, she climbed higher up the slope and was lost to sight. For three years
her tribe lost sight of her; then she came back with a child in her arms a beautiful boy with
brows of stone. The boy had wonderful power: he had only to point at a moose or a duck or a
bear, and it fell dead, so that the tribe never wanted food. For he was the son of the Indian
girl and the spirit of the mountain, who had commanded her not to reveal the boy's paternity.
Through years she held silence on this point, holding in contempt, like other Indians, the
prying inquiries of gossips and the teasing of young people, and knowing that Katahdin had
designed the child for the founder of a mighty race, with the sinews of the very mountains
in its frame, that should fill and rule the earth. Yet, one day, in anger at some slight, the
mother spoke: "Fools! Wasps who sting the fingers that pick you from the water! Why do you
torment me about what you might all see? Look at the boy's face--his brows: in them do you
not see Katahdin? Now you have brought the curse upon yourselves, for you shall hunt your own
venison from this time forth." Leading the child by the hand she turned toward the mountain
and went out from their sight. And since then the Indians who could not hold their tongues,
and who might otherwise have been great, have dwindled to a little people.

THE MOOSE OF MOUNT KINEO

Eastern traditions concerning Hiawatha differ in many respects from those of the West. In the
East he is known as Glooskap, god of the Passamaquoddies, and his marks are left in many places
in the maritime provinces and Maine. It was he who gave names to things, created men, filled
them with life, and moved their wonder with storms. He lived on the rocky height of Blomidon,
at the entrance to Minas Basin, Nova Scotia, and the agates to be found along its foot are
jewels that he made for his grandmother's necklace, when he restored her youth. He threw up
a ridge between Fort Cumberland and Parrsboro, Nova Scotia, that he might cross, dry shod,
the lake made by the beavers when they dammed the strait at Blomidon, but he afterward killed
the beavers, and breaking down their dam he let the lake flow into the sea, and went southward
on a hunting tour. At Mount Desert he killed a moose, whose bones he flung to the ground at
Bar Harbor, where they are still to be seen, turned to stone, while across the bay he threw
the entrails, and they, too, are visible as rocks, dented with his arrow-points. Mount Kineo
was anciently a cow moose of colossal size that he slew and turned into a height of land, and
the Indians trace the outline of the creature in the uplift to this day. Little Kineo was a
calf moose that he slew at the same time, and Kettle Mountain is his camp-caldron that he flung
to the ground in the ardor of the chase.

THE OWL TREE

One day in October, 1827, Rev. Charles Sharply rode into Alfred, Maine, and held service in
the meeting-house. After the sermon he announced that he was going to Waterborough to preach,
and that on his circuit he had collected two hundred and seventy dollars to help build a church
in that village. Would not his hearers add to that sum? They would and did, and that evening
the parson rode away with over three hundred dollars in his saddlebags. He never appeared in
Waterborough. Some of the country people gave tongue to their fear that the possession of the
money had made him forget his sacred calling and that he had fled the State.

On the morning after his disappearance, however, Deacon Dickerman appeared in Alfred riding
on a horse that was declared to be the minister's, until the tavern hostler affirmed that the
minister's horse had a white star on forehead and breast, whereas this horse was all black. 

What will he say, she muttered to himself, without regard to the question. It is even more beautiful
become even worse. What is that black? When the old man had died - Holy Madonna!

A wild chase of thoughts seemed vorueberzuziehn her. They come! she said at last, they come! We
do not fear, we know them. Then, remembering that they do not was alone, she said hastily: You
have in there, into the mill chamber. It may you here can not, she hates me, and who knows
what they nachredete me when a stranger would have met here. Arise, O Lord, and for Jesus' sake,
you keep quiet, that she will not hear. I do not think it was long.

If I'm in the way you, Teresa, and I will out there on the other side of the gorge.

You'll find yourself not go on that side, and down you should not pass the witch.

Think about your's also well, Teresa?

And if your brother would come into the mill chamber and a Foreign recipients considered hidden
there?-My brother knows me, "she said proudly. Away!

Just one more word. Who is she? your fear of this woman?

Everything, but I know Tommaso. She is the wife of Uncle Nino. When they found the dead body,
Puzzuoli washed ashore in because it was dry eye alone, God forgive ye, I not! because she hated
me because I am a lot nicer than they were. Now she wants me my Brother rob, the Sly. Tommaso
but they know he and I - I and he who shall separate us - Compete? still in the chamber, Lord,
and keep you. Afterwards I'll tell my brother why I done it.

They pushed and pulled him into the door firmly behind him, then he heard her hurry went through
the back doors on the grass. He, however, was left alone in his prison, at first not avoid a strong
excitement and trepidation. Soon, however, won the Charm of adventure prevailed, and he wondered
how it is in all possible cases would have to behave. Meanwhile, he found himself among the
many strange things order, the simple wheelwork he looked, the big screens and paper, the millstones
of different Size, were leaning against the wall. Tommaso there in the corner was open bed, a
prayer book was on the ceiling, a Weihkessel hung at the head on
the wall.

All light in the chamber fell, penetrated from the side of the mill wheel in through large
openings through which one in saw the spokes and the opposite bank of the rocky gorge. But even
in the wall, the the mill room of the central chamber retired, he soon discovered an opening to
him the greatest part left over look of it. Here he took Posto and waited with growing Tension
of the things that would come.

Before long came from the meadow, the siblings in the house. He saw Tommaso face under an abundance
of black curly hair, a twin-like resemblance to the trains the nurse. A deeply held back movement
revived every muscle and shone eerily from the dark eyes. The jacket he slipped from his shoulder,
without being noticed; long He stood with folded arms on the table
and nodded at times with the high forehead, as heard drawing attention
to his sister, who had taken his arm and with a fierce whisper, for
unvernehmbar the Germans, spoke to him.

But his thoughts seemed to be absent. At times, his full lower lip quivered, but he remained
silent during the whole time. He could not over thirty years of age, a glorious Maennergestalt
remembered a scout have seen in the mill chamber never.

There was a knock at the outer door. In a moment flew away from Teresa's brother to a page Chair
by the stove, the state of the distaff leaning. As Tommaso, his position is not left in,! called
and the door opened up, brandished the distaff and Teresa seemed to have have sat for an hour
so too. Her face was cold and calm.

With some hesitation, the blonde woman came in and made herself as she is the first greeting said,
to do with their clothing, apparently to conceal their excitement. They shook from the hem
of her skirt to drop off, threw down her shoes and pulled her easily
to the naked Feet.

Every movement was smooth, graceful, half aware, half course, appealing.

The face, heated from the road, burned over and over, and the black
clothing had the delicacy of their Colors and the dull blonde hair
of this southern land miraculously appear the more.

She was shorter than Teresa, fuller and more supple, more quickly
when they moved.

But the brown eyes bore all the fire of the Neapolitan is in heaven.

Good evening, Teresa! How are you, Tommy? she said.

It's you, Lucia? replied the girl.

What brings you over here from Naples, in our loneliness?

Take a seat, Lucia, and be welcome, said the brother, without her to sew some.

She followed the call and sat by the window, still busy with her clothing. I had to do in Carotta,
she began again, by the straw hat and took off her hair from his forehead. And I thought before
I went home again to visit you, Teresa. The Way up here is bad and we had bad weather.

For Mill, it was good, Teresa said shortly.

Lucia had her eyes on the room and walk around with ease on Tommaso face, in apparent indifference
with a piece of chalk, that lying on the table, Dash next to the
other painted.

The three men knew that covered key words should and everyone wanted another left up to the
entrance.

Bring me a glass of wine for Lucia! Tommaso said now, without her sister to look .-- Teresa eagerly
spun away. The stranger said, after some hesitation, "Let the wine, I have not to stay a long
time. The evening falls and enter my boat waiting for me at the marina
of Carotta, and I will back on the night in Naples.

As long as we have not seen! Why do you never come over here to Naples, Teresa? The winter
here has to be hard in the gorge.

No time is hard to me together with my brother, "replied the girl. And what have I am doing
in Naples? It draws me to no one there to anyone.

Again they were silent all. At last the man turned himself to the nurse and said quietly: Do
you have the animal's stall for the night, Teresa!

She winced as she took the hint.

But as she looked up, she recognized his firm view that it was his brother's will, they soon turned
off the distaff, and left the room, and they heard out on purpose, according to the stable
to the Gittertuer do make to cut off any suspicion that they listen.

The German opened his post Lauer heart when he left alone, the two other compared to him. Although
the past of his people was only half open, knew He still enough vorauszufuehlen a scene of the strangest
kind. He soon saw the man, now the nice woman at the window, and his own situation was becoming
embarrassing, if he said that the words that floated on both lips,
for no other human ear determines could be.

For a moment he thought of himself in the remotest corner of the
chamber Muehl to retract.

But every step he could tell, so he had to stop, where he stood.

The silence lasted a short time inside. Then Lucia said, your sister hates me, Tommy, what have
I done you any harm?

The brother shrugged his shoulders.

You see, she continued, it has often left me no rest, if I thought that it might alone is that
you have kept as far from us. She does not begrudge anyone, that your only one Word directed
at him. They alone will have you.

You are mistaken, "he said dryly. I had my reasons that I went away from Naples.

I know, Toma, I know. It is a child understands that their time verlort the pleasure of the sea,
after that accident.

But if it had come back, if you do not persuaded Teresa would have to include you here in the wilderness
and desolation. Are we not all our fates and yet have to endure among the people? If the crash
is not from the sky?

And may it petrify us so that we hate the people who can not help it?

Not their fault? That is the question.

She looked at him intently. I understand you not, Toma.

I do not much more, since you're gone.

Why did you not answer me on the letters I through you 've Angelo, the farmers sent? He did say
that he had handed over to you alone, both, or else I could think Teresa has denied you the answers.

The
letters? I burned them.

And what you now reply to that?

Lucia, I have not read a word that was in it.

She winced. Then he added: "Your husband is dead, as I said Angelo, and he I'm sorry, he was a
galantuomo, and the wrong that I've compared it to the heart, burns me even today. You are young
and beautiful, Lucia, you will soon find another, a disciple.

Be happy with it!

He threw away the piece of chalk and went down the hands behind his back, through the Room. She
followed his movements with anxious tension. At last she said: White Teresa, that I become a
widow?

She only found out just out of your black dress. We have the four
years since your name between us is not mentioned.

If you have not read the letters, so you do not know also that my husband you three hundred
Piastres bequeathed, but even you have to come to Naples to pick her up before the Court,
where they are laid down for you.

You can lie there until the Last Day, he said, without that reflecting when You prefer not
to give it to the poor.

I do not get, even if I needed more needed, as is the case, thank God. Money from your husband, Lucia!
Rather starve!

How do you speak? she said quietly, in a voice that trembled with consternation. How should
I interpret all this? It was usually different between us, Tommaso!

So much the worse that it was different!

She stood up from her seat, took a few steps toward him and tried
with shy eyes .

His own The drilled but firmly into the top of the table, behind which he re-entered was when
he was looking for something strange between them and the beautiful woman bring to protect against
her charms. She had her right hand firmly placed under the full chest, saw the German through
the wall column, the blue veins on the round arm and how long fingers trembled on the beating heart.

What
have I done to you, Toma? she said barely audible.

If you have slandered me with you, it tells me everything and I will put my finger on the host
and swear that I I am aware of no guilt. How buried I have lived with my husband, since your
gone, and no one can stand up and say that the landlady of the Sirena him a Glance or has indulged
in a smile.

This is your thing, and was the cause of death.

Why do you come and say to me?

Big tears came to mind when they heard the harsh words, and he felt well, how deep the impact was
taken, although he is still not looking at her.

He said after a while: What it helps that we speak through the mask, and adjust our voices?
Straightforward, Lucia: you came to tell me that you were now free, and no one more obstacles stand
between us two. But I tell you, there is but one among us, and we are doomed to feel for our sins
and eternal flame to be separated forever.

So he said, decided, at least the hope of living again in her. For our sins? she said quickly.
What we have to blame us?

Did I ever worn a different fruit, that we loved as sighing and crying from a distance? When
I think of your neck should topple, it would not be our first kiss?

But well I know who between us is, Tommaso: - your sister.

He shook his head vigorously. No! not! But do not ask me, and do not think that you saw it can
ever out of the way, our enemy, and he is not one of the survivors.

Go back to Naples, Lucia, and never come back up to the mill.

I will, I you may not see again.

She came to the table, facing him, that he shook the violent movement itself and he looked up suddenly.
All the terror of a desperate passion were in their face. I will not go, "she said with violent resistance,
or I need to know everything.

Tommaso, my husband is dead, long Nino sleeps in his grave, your sister is in my house be like
the lady and I like the maid, at the first bad word from me to her, you may expel me as if I
set fire to your roof, and as you say - and I see would have - that your heart has not changed:
who stands between us, Tommy?

The table trembled on the young man is based. I will tell you, he gasped hollow out, but then
go and ask no further. Nino stands between us!

You deceive me, she said. You want to divert my thoughts from Teresa, so I she did not reward some
day, what did it to me. You'll regret once again that you played with me poorest, and then discarded
me. And they, too, should the unnatural hear of you here hiding from the sun to hold, as the
miser's treasure. I'm going.

At Christ's blood, Lucia, I do not cheat. It is true, my sister gave you a Thing never forgiven.
But it is not - and you do not know what I mean when I say Nino stands between us! No one knows
at least Teresa. They would die if they knew.

And if I did?

Sun would take you all thought of the wretched Tommy, and you would be the way to the mill not
recover.

He covered his face with his hands.

You are wrong, they said, may never happen. It is a delusion that lies between us and I will blow it
like a smoke when you see him show me. If not, I find no Rest day or night, and throughout the
year, do you hear that you have plunged me into the grave.

He shuddered in and seemed to fight one last battle.

Then he saw her bleak, glowing, rigid and long, and said it must be made, I want the consuming
have pain to see you and to renounce you, not to survive a second time. Swear me with your salvation,
Lucia, you say that no one want, what no one heard of me has and what you shall hear now. Even
in confession and death can not enter the word over your lips.

It is not because it myself for the destruction would be if people 'knowing it, but Teresa
is not ueberstuende. Swear, Lucia!

She raised her hand. In our salvation, I swear to you's, Tommaso is, no one know except me and
you.

He sighed deeply, and threw himself into a chair, his arms leaning on her knees and the floor
staring at his feet. Lucia, he said, half aloud, I have spoken the truth, Nino stands between
us, now in death as in life at that time. He was pure and innocent as Abel, and also at his side
stood a Cain. Cain fled into the wilderness; understand you's now.

She was silent.

You're right, "he continued. Who can understand it? But there are times when the hell Has power
over us that it is as a foreign mind sitting in our chest and gagged all good thoughts, and
only the evil he could be free to do what they wanted. Let's have done then what is the end
of it afterwards - which I will one interpret a priest, Nobody knows!

As I have loved the boys! Killed had I the madman, who in my face only a breath would have spoken
ill of him! When I heard him sing, forgot I worry all, if he came to my house, it was bright inside.
An own son or brother can append any more. I was proud of him. As Naples to speak of his voice
began, 'says I look like a fool to the people, this is our Nino, my old playmate! And what I
knew it, I would have him as the voice from the sea and fishing gift. And as he was to me!
Since he was already famous and sang at Prince and Count and the proud Women are one of his eyes
envied - he was still in our house on the beach and was most comfortable with us, and many
a time I met him in the Toledo, my net over his shoulder, he let stand another friend and took my
arm and made a Route with me. No one was so gracious, no wrong in him, no sin. He would have
all women can have in Naples, but he gave no fig for that.

I saw him often about laughed, and I did not then know who is disgusted him the love around.

Only an evil he has done to me that he led me to his uncle into the house, as the brave Old
moved to Naples and Capua bought the Sirena. Did he not above all, in order to Ninos looking
forward to luck, which was his work? Why he had to come and bring with you, Lucia! Since I lost
an hour already Nino, heaven knows, not by his fault. But who could it will therefore gram,
except me and you, that he guarded the honor of his benefactor?

He was never otherwise have occurred to me to make accusations about my Liebeshaendel, although
He had no particular liking it when I spoke to him about this or that woman, I just had the
web. He was innocent as the Archangel Raphael, but he knew the world and knew that not everyone
was like him, and was far from that, people change to do. Even as he soon as it was to us,
Lucia, - was never a word about his Lips. But you know well that it was he alone who thwarted all
our lists and attacks. I foamed in me a hundred times I swore once I wiedersaehe him all friendship
terminate if he also watched your threshold, jealous as the Uncle himself, as a brother or a lover.
Because he loved you not, and no envy on me was involved. I saw him then, so I chewed my lips,
but did not say a word, and almost was mild after the frenzy you in me when I heard his voice.

It
seemed that he read to me all my thoughts in the chest. Many times
he talked to me by the uncle, how good he was, as harmless, and how
much the old man had done for him. He saw me then trusting on, as
if to say: No, Toma, it is not possible, that thou cast a man who
your friend has to thank all. And he is not against you, the kindness,
self-confidence?

I understood him well, but when I met you then,
I swallowed the anger of love All attachments, all concerns. My conscience
withered like a tree next to the flowing Lava. And for a year to go
around so I, who never have a period of fourteen days had also learned
to be patient! Once before, when the uncle went to Ischia, It remembers
you, and we a sigh, but he solicited a room in the Sirena, enter notes
to write off because of the noise to disturb him in his own home -
Even then, I gloomy thoughts. I wish him what mix with the wine, which
gave me an acquaintance; It should bring a man twenty-four hours to
sleep. But then shocked I. If it were a poison? Or is he hurt in his
voice? I did not, but it remained a thorn in my back towards him,
and from that moment on, I dodged him, for the sight of me annoyed,
as if he would have been me for life.

Thus came closer the day when
he was first sung in the opera. What we cover for that evening had
been persuaded, Lucia, you know it well. If I would have never known
you, - would have my house however, can burn, and I would be before
the last note, the Ninos should triumph not left my seat in the theater.
Now all my senses was only aimed at what to expect, after the first
act when I am away-human in the Sirena, where you the Patient wanted
to play so as not to have to with his uncle in the opera.

Since he
arrived the night before, as you know, and persuaded me to take him
to the sea. Which Angel or devil had whispered to him our secret?
For he knew it, and hardly that we were together alone on the lake,
he's told me in the face, the first time that I open it to task. I
denied everything. Toma, he said, if you not promise me at our old
friendship, desist, it is my misfortune. I will sing as a raven, they
will hiss me, and everything I ever hoped, will forever be there.
My brother, he said, I demand it from you! I might go and the Uncle
warn. But he would know which woman he has, and if I do not even your
name calls, we should have gone for ever, you and me. Promise's words,
the one sacrifice I can tell you must be worth .-- I remained obstinately
silent, looking after the nets, and heard last can not remember what
he said, for your image in front of me, Lucia, and my blood was raging
in the temples.

An hour later I came alone echoed in the boat to
the coast back.-The last words dark and toneless, and the two figures,
he in his seat, his face deeper between knees sunk, the woman, pale
as death, remained as images, while It was dark in the room and out
by the noise of the stream Teresa's voice was heard, sang a refrain,
as if to remind the brother that he her the pain of waiting not be
extended without trouble. And in fact the voice of the lost man woke
He rose from his chair and leaned across the table closer to the motionless
woman. No, Lucy, "he said hoarsely, I did not lie then. The network
pulled him into the deep, his feet became entangled, I do not have
the boat overturned, but that's not all. I sat at the wheel when he
was already rolled down. Icy was my bones, my Eyes staring at the
whirlpool next to me who had closed over his head, I saw the bubbles
rise, as if to call me, he is still breathing down there! And now,
now one of his hands appeared about on the waves and caught at a firm
hand of his Friend, a Bootslaenge only I looked away from me - a silver
ring gleams on little finger in the sun - had only to stretch the
helm I need and he was saved, Lucia! I wanted to save him does not
it? Had I not do? I did not Rowing on the knees, and just a jerk of
the arm and the hand with the ring would have a question clamped? There were rivals in the search, and on reaching
the plateau they looked up and saw him kneeling on a narrow ledge with arms extended as in
rapture. They called to him. He answered not. He was dead--dead of joy and triumph. While they
looked a portion of the crag above him fell away and rolled from rock to rock, marking its
course with flashes of bloody fire, until it reached the Lake of the Clouds, and the waters
of that tarn drowned its glory. Yet those waters are not always black, and sometimes the hooked
crest of Mount Monroe is outlined against the night sky in a ruddy glow.

SKINNER'S CAVE

The abhorrence to paying taxes and duties--or any other levy from which an immediate and personal
good is not promised--is too deeply rooted in human nature to be affected by statutes, and
whenever it is possible to buy commodities that have escaped the observation of the revenue
officers many are tempted to do so for the mere pleasure of defying the law. In the early part
of this century the northern farmers and their wives were, in a way, providing themselves with
laces, silver-ware, brandy, and other protected and dreadful articles, on which it was evident
that somebody had forgotten to pay duty. The customs authorities on the American side of the
border were long puzzled by the irruption of these forbidden things, but suspicion ultimately
fell on a fellow of gigantic size, named Skinner.

It was believed that this outlaw carried on the crime of free trade after sunset, hiding his
merchandise by day on the islands of Lake Memphremagog. This delightful sheet of water lies
half in Canada and half in Vermont--agreeably to the purpose of such as he. Province Island
is still believed to contain buried treasure, but the rock that contains Skinner's Cave was
the smuggler's usual haunt, and when pursued he rowed to this spot and effected a disappearance,
because he entered the cave on the northwest side, where it was masked by shrubbery. One night
the officers landed on this island after he had gone into hiding, and after diligent search
discovered his boat drawn up in a covert. They pushed it into the lake, where the winds sent
it adrift, and, his communication with the shore thus cut off, the outlaw perished miserably
of hunger. His skeleton was found in the cavern some years later.

YET THEY CALL IT LOVER'S LEAP

In the lower part of the township of Cavendish, Vermont, the Black River seeks a lower level
through a gorge in the foot-hills of the Green Mountains. The scenery here is romantic and
impressive, for the river makes its way along the ravine in a series of falls and rapids that
are overhung by trees and ledges, while the geologist finds something worth looking at in the
caves and pot-holes that indicate an older level of the river. At a turn in the ravine rises
the sheer precipice of Lover's Leap. It is a vertical descent of about eighty feet, the water
swirling at its foot in a black and angry maelstrom. It is a spot whence lovers might easily
step into eternity, were they so disposed, and the name fits delightfully into the wild and
somber scene; but ask any good villager thereabout to relate the legend of the place and he
will tell you this:

About forty years ago a couple of young farmers went to the Leap--which then had no name--to
pry out some blocks of the schistose rock for a foundation wall. They found a good exposure
of the rock beneath the turf and began to quarry it. In the earnestness of the work one of
the men forgot that he was standing on the verge of a precipice, and through a slip of his
crowbar he lost his balance and went reeling into the gulf. His horrified companion crept to
the edge, expecting to see his mangled corpse tossing in the whirlpool, but, to his amazement,
the unfortunate was crawling up the face of a huge table of stone that had fallen from the
opposite wall and lay canted against it.

"Hello!" shouted the man overhead. "Are you hurt much?"

The victim of the accident slowly got upon his feet, felt cautiously of his legs and ribs,
and began to search through his pockets, his face betraying an anxiety that grew deeper and
deeper as the search went on. In due time the answer came back, deliberate, sad, and nasal,
but distinct above the roar of the torrent: "Waal, I ain't hurt much, but I'll be durned if
I haven't lost my jack-knife!"

And he was pulled out of the gorge without it.

SALEM AND OTHER WITCHCRAFT

The extraordinary delusion recorded as Salem witchcraft was but a reflection of a kindred insanity
in the Old World that was not extirpated until its victims had been counted by thousands. That
human beings should be accused of leaguing themselves with Satan to plague their fellows and
overthrow the powers of righteousness is remarkable, but that they should admit their guilt
is incomprehensible, albeit the history of every popular delusion shows that weak minds are
so affected as to lose control of themselves and that a whimsey can be as epidemic as small-pox.

Such was the case in 1692 when the witchcraft madness, which might have been stayed by a seasonable
spanking, broke out in Danvers, Massachusetts, the first victim being a wild Irishwoman, named
Glover, and speedily involved the neighboring community of Salem. The mischiefs done by witches
were usually trifling, and it never occurred to their prosecutors that there was an inconsistency
between their pretended powers and their feeble deeds, or that it was strange that those who
might live in regal luxury should be so wretchedly poor. Aches and pains, blight of crops,
disease of cattle, were charged to them; children complained of being pricked with thorns and
pins (the pins are still preserved in Salem), and if hysterical girls spoke the name of any
feeble old woman, while in flighty talk, they virtually sentenced her to die. The word of a
child of eleven years sufficed to hang, burn, or drown a witch.

Giles Corey, a blameless man of eighty, was condemned to the mediaeval peine forte et dure,
his body being crushed beneath a load of rocks and timbers. He refused to plead in court, and
when the beams were laid upon him he only cried, "More weight!" The shade of the unhappy victim
haunted the scene of his execution for years, and always came to warn the people of calamities.
A child of five and a dog were also hanged after formal condemnation. Gallows Hill, near Salem,
witnessed many sad tragedies, and the old elm that stood on Boston Common until 1876 was said
to have served as a gallows for witches and Quakers. The accuser of one day was the prisoner
of the next, and not even the clergy were safe.

A few escapes were made, like that of a blue-eyed maid of Wenham, whose lover aided her to
break the wooden jail and carried her safely beyond the Merrimac, finding a home for her among
the Quakers; and that of Miss Wheeler, of Salem, who had fallen under suspicion, and whose
brothers hurried her into a boat, rowed around Cape Ann, and safely bestowed her in "the witch
house" at Pigeon Cove. Many, however, fled to other towns rather than run the risk of accusation,
which commonly meant death.

When the wife of Philip English was arrested he, too, asked to share her fate, and both were,
through friendly intercession, removed to Boston, where they were allowed to have their liberty
by day on condition that they would go to jail every night. Just before they were to be taken
back to Salem for trial they went to church and heard the Rev. Joshua Moody preach from the
text, "If they persecute you in one city, flee unto another." The good clergyman not only preached
goodness, but practised it, and that night the door of their prison was opened. Furnished with
an introduction from Governor Phipps to Governor Fletcher, of New York, they made their way
to that settlement, and remained there in safe and courteous keeping until the people of Salem
had regained their senses, when they returned. Mrs. English died, soon after, from the effects
of cruelty and anxiety, and although Mr. Moody was generally commended for his substitution
of sense and justice for law, there were bigots who persecuted him so constantly that he removed
to Plymouth.

According to the belief of the time a witch or wizard compacted with Satan for the gift of
supernatural power, and in return was to give up his soul to the evil one after his life was
over. The deed was signed in blood of the witch and horrible ceremonies confirmed the compact.
Satan then gave his ally a familiar in the form of a dog, ape, cat, or other animal, usually
small and black, and sometimes an undisguised imp. To suckle these "familiars" with the blood
of a witch was forbidden in English law, which ranked it as a felony; but they were thus nourished
in secret, and by their aid the witch might raise storms, blight crops, abort births, lame
cattle, topple over houses, and cause pains, convulsions, and illness. If she desired to hurt
a person she made a clay or waxen image in his likeness, and the harms and indignities wreaked
on the puppet would be suffered by the one bewitched, a knife or needle thrust in the waxen
body being felt acutely by the living one, no matter how far distant he might be. By placing
this image in running water, hot sunshine, or near a fire, the living flesh would waste as
this melted or dissolved, and the person thus wrought upon would die. This belief is still
current among negroes affected by the voodoo superstitions of the South. The witch, too, had
the power of riding winds, usually with a broomstick for a conveyance, after she had smeared
the broom or herself with magic ointment, and the flocking of the unhallowed to their sabbaths
in snaky bogs or on lonely mountain tops has been described minutely by those who claim to
have seen the sight. Sometimes they cackled and gibbered through the night before the houses
of the clergy, and it was only at Christmas that their power failed them. The meetings were
devoted to wild and obscene orgies, and the intercourse of fiends and witches begot a progeny
of toads and snakes.

Naturally the Indians were accused, for they recognized the existence of both good and evil
spirits, their medicine-men cured by incantations in the belief that devils were thus driven
out of their patients, and in the early history of the country the red man was credited by
white settlers with powers hardly inferior to those of the oriental and European magicians
of the middle ages. Cotton Mather detected a relation between Satan and the Indians, and he
declares that certain of the Algonquins were trained from boyhood as powahs, powwows, or wizards,
acquiring powers of second sight and communion with gods and spirits through abstinence from
food and sleep and the observance of rites. Their severe discipline made them victims of nervous
excitement and the responsibilities of conjuration had on their minds an effect similar to
that produced by gases from the rift in Delphos on the Apollonian oracles, their manifestations
of insanity or frenzy passing for deific or infernal possession. His mood, while he
was busy with his dramatic works, he described 28 November 1771 In a letter to his friend, the
Actuar Salzmann in Strasbourg. "You know me so well," he wrote, "and yet I bet you do not guess
why I'm not writing. It is a Passion, an unexpected passion, you know me in the like Cirkelchen
can throw, that I forget the sun, moon and the stars love it. I can not do without that be, you know
it long, and cost what it may, I bargain rush. This time is without fear of consequences. My
whole Genius is on a company about which Homer and Shakespeare and everything will be forgotten.
I dramatisire the story of one of the noblest Germans save the memory of a brave man, and the
hard work that's cost me, I do a true pastime that I have so necessary. It is sad to live in a place
where all our activity must buzz in itself. I am moving with myself on the field and around
on the paper. But it would be a sad society when I was not all starch I feel in me, throws
on an object, and to pack it and tried to take as much possible for me and what does not, which
I carry. I hope not to enjoy little if I give you a noble ancestors, who we unfortunately have
only their grave stones in life performing. How often do I want you here to tell you to read
a piece of work and opinion and hear applause from you. Here Everything around me is dead.
Frankfurt bieibt [remained] the nest, Nidus, if you do well in order to hatch birds, or even figuratively
Spelunca. God help from this misery, Amen. "In a later letter to Salzmann on February 3, 1772
Goethe thanked his friend for the applause, which he communicated to him the idol of the samples
Berlichingen paid tribute, he added. "The diary of my circumstances, as you know, for the speed
typing impossible. By now you have seen from the drama that the Intentions, my soul will be
permanent, and I hope they will be determined by and by. Prospects for expanding daily, and
clear obstacles away. A day like in the other go to school, for once and for all, but the Minorennität
can not skip. "

Being so strong, interest in his dramatic works might, but the other could be Impression on Goethe's
feelings by not appease. Deep had taken him a letter from Sesenheim.

He felt pain, of Frederica, without having to relieve him. Had to tear away it extends from the
gloomy mood that seized him and all his activity to threatened to paralyze. He needed the distraction.
Only in the great outdoors, he felt again better. His friends called him the Wanderer, because
he often several days in the neighborhood of Frankfurt around dash, and sometimes even struck
off for Darmstadt and Homburg. On these lonely walks were more of his lyrical Poesieen under
which only the poem: "Wanderers storm song" that he opposed while he was a terrible weather;
recited to herself, has received in his works. Sometimes he limited his wanderings only to Frankfurt
and the suburbs of this city. He came by with the different stands and classes of people in
contact. In a letter from the first in June 1773 told Goethe, as he vigorous water hauled to delete
a night in the Jewish quarter ESTABLISHED FIRE to help. "The strangest, deepest, most varied emotions,"
he wrote, "have I rewarded my efforts on the spot. I again take this opportunity to the common
people met, and am convinced that it is the best man after all. "

Through his seemingly scattered life was not interrupted Goethe's activity. At least escaped
him, none of the modern literary phenomena in the domain of literature. From the impression that
Herder's oldest document of the Human Race "on him was made, he himself
be little accountability.

In a letter to a friend of his parents' house; to the then living in Algiers Danish Consul Schoenborn,
of 8 June 1773, he called Herder Work "is so far brilliant intimate mystical whole, a living
in the fullness of intertwined branches World that is neither a drawing to scale, some expression
of the tapered shape of giant ape, nor a faithful outline of some parts and melodic sound with
sympatethischem could strike in the soul. Herder, "he added," is in the depths of his feeling descended,
it has stirred up all the high power of the sacred nature talk shop, and leads they now dawning
in Orphic, wetterleuchtendem, here and there tomorrow friendly smiling New song up from the
east over the world, after the first modern breed of truck Ghosts, deists, atheists, philologists,
Textverbesserer, Orientalists, etc. with fire and blotted out the sword and Fluthsturm. "

This contrasted a glowing enthusiasm for Herder contained in this letter violent attack upon
Wieland, judging by a not very favorable of idol Berlichingen of Mercury in the German Goethe's
Autoreitelkeit had offended and in fact its former esteem was very down. Klopstock was Goethe's
favorite poet.

The Messiah He had been enthusiastic in his youth. Carefully, he wrote, however, the individual
Odes and elegies that singer from, and was delighted when the country Countess Caroline of Hesse-Darmstadt
the first collection of poems organized Klopstock. Even for those of the writer then published
"German Republic of Letters" interested himself Goethe lively. "This magnificent work, "he wrote,"
gave me new life poured into the soul. The only poetry all ages and nations, the only rules that
are possible! That is history of feeling as it gradually strengthens and purifies, and make him as expression
and language itself. And the most honest Aldermans-truths of what is noble and humane to the poets,
all the deepest from the heart, own experience, written down with a charming simplicity. Among
the youths, has led to the disaster under the Recensentenschaar, and the Now, if he reads this
work, not throwing away his pen, all criticism and Kritelei conspiring not like a quietist for Contemplation
of himself sits down, nothing from the will; because this flow, the two sources of visual sensation
from the throne of pure nature. "

One of the most peculiar phenomena in the literary world at that time was Lavater. It said
that he would come to Frankfurt. This remarkable man to know, was for Goethe of great interest.
In a letter to Schönborn of 8 June 1773 he complained Lavater's "lack constant sense of self,
"and drew from him a kind of pattern in the words: "The best of the
human soul is tormented fate so closely, because a sick body and a
wandering spirit been withdrawn from the collective power and so the
best joy of living has robbed himself.

It's unbelievable how weak he is, and how to him, but has the most beautiful, simplest sense,
once riddles and mysteries, speaks if you are in and out of the living and the acting heart speaks.
"

Lavater changed his opinion about Goethe, when he got to know him soon afterwards in person.
"He was," he wrote on the 4th July 1773, four days with us, and I have again learned that No one
should talk about if you have not seen it yet. How different was it Everything! Lavater says repeatedly
that he was weak, and I still knew no one, the more beautiful Strengths would have had, than
he. In his element he is indefatigably active, ready, determined,
and a soul full of glorious love and innocence.

I never for a dreamer held, and he has even less imagination than I imagined. But because his
Characterize the true feelings to him, so much misunderstood conditions of nature in his soul;
He therefore throws away any terminology, from the heart speaks and acts, and his audience
to put in a strange world seems turning them into the unfamiliar corner of her own heart out -
he can not escape the accusation of a dreamer .-- His physiognomy gives an extensive work with
many engravings. It will be great contributions to the visual arts mentioned, and be the historical
and portrait painter indispensable. "

Goethe observed during the German literature and its representatives with a keen eye rested not
his own literary activity. Some information on several literary Work he was in a letter to Schönborn
1 Juni 1773rd "All kinds of new things," he wrote, . Have I made a story of the title: The Sorrows
of Young Werther, a fact I young people performing, with a pure sensation of deep penetration
and true talent, swarming in dreams, loses himself in digging through
speculation, till at last by to entering passions, especially shattered
an endless love, a bullet through Head shot.

Then I was working a tragedy: Clavigo, dramatized a modern anecdote, with the utmost simplicity
and truth of heart. My hero is a vague, half-size, less than half human, the equivalent of the
Weis Linger in an idol, but even in the Weis Linger whole curve of a main character. Also there
are scenes here that I in an idol to the main interest to weaken not only could suggest. A few
plans to major dramas have I found and in my heart. "

In this letter, Goethe admitted that he "may not come from Frankfurt, however, a very confused
Life had led, that he lacked in new sensations and ideas before. "The date however, was near where
he had left, after his father's desire to Frankfurt again, and after Wetzlar should go to get
there in the Supreme Court in the juridical practice to practice. This change of location
had little Alluring for him. He feared that in Wetzlar, except the Civil and Political Rights, oppose
him nothing scientific, and that particularly wants to find his love of poetry there is little
food.

Regarding the latter saw the fate for him, by him to the acquaintance in Wetzlar Gotter's helped. The
strong preference this poet for the French dramatist Goethe could not agree with though. However,
took place between him and God a lively exchange of ideas. Through his new friend Goethe was
inspired to several lyrical poems, which in part, as in the other excellent Poem, "The Wanderer,"
in the Göttingen Musenalmanach were taken. This was Goethe in close contact with the Göttingen
poets league to which the Count Stolberg, Voss, citizens, Hölty included among others. The high
respect which the poet Klopstock said unpaid, could Goethe not share the same degree. His early enthusiasm
for the singer of the Messiah had found a limit, since in his odes Klopstock, instead of Greek
mythology, the nomenclature of the Nordic mythology was introduced.

Among its various poetic pursuits, particularly an eager study of the Homer, Goethe was by daily recurring
discussions on the condition of the visitation court and so many obstacles and shortcomings while
prevailing uncomfortably reminded that he was in Wetzlar. The petty details of negligence, negligence,
injustice, Bribes etc wearied him. Scattered through public duties did him no aesthetic work succeed.
Allowed him came by Merk Darmstadt handed down to him Call for papers for the Frankfurt learned
displays. Goethe's brother-Schlosser, was the editor of that paper. By Goethe for the Frankfurt
scholars ads delivered Recensions were for the most part echoes of
his academic years.

Everywhere it was the freshly produced groundbreaking nature of the poet, lacking all the
dry theory being, imply in any manner sought air. He fiercely opposed anything wrong, unnatural and
skewness recensions in those that contained no trace of him in later years are calm and prudence.

A
welcome distraction he was on a trip to the Rhine, to which he invited Merk Darmstadt had. In Coblenz he met
Wieland's childhood friend Sophie la Roche, and unless you are particularly known for its attractive
powers of conversation Leuchsenring writers know, Goethe's character later, with much humor
in his carnival game "Pater Brey," described. Some trips took Goethe in the neighborhood, according
to another Ehrenbreitstein.

His literary activity had rested for a while. Only when he left Wetzlar and was returned to Frankfurt,
is designed of material for "Götz von Berlichingen" he long carried about with him, actually make a whole.
This subject had the right his imagination extended so far that it is entirely the limits of
dramatic form exceed threatened.

His sister Cornelia could hardly expect the completion of the work. They often expressed their
doubts as to Goethe's insistence. As he related in later years, he had finished his work in
six weeks. Neither's wish, nor Herder's opinion, which he communicated his manuscript, satisfied
him. As he himself about his dramatic Product thought, Goethe described in later years. The first
Acts of his play, he was generally satisfactory, but in the following,
especially towards the end, it was said he carried away a great passion
unconscious.

"I had," confessed he, "when I tried to describe to Adelaide amiable, I fell in love with her.
Involuntarily, my pen was just dedicated to her. The interest their fate was rampant, and as
already towards the end of the play out of all idols Action set, only an unfortunate participation
in the Peasants' War came back, so nothing was more natural than that a lovely woman ausstach
him with me. This lack, or rather, recognized this reprehensible abundance I soon. I was therefore
looking for my works always to give more historical and national content, and what it fabulous
or merely passionate was to wipe out, and I sacrificed many things, however. So I had my something
right, for example, done to property, as I appear in a horrible night gypsy scene Adelaide,
and do her beautiful presence was surprising.

A closer examination banished this scene, as well in the fourth and fifth act awkward running
love affair between Francis and his lady in Enge's out, and shone forth in his only major
moments. "

Goethe decided to make a reworking of his play, which he completed in several weeks. In his collected
works, one also finds the "idol of Berlichingen in its original Form and subsequent processing
of that theatrical drama from 1804. No one, however, was dissatisfied with this transformation of his play,
as a reminder. He insisted on the surrender of the Drama, and offered as Goethe, as before with
the "accomplice," no publisher could be found to take over the cost of printing, when Goethe
provide for the purchase of the paper wanted. Thus was printed the "idol of Berlichingen to Hamburg
in 1773 and as early as next Years re-issued in the birthplace of the poet, who are, according
to his confessions was from a later time, "Casse exhausted at very
much embarrassed, as the paper should pay, on which he had made known
to the world with his talent.

"

The fabric chosen, the Goethe was suitable to widespread effect. By his own sense of freedom was
air, he had nourished the German patriotism, which by Klopstock's "Hermann Battle" and the
bard songs had been aroused. The share of the audience to those "wild dramatic sketch," as Goethe
called his play in later years, was all the greater, the nobler and engaging the poetic form of
the idol of historical been drawn to him, was in a wild, lawless time did not hesitate to self-help
to grasp. In the praise, the poet both the description of the individual characters, and was
donated because of the style, he also met some bitter criticism, especially the Allegation, described
the law of the jungle with too bright colors, and the lawless caprice
talked to by the word.

Goethe seemed to be dramatic about Product precipitated judgments to care little. Amusing but it
was the idea of ​​a bookseller, the asked him to write a dozen such pieces, and they promised
to honor Irene Gut.

With Goethe's poetic drafts manifold harmonizes not completely heterogeneous transactions which
he had to pay in Wetzlar. The cold reality that destroyed his ideals, produced in him a deep discontent
and weariness of life almost complete, the reinforced was the passionate affection denied him
a subject. The familiar Dealing with Charlotte Buff, the daughter of a bailiff in Wetzlar,
with the residents, there Bremen Gesandschaftssecretär Kestner was engaged, Goethe sought
to fill the void, the relation with the resolution of the minister's daughter in Sesenheim
left in his heart had. Often with the sole object of his affection, the garden and walking alone,
he felt the destruction of his growing passion.

The life he was indifferent since his high-flying imagination everywhere to the limits of a bourgeois
existence in the most ordinary Sense of the word came to him not granted cheerful look to
the future. In his angrily Mood struck him several times even the thought of taking his own
life. All the more shocking seemed to him the suicide of one of his acquaintances. It was Karl Wilhelm
Jerusalem, a son the famous Brunswick theologians. Driven by a passion to unsatisfied just the subject,
which Goethe had not given up without a hard fight, that unfortunate young man his life ended
by a bullet.

Deeply moved by the accurate portrayal of that tragic event, it took Goethe, to describe in
his "Werther" the painful condition, which he knew from personal experience. What he himself felt his mind
was in a passionate movement, and so did there that he breathed into his novel the fire and the blaze,
which permits no distinction between the seal and the reality. wrote to Goethe's own confession in later
times he all external interference as much as possible, avoiding the "Werther" in four weeks
without have previously designed a proper plan or exported to certain portions of his novel.
He was almost deified because of his work, but found on the other hand, many Opponents, especially
as the unhappy end of his exalted heroes, some of the same That provoked.

The

multiple disasters that was attached to that novel, and without cause, would be randomly almost
been prevented if Goethe upset by the indifference of the Merk's Communication of his novel,
the decision would have run to burn it immediately. By Weygand booksellers in Leipzig, Goethe
was an agreement for the publishing of his novel. Straight on the wedding day of his sister Cornelia
was the letter to Weygand, who asked him to To send the manuscript to Leipzig. The "Werther"
was published in 1774, and as early as next Years a new edition with some additions and with
a few verses later omitted On the front page of the two parts of the novel.

Goethe was when he finished his work, become cheerful again. He had, after his own confession
in later years, "rescued from a violent element to it by the own
and foreign debt, by random and selected life style, intent and precipitation
been tossed about was.

"

In relation to the countless imitations, parodies and reviews of his work, he spoke angrily in
a letter dated 6 March 1775 with the words: "I am the digging and dissect I heartily sick of Werther.
The one scolds, praises the other, the third says that the issue yet yet, so I like the one inciting
the other. If it's me, "he added," nothing from my whole,'s touched and moved me in my work's
not yet that only the kept joys and sorrows of my life. "At a Berlin of the bookseller Friedrich
Nicolai's publication, "the joys of Young Werther", titled revenge
Goethe poem by a satyr, "Nicolai at Werther's grave" and a prose written
dialogue between Lotte and Werther.

Both productions were unpublished.

The manifold issues concerning the life and character of the unfortunate young man, which he described
in his novel, were addressed to him, Goethe sought in vain to avoid.

The curiosity of the audience satisfied somewhat of a then unknown author (1775) published
document: "Report of the story of Young Werther." Notwithstanding his annoying intrusion Goethe
felt flattered but as a writer, that a number of talented young men and renewed his acquaintance
sought to deal with it. Most intimately joined when he had returned to London, poet Lenz at
him, he already had, as mentioned earlier, learned to know in Strasbourg. He showed him several
of his dramatic Products, the "steward," the "new Mendoza", etc. Also, Wagner, as the Doctor's
rights and lawyer in Frankfurt, also paid homage to the poetry came to the author of Gotz and
Werther forward with ingenuous candor. He was mistaken, however, Goethe's trust, it more his dramatic
plans had communicated. Gretchen's disaster in the fist used Wagner
among others written by him for a tragedy, "the child murderer" titled.

Reiner and the intimate relation of Goethe's was his compatriot, the poet Klinger.

With Lavater, Goethe had already been a long time in correspondence, and him, besides several literary
drafts, the "Werther" in manuscript communicated. 20, August 1774 wrote he Lavater: "You will
take great interest in the sufferings of the dear boy, whom I represent. We walked side by side,
in the six years to approach without us, and now I have his History borrowed my feelings, and so
it makes a strange picture. "Regarding his activity he observed in this letter: "I'm not leave,
as long as I on earth am sure I will conquer my stride country every day. " About his activities
imparted it some information in a later letter of 18 October 1774th "My work," said he, "has
been passed in portraits and large, in small love songs. I have been three days with the greatest
possible diligence I worked, and I'm not done yet. It is good Everything that once you do,
do what you can. "Lavater's allegations about the fragmented nature Time and energy produced
from Goethe with the words: "What do you tease me for my amusement? I wish I would have a higher
destiny, so I wanted my actions or amusement call, nor me, instead
of acting, amused.

"

A constant excitation gave the correspondence with Goethe, Lavater, unless the articles provided for
those whose physiognomy, Lavater particularly favorite topic of dispute between Knowledge
and belief.


Alice had heard the cry of warning and would have called him back, but she was forsaken by
the power of speech, and watched, with pale face and straining eyes, the boat beating smartly
across the surges. It was seen to reach Egg Rock, and after a lapse came dancing toward the
shore again; but the tide, was now swirling in rapidly, the waves were running high, and the
wind freshened as the sun sank. At times the boat was out of sight in the hollowed water, and
as it neared Nahant it became unmanageable. Apparently it had filled with water and the tiller-rope
had broken. Nothing could be done by the spectators who had gathered on the rocks, except to
shout directions that were futile, even if they could be heard. At last the boat was lifted
by a breaker and hurled against a mass of granite at the very feet of the man's mistress. When
the body was recovered next day, a bunch of forget-me-not was clasped in the rigid hand.

THE OLD MILL AT SOMERVILLE

The "old powder-house," as the round stone tower is called that stands on a gravel ridge in
Somerville, Massachusetts, is so named because at the outbreak of the Revolutionary War it
was used temporarily as a magazine; but long before that it was a wind-mill. Here in the old
days two lovers held their tryst: a sturdy and honest young farmer of the neighborhood and
the daughter of a man whose wealth puffed him with purse-pride. It was the plebeian state of
the farmer that made him look at him with an unfavorable countenance, and when it was whispered
to him that the young people were meeting each other almost every evening at the mill, he resolved
to surprise them there and humiliate, if he did not punish them. From the shadow of the door
they saw his approach, and, yielding to the girl's imploring, the lover secreted himself while
she climbed to the loft. The flutter of her dress caught the old man's eye and he hastened,
panting, into the mill. For some moments he groped about, for his eyes had not grown used to
the darkness of the place, and hearing his muttered oaths, the girl crept backward from the stair.

She was beginning to hope that she had not been seen, when her foot caught in a loose board
and she stumbled, but in her fall she threw out her hand to save herself and found a rope within
her grasp. Directly that her weight had been applied to it there was a whir and a clank. The
cord had set the great fans in motion. At the same moment a fall was heard, then a cry, passing
from anger into anguish. She rushed down the stair, the lover appeared from his hiding-place
at the same moment, and together they dragged the old man to his feet. At the moment when the
wind had started the sails he had been standing on one of the mill-stones and the sudden jerk
had thrown him down. His arm caught between the grinding surfaces and had been crushed to pulp.
He was carried home and tenderly nursed, but he did not live long; yet before he died he was
made to see the folly of his course, and he consented to the marriage that it had cost him
so dear to try to prevent. Before she could summon heart to fix the wedding-day the girl passed
many months of grief and repentance, and for the rest of her life she avoided the old mill.
There was good reason for doing so, people said, for on windy nights the spirit of the old
man used to haunt the place, using such profanity that it became visible in the form of blue
lights, dancing and exploding about the building.

EDWARD RANDOLPH'S PORTRAIT

Nothing is left of Province House, the old home of the royal governors, in Boston, but the
gilded Indian that served as its weathercock and aimed his arrow at the winds from the cupola.
The house itself was swept away long ago in the so-called march of improvement. In one of its
rooms hung a picture so dark that when Lieutenant-Governor Hutchinson went to live there hardly
anybody could say what it represented. There were hints that it was a portrait of the devil,
painted at a witch-meeting near Salem, and that on the eve of disasters in the province a dreadful
face had glared from the canvas. Shirley had seen it on the night of the fall of Ticonderoga,
and servants had gone shuddering from the room, certain that they had caught the glance of
a malignant eye.

It was known to the governors, however, that the portrait, if not that of the arch fiend, was
that of one who in the popular mind was none the less a devil: Edward Randolph, the traitor,
who had repealed the first provincial charter and deprived the colonists of their liberties.
Under the curse of the people he grew pale and pinched and ugly, his face at last becoming
so hateful that men were unwilling to look at it. Then it was that he sat for his portrait.
Threescore or odd years afterward, Hutchinson sat in the hall wondering vaguely if coming events
would consign him to the obloquy that had fallen on his predecessor, for at his bidding a fleet
had come into the harbor with three regiments of red coats on board, despatched from Halifax
to overawe the city. The coming of the selectmen to protest against quartering these troops
on the people and the substitution of martial for civic law, interrupted his reverie, and a
warm debate arose. At last the governor seized his pen impatiently, and cried, "The king is
my master and England is my home. Upheld by them, I defy the rabble."

He was about to sign the order for bringing in the troops when a curtain that had hung before
the picture was drawn aside. Hutchinson stared at the canvas in amazement, then muttered, "It
is Randolph's spirit! It wears the look of hell." The picture was seen to be that of a man
in antique garb, with a despairing, hunted, yet evil expression in the face, and seemed to
stare at Hutchinson.

"It is a warning," said one of the company.

Hutchinson recovered himself with an effort and turned away. "It is a trick," he cried; and
bending over the paper he fixed his name, as if in desperate haste. Then he trembled, turned
white, and wiped a sweat from his brow. The selectmen departed in silence but in anger, and
those who saw Hutchinson on the streets next day affirmed that the portrait had stepped out
of its canvas and stood at his side through the night. Afterward, as he lay on his death-bed,
he cried that the blood of the Boston massacre was filling his throat, and as his soul passed
from him his face, in its agony and rage, was the face of Edward Randolph.

LADY ELEANORE'S MANTLE

Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe, being orphaned, was admitted to the family of her distant relative,
Governor Shute, of Massachusetts Bay, and came to America to take her home with him. She arrived
at the gates of Province House, in Boston, in the governor's splendid coach, with outriders
and guards, and as the governor went to receive her, a pale young man, with tangled hair, sprang
from the crowd and fell in the dust at her feet, offering himself as a footstool for her to
tread upon. Her proud face lighted with a smile of scorn, and she put out her hand to stay
the governor, who was in the act of striking the fellow with his cane.

"Do not strike him," she said. "When men seek to be trampled, it is a favor they deserve."

For a moment she bore her weight on the prostrate form, "emblem of aristocracy trampling on
human sympathies and the kindred of nature," and as she stood there the bell on South Church
began to toll for a funeral that was passing at the moment. The crowd started; some looked
annoyed; Lady Eleanore remained calm and walked in stately fashion up the passage on the arm
of His Excellency. "Who was that insolent fellow?" was asked of Dr. Clarke, the governor's
physician.

"Gervase Helwyse," replied the doctor; "a youth of no fortune, but of good mind until he met
this lady in London, when he fell in love with her, and her pride and scorn have crazed him."

A few nights after a ball was given in honor of the governor's ward, and Province House was
filled with the elect of the city. Commanding in figure, beautiful in face, richly dressed
and jewelled, the Lady Eleanore was the admired of the whole assembly, and the women were especially
curious to see her mantle, for a rumor went out that it had been made by a dying girl, and
had the magic power of giving new beauty to the wearer every time it was put on. While the
guests were taking refreshment, a young man stole into the room with a silver goblet, and this
he offered on his knee to Lady Eleanore. As she looked down she recognized the face of Helwyse.

"Drink of this sacramental wine," he said, eagerly, "and pass it among the guests."

"Perhaps it is poisoned," whispered a man, and in another moment the liquor was overturned,
and Helwyse was roughly dragged away.

"Pray, gentlemen, do not hurt my poor admirer," said the lady, in a tone of languor and condescension
that was unusual to her. Breaking from his captives, Helwyse ran back and begged her to cast
her mantle into the fire. She replied by throwing a fold of it above her head and smiling as
she said, "Farewell. Remember me as you see me now."

Helwyse shook his head sadly and submitted to be led away. The weariness in Eleanore's manner
increased; a flush was burning on her cheek; her laugh had grown infrequent. Dr. Clarke whispered
something in the governor's ear that made that gentleman start and look alarmed. It was announced
that an unforeseen circumstance made it necessary to close the festival at once, and the company
went home. A few days after the city was thrown into a panic by an outbreak of small-pox, a
disease that in those times could not be prevented nor often cured, and that gathered its victims
by thousands. Graves were dug in rows, and every night the earth was piled hastily on fresh
corpses. Before all infected houses hung a red flag of warning, and Province House was the
first to show it, for the plague had come to town in Lady Eleanore's mantle. The people cursed
her pride and pointed to the flags as her triumphal banners. The pestilence was at its height
when Gervase Helwyse appeared in Province House. There were none to stay him now, and he climbed
the stairs, peering from room to room, until he entered a darkened chamber, where something
stirred feebly under a silken coverlet and a faint voice begged for water. Helwyse tore apart
the curtains and exclaimed, "Fie! What does such a thing as you in Lady Eleanore's apartment?"

The figure on the bed tried to hide its hideous face. "Do not look on me," it cried. "I am
cursed for my pride that I wrapped about me as a mantle. You are avenged. I am Eleanore Rochcliffe."

The lunatic stared for a moment, then the house echoed with his laughter. The deadly mantle
lay on a chair. He snatched it up, and waving also the red flag of the pestilence ran into
the street. In a short time an effigy wrapped in the mantle was borne to Province House and
set on fire by a mob. From that hour the pest abated and soon disappeared, though graves and
scars made a bitter memory of it for many a year. Unhappiest of all was the disfigured creature
who wandered amid the shadows of Province House, never showing her face, unloved, avoided, lonely.

HOWE'S MASQUERADE

During the siege of Boston Sir William Howe undertook to show his contempt for the raw fellows
who were disrespectfully tossing cannon-balls at him from the batteries in Cambridge and South
Boston, by giving a masquerade. It was a brilliant affair, the belles and blades of the loyalist
set being present, some in the garb of their ancestors, for the past is ever more picturesque
than the present, and a few roisterers caricaturing the American generals in ragged clothes,
false noses, and absurd wigs. At the height of the merriment a sound of a dirge echoing through
the streets caused the dance to stop. The funeral music paused before the doors of Province
House, where the dance was going on, and they were flung open. Muffled drums marked time for
a company that began to file down the great stair from the floor above the ball-room: dark
men in steeple-hats and pointed beards, with Bibles, swords, and scrolls, who looked sternly
at the guests and descended to the street.

Colonel Joliffe, a Whig, whose age and infirmity had prevented him from joining Washington,
and whose courtesy and intelligence had made him respected by his foes, acted as chorus: "These
I take to be the Puritan governors of Massachusetts: Endicott, Winthrop, Vane, Dudley, Haynes,
Bellingham, Leverett, Bradstreet." Then came a rude soldier, mailed, begirt with arms: the
tyrant Andros; a brown-faced man with a sailor's gait: Sir William Phipps; a courtier wigged
and jewelled: Earl Bellomont; the crafty, well-mannered Dudley; the twinkling, red-nosed Shute;
the ponderous Burnet; the gouty Belcher; Shirley, Pownall, Bernard, Hutchinson; then a soldier,
whose cocked hat he held before his face. "'Tis the shape of Gage!" cried an officer, turning
pale. The lights were dull and an uncomfortable silence had fallen on the company. Last, came
a tall man muffled in a military cloak, and as he paused on the landing the guests looked from
him to their host in amazement, for it was the figure of Howe himself. The governor's patience
was at an end, for this was a part of the masquerade that had not been looked for. He fiercely
cried to Joliffe, "There is a plot in this. Your head has stood too long on a traitor's shoulders."

"Make haste to cut it off, then," was the reply, "for the power of Sir William Howe and of
the king, his master, is at an end. These shadows are mourners at his funeral. Look! The last
of the governors."

Howe rushed with drawn sword on the figure of himself, when it turned and looked at him. The
blade clanged to the floor and Howe fell back with a gasp of horror, for the face was his own.
Hand nor voice was raised to stay the double-goer as it mournfully passed on. At the threshold
it stamped its foot and shook its fists in air; then the door closed. Mingled with the strains
of the funeral march, as it died along the empty streets, came the tolling of the bell on South
Church steeple, striking the hour of midnight. The festivities were at an end and, oppressed
by a nameless fear, the spectators of this strange pageant made ready for departure; but before
they left the booming of cannon at the southward announced that Washington had advanced. The
glories of Province House were over. When the last of the royal governors left it he paused
on the threshold, beat his foot on the stone, and flung up his hands in an attitude of grief
and rage.

OLD ESTHER DUDLEY

Boston had surrendered. Washington was advancing from the heights where he had trained his
guns on the British works, and Sir William Howe lingered at the door of Province House,--last
of the royal governors who would stand there,--and cursed and waved his hands and beat his
heel on the step, as if he were crushing rebellion by that act. The sound brought an old woman
to his side. "Esther Dudley!" he exclaimed. "Why are you not gone?"

"I shall never leave. As housekeeper for the governors and pensioner of the king, this has
been my home; the only home I know. Go back, but send more troops. I will keep the house till
you return."

"Grant that I may return," he cried. "Since you will stay, take this bag of guineas and keep
this key until a governor shall demand it."

Then, with fierce and moody brow, the governor went forth, and the faded eyes of Esther Dudley
saw him nevermore. When the soldiers of the republic cast about for quarters in Boston town,
they spared the official mansion to this old woman. Her bridling toryism and assumption of
old state amused them and did no harm; indeed, her loyalty was half admired; beside, nobody
took the pride in the place that she did, or would keep it in better order. That she sometimes
had a half-dozen of unrepentant codgers in to dinner, and that they were suspected of drinking
healths to George III. in crusted port, was a fact to blink. Rumor had it that not all her
guests were flesh and blood, but that she had an antique mirror across which ancient occupants
of the house would pass in shadowy procession at her command, and that she was wont to have
the Shirleys, Olivers, Hutchinsons, and Dudleys out of their graves to hold receptions there;
so a touch of dread may have mingled in the feeling that kept the populace aloof.

Living thus by herself, refusing to hear of rebel victories, construing the bonfires, drumming,
hurrahs, and bell-ringing to signify fresh triumphs for England, she drifted farther and farther
out of her time and existed in the shadows of the past. So, when it was bandied about the streets
that the governor was coming, she took it in no wise strange, but dressed herself in silk and
hoops, with store of ancient jewels, and made ready to receive him. In truth, there was a function,
for already a man of stately mien, and richly dressed, was advancing through the court, with
a staff of men in wigs and laced coats behind him, and a company of troops at a little distance.
Esther Dudley flung the door wide and dropping on her knees held forth the key with the cry,
"Thank heaven for this hour! God save the king!"

The governor put off his hat and helped the woman to her feet. "A strange prayer," said he;
"yet we will echo it to this effect: For the good of the realm that still owns him to be its
ruler, God save King George."

Esther Dudley stared wildly. That face she remembered now,--the proscribed rebel, John Hancock;
governor, not by royal grant, but by the people's will.

"Have I welcomed a traitor? Then let me die."

"Alas! Mistress Dudley, the world has changed for you in these later years. America has no
king." He offered her his arm, and she clung to it for a moment, then, sinking down, the great
key, that she so long had treasured, clanked to the floor.

"I have been faithful unto death," she gasped. "God save the king!"

The people uncovered, for she was dead.

"At her tomb," said Hancock, "we will bid farewell forever to the past. A new day has come
for us. In its broad light we will press onward."

THE LOSS OF JACOB HURD

Jacob Hurd, stern witch-harrier of Ipswich, can abide nothing out of the ordinary course of
things, whether it be flight on a broomstick or the wrong adding of figures; so his son gives
him trouble, for he is an imaginative boy, who walks alone, talking to the birds, making rhymes,
picking flowers, and dreaming. That he will never be a farmer, mechanic, or tradesman is as
good as certain, and one day when the child runs in with a story of a golden horse, with tail
and mane of silver, on which he has ridden over land and sea, climbing mountains and swimming
rivers, he turns pale with fright lest the boy be bewitched; then, as the awfulness of the
invention becomes manifest, he cries, "Thou knowest thou art lying," and strikes the little fellow.

The boy staggers into his mother's arms, and that night falls into a fever, in which he raves
of his horse and the places he will see, while Jacob sits by his side, too sore in heart for
words, and he never leaves the cot for food or sleep till the fever is burned out. Just before
he closes his eyes the child looks about him and says that he hears the horse pawing in the
road, and, either for dust or cloud or sun gleam, it seems for an instant as if the horse were
there. The boy gives a cry of joy, then sinks upon his pillow, lifeless.

Some time after this Jacob sets off one morning, while the stars are out, to see three witches
hanged, but at evening his horse comes flying up the road, splashed with blood and foam, and
the neighbors know from that of Jacob's death, for he is lying by the wayside with an Indian
arrow in his heart and an axemark on his head. The wife runs to the door, and, though she shakes
with fear at its approach, she sees that in the sunset glow the horse's sides have a shine
like gold, and its mane and tail are silver white. Now the animal is before the house, but
the woman does not faint or cry at the blood splash on the saddle, for--is it the dust-cloud
that takes that shape?--she sees on its back a boy with a shining face, who throws a kiss at
her,--her Paul. He, little poet, lives in spirit, and has found happiness.

THE HOBOMAK

Such was the Indian name of the site of Westboro, Massachusetts, and the neighboring pond was
Hochomocko. The camp of the red men near the shore was full of bustle one day, for their belle,
Iano, was to marry the young chief, Sassacus. The feast was spread and all were ready to partake
of it, when it was found that the bride was missing. One girl had seen her steal into the wood
with a roguish smile on her lip, and knew that she intended to play hide-and-seek with Sassacus
before she should be proclaimed a wife, but the day wore on and she did not come. Among those
who were late in reaching camp was Wequoash, who brought a panther in that he had slain on
Boston Hill, and he bragged about his skill, as usual. There had been a time when he was a
rival of the chief for the hand of Iano, and he showed surprise and concern at her continued
absence. The search went on for two days, and, at the end of that time, the girl's body was
taken from the lake.

At the funeral none groaned so piteously as Wequoash. Yet Sassacus felt his loss so keenly
that he fell into a sickness next day, and none was found so constant in his ministrations
as Wequoash; but all to no avail, for within a week Sassacus, too, was dead. As the strongest
and bravest remaining in the tribe, Wequoash became heir to his honors by election.

A year later he sat moodily by the lakeside, when a flame burst up from the water, and a canoe
floated toward him that a mysterious agency impelled him to enter. The boat sped toward the
flame, that, at his approach, assumed Iano's form. He heard the water gurgle as he passed over
the spot where the shape had glimmered, but there was no other sound or check. Next year this
thing occurred again, and then the spirit spoke: "Only once more."

Yet a third time his fate took him to the spot, and as the hour came on he called his people
to him: "This," said he, "is my death-day. I have done evil, and the time comes none too soon.
Sassacus was your chief. I envied him his happiness, and gave him poison when I nursed him.
Worse than that, I saw Iano in her canoe on her wedding-day. She had refused my hand. I entered
my canoe and chased her over the water, in pretended sport, but in the middle of the lake I
upset her birch and she was drowned. See! she comes!"

For, as he spoke, the light danced up again, and the boat came, self-impelled, to the strand.
Wequoash entered it, and with head bent down was hurried away. Those on the shore saw the flame
condense to a woman's shape, and a voice issued from it: "It is my hour!" A blinding bolt of
lightning fell, and at the appalling roar of thunder all hid their faces. When they looked
up, boat and flame had vanished. 

But the people said when she found dead the next morning he was frozen.

  

    [Image]
    

    [Note 1: Juki = snow, onna = woman, Juki-onna = Snow woman.]

[Note 2.

Nishikase Say]

  

The white fox.

[Image]

Many years ago, once hunted in the forest of Shimoda [1] the son of a prince. He had the rare
chance to catch a snow-white fox female. He wanted the animal kill, but Yasuna, the son of a
temple warden, who took part in the hunt, asked it to give him, because he knew that such
foxes with white fur have magical powers, several thousand years old and are able to transform
into any shape. But the son the prince wanted the beautiful fur of the animal itself, from the
request and suggested Yasuna ordered his men to kill the fox. Yasuna but took possession of
by force, as he struggled with the hunters and, although bleeding from many wounds, he could
with the animals flee.

After a while he was gone, he broke exhausted together, and he had The Fox release, which disappeared quickly
in the forest. Strangely, suddenly his Fiancee Kuzunoha therefore that, when they saw his wounds,
and she joined him home conducted.

Yasuna was surprised to see his
fiancee with him, which he wore at her parents, who in Kumamoto province
[2], far from Shimoda, lived, suspected and asked, therefore, how
it is that they here are now and have found him in the forest. At last they could endure his abuse no
longer; his example had affected other Anglomaniacs, and a committee waited on him to tell
him that he could either swear allegiance to the colonies or be hanged. He said he would be
hanged if he would swear, or words to that effect, and hanged he was, on a ready-made gallows
in the street. He was let down shortly, "brought around" with rum, and the oath was offered
again. He refused it. This had not been looked for. It had been taken for granted that he would
abjure his fealty to the king at the first tightening of the cord. A conference was held, and
it was declared that retreat would be undignified and unsafe, so the Tory was swung up again,
this time with a yank that seemed to "mean business." He hung for some time, and when lowered
gave no sign of life. There was some show of alarm at this, for nobody wanted to kill the old
fellow, and every effort was made to restore consciousness. At last the lungs heaved, the purple
faded from his cheek, his eyes opened, and he gasped, "I'll swear." With a shout of joy the
company hurried him to the tavern, seated him before the fire, and put a glass of punch in
his hand. He drank the punch to Washington's health, and after a time was heard to remark to
himself, "It's a hard way to make Whigs, but it'll do it."

Nathan Jackson, of Tyringham, was another Yankee who had seen fit to take arms against his
countrymen, and when captured he was charged with treason and remanded for trial. The jail,
in Great Barrington, was so little used in those days of sturdy virtue that it had become a
mere shed, fit to hold nobody, and Jackson, after being locked into it, might have walked out
whenever he felt disposed; but escape, he thought, would have been a confession of the wrongness
of Tory principles, or of a fear to stand trial. He found life so monotonous, however, that
he asked the sheriff to let him go out to work during the day, promising to sleep in his cell,
and such was his reputation for honesty that his request was granted without a demur, the prisoner
returning every night to be locked up. When the time approached for the court to meet in Springfield
heavy harvesting had begun, and, as there was no other case from Berkshire County to present,
the sheriff grumbled at the bother of taking his prisoner across fifty miles of rough country,
but Jackson said that he would make it all right by going alone. The sheriff was glad to be
released from this duty, so off went the Tory to give himself up and be tried for his life.
On the way he was overtaken by Mr. Edwards, of the Executive Council, then about to meet in
Boston, and without telling his own name or office, he learned the extraordinary errand of
this lonely pedestrian. Jackson was tried, admitted the charges against him, and was sentenced
to death. While he awaited execution of the law upon him, the council in Boston received petitions
for clemency, and Mr. Edwards asked if there was none in favor of Nathan Jackson. There was
none. Mr. Edwards related the circumstance of his meeting with the condemned man, and a murmur
of surprise and admiration went around the room. A despatch was sent to Springfield. When it
reached there the prison door was flung open and Jackson walked forth free.

THE REVENGE OF JOSIAH BREEZE

Two thousand Cape Cod fishermen had gone to join the colonial army, and in their absence the
British ships had run in shore to land crews on mischievous errands. No man, woman, or child
on the Cape but hated the troops and sailors of King George, and would do anything to work
them harm. When the Somerset was wrecked off Truro, in 1778, the crew were helped ashore, 'tis
true, but they were straightway marched to prison, and it was thought that no other frigate
would venture near the shifting dunes where she had laid her skeleton, as many a good ship
had done before and has done since. It was November, and ugly weather was shutting in, when
a three-decker, that had been tacking off shore and that flew the red flag, was seen to yaw
wildly while reefing sail and drift toward land with a broken tiller. No warning signal was
raised on the bluffs; not a hand was stirred to rescue. Those who saw the accident watched
with sullen satisfaction the on-coming of the vessel, nor did they cease to look for disaster
when the ship anchored and stowed sail.

Ezekiel and Josiah Breeze, father and son, stood at the door of their cottage and watched her
peril until three lights twinkling faintly through the gray of driving snow were all that showed
where the enemy lay, straining at her cables and tossing on a wrathful sea. They stood long
in silence, but at last the boy exclaimed, "I'm going to the ship."

"If you stir from here, you're no son of mine," said Ezekiel.

"But she's in danger, dad."

"As she oughter be. By mornin' she'll be strewed along the shore and not a spar to mark where
she's a-swingin' now."

"And the men?"

"It's a jedgment, boy."

The lad remembered how the sailors of the Ajax had come ashore to burn the homes of peaceful
fishermen and farmers; how women had been insulted; how his friends and mates had been cut
down at Long Island with British lead and steel; how, when he ran to warn away a red-faced
fellow that was robbing his garden, the man had struck him on the shoulder with a cutlass.
He had sworn then to be revenged. But to let a host go down to death and never lift a helping
hand--was that a fair revenge? "I've got to go, dad," he burst forth. "Tomorrow morning there'll
be five hundred faces turned up on the beach, covered with ice and staring at the sky, and
five hundred mothers in England will wonder when they're goin' to see those faces again. If
ever they looked at me the sight of 'em would never go out of my eyes. I'd be harnted by 'em,
awake and asleep. And to-morrow is Thanksgiving. I've got to go, dad, and I will." So speaking,
he rushed away and was swallowed in the gloom.

The man stared after him; then, with a revulsion of feeling, he cried, "You're right, 'Siah.
I'll go with you." But had he called in tones of thunder he would not have been heard in the
roar of the wind and crash of the surf. As he reached the shore he saw faintly on the phosphorescent
foam a something that climbed a hill of water; it was lost over its crest and reappeared on
the wave beyond; it showed for a moment on the third wave, then it vanished in the night. "Josiah!"
It was a long, querulous cry. No answer. In half an hour a thing rode by the watcher on the
sands and fell with a crash beside him--a boat bottom up: his son's.

Next day broke clear, with new snow on the ground. In his house at Provincetown, Captain Breeze
was astir betimes, for his son Ezekiel, his grandson Josiah, and all other relatives who were
not at the front with Washington were coming for the family reunion. Plump turkeys were ready
for the roasting, great loaves of bread and cake stood beside the oven, redoubtable pies of
pumpkin and apple filled the air with maddening odors. The people gathered and chattered around
his cheery fire of the damage that the storm had done, when Ezekiel stumbled in, his brown
face haggard, his lips working, and a tremor in his hands. He said, "Josiah!" in a thick voice,
then leaned his arms against the chimney and pressed his face upon them. Among fishermen whose
lives are in daily peril the understanding of misfortune is quick, and the old man put his
hand on the shoulder of his son and bent his head. The day of joy was become a day of gloom.
As the news went out, the house began to fill with sympathizing friends, and there was talking
in low voices through the rooms, when a cry of surprise was heard outside. A ship, cased in
tons of ice, was forging up the harbor, her decks swarming with blue jackets, some of whom
were beating off the frozen masses from lower spars and rigging. She followed the channel so
steadily, it was plain to be seen that a wise hand was at her helm; her anchor ran out and
she swung on the tide. "The Ajax, as I'm a sinner!" exclaimed a sailor on shore. A boat put
off from her, and people angrily collected at the wharf, with talk of getting out their guns,
when a boyish figure arose in the stern, and was greeted with a shout of surprise and welcome.

The boat touched the beach, Josiah Breeze leaped out of it, and in another minute his father
had him in a bear's embrace, making no attempt to stop the tears that welled out of his eyes.
An officer had followed Josiah on shore, and going to the group he said, "That boy is one to
be proud of. He put out in a sea that few men could face, to save an enemy's ship and pilot
it into the harbor. I could do no less than bring him back." There was praise and laughter
and clasping of hands, and when the Thanksgiving dinner was placed, smoking, on the board,
the commander of H. M. S. Ajax was among the jolliest of the guests at Captain Breeze's table.

THE MAY-POLE OF MERRYMOUNT

The people of Merrymount--unsanctified in the eyes of their Puritan neighbors, for were they
not Episcopals, who had pancakes at Shrovetide and wassail at Christmas?--were dancing about
their May-pole one summer evening, for they tried to make it May throughout the year. Some
were masked like animals, and all were tricked with flowers and ribbons. Within their circle,
sharing in song and jest, were the lord and lady of the revels, and an English clergyman waiting
to join the pair in wedlock. Life, they sang, should be all jollity: away with care and duty;
leave wisdom to the weak and old, and sanctity for fools. Watching the sport from a neighboring
wood stood a band of frowning Puritans, and as the sun set they stalked forth and broke through
the circle. All was dismay. The bells, the laughter, the song were silent, and some who had
tasted Puritan wrath before shrewdly smelled the stocks. A Puritan of iron face--it was Endicott,
who had cut the cross from the flag of England--warning aside the "priest of Baal," proceeded
to hack the pole down with his sword. A few swinging blows, and down it sank, with its ribbons
and flowers.

"So shall fall the pride of vain people; so shall come to grief the preachers of false religion,"
quoth he. "Truss those fellows to the trees and give them half a dozen of blows apiece as token
that we brook no ungodly conduct and hostility to our liberties. And you, king and queen of
the May, have you no better things to think about than fiddling and dancing? How if I punish
you both?"

"Had I the power I'd punish you for saying it," answered the swain; "but, as I have not, I
am compelled to ask that the girl go unharmed."

"Will you have it so, or will you share your lover's punishment?" asked Endicott.

"I will take all upon myself," said the woman.

The face of the governor softened. "Let the young fellow's hair be cut, in pumpkin-shell fashion,"
he commanded; "then bring them to me but gently."

He was obeyed, and as the couple came before him, hand in hand, he took a chain of roses from
the fallen pole and cast it about their necks. And so they were married. Love had softened
rigor and all were better for the assertion of a common humanity. But the May-pole of Merrymount
was never set up again. There were no more games and plays and dances, nor singing of worldly
music. The town went to ruin, the merrymakers were scattered, and the gray sobriety of religion
and toil fell on Pilgrim land again.

THE DEVIL AND TOM WALKER

When Charles River was lined with groves and marshes there lived in a cabin, near Brighton,
Massachusetts, an ill-fed rascal named Tom Walker. There was but one in the commonwealth who
was more penurious, and that was his wife. They squabbled over the spending of a penny and
each grudged food to the other. One day as Tom walked through the pine wood near his place,
by habit watching the ground--for even there a farthing might be discovered--he prodded his
stick into a skull, cloven deep by an Indian tomahawk. He kicked it, to shake the dirt off,
when a gruff voice spake: "What are you doing in my grounds?" A swarthy fellow, with the face
of a charcoal burner, sat on a stump, and Tom wondered that he had not seen him as he approached.

He replied, "Your grounds! They belong to Deacon Peabody."

"Deacon Peabody be damned!" cried the black fellow; "as I think he will be, anyhow, if he does
not look after his own sins a little sharper and a little less curiously after his neighbors'.
Look, if you want to see how he is faring," and, pointing to a tree, he called Tom to notice
that the deacon's name was written on the bark and that it was rotten at the core. To his surprise,
Tom found that nearly every tree had the name of some prominent man cut upon it.

"Who are you?" he asked.

"I go by different names in different places," replied the dark one. "In some countries I am
the black miner; in some the wild huntsman; here I am the black woodman. I am the patron of
slave dealers and master of Salem witches."

"I think you are the devil," blurted Tom.

"At your service," replied his majesty.

Now, Tom, having lived long with Mrs. Walker, had no fear of the devil, and he stopped to have
a talk with him. The devil remarked, in a careless tone, that Captain Kidd had buried his treasure
in that wood, under his majesty's charge, and that whoever wished could find and keep it by
making the usual concession. This Tom declined. He told his wife about it, however, and she
was angry with him for not having closed the bargain at once, declaring that if he had not
courage enough to add this treasure to their possessions she would not hesitate to do it. Tom
showed no disposition to check her. If she got the money he would try to get a share of it,
and if the devil took away his helpmate--well, there were things that he had made his mind
to endure, when he had to. True enough, the woman started for the wood before sundown, with
her spoons in her apron. When Tom discovered that the spoons were gone he, too, set off, for
he wanted those back, anyway; but he did not overtake his wife. An apron was found in a tree
containing a dried liver and a withered heart, and near that place the earth had been trampled
and strewn with handfuls of coarse hair that reminded Tom of the man that he had met in the
woods. "Egad!" he muttered, "Old Nick must have had a tough time with her." Half in gratitude
and half in curiosity, Tom waited to speak to the dark man, and was next day rewarded by seeing
that personage come through the wood with an axe, whistling carelessly. Tom at once approached
him on the subject of the buried treasure--not the vanished wife, for her he no longer regarded
as a treasure.

After some haggling the devil proposed that Tom should start a loan office in Boston and use
Kidd's money in exacting usury. This suited Tom, who promised to screw four per cent. a month
out of the unfortunates who might ask his aid, and he was seen to start for town with a bag
which his neighbors thought to hold his crop of starveling turnips, but which was really a
king's ransom in gold and jewels--the earnings of Captain Kidd in long years of honest piracy.
It was in Governor Belcher's time, and cash was scarce. Merchants and professional men as well
as the thriftless went to Tom for money, and, as he always had it, his business grew until
he seemed to have a mortgage on half the men in Boston who were rich enough to be in debt.
He even went so far as to move into a new house, to ride in his own carriage, and to eat enough
to keep body and soul together, for he did not want to give up his soul to the one who would
claim it just yet.

The most singular proof of his thrift--showing that he wanted to save soul and money both--was
shown in his joining the church and becoming a prayerful Christian. He kept a Bible in his
pocket and another on his desk, resolved to be prepared if a certain gentleman should call.
He buried his old horse feet uppermost, for he was taught that on resurrection day the world
would be turned upside down, and he was resolved, if his enemy appeared, to give him a run
for it. While employed one afternoon in the congenial task of foreclosing a mortgage his creditor
begged for another day to raise the money. Tom was irritable on account of the hot weather
and talked to him as a good man of the church ought not to do.

"You have made so much money out of me," wailed the victim of Tom's philanthropies.

"Now, the devil take me if I have made a farthing!" exclaimed Tom.

At that instant there were three knocks at the door, and, stepping out to see who was there,
the money lender found himself in presence of his fate. His little Bible was in a coat on a
nail, and the bigger one was on his desk. He was without defence. The evil one caught him up
like a child, had him on the back of his snorting steed in no time, and giving the beast a
cut he flew like the wind in the teeth of a rising storm toward the marshes of Brighton. As
he reached there a lightning flash descended into the wood and set it on fire. At the same
moment Tom's house was discovered to be in flames. When his effects were examined nothing was
found in his strong boxes but cinders and shavings.

THE GRAY CHAMPION

It befell Sir Edmund Andros to make himself the most hated of the governors sent to represent
the king in New England. A spirit of independence, born of a free soil, was already moving
in the people's hearts, and the harsh edicts of this officer, as well as the oppressive measures
of his master, brought him into continual conflict with the people. He it was who went to Hartford
to demand the surrender of the liberties of that colony. The lights were blown out and the
patent of those liberties was hurried away from under his nose and hidden from his reach in
a hollow of the Charter Oak.

In Boston, too, he could call no American his friend, and it was there that he met one of the
first checks to his arrogance. It was an April evening in 1689, and there was an unusual stir
in the streets. People were talking in low tones, and one caught such phrases as, "If the Prince
of Orange is successful, this Andros will lose his head." "Our pastors are to be burned alive
in King Street." "The pope has ordered Andros to celebrate the eve of St. Bartholomew in Boston:
we are to be killed." "Our old Governor Bradstreet is in town, and Andros fears him." While
talk was running in this excited strain the sound of a drum was heard coming through Cornhill.
Now was seen a file of soldiers with guns on shoulder, matches twinkling in the falling twilight,
and behind them, on horseback, Andros and his councillors, including the priest of King's Chapel,
all wearing crucifixes at their throats, all flushed with wine, all looking down with indifference
at the people in their dark cloaks and broadbrimmed hats, who looked back at them with suspicion
and hate. The other performs the signature sheet: Dedi à Mr. le Docteur Hermann, Assesseur de
la cour provinciale suprême de justice SA Elect. Saxe et de la ville de Senator for Leipsic, par son
ami Goethe. An accurate and detailed description of the aforementioned sheets provided Karl
Buchner's an essay in the morning paper from 1828. No. 3-6.

The fumes injurious to health, which developed the etching of copper engravings, Goethe was
a dangerous chest tightness fault that he is also probably due to the have been subjected to copious
consumption of beer and strong coffee might Merseburg. The organism his nature was shaken so violently
that he had once awakened at night by a severe hemorrhage. The medical assistance of Dr. Reichel
accelerated his recovery. He was again clear voted for the handling of his friends, which
he ill-health and ill-humor of had shooed itself.

The time when Goethe was to return to quit studies again in the parental home, was near. Shortly
before his departure occurred a riot between the students and citizen soldiers. Goethe had no part
in these affairs. With that academic echo of great deeds he left Leipzig in September 1768th He
had been there some builds friendships. The influence which had a residence in Leipzig on his education,
he could not ignore. He had to admit however that he was not the prospects and hopes of his
parents, particularly met. He had devoted entirely to other studies, do as his father did,
the with difficulty concealed the indignation, his son, who now holds the virus and he prescribed
should go through web is still not adequately prepared for it, and
besides, mentally and to see physically ill to return home.

But Goethe did not regret the self-chosen path, and never forgot his gratitude to the man the
first leads him up on it. 9 November 1768 he wrote to Leipzig to Oeser: "What am I not guilty
of all that you showed me the way to the truth and beauty that You have made my heart to feel
the excitement. I owe you more than I will could thank. The taste, which I am beautiful, my knowledge,
insights, have I not all of you by? As surely as obvious to me is true of the strange, almost incomprehensible
sentence become that the workshop of a great artist over the budding philosophers, the germinating
density development, as the auditorium of the wise and the critic. Teaching does much, but encouragement
does everything. Encouragement after censure is sunshine after the rain, fertile Flourish. If
you had not helped up my love of the Muses, I was desperate. You know what I was when I came
to you, and what I was when I went from you.

The Difference is your work. "

As Goethe [Goethe] wrote this letter he had recently recovered from a dangerous disease, by defective
digestion and thus produced the liveliest apprehensions Asthma his parents excited. Never forget
it was the loving care of his mother and the tender Sympathy of his sister Cornelia. Due to his
illness all earthly matters alienated, turned his mind to the heavenly. With all the warmth and
intimacy of his Feeling he was trying to take the invisible. Like him as a child, preferably
the Old Testament addressed, he worked well, like a fanatical enthusiasm
taken with the New Testament writings.

In this turn of mind he met a friend of his sick soul

Mother, a lady of mountain climbing, and later from their conversations and letters, the Goethe
Fabric hernahm to in his "Wilhelm Meister" contained "Confessions of a beautiful soul." His relation
to the lady of mountain climbing was, despite the enthusiastic direction their spirit, the earthly
existence utterly alienated only with the eternal salvation of the Soul busy, but not without
influence on Goethe's moral refinement. In any case, would however, he can use his time better
than the reading of all sorts of mystical writings. By Theophrastus, Paracelsus, and others,
he was in the field of chemistry out. With the help of a small laboratory he made, under the guidance of some
chemical Boerhave'schen Compendium Experiments, which proved imperfect as it is, his knowledge in
many ways enriched. Also, drawing, etching, etchings and came back
into the series of his favorite activities.

According to the most varied directions wandered its activity, which won only a fixed base
seemed to have, as he again turned to philosophical studies.

The path that took his level was a letter to the daughter of his friend Oeser, from 13. Februar
1769th "My present life," wrote Goethe, "is dedicated to the philosophy. Imprisoned, alone, circle,
paper, pen and ink, and two books is my whole armor; and in this simple way to get the knowledge
of truth is often so close and further Other than with their library science. A great scholar is seldom
a great philosopher, and who has browsed through a lot of trouble with books, scorned the
easy, simple book of nature, and nothing is true, but what is simple. Of course, a recommendation
for the true wisdom! Who's the stupid way that it go and be quiet. Demuth and deliberately are
the most necessary steps on our properties, each of which finally rewarded is. I thank your dear
father, he has prepared for my first soul to this path. The Time will bless my industry, that
he can perform what is started. If you think otherwise, as great minds, so it is usually a sign
of a small mind. I do not like to One and the other being. A great mind wanders as good as
a smaller, that because he does not Bounds, knows this, because he takes his horizons to the
world. O my friend; Light is the truth of which it swells the light. The night is not true. And what
is Beauty? It is not light and not night, twilight, a birth of truth and falsehood, a cross. In
their kingdom there is a crossroads, however ambiguous, so cross-eyed,
a Hercules among philosophers could lay hands.

"

In grateful recollection of his "love Oeser" wrote Goethe 20 February 1770 to the bookseller Empire
in London: "After Oeser and Wieland Shakspeare is the only one I outlaw for my teacher know. Others
had shown me that I was missing, which show me I should do better. "The letter was also mentioned
some characteristic Observations of Wieland. "My opinion as to the Diogenes of Sinope," wrote
Goethe, "will Do not ask. Feelings and silence is all what you do on this occasion can, because
that will commend you a great man did not know if one is not as great as he. But angry, I'm
looking forward to Wieland's statement, and I think rightly so. Wieland has the misfortune to
be often not understood. Maybe sometimes the blame is his, but sometimes it is not, and there
has to be irritated when people their misunderstandings of the Sell ​​audience for explanations.
"His devotion to Goethe Wieland said at the conclusion of his Letter in the word. "When you write
this great author or him speak, have The goodness to make him a young man known to the man's,
although not enough to appreciate its merits, but has a tender heart
enough to worship them.

"

How little value attributed Goethe created his poems in Leipzig, he proved by the executed resolution,
the greater part of them, soon after his arrival in Frankfurt, the flames of sacrifice. Several
unfinished dramatic works met this fate. Spared remained only "the mood of the lover" and "accomplices."
The latter piece received some improvements. These poetic pursuits were interrupted by near his
departure to Strasbourg. There should Goethe after his father's wishes, his studies and complete
the purchase is legal Doctorhut. Goethe's father was still hope not
to educate his son, an able lawyer.

From the cathedral looked Goethe soon after his arrival in Strasbourg, the city and its environs.
He praised his fate that he had intended such a graceful residence. On the summer side the fish
market, a long and very busy street, he took a friendly apartment. The lunch table he had in a
very educated merchant family, to which he has been recommended was. A large portion of the
study leaders in Strasbourg was dedicated to the pharmacy. This strengthened Goethe also an interest
in medicine. In the second semester he heard in chemistry, musician, and anatomy at Lobstein, without
putting in question his professional career, the jurisprudence.

With the help of a repeaters, which he added one of his friends, the Actuar Salzmann, recommended
Goethe, which he missed yet to succeed in the legal exam with honors.

On dispersal and dismemberment of his studies he lacked in Strasbourg as little as During his stay
in Leipzig. Tempting for him was the gay life in Alsace. Some Summer evening he spent with
some friends in public gardens and other pleasure resorts. Also, he made frequent trips, especially
romantic in the mountain areas. His graceful Shape, open mind recommended him everywhere, and he
won access to the principal Circles.

The demands of academic life, he corresponded with his skill in Fencing. But the dance and the
card game that he did not actually, paid homage to Goethe, so as not to offend the fine Gesellschaftston.

Unquestionably
the most important event during his stay in Strasbourg was the personal Acquaintance with Herder,
who as a travel companion of the Prince of Holstein-gemüthskranken Eutin came to Strasbourg.
A long-cherished desire favorite saw Goethe met, as granted to him was to approach the famous
man who through his "Fragments of German literature", by its 'critical forests' and other writings
the interest of the educated public had directed to be decided. In the inn, where Herder returned,
he made Goethe his respects. Herder was wearing a black dress and a silk coat of the same color.
His powdered hair was attached to a round curl, making it similar to a priest saw. After the description
which Goethe drew in later years of Herder's personality, was "around his face, his forehead significantly,
the nose a bit dull, his mouth slightly raised, but highly individual pleasant and amiable. In
a brown-black eyes sparkled Pair of coal-black eyes out, their effect did not fail, regardless
of one eye inflamed and red, was and should be operated upon by Lobstein.

"

Through a wealth of life experiences, coupled with a peculiar attraction Herder practiced, though
he was only five years older than Goethe, this such a compelling Appeal of that openness with him
a true-hearted account of his youth jobs designed and hobbies. Herder's sharp rebuke, and
his sarcastic remarks could it does not reduce the respect that Goethe felt for him. He owed
a large increase in new ideas and the most varied skills. In a completely different light seemed
to him the favorite book of his youth, the Bible, by Herder in his work: "The Spirit of Hebrew
Poetry" collected flowers oriental poetry. Everywhere Herder told him a freer view of the
large field of literature. Was particularly Goethe by him acquainted with the principal products
of the English literature. A even more decisive influence on Herder, Goethe would have won's
education, when his insatiable thirst for knowledge had not often deterred by all sorts of sarcastic
remarks Goethe's met the very complacency and vanity. For fear of censure Herder Goethe hid
him hence his interest in poetic objects, and especially the idea to choose the curry and gallant
knight Götz von Berlichingen a dramatic hero.

To the circle in which Goethe was moving at the time, were out of Herder, some others more or less excellent
individuals. The well-known under the name of Jung-Stilling writer was then in Strasbourg.
Goethe praised in later years of his enthusiasm for everything good, true and rights. "Indestructible,
Goethe said, his faith in God and was to an outgoing immediately help him. His faith would
tolerate no doubt, and his Conviction, not ridicule. "A peculiar innocence and a gentle sense of humor-characterized,
according to Goethe's own confession, his friend Franz Lerse. His skill at fencing qualificirte him to
arbitration and adjudication in all affairs, the students in the world, not by Words and declarations
could be eliminated. The name of his friend Goethe later immortalized in his "idol of Berlichingen."
Only in the last period of his stay he met the known as a brilliant eccentric known poet Lenz,
who later (1792) in mental disorders died at Moscow. The eccentricity of Shakspeare and the incomparable
humor of Britten perceive and reproduce, no one was more suitable than spring, as its translation
from Love's Labour's Lost and the same proved accompanying notes to the theater. How he felt, even
Goethe not repulsed by the coarseness in Shakespeare's works, rather abundantly compensated by the
fact prevailing truth and nature. In their social Circles of Goethe and his friends availed themselves
of the used words and phrases from Shakespeare. He was their example in poetry, as in life.

The Goethe awoke early feeling for natural beauty attracted him in
the graceful neighborhood Strasbourg.

With a few friends there, he visited Zabern, book Weiler, Lützelstein, Saarbrücken and other
towns and villages in Alsace. On these excursions he got to know several families, where he found
a hospitable reception. Excellent was the case with the priest Diess Brion in about six hours from
Strasbourg Sesenheim distant village. A special interest received this acquaintance of Goethe
by a love affair to the third daughter of the Clergy. After matching products Friederike Brion
was a girl of good Stature, blond hair and blue eyes. What it lacked in external stimuli, they
replaced it with grace in their nature and the talent sociable entertainment. She had her mind
by the Read the best writers [writer] formed, and was musical. Often wandered Goethe, with her graceful
area. A book grove was his favorite place. Convivial Distractions, sometimes forfeits games
where Goethe was conspicuous by his wit and humor, brightened the circle of friends and relatives
in the pastor's house to Sesenheim Brion, if Goethe returned to Strasbourg, there again appeared.
He stayed sometimes several Sesenheim weeks. The wobble of distractions, in which he was marked,
individual Passages in his letters to the Actuar Salzmann in Strasbourg.

"I was dancing I," he wrote, among others, "the Pentecostal Assembly of 2 clock after dinner to twelve
Clock at night, without stopping, except for some of Intermezzo's
food and drink.

We had Schnurr brave musicians get caught, because we went as the weather. The whole I was lost
in the dancing. " He harmed by the excess of his health. Plagued by a persistent cough, wrote
he some days later: "One lives but only half, if you can not take breath And yet. I do not like
back in the city. The free air movement and helps at least to help what is "not without a tinge
of sadness he closed his letter with the words:". The World is beautiful, so beautiful! Who
might enjoy it! I am sometimes annoyed and sometimes I consider myself edifying edifying hours
of the day, about this idea that our happiness is so indispensable, and many a professor of
ethics is not understood, and no one tolerates. "
 As his eyes grew
accustomed to the faint light he made out tails and cloven feet on the dancing figures; and
one tall form with wings, around whose head a wreath of lightning glittered, and who received
the deference of the rest, he surmised to be the devil himself. It was such a night and such
a place as Satan and his imps commonly chose for high festivals.

As he lay watching them through the sheeted rain a tall and painted Indian leaped on Devil's
Altar, fresh scalps dangling round his body in festoons, and his eyes blazing with fierce command.
In a brief incantation he summoned the shadow hordes around him. They came, with torches that
burned blue, and went around and around the rock singing a harsh chant, until, at a sign, an
Indian girl was dragged in and flung on the block of sacrifice. The figures rushed toward her
with extended arms and weapons, and the terrified girl gave one cry that rang in the hunter's
ears all his life after. The wizard raised his axe: the devils and vampires gathered to drink
the blood and clutch the escaping soul, when in a lightning flash the girl's despairing glance
fell on the face of Chamberlain. That look touched his manhood, and drawing forth his Bible
he held it toward the rabble while he cried aloud the name of God. There was a crash of thunder.
The light faded, the demons vanished, the storm swept past, and peace settled on the hills.

BALANCED ROCK

Balanced Rock, or Rolling Rock, near Pittsfield, Massachusetts, is a mass of limestone that
was deposited where it stands by the great continental glacier during the ice age, and it weighs
four hundred and eighty tons (estimated) in spite of its centuries of weathering. Here one
of the Atotarhos, kings of the Six Nations, had his camp. He was a fierce man, who ate and
drank from bowls made of the skulls of enemies, and who, when he received messages and petitions,
wreathed himself from head to foot with poison snakes. The son of this ferocious being inherited
none of his war-like tendencies; indeed, the lad was almost feminine in appearance, and on
succeeding to power he applied himself to the cultivation of peaceful arts. Later historians
have uttered a suspicion that he was a natural son of Count Frontenac, but that does not suit
with this legend.

The young Atotarho stood near Balanced Rock watching a number of big boys play duff. In this
game one stone is placed upon another and the players, standing as far from it as they fancy
they can throw, attempt to knock it out of place with other stones. The silence of Atotarho
and his slender, girlish look called forth rude remarks from the boys, who did not know him,
and who dared him to test his skill. The young chief came forward, and as he did so the jeers
and laughter changed to cries of astonishment and fear, for at each step he grew in size until
he towered above them, a giant. Then they knew him, and fell down in dread, but he took no
revenge. Catching up great bowlders he tossed them around as easily as if they had been beechnuts,
and at last, lifting the balanced rock, he placed it lightly where it stands to-day, gave them
a caution against ill manners and hasty judgments, and resumed his slender form. For many years
after, the old men of the tribe repeated this story and its lesson from the top of Atotarho's duff.

SHONKEEK-MOONKEEK

This is the Mohegan name of the pretty lake in the Berkshires now called Pontoosuc. Shonkeek
was a boy, Moonkeek a girl, and they were cousins who grew up as children commonly do, whether
in house or wigwam: they roamed the woods and hills together, filled their baskets with flowers
and berries, and fell in love. But the marriage of cousins was forbidden in the Mohegan polity,
and when they reached an age in which they found companionship most delightful their rambles
were interdicted and they were even told to avoid each other. This had the usual effect, and
they met on islands in the lake at frequent intervals, to the torment of one Nockawando, who
wished to wed the girl himself, and who reported her conduct to her parents.

The lovers agreed, after this, to fly to an Eastern tribe into which they would ask to be adopted,
but they were pledged, if aught interfered with their escape, to meet beneath the lake. Nockawando
interfered. On the next night, as the unsuspecting Shonkeek was paddling over to the island
where the maid awaited him, the jealous rival, rowing softly in his wake, sent an arrow into
his back, and Shonkeek, without a cry, pitched headlong into the water. Yet, to the eyes of
Nockawando, he appeared to keep his seat and urge his canoe forward. The girl saw the boat
approach: it sped, now, like an eagle's flight. One look, as it passed the rock; one glance
at the murderer, crouching in his birchen vessel, and with her lover's name on her lips she
leaped into her own canoe and pushed out from shore. Nockawando heard her raise the death-song
and rowed forward as rapidly as he could, but near the middle of the lake his arm fell palsied.

The song had ended and the night had become strangely, horribly still. Not a chirp of cricket,
not a lap of wave, not a rustle of leaf. In his still very poor
knowledge of the French promoted him, however, these studies very little and he gave up again
when he had not read without difficulty, the prefaces, in which Corneille Racine and defended themselves
against the critics and the public.

Decided stirred in the boy growing in later years, driving, many natural objects, their internal
structure to the eye withdrew, to know you better. He tore flowers to see how the leaves were
inserted in their cup. His youthful curiosity and Research focused on the pleasure most diverse
objects. He admired the secret of the magnet's attraction, and not tired, that he failed to
effect to test filings and needles.

THE SALEM ALCHEMIST

In 1720 there lived in a turreted house at North and Essex Streets, in Salem, a silent, dark-visaged
man,--a reputed chemist. He gathered simples in the fields, and parcels and bottles came and
went between him and learned doctors in Boston; but report went around that it was not drugs
alone that he worked with, nor medicines for passing ailments that he distilled. The watchman,
drowsily pacing the streets in the small hours, saw his shadow move athwart the furnace glare
in his tower, and other shadows seemed at the moment to flit about it--shadows that could be
thrown by no tangible form, yet that had a grotesque likeness to the human kind. A clink of
hammers and a hiss of steam were sometimes heard, and his neighbors devoutly hoped that if
he secured the secret of the philosopher's stone or the universal solvent, it would be honestly
come by.

But it was neither gold nor the perilous strong water that he wanted. It was life: the elixir
that would dispel the chill and decrepitude of age, that would bring back the youthful sparkle
to the eye and set the pulses bounding. He explored the surrounding wilderness day after day;
the juices of its trees and plants he compounded, night after night, long without avail. Not
until after a thousand failures did he conceive that he had secured the ingredients but they
were many, they were perishable, they must be distilled within five days, for fermentation
and decay would set in if he delayed longer. Gathering the herbs and piling his floor with
fuel, he began his work, alone; the furnace glowed, the retorts bubbled, and through their
long throats trickled drops--golden, ruddy, brown, and crystal--that would be combined into
that precious draught.

And none too soon, for under the strain of anxiety he seemed to be aging fast. He took no sleep,
except while sitting upright in his chair, for, should he yield entirely to nature's appeal,
his fire would die and his work be spoiled. With heavy eyes and aching head he watched his
furnace and listened to the constant drip, drip of the precious liquor. It was the fourth day.
He had knelt to stir his fire to more active burning. Its brightness made him blink, its warmth
was grateful, and he reclined before it, with elbow on the floor and head resting on his hand.
How cheerily the logs hummed and crackled, yet how drowsily--how slow the hours were--how dull
the watch! Lower, lower sank the head, and heavier grew the eyes. At last he lay full length
on the floor, and the long sleep of exhaustion had begun.

He was awakened by the sound of a bell. "The church bell!" he cried, starting up. "And people
going through the streets to meeting. How is this? The sun is in the east! My God! I have been
asleep! The furnace is cold. The elixir!" He hastily blended the essences that he had made,
though one or two ingredients were still lacking, and drank them off. "Faugh!" he exclaimed.
"Still unfinished-perhaps spoiled. I must begin again." Taking his hat and coat he uttered
a weary sigh and was about to open the door when his cheek blenched with pain, sight seemed
to leave him, the cry for help that rose to his lips was stifled in a groan of anguish, a groping
gesture brought a shelf of retorts and bottles to the floor, and he fell writhing among their
fragments. The elixir of life, unfinished, was an elixir of death.

ELIZA WHARTON

Under the name of Eliza Wharton for a brief time lived a woman whose name was said to be Elizabeth
Whitman. Little is known of her, and it is thought that she had gone among strangers to conceal
disgrace. She died without telling her story. In 1788 she arrived at the Bell Tavern, Danvers,
in company with a man, who, after seeing her properly bestowed, drove away and never returned.
A graceful, beautiful, well-bred woman, with face overcast by a tender melancholy, she kept
indoors with her books, her sewing, and a guitar, avoiding the gossip of the idle. She said
that her husband was absent on a journey, and a letter addressed to "Mrs. Eliza Wharton" was
to be seen on her table when she received callers. Once a stranger paused at her door and read
the name thereon. As he passed on the woman groaned, "I am undone!" One good woman, seeing
her need of care and defiant of village prattling, took her to her home, and there, after giving
birth to a dead child, she passed away. Among her effects were letters full of pathetic appeal,
and some verses, closing thus:

     "O thou for whose dear sake I bear
     A doom so dreadful, so severe,
     May happy fates thy footsteps guide
     And o'er thy peaceful home preside.
     Nor let Eliza's early tomb
     Infect thee with its baleful gloom."

A stone was raised above her grave, by whom it is not known, and this inscription was engraved
thereon: "This humble stone, in memory of Elizabeth Whitman, is inscribed by her weeping friends,
to whom she endeared herself by uncommon tenderness and affection. Endowed with superior genius
and acquirements, she was still more endeared by humility and benevolence. Let candor throw
a veil over her frailties, for great was her charity for others. She sustained the last painful
scene far from every friend, and exhibited an example of calm resignation. Her departure was
on the 25th of July, 1788, in the thirty-seventh year of her age, and the tears of strangers
watered her grave."

SALE OF THE SOUTHWICKS

Bitter were the persecutions endured by Quakers at the hands of the Puritans. They were flogged
if they were restless in church, and flogged if they did not go to it. Their ears were slit
and they were set in the stocks if they preached, and if any tender-hearted person gave them
bed, bite, or sup, he, too, was liable to punishment. They were charged with the awful offence
of preaching false doctrine, and no matter how pure their lives might be, the stern Salemite
would concede no good of them while their faith was different from his. They even suspected
Cobbler Keezar of mischief when he declared that his magic lapstone which Agrippa had torn
from the tower at Nettesheim--gave him a vision of the time when men would be as glad as nature,
when the "snuffler of psalms" would sing for joy, when priests and Quakers would talk together
kindly, when pillory and gallows should be gone. Poor Keezar! In ecstasy at that prospect he
flung up his arms, and his lapstone rolled into the Merrimack. The tired mill-girls of Lowell
still frequent the spot to seek some dim vision of future comfort.

In contrast to the tales of habitual tyranny toward the Quakers is the tradition of the Southwicks.
Lawrence and Cassandra, of that name, were banished from Salem, in spite of their blameless
lives, for they had embraced Quakerism. They died within three days of each other on Shelter
Island, but their son and daughter, Daniel and Provided, returned to their birthplace, and
were incessantly fined for not going to church. At last, having lost their property through
seizures made to satisfy their fines, the General Court of Boston issued an order for their
sale, as slaves, to any Englishman of Virginia or Barbadoes. Edward Butter was assigned to
sell and take them to their master. The day arrived and Salem market-place was crowded with
a throng of the curious. Provided Southwick mounted the block and Butter began to call for
bids. While expatiating on the aptness of the girl for field or house-service, the master of
the Barbadoes ship on which Butter had engaged passage for himself and his two charges looked
into her innocent face, and roared, in noble dudgeon, "If my ship were filled with silver,
by God, I'd sink her in harbor rather than take away this child!" The multitude experienced
a quick change of feeling and applauded the sentiment. As the judges and officers trudged away
with gloomy faces, Provided Southwick descended from the auction-block, and brother and sister
went forth into the town free and unharmed.

THE COURTSHIP OF MYLES STANDISH

Myles Standish, compact, hard-headed little captain of the Puritan guard at Plymouth, never
knew the meaning of fear until he went a-courting Priscilla Mullins--or was she a Molines,
as some say? He had fought white men and red men and never reeked of danger in the doing it,
but his courage sank to his boots whenever this demure maiden glanced at him, as he thought,
with approval. Odd, too, for he had been married once, and Rose was not so long dead that he
had forgotten the ways and likings of women; but he made no progress in his suit, and finally
chose John Alden to urge it for him. John--who divides with Mary Chilton the honor of being
first to land on Plymouth Rock--was a well-favored lad of twenty-two. Until he could build
a house for himself he shared Standish's cottage and looked up to that worthy as a guardian,
but it was a hard task that was set for him now. He went to goodman Mullins with a slow step
and sober countenance and asked leave to plead his protector's cause. The father gave it, called
his daughter in, and left them together; then, with noble faith to his mission, the young man
begged the maiden's hand for the captain, dwelling on his valor, strength, wisdom, his military
greatness, his certainty of promotion, his noble lineage, and all good attributes he could
endow him with.

Priscilla kept at her spinning while this harangue went on, but the drone of the wheel did
not prevent her noting a sigh and a catch of the breath that interrupted the discourse now
and then. She flushed as she replied, "Why does not Captain Standish come to me himself? If
I am worth the winning I ought to be worth the wooing."

But John Alden seemed not to notice the girl's confusion until, in a pause in his eloquence,
Priscilla bent her head a little, as if to mend a break in the flax, and said, "Prithee, John,
why don't you speak for yourself?"

Then a great light broke on the understanding of John Alden, and a great warmth welled up in
his heart, and--they were married. Myles Standish--well, some say that he walked in the wedding
procession, while one narrator holds that the sturdy Roundhead tramped away to the woods, where
he sat for a day, hating himself, and that he never forgave his protege nor the maiden who
took advantage of leap year. However that may be, the wedding was a happy one, and the Aldens
of all America claim John and Priscilla for their ancestors.

MOTHER CREWE

Mother Crewe was of evil repute in Plymouth in the last century. It was said that she had taken
pay for luring a girl into her old farm-house, where a man lay dead of small-pox, with intent
to harm her beauty; she was accused of blighting land and driving ships ashore with spells;
in brief, she was called a witch, and people, even those who affected to ignore the craft of
wizardry, were content to keep away from her. When the Revolution ended, Southward Howland
demanded Dame Crewe's house and acre, claiming under law of entail, though primogeniture had
been little enforced in America, where there was room and to spare for all. But Howland was
stubborn and the woman's house had good situation, so one day he rode to her door and summoned
her with a tap of his whip.

"What do you here on my land?" said he.

"I live on land that is my own. I cleared it, built my house here, and no other has claim to it."

"Then I lay claim. The place is mine. I shall tear your cabin down on Friday."

"On Friday they'll dig your grave on Burying Hill. I see the shadow closing round you. You
draw it in with every breath. Quick! Home and make your peace!" The hag's withered face was
touched with spots of red and her eyes glared in their sunken sockets.

"Bandy no witch words with me, woman. On Friday I will return." And he swung himself into his
saddle. As he did so a black cat leaped on Mother Crewe's shoulder and stood there, squalling.
The woman listened to its cries as if they were words. Her look of hate deepened. Raising her
hand, she cried, "Your day is near its end. Repent!"

"Bah! You have heard what I have said. If on Friday you are not elsewhere, I'll tear the timbers
down and bury you in the ruins."

"Enough!" cried the woman, her form straightening, her voice grown shrill. "My curse is on
you here and hereafter. Die! Then go down to hell!"

As she said this the cat leaped from her shoulder to the flank of the horse, spitting and clawing,
and the frightened steed set off at a furious pace. As he disappeared in the scrub oaks his
master was seen vainly trying to stop him. The evening closed in with fog and chill, and before
the light waned a man faring homeward came upon the corpse of Southward Howland stretched along
the ground.

AUNT RACHEL'S CURSE

On a headland near Plymouth lived "Aunt Rachel," a reputed seer, who made a scant livelihood
by forecasting the future for such seagoing people as had crossed her palm. The crew of a certain
brig came to see her on the day before sailing, and she reproached one of the lads for keeping
bad company. "Avast, there, granny," interrupted another, who took the chiding to himself.
"None of your slack, or I'll put a stopper on your gab." The old woman sprang erect. Levelling
her skinny finger at the man, she screamed, "Moon cursers! You have set false beacons and wrecked
ships for plunder. It was your fathers and mothers who decoyed a brig to these sands and left
me childless and a widow. He who rides the pale horse be your guide, and you be of the number
who follow him!"

That night old Rachel's house was burned, and she barely escaped with her life, but when it
was time for the brig to sail she took her place among the townfolk who were to see it off.
The owner of the brig tried to console her for the loss of the house. "I need it no longer,"
she answered, "for the narrow house will soon be mine, and you wretches cannot burn that. But
you! Who will console you for the loss of your brig?"

"My brig is stanch. She has already passed the worst shoal in the bay."

"But she carries a curse. She cannot swim long."

As each successive rock and bar was passed the old woman leaned forward, her hand shaking,
her gray locks flying, her eyes starting, her lips mumbling maledictions, "like an evil spirit,
chiding forth the storms as ministers of vengeance." The last shoal was passed, the merchant
sighed with relief at seeing the vessel now safely on her course, when the woman uttered a
harsh cry, and raised her hand as if to command silence until something happened that she evidently
expected. For this the onlookers had not long to wait: the brig halted and trembled--her sails
shook in the wind, her crew were seen trying to free the cutter--then she careened and sank
until only her mast-heads stood out of the water. Most of the company ran for boats and lines,
and few saw Rachel pitch forward on the earth-dead, with a fierce smile of exultation on her
face. The rescuers came back with all the crew, save one--the man who had challenged the old
woman and revengefully burned her cabin. Rachel's body was buried where her house had stood,
and the rock--before unknown--where the brig had broken long bore the name of Rachel's Curse.

NIX'S MATE

The black, pyramidal beacon, called Nix's Mate, is well known to yachtsmen, sailors, and excursionists
in Boston harbor. It rises above a shoal,--all that is left of a fair, green island which long
ago disappeared in the sea. In 1636 it had an extent of twelve acres, and on its highest point
was a gallows where pirates were hanged in chains. One night cries were heard on board of a
ship that lay at anchor a little way off shore, and when the watch put off, to see what might
be amiss, the captain, named Nix, was found murdered in his bed. Also during the call, which he now LINKED, turned the rider, not a
moment for him to. Her voice was deep, her accent was bad Neapolitan. But so short it was answered,
but in its tone neither the desire to Questioner cleared, nor to fetter him by mocking defiance.

You
come from Sorrento, beautiful solitude? he asked.

No, of Meta.

You have visited friends there?

In the church I was.

And rides to Sant 'Agata up to the festival?

No, sir.

But this is the path that leads up?

No, sir.

So I do a favor to show me the right one.

You have to go back, she said, still without looking, and the next gate, the next follow up leads,
so you come to the roadway.

If I have to go back, I prefer to let the hard drive as the pleasure,
no matter how long it Do not be annoying is herzugehen next to you.

How do you want, not the way has been paved for me alone.

Do you know that it would be kind of you if you hinkehrtet the face to me once?

She did it left, without moving a muscle.

What? she asked, what have you show me your?

I think you have to show me something.

I?

You are beautiful. So I show your eyes.

The sea is even more beautiful than I, and you would do wiser to look
at it as eyes that you have nothing to say.

The sea? I see it every day from my balcony.

But I do not.

Allowed for that I am using this opportunity - and she turned away again.

Can see the sea from these mountains, not everywhere? he asked.

My brother's mill is Over There deep in the gorge, the rock occurs much earlier and the Brushwood
above, the last view over grow.

You live with your brother?

Yes, sir.

But you will not live there long, or the young men have no eyes in Meta.

Let them have eyes. What I care about their looks? I am happier with my Brother as all the
women at the level of Sorrento to Naples.

Have you ever displeasure with the wife of your brother?

He has not and will never have one. He and I, I and he - what we need more, except the protection
of the holy Madonna?

And you are so sure that it always remains that he never will like a girl?

As surely as I live.

But what does it matter to you - and they drove at a stroke of the
hand the ass on that he shook his ears.

Why is not your brother been with you in Meta? asked the German again, although which it basically
did not need to worry about.

He never leaves the mill, only to confess when he goes up there, in
Deserta.

Is he sick?

He may not see people, except me. And the sight of the sea hurts him, since he was then - but
who you, that you may be questioning me? Are you a Prete? or by police in Naples?

He had to laugh. Neither, he said, but you will not force myself to ask? If your face zukehrtet
me, I would to talk soon forget. Now I am pay compensation to look through your voice.

They measured him with a serious look and then asked: What have you always with my face? Are
you an artist?

He paused a moment, and the old envious frustration stirred again within him that only the painters
should be verstattet of carrying out a beauty. Of course, who can they resent what belongs to
her craft? The lucky ones with the free pass travel the world! The fact that he, too, by virtue
of its nature and art have a right to interfere in to deepen the aspects of this girl, how
could he make it clear which are no doubt had the noble guild of poets do not know.

You want it even once have as well, he thought to himself, and answered with bold face: However,
I am a painter, and if you allow - but like your name?

Teresa.

If you allow, beautiful Teresa, I go with you like in your mill, a
picture of you to draw in my sketchbook.

He did this reckless Please harmless, since it is highly coveted, and the brother to see and take
a look into the home of the lonely siblings. If it then came to the meeting, it should be at
some find a way out. And was not his lie a white lie? Indeed, he was not sincere not any longer
be seen in Teresa's eyes?

She thought for a while. Then she said: If you are a painter, so take a picture of me, I can
give my brother. I shall die once, so he has me always remember as for my life. - Do you see
the wide stream, which projects there, the canyon and precipitous way into the depths? It drives
our mill, and we have to turn right and follow him. The rain was very much swelled, and the narrow
path in the gorge is not to happen. Wait! You shall put on the donkey
ride up and, while I bring him.

You lead him to walk? Never again, Teresa!

So you will remain just below, for if you also hinaufstieget barefoot through the water like me,
You know the way the bed and not stuerztet and at every step.

She had already stopped the animal and lowered slightly curved. While he was still hesitating
and the thought was that he deceived him worried because it had, they have shoes Stockings
and feet of the beautiful striped and now took it calmly sight that
Bridle of the donkey.

Let it be! he said half laughing. Although I'll make a little chivalrous figure, if I leave you
over the worse part.

He sat and they went to the brook, the girl forward, the reins wrapped around her arm. When
they came to the ravine, she took a last long look over the sea, then directed them, the water
they legal depart umrauschte not heeding into the stream that are large stones rolled and
filled the whole width of the canyon. Here it was cool and out to the hazy daylight, and the
shrubs was low on both sides narrowness of the rocks start.

The German, while the animal carried him carefully from stone to stone and spray it up to the
knees injected, looked up and saw a few hundred yards in the height of the mill, built dangerously
into the rock, gray as the rock beside her. The wheel was suspended on account of Sunday, no
other sound uebertoente the roar of the stream as the cry of a hawk, hovering over the canyon
of the chest rising up to the Water mist seemed to cool. Meanwhile Teresa walked on one side close
to the rocks out. Now and then the way was completely under their feet visible, while other
routes were flooded. She said nothing. Also, it was not easy in the noise of the waves to make
understandable that echoed along the sunken road hundreds of times
in itself.

Only near the rock walls of the house were wide apart, the way stood out from the Water out,
and the rider as soon as he saw his animals on solid ground, jumped
on his Legs, quietly pleased that no third had at least seen the adventurous
train with.

Because the mill was deserted, even as he stood before that date,
was the German almost tempted to keep them for a backdrop.

The shutters were closed, the brown Door in the gray wall had no handle and did not seem feasible
under the shadow the eaves could just as well be painted. Meanwhile, the maiden opened the
gate a barn was blown up in the rocks and left into the gray friend.

Then she joined the front door with a slight inward pressure on the
unknown and came forward over the threshold.

One look was enough to make the Germans with all rooms of the Interior announced. In the Middle
of a fairly wide room, which occupied the entire depth of the house, the stove at the Side,
a heavy table and wooden chairs in the middle, Hausgeraet in a closet, the right hand side
of the rock after a chamber with a bed, next to the grinding chamber with the wheelwork. A door
in the rear wall of the house was also open, and you could see in an open green space beyond the
sun was a single broad stripe. He liked some morning in the square and have been high enough above
the creek located that a small garden area there could have been
planted.

But the mountain basin, which enclosed the reason was to high, the
air is too cool to be the flower-growing cheap.

And so rampant because only the Grass on the pitch and a goat grazing on the banks of the
water. But where a crack of the mountain that single Sonnenblick in. urged, were, as a nice surprise,
two individual Orange trees in the middle of the meadow, although sparsely hung with fruit,
but full freshness.

The brother is not home, Teresa, said the German.

She let the eye wander over the quiet meadow and then said, you do
not see him over there, where the gorge closes again?

The stream has shaken the wall that forcing him there in its proper bed. Now he takes a windrow
behind the stones that the grass is not flooded. He thinks of everything, my brother, and can do
everything, you can look for one thousand years and find no one who
has more genius.

Why he's wasted here, but in solitude?

Because he wants.

And you are grown up here in the mill, poorer, and have never seen more sun than there seems
to Orange business? I can not believe it, your cheeks are difficult on the short ride on Sundays
so dark in the church.

No, they said, it is not yet a full four year that we live here and the mill Tommaso has purchased.
Will you believe it? He had previously, where we were in Naples and his fishing operation, no idea
what a water wheel and revolve like a stone. And on the first day, when we had come up here -
the old Mueller was dead - he's put in motion as he would have done
it from childhood.

O a man like Toma, is at the court of the king no wiser!

While these words it was not a stranger to see the face of the man on extreme end of the meadow land
was vigorous in its work and after the mill is not turned. He saw only a tall figure, black
curly hair under the gray hat a coat of dark color walls hanging loosely over the shoulder
.-- What he has only the city and the sea and its beautiful commercial spoiled? now he asked the
sister who was standing next to him.

She seemed to have ueberhoert the question. You know what? she said, sit down and start the Image
from, so it's ready, when my brother comes back into the house. Then I ask him, who it was,
and he realizes it, he gives you what you want for it, because we are not poor; You have to
know. When we lived in Naples, my brother among them, and had seven fish drove in three Kaehne into the
sea, and would also probably be able to buy a farm, instead of the mill here. ! What he now helps
his money in his heavy heart - Sit down, sir, I will not talk, you shall shut their mouths completely
and correctly paint on paper and the eyes and everything.

Our friend was in no small embarrassment when he saw that there should be serious. It is a little
darker here, he said with a beating heart.

So we go to the meadow.

There it is again too bright, Teresa. You do not know how difficult it is to the right light
to find.

Wait, they said, and quickly opened the shutters. I mean, it's now
a pretty Light in the house. I, at least if I had learned it, I wish
you here to a hair draw on the wall.

Well, he said boldly, so we
begin.

He pushed two chairs at one window, down the gorge the whole
course of the stream overlooked, and asked her to sit down. Those
leaves, which he put himself to any capture inspiration of the muse
on it, he pulled out and laid it on his knee, the pin in his right.
A deep blush blazed the brown cheeks of the girl, as she now his eyes
resting on him felt excited. Her eye, above the the thick eyelashes
as the Swing of a black butterfly on and went down, was also addressed
and fixed in a few Moments moist clouded by the tension of the gaze.
He asked them to move freely to It would therefore not be worse. However,
he could not deny it, strong in their to make hair to create a little.
Teresa - he said.

What?

Nothing .-- It was impossible for him compared
to the great look of her eyes, something tender or to say fades. How
firm, broad and flat was the forehead, the brows curved like quiet!
He had now decided to do half an hour, eager, as he was in the best
Work concept, and thereby to enjoy the sights, but then tear the sheet
quickly, to blame for his bad day and his confused eyes and say goodbye.

When
he had chosen his position very calm and made the face of the beginning,
noted it over in the bedroom on the wall a male portrait in a black
frame, the gave a welcome pretext to keep once again held.

Ye have
a nice picture of your brother, he said, getting up to look at it
closer. Who painted it? In fact, an excellent work. What a gentle
and fiery face! It always makes me curious to see it myself.

This
presents the image, she said hesitantly, you will never see alive.

It
is not your brother?

It was his friend. He died young, and many have
mourned him.

It hurts you, Teresa speak, thereof; forgive that I
have so much intrusive questions do. He took his place at the window
again. The redness had disappeared from her face, and her eyes were
gone. After a pause, in which only the noise of the gorge pressed
up to her ear, she began saying again: You are right, gentle and ardent
was he could defraud him a child, but for the ones he loved, he had,
over the Vesuvius crashed when it requires it to have. The men are
all bad, says Tommaso. But it took and he was right. Who looked at
him, knew no more pure soul breathed the Air under the moon. Is it
any wonder that Tommy hates the sea, which him such a Friend has swallowed?
That he had a heavy heart since that day when he drove out with him
for fishing and came back without him? No one has suspected him that
he was of profound That hour and his business was spoiled him.

He
was also a fisherman, like your brother?

He was a singer, sir, but
a poor fisherman child and his parents still live today. Even As a
boy in the churches he melted all the heart, when he began to sing.
A rich Uncle of his, who had a trattoria on the beach, let him then
get to a singing-master; he should go to the opera. And now to yourself,
the day before his first appearance, where throughout Naples have
said nothing else, it comes so in the evening to my brother, for they
knew each other from childhood on and still held together forever.
Toma, he said, we still want make a sea voyage? I have to do, Nino,
says my brother, the networks have to come, and Beppo, he says, that
the servant must. - Leave him at home, Toma, I'll help you already,
I've not forgotten about the note reading .-- And so they both go
out, I see still, the brother at the wheel, Nino at the helm, his
hair flashed in the sun, and he had eyes on our house, I always look
to the faces of the soul. And Sun was hardly down when I hear the
oars and jump under the door to greet them - but Tommaso was alone
in the boat and rowed like a madman, shouting to me: Good evening,
Teresa; I will greet you by Nino, he is already asleep on the seabed
- And more listens' I do not.

Horrible! the beautiful hopeful youth!
How was it possible for the accident because they were two and had
the boat?

The heavy net pulled him down. The peg on which it was
stuck in the boat gave way suddenly the gap and shot overboard, and
he bent over his arms to take the power, entangled be turned into
the mesh, and the boat, and as Tommy turns up again, he sees the empty
boat floating quietly in the afterglow of Nino and only the straw
hat with the band, I stapled it to him the day before hatte.-Poor
Nino!

Your complains it? He went straight into paradise and sings
before the throne of the Madonna with his golden voice. Complained
my brother, sir, the peace is to be under the sea absorbed, and it
brings up a diver. Since that day he has not laughed, my Tommaso poor.
Still, it was feared that if they learned the truth about that execution the Indians would
learn a harmful lesson in deceit, and it was, therefore, resolved to punish the true offender.
He, thinking they were in jest, submitted to be bound, though before doing so he could have
"cleaned out" the court-room, and ere he was really aware of the purpose of his judges he was
kicking at vacancy.

Butler, in "Hudibras," quotes the story, but makes the offence more serious--

    "This precious brother, having slain,
    In time of peace, an Indian,
    Not out of malice, but mere zeal,
    Because he was an infidel,
    The mighty Tottipotimoy
    Sent to our elders an envoy
    Complaining sorely of the breach Of league."

But the Puritans, having considered that the offender was a teacher and a cobbler,

    "Resolved to spare him; yet, to do
    The Indian Hoghan Moghan, too,
    Impartial justice, in his stead did
    Hang an old weaver that was bed-rid."

The whole circumstance is cloudy, and the reader may accept either version that touches his fancy.

THE UNKNOWN CHAMPION

There was that in the very air of the New World that made the Pilgrims revolt against priests
and kings. The Revolution was long a-breeding before shots were fired at Lexington. Stout old
Endicott, having conceived a dislike to the British flag because to his mind the cross was
a relic of popery, paraded his soldiers and with his sword ripped out the offending emblem
in their presence. There was a faint cry of "Treason!" but he answered, "I will avouch the
deed before God and man. Beat a flourish, drummer. Shout for the ensign of New England. Pope
nor tyrant hath part in it now." And a loud huzza of independence went forth.

With this sentiment confirmed among the people, it is not surprising that the judges who had
condemned a papist king--Charles I.--to the block should find welcome in this land. For months
at a time they lived in cellars and garrets in various parts of New England, their hiding-places
kept secret from the royal sheriffs who were seeking them. For a time they had shelter in a
cave in West Rock, New Haven, and once in that town they were crouching beneath the bridge
that a pursuing party crossed in search of them. In Ipswich the house is pointed out where
they were concealed in the cellar, and the superstitious believed that, as a penalty for their
regicidal decision, they are doomed to stay there, crying vainly for deliverance.

Philip, the Narragansett chief, had declared war on the people of New England, and was waging
it with a persistence and fury that spread terror through the country. It was a struggle against
manifest destiny, such as must needs be repeated whenever civilization comes to dispute a place
in new lands with savagery, and which has been continued, more and more feebly, to our own
day. The war was bloody, and for a long time the issue hung in the balance. At last the Indian
king was driven westward. The Nipmucks joined him in the Connecticut Valley, and he laid siege
to the lonely settlements of Brookfield, Northfield, Deerfield, and Springfield, killing, scalping,
and burning without mercy. On the 1st of September, 1675, he attacked Hadley while its people
were at church, the war-yelp interrupting a prayer of the pastor. All the men of the congregation
sallied out with pikes and guns and engaged the foe, but so closely were they pressed that
a retreat was called, when suddenly there appeared among them a tall man, of venerable and
commanding aspect, clad in leather, and armed with sword and gun.

His hair and beard were long and white, but his eye was dark and resolute, and his voice was
strong. "Why sink your hearts?" he cried. "Fear ye that God will give you up to yonder heathen
dogs? Follow me, and ye shall see that this day there is a champion in Israel."

Posting half the force at his command to sustain the fight, he led the others quickly by a
detour to the rear of the Indians, on whom he fell with such energy that the savages, believing
themselves overtaken by reinforcements newly come, fled in confusion. When the victors returned
to the village the unknown champion signed to the company to fall to their knees while he offered
thanks and prayer. Then he was silent for a little, and when they looked up he was gone.

They believed him to be an angel sent for their deliverance, nor, till he had gone to his account,
did they know that their captain in that crisis was Colonel William Goffe, one of the regicide
judges, who, with his associate Whalley, was hiding from the vengeance of the son of the king
they had rebelled against. After leaving their cave in New Haven, being in peril from beasts
and human hunters, they went up the Connecticut Valley to Hadley, where the clergyman of the
place, Rev. John Russell, gave them shelter for fifteen years. Few were aware of their existence,
and when Goffe, pale with seclusion from the light, appeared among the people near whom he
had long been living, it is no wonder that they regarded him with awe.

Whalley died in the minister's house and was buried in a crypt outside of the cellar-wall,
while Goffe kept much abroad, stopping in many places and under various disguises until his
death, which occurred soon after that of his associate. He was buried in New Haven.

GOODY COLE

Goodwife Eunice Cole, of Hampton, Massachusetts, was so "vehemently suspected to be a witch"
that in 1680 she was thrown into jail with a chain on her leg. She had a mumbling habit, which
was bad, and a wild look, which was worse. The death of two calves had been charged to her
sorceries, and she was believed to have raised the cyclone that sent a party of merrymakers
to the sea-bottom off the Isles of Shoals, for insulting her that morning. Some said that she
took the shapes of eagles, dogs, and cats, and that she had the aspect of an ape when she went
through the mummeries that caused Goody Marston's child to die, yet while she was in Ipswich
jail a likeness of her was stumping about the graveyard on the day when they buried the child.
For such offences as that of making bread ferment and give forth evil odors, that housekeepers
could only dispel by prayer, she was several times whipped and ducked by the constable.

At last she lay under sentence of death, for Anna Dalton declared that her child had been changed
in its cradle and that she hated and feared the thing that had been left there. Her husband,
Ezra, had pleaded with her in vain. "'Tis no child of mine," she cried. "'Tis an imp. Don't
you see how old and shrewd it is? How wrinkled and ugly? It does not take my milk: it is sucking
my blood and wearing me to skin and bone." Once, as she sat brooding by the fire, she turned
to her husband and said, "Rake the coals out and put the child in them. Goody Cole will fly
fast enough when she hears it screaming, and will come down chimney in the shape of an owl
or a bat, and take the thing away. Then we shall have our little one back."

Goodman Dalton sighed as he looked into the worn, scowling face of his wife; then, laying his
hands on her head, he prayed to God that she might be led out of the shadow and made to love
her child again. As he prayed a gleam of sunset shone in at the window and made a halo around
the face of the smiling babe. Mistress Dalton looked at the little thing in doubt; then a glow
of recognition came into her eyes, and with a sob of joy she caught the child to her breast,
while Dalton embraced them both, deeply happy, for his wife had recovered her reason. In the
midst of tears and kisses the woman started with a faint cry: she remembered that a poor old
creature was about to expiate on the gallows a crime that had never been committed. She urged
her husband to ride with all speed to justice Sewall and demand that Goody Cole be freed. This
the goodman did, arriving at Newbury at ten o'clock at night, when the town had long been abed
and asleep. By dint of alarms at the justice's door he brought forth that worthy in gown and
night-cap, and, after the case had been explained to him, he wrote an order for Mistress Cole's
release.

With this paper in his hand Dalton rode at once to Ipswich, and when the cock crew in the dawning
the victim of that horrible charge walked forth, without her manacles. Yet dark suspicion hung
about the beldam to the last, and she died, as she had lived, alone in the little cabin that
stood near the site of the academy. Even after her demise the villagers could with difficulty
summon courage to enter her cot and give her burial. Her body was tumbled into a pit, hastily
dug near her door, and a stake was driven through the heart to exorcise the powers of evil
that possessed her in life.

GENERAL MOULTON AND THE DEVIL

Jonathan Moulton, of Hampton, was a general of consequence in the colonial wars, but a man
not always trusted in other than military matters. It was even hinted that his first wife died
before her time, for he quickly found consolation in his bereavement by marrying her companion.
In the middle of the night the bride was awakened with a start, for she felt a cold hand plucking
at the wedding-ring that had belonged to the buried Mrs. Moulton, and a voice whispered in
her ear, "Give the dead her own." With a scream of terror she leaped out of bed, awaking her
husband and causing candles to be brought. The ring was gone.

It was long after this occurrence that the general sat musing at his fireside on the hardness
of life in new countries and the difficulty of getting wealth, for old Jonathan was fond of
money, and the lack of it distressed him worse than a conscience. "If only I could have gold
enough," he muttered, "I'd sell my soul for it." Whiz! came something down the chimney. The
general was dazzled by a burst of sparks, from which stepped forth a lank personage in black
velvet with clean ruffles and brave jewels. "Talk quick, general," said the unknown, "for in
fifteen minutes I must be fifteen miles away, in Portsmouth." And picking up a live coal in
his fingers he looked at his watch by its light. "Come. You know me. Is it a bargain?"

The general was a little slow to recover his wits, but the word "bargain" put him on his mettle,
and he began to think of advantageous terms. "What proof may there be that you can do your
part in the compact?" he inquired. The unknown ran his fingers through his hair and a shower
of guineas jingled on the floor. They were pretty warm, but Moulton, in his eagerness, fell
on hands and knees and gathered them to his breast.

"Give me some liquor," then demanded Satan, for of course he was no other, and filling a tankard
with rum he lighted it with the candle, remarked, affably, "To our better acquaintance," and
tossed off the blazing dram at a gulp. "I will make you," said he, "the richest man in the
province. Sign this paper and on the first day of every month I will fill your boots with gold;
but if you try any tricks with me you will repent it. For I know you, Jonathan. Sign."

Moulton hesitated. "Humph!" sneered his majesty. "You have put me to all this trouble for nothing."
And he began to gather up the guineas that Moulton had placed on the table. This was more than
the victim of his wiles could stand. He swallowed a mouthful of rum, seized a pen that was
held out to him, and trembled violently as a paper was placed before him; but when he found
that his name was to appear with some of the most distinguished in the province his nerves
grew steadier and he placed his autograph among those of the eminent company, with a few crooked
embellishments and all the t's crossed. "Good!" exclaimed the devil, and wrapping his cloak
about him he stepped into the fire and was up the chimney in a twinkling.

Shrewd Jonathan went out the next day and bought the biggest pair of jack-boots he could find
in Hampton. He hung them on the crane on the last night of that and all the succeeding months
so long as he lived, and on the next morning they brimmed with coins. Moulton rolled in wealth.
The neighbors regarded his sudden prosperity with amazement, then with envy, but afterward
with suspicion. All the same, Jonathan was not getting rich fast enough to suit himself.

When the devil came to make a certain of his periodical payments he poured guineas down the
chimney for half an hour without seeming to fill the boots. Bushel after bushel of gold he
emptied into those spacious money-bags without causing an overflow, and he finally descended
to the fireplace to see why. Moulton had cut the soles from the boots and the floor was knee-deep
in money. With a grin at the general's smartness the devil disappeared, but in a few minutes
a smell of sulphur pervaded the premises and the house burst into flames. Moulton escaped in
his shirt, and tore his hair as he saw the fire crawl, serpent-like, over the beams, and fantastic
smoke-forms dance in the windows. Then a thought crossed his mind and he grew calm: his gold,
that was hidden in wainscot, cupboard, floor, and chest, would only melt and could be quarried
out by the hundred weight, so that he could be well-to-do again. Before the ruins were cool
he was delving amid the rubbish, but not an ounce of gold could he discover. Every bit of his
wealth had disappeared. It was not long after that the general died, and to quiet some rumors
of disturbance in the graveyard his coffin was dug up. It was empty.

THE SKELETON IN ARMOR

The skeleton of a man wearing a breastplate of brass, a belt made of tubes of the same metal,
and lying near some copper arrow-heads, was exhumed at Fall River, Massachusetts, in 1834.
The body had been artificially embalmed or else preserved by salts in the soil. His arms and
armor suggest Phoenician origin, but the skeleton is thought to be that of a Dane or Norwegian
who spent the last winter of his life at Newport. He may have helped to carve the rock at West
Newbury, or the better-known Dighton rock at Taunton River that is covered with inscriptions
which the tides and frosts are fast effacing, and which have been construed into a record of
Norse exploration and discovery, though some will have it that the inevitable Captain Kidd
cut the figures there to tell of buried treasure. The Indians have a legend of the arrival
of white men in a "bird," undoubtedly a ship, from which issued thunder and lightning. A battle
ensued when the visitors landed, and the white men wrote the story of it on the rock. Certain
scholars of the eighteenth century declared that the rock bore an account of the arrival of
Phoenician sailors, blown across the Atlantic and unable or unwilling to return. A representation
of the pillars of Hercules was thought to be included among the sculptures, showing that the
castaways were familiar with the Mediterranean. Only this is known about Dighton Rock, however:
that it stood where it does, and as it does, when the English settled in this neighborhood.
The Indians said there were other rocks near it which bore similar markings until effaced by
tides and drifting ice.

Longfellow makes the wraith of the long-buried exile of the armor appear and tell his story:
He was a viking who loved the daughter of King Hildebrand, and as royal consent to their union
was withheld he made off with the girl, hotly followed by the king and seventy horsemen. The
viking reached his vessel first, and hoisting sail continued his flight over the sea, but the
chase was soon upon him, and, having no alternative but to fight or be taken, he swung around
before the wind and rammed the side of Hildebrand's galley, crushing in its timbers. The vessel
tipped and sank, and every soul on board went with her, while the viking's boat kept on her
course, and after a voyage of three weeks put in at Narragansett Bay. The round tower at Newport
this impetuous lover built as a bower for his lady, and there he guarded her from the dangers
that beset those who are first in savage countries. When the princess died she was buried in
the tower, and the lonely viking, arraying himself in his armor, fell on his spear, like Brutus,
and expired.

MARTHA'S VINEYARD AND NANTUCKET

There is no such place as Martha's Vineyard, except in geography and common speech. It is Martin
Wyngaard's Island, and so was named by Skipper Block, an Albany Dutchman. But they would English
his name, even in his own town, for it lingers there in Vineyard Point. Bartholomew Gosnold
was one of the first white visitors here, for he landed in 1602, and lived on the island for
a time, collecting a cargo of sassafras and returning thence to England because he feared the
savages.

This scarred and windy spot was the home of the Indian giant, Maushope, who could wade across
the sound to the mainland without wetting his knees, though he once started to build a causeway
from Gay Head to Cuttyhunk and had laid the rocks where you may now see them, when a crab bit
his toe and he gave up the work in disgust. He lived on whales, mostly, and broiled his dinners
on fires made at Devil's Den from trees that he tore up by the roots like weeds. In his tempers
he raised mists to perplex sea-wanderers, and for sport he would show lights on Gay Head, though
these may have been only the fires he made to cook his supper with, and of which some beds
of lignite are to be found as remains. He clove No-Man's Land from Gay Head, turned his children
into fish, and when his wife objected he flung her to Seconnet Point, where she preyed on all
who passed before she hardened into a ledge.

It is reported that he found the island by following a bird that had been stealing children
from Cape Cod, as they rolled in the warm sand or paddled on the edge of the sea. He waded
after this winged robber until he reached Martha's Vineyard, where he found the bones of all
the children that had been stolen. "Thy Revelation," he wrote the second November 1779, "I had a lot
fun. I have it right and much of it read more than once. I heard that you had preached about
an ex officio, it gave me a whole new interest because I could now understand more as you busy
yourself with this book for so long, it is quite felt in love with you over you, and in such an
alien without Vehículo strange, perhaps actually heterogeneous additive can again rise out of
you could, because in my Sensation makes your painting no other impression than does the original
sketch, at least a core of this century, where the ideas you put into it, even from childhood down
into it to maintain. The work itself was going to happily pay, and some excellent Broad interpretation
and feeling in it. Painted many places quite admirably, especially all those of the inner sensation
of tenderness and strength, such as the promise of eternal life, the sheep grazing under the
palm trees, etc. In some figures and parables did you also held up well, but your monster disappear
too quickly for me in allegorical Steam. But even this, if I remember right, the wisest part, can take
to do is. " The letter concludes with the heartfelt words: "Let us remain so today, the other longer.
New friends and loved ones, I do not like. Unfortunately, I feel my thirty years and world-being.
Even some distance from becoming, unfolding, I recognize 'there with pleasure, My spirit is near
to him, but my heart is strange. Great ideas that the young man very strange now fill my soul.
"

In a letter to Merk, of 7 April 1780, announced his recovery from
a lengthy Goethe Disease that attacked him soon after his return from
Switzerland.

"Even in Frankfurt," wrote he, "and as we moved around in the cold at the courts, I just was not
me. The movement of the Trip, it did not come to a head. But I had a wicked combination seclusion,
a Cold, and Untheilnehmung that everyone noticed and not natural. Now go all but not good. "

This
letter also contained volatile Goethe's remarks on some literärische designs However, the most
part remained unfulfilled. "The most important part of my journey to Switzerland," he wrote, "is
composed of individual, at the moment by a note written leaflets
and vivid memory composed.

Wieland declarirte it for Poema. But I have still a long way more so before, and if I succeed, I
will begin with this yarn many birds. To Duke Bernhard of Weimar history have I many Collectaneen
Documents and brought together they can tell pretty, and I will if I only printed the stake
and unprinted news, documents and anecdotes combined quite delicate, elaborated, and have spread
around a lot of beautiful fragrance and incense to him at once fine dry night light, and this
art and pleasure of the fire for fun Publici can burn. "

Even in a later letter to Lavater, of 5 June 1780, Goethe took the idea of ​​a biography the Duke
Bernhard again. "I scrape," he wrote, "In my way to a store of Biography of this truly a hero
and ruler very remarkable man, who in was his short career, a favorite of the people is gradually
together, and expect the time when I will succeed's might make a
firework it.

Its annual fall in the Thirty Years War. His brothers and his family painting interests me more
most, as their great-grandchildren I, in which so many features come in the flesh, so close am.
However, I try all sorts of incantations and hocus pocus to the figures, while Heroes and rags,
in imitation of the Witch of Endor at least to the belt from the grave let rise, and if at all
a king who believes in signs and wonders into the to hunt buck horn. "

About that idea, which he gave up again, said Goethe in later years with the words: "Some time
and effort was to write to the intent, the life of Duke Bernard, in vain spent. Collection and after
many repeated Schematisiren was last all too clear that the events of the hero made a picture.
In the miserable Iliad of the Thirty Years War, he played a decent role, but could not separate
from that society.

One solution I thought I had found however. I wanted to write the life as a first volume, which
made the second requisite. Everywhere should stop teeth, so sorry for everyone that a premature
death had prevented the architect, his work to complete. For me, this effort was not fruitless,
for, as the study of Götz von Berlichingen gave me deeper insight into the fifteenth and sixteenth
century, This time I had the depravity of the seventeenth to develop more than could possibly
would happen. "

Even Goethe liked by other occupations that historical work has been withdrawn . Being Still,
he pursued with keen interest since his early youth he cherished Art studies. His letters to
Lavater and Information contained on the manifold manifestations Design and execution of valuable
landscapes, leaves, and sketches, which he partly owned, partly wanted to get to complete his
collection.

About Albrecht Dürer wrote He has the 6th March 1780 to Lavater: "I adore more every day that gold
and silver, not to paying work of the man who, if one learns to recognize him right at heart, in
truth, has grandeur, and even grace only the first Italians to be the same. This will we say
that. "In this letter he mentioned the possession of a collection of" intellectual hand cracks,
particularly in landscapes, which he wished to reproduce He wrote to Lavater. "Passe but on, you
so much goes through your hands. If you so find a sheet, as the first fastest, most direct
manifestation of the artistic spirit is printed, it will not let you escape, if thou can have money
to tolerable. Makes me a special pleasure. "

Goethe's interest in art was nurtured by a two-week stay in Oeser's Ettersburg. Nothing could have
pleased him, be-ing, as the reunion of his old friend and Leipzig Teacher, which he, by his own
confession in letters previously communicated, a large Owed part of his education. Oeser was
busy with many cases of device and location the amateur theater in
Ettersburg on which the edited by Aristophanes von Goethe Comedy,
"the birds" should be presented.

Goethe wrote of Oeser: "The old man had change throughout the day to dig a little to give, to draw,
interpret, discuss, teach so that not a minute was empty. Since then he's gone, goes of course
somewhat quieter and easier. "

By Oeser's departure gave Goethe's tendency to art gradually growing in the later years Interest
in manifold natural objects. His friends wish he had, in a letter dated 3. July 1780 communicated
the message that the sculptor Klauer Oeser's head of love " bossirt, "and that the same should
be cast in plaster and carved in gray stone." A propops " he added, "of stones I have now
started something very pleasant and entertaining.

By a young man whom we brought to the mountain being, I leave a mineralogical Description of Weimar,
Eisenach and Jena make. He brings all kinds of stone, with his description respectively, and
with numerirt, resulting in a very simple but interesting result for us Cabinet. We also find
many things that is good and useful, I will not say but profitable. " His letter ended with the Goethe
addressed to Information request: "Thou doest a great favor if you send me occasional test a piece
of the granite, not far from you Mountain range, which make great sawed-off pieces of them believe
that the Romans obelisk have therefore taken. If you find an opportunity to explore again what the rock
mountain on has its highest level for stones, it is be-ing me very comfortable. "

While Goethe roamed the field of science and art to the most various directions, seemed to slumber
his poetic activity. She was awakened again by the appearance of Wieland's Oberon. He wrote
to wish 7 April 1780: "You will read the Oberon and have enjoyed it up. I Wielandner 'it sent
a laurel wreath he has delighted "after a subsequent letter to Lavater dated July 3, 1780,
Goethe was convinced.: "As long as poetry poetry, gold and gold Crystall
Crystall will remain, even Wieland's Oberon to be loved as a masterpiece
of poetic art and admired.

"

Excited by the said epic, he warned in a letter dated 24 June 1780 before the shallow and presumptuous
criticism, not sparing even the most excellent. "On the occasion of Wieland's Oberon, "he wrote
to Lavater," you just need the word talent, as if it is the antithesis of Genius would be, if
not entirely, at least somewhat subordinated. We should remember, however, that the real talent
can be nothing more than the language of genius.

I do not want , Chikaniren because I know what you will, on average, mean, and I pluck up only
the sleeve. We are often too liberal in general terms, and cut if We have read a book that made
us from side to side joy, and worthy of all honor occurred, is finally happy with the scissors
as straight through, through a white sheet Paper. When I see such a work even merely as a
Schnitzbildchen, it will still the finest scissors impossible to form any small trains and lines
in which the value is, . Herauszusondern It is after one thing, which is estimated not easy in
such works, because it is so rare: that the author has no wish to make and has made, as what
is just there. For the feeling that the art and freedom to omit much that he deserves of course
the biggest thanks that gives him but only the artist and companion. "

Thus Goethe reassured by the one-sided opinion, by several pages of his "triumph the sensitivity
met, "a harmless satire on the then-Weimar theater staff, with references to various incidents and
events of the day. Some blame, he had also heard about the prevailing sentiment in the drama
written by him "Lila", in the drama "the brothers and sisters," and in another of his former
productions.

In a dramatic form Goethe dressed several partly serious, partly humorous poems, which he carried
Festivities of the Weimar court was initiated.

A higher poetic idea was his "Iphigenia" at the foundation. The first draft of this play and
his only several years later completed novel "Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship" falls in this
period of Goethe's life. The sentence of his friends, whom he several of his Producten then
imparted by hand, was not indifferent to him.

24, July 1780 he wrote to Lavater: "The fact that you have had joy in my Iphigenia me is an extraordinary
Gift. Because we are so close with our lives, and our thoughts and imaginations Go as far apart
as two gunmen who with his back leaning against each other, after all different targets to shoot,
I never allow myself the hope that my stuff to you something could be. I am so heartily that
I also use this Product come back to my heart am. "

In such a mood verschmerzte Goethe the anger and indignation to him by a profit-seeking Booksellers,
Himburg in Berlin, had prepared, as he without Goethe's complicity a collection his previous
writings in two octavo volumes held. Goethe received from him a Letter in which he thought he
had proven to the public a great service, and offered to to send
the poet as a proof of his gratitude, some Berlin porcelain.

Appalled by the arrogance of the uncalled publisher of his writings, Goethe had it in the addressed
letter unanswered, and took revenge in secret by some satirical verses.

Scientific research of various kinds kept for him a lot of interest. Always new pleasure he drew
from the contemplation of nature, and the inorganic, to its often travel in the neighborhood,
especially after francs, as a companion of the Duke of Weimar. In terms of its mineralogical
studies Goethe remarked in a letter to wish of 11 October 1780: "I
give these sciences with complete passion, and I a very great pleasure.

Here I limit myself but do not have the latest Electorate of Saxony, philistine to one, if that mountain
is owned by the Duke of Weimar or not. Like a deer, irrespective of the territory is äset, so I
think, must also be-ing the mineralogist. And so I'm from the summit of Island Mountain, the
highest of the Thuringian forest, to tables in Würzburg's, Fulda tables, Hessian, Chursächsische
until the hall over, and so on up again Saalfeld and Coburg around, pushed my quick trips, have
the most stone-and Rocks from all these areas together, and I find in my way to see the little
Metallic, which lures the weary people into the depths, always the least. By all this together and
through the land of my predecessors, Kramer I am able, a small to supply paper, which will certainly
be interesting. I now have the most general ideas and certainly a pure concept, as everything is
at one another and is without pretension run how it came to each other. Because once I can
not learn from books, so I begin only now, after I had turned the mile-long sheets of our
areas, including to study the experience of others and use. This field is, I see only now, short
time ago been planted with great industry and I am convinced that with so many attempts expedients
and one big man who rotate at the feet or the spirit world could recognize this strange assembled
ball once for all, and could describe, what may have been done already Buffon in the highest
sense, wherefore also French and German, French say that he had written a novel that is told very well,
because the respectable audience Extraordinary everything only through the novel knows. "

Through these studies and other favorite passions Goethe was not deprived of Amtsthätigkeit,
its position as the Privy Council with a seat and vote in several colleges demanded of him. The
bounty of his prince had him free of some troublesome business. He too was, after Confessions of
a previously communicated, "his day's work easy." However, he complained in a February 1781 letter
written Lavater, that he would invite almost too much to himself. He added: "State property should the
person who is put into it to devote himself entirely, and so I would not have so many other things
fall. "

In the same spirit he had expressed in an earlier letter to Lavater: "The good land- and father of
the family closer you would regret. What is there to endure, is not meant tongue. No one rule
is innate, and which they inherited, they must win so bitter as the Conqueror, if he wants it,
and bitter. It goes Diess no man who has his sphere has set out and expelled. "Then he comforted
himself with the comfortable Feeling of health. In a letter to Lavater dated 18 March 1781
he expressed a desire to that God preserve him for a long time on
this beautiful world and wants to give it strength, their to serve
and to use them.

"With me's is good," he wrote, "especially internally. In secular Things working, I daily more skill,
and the spirit to my mind every day and shed Fog, that I think he would have to stand naked throughout,
and yet it remains still covers enough. "

What makes him particularly, to printing and changing external conditions of life was raised,
Goethe's Sense of the beauties of nature. Manifold enjoyment offered him on his Weimar Park located
Garden. "The next few weeks of spring," he wrote on the 9th April 1781 to Lavater, "are me blessed.
Every morning I receive a new flower or bud. The quiet, clean, always recurrent suffering comforts
me loose vegetation often the people need, their moral and more physical evil. "Similar statements
did a subsequent letter to Lavater 22 Juni 1781st "Believe me," wrote
Goethe, "our moral and political world is with underground tunnels,
cellars and sewers minirt, such a great city cares to be, to their
context and conditions of their inhabitants, no one thinks and meditates.

Now it to the one which has some clients, much easier to understand if there even collapse of
the ground, and then once the smoke rising from a ravine. "

From such considerations turned Goethe, as he did in his youth, for Supersensible. "I am," he wrote
to Lavater, "more inclined than someone, even in a world to think outside of the visible, and I
seal and vitality enough, even my own limited self-expanded to a Swedenborg-spirit-universe feel.
Then I might like but that the silly and disgusting human excrement by a fine ferment isolated
and the cleanest state in which we may be relocated perceived will. "

In manifold distractions of work and was Goethe, according to his own words, again returned to poetry.
In addition to the still unfinished "Iphigenia" occupied him the
idea Torquato Tasso, the poet of the liberated Jerusalem, the hero
of a drama's to choose.

The Material to the surroundings of his play he was at the court of the Duchess Amalia of
Weimar. There he learned about the tone that befitted such environments. His friends reported
Lavater Goethe 14 November 1781, he had finished the first act of his "Tasso". "I wish" he
added, "that he would be-ing also written for you." Goethe was the way in a mood and in ratios
that are not favorable to the rapid promotion of his work appeared. "The unrest, in which I
live," he wrote, ["] will not let me on like fun Works remain, and so I also have not the
space in front of me to end the other acts.

I feel like it's the waste that at the moment, when at about lack of income, complaint is spanned
debts, as it were by a spirit of contradiction set out to cultivate new connections in and expenses
to fall. "

Goethe had aptly described in the letters themselves and the agility of his mind, that it was not
long linger in one and the same thing. Also, the dramatic Interested him was not able to bind
exclusively. reported in the above-mentioned letters Goethe: "On our drawing academy have I
myself made this winter, with teachers and students go through the bone structure of the human
body, both to them than me to use, leading them to the strange shape of this one, and thereby to the
to represent the first step to recognize the significant in the imitation of things clearer and
to search. At the same time I treat the bones as a text, what is all life and all Human can attach,
it had the advantage of twice a week to speak publicly, and about things that are worthy of
me, me to talk to people attentive.

["] That is, he said, renouncing a pleasure, which he in the ordinary world, business and farm life
would. His years spurred him to redoubled activity. "With my life," he wrote, "It moves up strongly,
and I'm now soon to understand why, as soon as we here on earth set up have started again on
it further. "

Overwhelmed duties then took Goethe's forces almost excessive use. 16 July 1782 he wrote to Brand:
"I feel like the good friend in my birds I will make a. Piece of the empire after another,
transferred to a walk. This time, I must now's course Seriously, be very serious, because my
predecessor Lord has given me a lot of work. Sometimes I's mad because I'm out of good faith.
Then I think of again: Hic est aut nusquam, quod quaerimus. Similarly, Goethe said in a later
letter of 29 July 1782: "From me have I nothing to say except that I sacrifice my career where
I no more looking as if it were the object of my terms. "

From earthly affairs, Goethe turned back to the supernatural.

His interest it was obtained by the lively correspondence with Lavater. "That you," he wrote
on the 4th October 1782, "I wanted to once again present the internal connection of your religion
was, I welcome very much. We are even now probably sometime soon to know each other on this point
and leave it alone. Deserves great thanks to nature, that in the existence of every living
System has placed too much power to act that, if it at one or the other End is torn itself can patch
up, and what are a thousand religions otherwise, a thousand times the manifestations of this
healing power?
 Dr. Steele, a learned and aged man from England, built a crazy-looking house in a lonely
spot on Mount Tom, and was soon as much a mystery as the noises, for it was known that he had
come to this country to stop them by magic and to seize the great carbuncle in the cave--if
he could find it. Every window, crack, and keyhole was closed, and nobody was admitted while
he stayed there, but the clang of hammers was heard in his house all night, sparks shot from
his chimney, and strange odors were diffused. When all was ready for his adventure he set forth,
his path marked by a faint light that moved before him and stopped at the closed entrance to
the cavern.

Loud were the Moodus noises that night. The mountain shook and groans and hisses were heard
in the air as he pried up the stone that lay across the pit-mouth. When he had lifted it off
a light poured from it and streamed into the heaven like a crimson comet or a spear of the
northern aurora. It was the flash of the great carbuncle, and the stars seen through it were
as if dyed in blood. In the morning Steele was gone. He had taken ship for England. The gem
carried with it an evil fate, for the galley sank in mid-ocean; but, though buried beneath
a thousand fathoms of water, the red ray of the carbuncle sometimes shoots up from the sea,
and the glow of it strikes fear into the hearts of passing sailors. Long after, when the booming
was heard, the Indians said that the hill was giving birth to another beautiful stone.

Such cases are not singular. A phenomenon similar to the Moodus noises, and locally known as
"the shooting of Nashoba Hill," occurs at times in the eminence of that name near East Littleton,
Massachusetts. The strange, deep rumbling was attributed by the Indians to whirlwinds trying
to escape from caves.

Bald Mountain, North Carolina, was known as Shaking Mountain, for strange sounds and tremors
were heard there, and every moonshiner who had his cabin on that hill joined the church and
was diligent in worship until he learned that the trembling was due to the slow cracking and
separation of a great ledge.

At the end of a hot day on Seneca Lake, New York, are sometimes heard the "lake guns," like
exploding gas. Two hundred years ago Agayentah, a wise and honored member of the Seneca tribe,
was killed here by a lightning-stroke. The same bolt that slew him wrenched a tree from the
bank and hurled it into the water, where it was often seen afterward, going about the lake
as if driven by unseen currents, and among the whites it got the name of the Wandering Jew.
It is often missing for weeks together, and its reappearances are heralded by the low booming
of--what? The Indians said that the sound was but the echo of Agayentah's voice, warning them
of dangers and summoning them to battle, while the Wandering Jew became his messenger.

HADDAM ENCHANTMENTS

When witchcraft went rampant through New England the Connecticut town of Haddam owned its share
of ugly old women, whom it tried to reform by lectures and ducking, instead of killing. It
was averred that Goody So-and-So had a black cat for a familiar, that Dame Thus-and-Thus rode
on a broomstick on stormy nights and screeched and gibbered down the farm-house chimneys, and
there were dances of old crones at Devils' Hop Yard, Witch Woods, Witch Meadows, Giant's Chair,
Devil's Footprint, and Dragon's Rock. Farmers were especially fearful of a bent old hag in
a red hood, who seldom appeared before dusk, but who was apt to be found crouched on their
door-steps if they reached home late, her mole-covered cheeks wrinkled with a grin, two yellow
fangs projecting between her lips, and a light shining from her eyes that numbed all on whom
she looked. On stormy nights she would drum and rattle at windows, and by firelight and candle-light
her face was seen peering through the panes.

At Chapman Falls, where the attrition of a stream had worn pot-holes in the rocks, there were
meetings of Haddam witches, to the number of a dozen. They brewed poisons in those holes, cast
spells, and talked in harsh tongues with the arch fiend, who sat on the brink of the ravine
with his tail laid against his shoulder, like a sceptre, and a red glow emanating from his body.

In Devils' Hop Yard was a massive oak that never bears leaves or acorns, for it has been enchanted
since the time that one of the witches, in the form of a crow, perched on the topmost branch,
looked to the four points of the compass, and flew away. That night the leaves fell off, the
twigs shrivelled, sap ceased to run, and moss began to beard its skeleton limbs.

The appearance of witches in the guise of birds was no unusual thing, indeed, and a farmer
named Blakesley shot one of them in that form. He was hunting in a meadow when a rush of wings
was heard and he saw pass overhead a bird with long neck, blue feathers, and feet like scrawny
hands. It uttered a cry so weird, so shrill, so like mocking laughter that it made him shudder.
This bird alighted on a dead tree and he shot at it. With another laughing yell it circled
around his head. Three times he fired with the same result. Then he resolved to see if it were
uncanny, for nothing evil can withstand silver--except Congress. Having no bullets of that
metal he cut two silver buttons from his shirt and rammed them home with a piece of cloth and
a prayer. This time the bird screamed in terror, and tried, but vainly, to rise from the limb.
He fired. The creature dropped, with a button in its body, and fell on its right side. At that
moment an old woman living in a cabin five miles distant arose from her spinning-wheel, gasped,
and fell on her right side-dead.

BLOCK ISLAND AND THE PALATINE

Block Island, or Manisees, is an uplift of clayey moorland between Montauk and Gay Head. It
was for sailors an evil place and "bad medicine" for Indians, for men who had been wrecked
there had been likewise robbed and ill treated--though the honest islanders of to-day deny
it--while the Indians had been driven from their birthright after hundreds of their number
had fallen in its defence. In the winter of 1750-51 the ship Palatine set forth over the seas
with thrifty Dutch merchants and emigrants, bound for Philadelphia, with all their goods. A
gale delayed them and kept them beating to and fro on the icy seas, unable to reach land. The
captain died--it was thought that he was murdered--and the sailors, a brutal set even for those
days, threw off all discipline, seized the stores and arms, and starved the passengers into
giving up their money.

When those died of hunger whose money had given out--for twenty guilders were demanded for
a cup of water and fifty rix dollars for a biscuit--their bodies were flung into the sea, and
when the crew had secured all that excited their avarice they took to their boats, leaving
ship and passengers to their fate. It is consoling to know that the sailors never reached a
harbor. The unguided ship, in sight of land, yet tossed at the mercy of every wind and tenanted
by walking skeletons, struck off Block Island one calm Sunday morning and the wreckers who
lived along the shore set out for her. Their first work was to rescue the passengers; then
they returned to strip everything from the hulk that the crew had left; but after getting her
in tow a gale sprang up, and seeing that she was doomed to be blown off shore, where she might
become a dangerous obstruction or a derelict, they set her on fire. From the rocks they watched
her drift into misty darkness, but as the flames mounted to the trucks a scream rang across
the whitening sea: a maniac woman had been left on board. The scream was often repeated, each
time more faintly, and the ship passed into the fog and vanished.

A twelvemonth later, on the same evening of the year, the islanders were startled at the sight
of a ship in the offing with flames lapping up her sides and rigging, and smoke clouds rolling
off before the wind. It burned to the water's edge in sight of hundreds. In the winter following
it came again, and was seen, in fact, for years thereafter at regular intervals, by those who
would gladly have forgotten the sight of it (one of the community, an Indian, fell into madness
whenever he saw the light), while those who listened caught the sound of a woman's voice raised
in agony above the roar of fire and water.

Substantially the same story is told of a point on the North Carolina coast, save that in the
latter case the passengers, who were from the Bavarian Palatinate, were put to the knife before
their goods were taken. The captain and his crew filled their boats with treasure and pulled
away for land, first firing the ship and committing its ghastly freight to the flames. The
ship followed them almost to the beach, ere it fell to pieces, as if it were an animate form,
bent on vengeance. The pirates landed, but none profited by the crime, all of them dying poor
and forsaken.

THE BUCCANEER

Among the natives of Block Island was a man named Lee. Born in the last century among fishermen
and wreckers, he has naturally taken to the sea for a livelihood, and, never having known the
influences of education and refinement, he is rude and imperious in manner. His ship lies in
a Spanish port fitting for sea, but not with freight, for, tired of peaceful trading, Lee is
equipping his vessel as a privateer. A Spanish lady who has just been bereaved of her husband
comes to him to ask a passage to America, for she has no suspicion of his intent. Her jewels
and well-filled purse arouse Lee's cupidity, and with pretended sympathy he accedes to her
request, even going so far as to allow Senora's favorite horse to be brought aboard.

Hardly is the ship in deep water before the lady's servants are stabbed in their sleep and
Lee smashes in the door of her cabin. Realizing his purpose, and preferring to sacrifice life
to honor, she eludes him, climbs the rail, and leaps into the sea, while the ship ploughs on.
As a poor revenge for being thus balked of his prey the pirate has the beautiful white horse
flung overboard, the animal shrilling a neigh that seems to reach to the horizon, and is like
nothing ever heard before. But these things he affects to forget in dice and drinking. In a
dispute over a division of plunder Lee stabs one of his men and tosses him overboard. Soon
the rovers come to Block Island, where, under cover of night, they carry ashore their stealings
to hide them in pits and caves, reserving enough gold to buy a welcome from the wreckers, and
here they live for a year, gaming and carousing. Their ship has been reported as a pirate and
to baffle search it is set adrift.

One night a ruddy star is seen on the sea-verge and the ruffians leave their revelling to look
at it, for it is growing into sight fast. It speeds toward them and they can now see that it
is a ship--their shipwrapped in flames. It stops off shore, and out of the ocean at its prow
emerges something white that they say at first is a wave-crest rolling upon the sands; but
it does not dissolve as breakers do: it rushes on; it scales the bluff it is a milk-white horse,
that gallops to the men, who inly wonder if this is an alcoholic vision, and glares at Lee.
A spell seems to be laid on him, and, unable to resist it, the buccaneer mounts the animal.
It rushes away, snorting and plunging, to the highest bluff, whence Lee beholds, in the light
of the burning ship, the bodies of all who have been done to death by him, staring into his
eyes through the reddening waves.

At dawn the horse sinks under him and he stands there alone. From that hour even his companions
desert him. They fear to share his curse. He wanders about the island, a broken, miserable
man, unwilling to live, afraid to die, refused shelter and friendship, and unable to reach
the mainland, for no boat will give him passage. After a year of this existence the ship returns,
the spectre horse rises from the deep and claims Lee again for a rider. He mounts; the animal
speeds away to the cliff, but does not pause at the brink this time: with a sickening jump
and fall he goes into the sea. Spurning the wave-tops in his flight he makes a circuit of the
burning ship, and in the hellish light, that fills the air and penetrates to the ocean bottom,
the pirate sees again his victims looking up with smiles and arms spread to embrace him.

There is a cry of terror as the steed stops short; then a gurgle, and horse and rider have
disappeared. The fire ship vanishes and the night is dark.

ROBERT LOCKWOOD'S FATE

In the winter of 1779, General Putnam was stationed at Reading, Connecticut, with a band of
ill-fed, unpaid troops. He was quartered at the Marvin house, and Mary, daughter of farmer
Marvin, won her way to the heart of this rough soldier through the excellence of her dumplings
and the invigorating quality of her flip. He even took her into his confidence, and, being
in want of a spy in an emergency, he playfully asked her if she knew any brave fellow who could
be trusted to take a false message into the British lines that would avert an impending attack.
Yes, she knew such an one, and would guarantee that he would take the message if the fortunes
of the colonial army would be helped thereby. Putnam assured her that it would aid the patriot
cause, and, farther, that he would reward her; whereat, with a smile and a twinkling eye, the
girl received the missive and left the room.

When daylight had left the sky, Mary slipped out of the house, crossed a pasture, entered a
ravine, and in a field beyond reached a cattle shelter. On the instant a tall form stepped
from the shadows and she sank into its embrace. There was a kiss, a moment of whispered talk,
and the girl hurriedly asked her lover if he would carry a letter to the British headquarters,
near Ridgefield. Of course he would. But he must not read it, and he must on no account say
from whom he had it. The young man consented without a question--that she required it was sufficient;
so, thrusting the tiny paper into his hand and bidding him God-speed, she gave him another
kiss and they parted--he to go on his errand, she to pass the night with the clergyman's daughter
at the parsonage. At about ten o'clock Putnam was disturbed by the tramping of feet and a tall,
goodlooking fellow was thrust into his room by a couple of soldiers. The captive had been found
inside the lines, they said, in consultation with some unknown person who had escaped the eye
of the sentry in the darkness. When captured he had put a piece of paper into his mouth and
swallowed it. He gave the name of Robert Lockwood, and when Putnam demanded to know what he
had been doing near the camp without a permit he said that he was bound by a promise not to tell.

"Are you a patriot?" asked the general.

"I am a royalist. I do not sympathize with rebellion. I have been a man of peace in this war."

Putnam strode about the room, giving vent to his passion in language neither choice nor gentle,
for he had been much troubled by spies and informers since he had been there. Then, stopping,
he said:

"Some one was with you to-night-some of my men. Tell me that traitor's name and I'll spare
your life and hang him before the whole army."

The prisoner turned pale and dropped his head. He would not violate his promise.

"You are a British spy, and I'll hang you at sunrise!" roared Putnam.

In vain the young man pleaded for time to appeal to Washington. He was not a spy, he insisted,
and it would be found, perhaps too late, that a terrible mistake had been committed. His words
were unheeded: he was led away and bound, and as the sun was rising on the next morning the
sentence of courtmartial was executed upon him.

At noon Mary returned from the parsonage, her eyes dancing and her mouth dimpling with smiles.
Going to Putnam, she said, with a dash of sauciness, "I have succeeded, general. I found a
lad last night to take your message. I had to meet him alone, for he is a Tory; so he cannot
enter this camp. The poor fellow had no idea that he was doing a service for the rebels, for
he did not know what was in the letter, and I bound him not to tell who gave it to him. You
see, I punished him for abiding by the king."

The general laughed and gazed at her admiringly.

"You're a brave girl," he said, "and I suppose you've come for your reward. Well, what is it
to be?"

"I want a pass for Robert Lockwood. He is the royalist I spoke of, but he will not betray you,
for he is not a soldier; and--his visits make me very happy."

"The spy you hanged this morning," whispered an aide in Putnam's ear. "Give her the pass and
say nothing of what has happened."

The general started, changed color, and paused; then he signed the order with a dash, placed
it in the girl's hand, gravely kissed her, watched her as she ran lightly from the house, and
going to his bedroom closed the door and remained alone for an hour. From that time he never
spoke of the affair, but when his troops were ordered away, soon after, he almost blenched
as he gave good-by to Mary Marvin, and met her sad, reproachful look, though to his last day
he never learned whether or no she had discovered Robert Lockwood's fate.

LOVE AND RUM

Back in the seventeenth century a number of Yankee traders arrived in Naugatuck to barter blankets,
beads, buttons, Bibles, and brandy for skins, and there they met chief Toby and his daughter.
Toby was not a pleasing person, but his daughter was well favored, and one of the traders told
the chief that if he would allow the girl to go to Boston with him he would give to him--Toby--a
quart of rum. Toby was willing enough. He would give a good deal for rum. But the daughter
declined to be sold off in such a fashion unless--she coyly admitted--she could have half of
the rum herself. Loth as he was to do so, Toby was brought to agree to this proposition, for
he knew that rum was rare and good and girls were common and perverse, so the gentle forest
lily took her mug of liquor and tossed it off. Now, it is not clear whether she wished to nerve
herself for the deed that followed or whether the deed was a result of the tonic, but she made
off from the paternal wigwam and was presently seen on the ledge of Squaw Rock, locally known
also as High Rock, from which in another moment she had fallen. Toby had pursued her, and on
finding her dead he vented a howl of grief and anger and flung the now empty rum-jug after
her. 

May this gift so that I was the youth in my native Germany from where the distant East, offering
from the land of the rising sun, will be gladly accepted and applause find.

  

    Tokyo.

  

Karl Alberti.

[Decoration]

Juki-onna [1].

Once there were two wood-cutters: one
was Nishikaze [2], this was an older man, while the other was Teramichi
and another young man was. Both lived in the same village and went
together every day in the woods to beat wood. Many have tried to capture the snake and secure this
precious stone, for an old prophecy promises wealth to whoever shall wrest it from the serpent.
But thus far the people of Connecticut have found more wealth in clocks and tobacco than in
snakes and carbuncles.

