It took the man who could shoot Phantom Falls to find out, "Its bite is not severe, nor is
it ordinarily poisonous. There may be an occasional exception to this rule; but beside the
bite of the mosquito, it is comparatively mild and harmless." And again: "Gnats...in my way
of thinking, are much worse than the black fly or mosquito." So says Murray. Our observations
differ. A thousand mosquitoes and as many gnats can bite me without leaving a mark, or having
any effect save the pain of the bite while they are at work. But each bite of the black fly
makes a separate and distinct boil, that will not heal and be well in two months.

While fishing for brook trout in July last, I ran into a swarm of them on Moose River and got
badly bitten. I had carelessly left my medicine behind. On the first of October the bites had
not ceased to be painful, and it was three months before they disappeared entirely. Frank Forester
says, in his Fish and Fishing, page 371, that he has never fished for the red-fleshed trout
of Hamilton county, "being deterred therefrom by dread of that curse of the summer angler,
the black fly, which is to me especially venomous."

"Adirondack Murray" gives extended directions for beating these little pests by the use of
buckskin gloves with chamois gauntlets, Swiss mull, fine muslin, etc. Then he advises a mixture
of sweet oil and tar, which is to be applied to face and hands; and he adds that it is easily
washed off, leaving the skin soft and smooth as an infant's; all of which is true. But, more
than forty years' experience in the woods has taught me that the following recipe is infallible
anywhere that sancudos, moquims, or our own poisonous insects do most abound.

It was published in Forest and Stream in the summer of 1880 and again in '83. It has been pretty
widely quoted and adopted and I have never known it to fail: Three ounces pine tar, two ounces
castor oil, one ounce pennyroyal oil. Simmer all together over a slow fire and bottle for use.
You will hardly need more than a two-ounce vial full in a season. One ounce has lasted me six
weeks in the woods. Rub it in thoroughly and liberally at first, and after you have established
a good glaze, a little replenishing from day to day will be sufficient. And don't fool with
soap and towels where insects are plenty. A good safe coat of this varnish grows better the
longer it is kept on--and it is cleanly and wholesome. If you get your face and hands crocky
or smutty about the campfire, wet the corner of your handkerchief and rub it off, not forgetting
to apply the varnish at once, wherever you have cleaned it off. Last summer I carried a cake
of soap and a towel in my knapsack through the North Woods for a seven weeks' tour and never
used either a single time. When I had established a good glaze on the skin, it was too valuable
to be sacrificed for any weak whim connected with soap and water. When I struck a woodland
hotel, I found soap and towels plenty enough. I found the mixture gave one's face the ruddy
tanned look supposed to be indicative of health and hard muscle. A thorough ablution in the
public wash basin reduced the color, but left the skin very soft and smooth; in fact, as a
lotion for the skin it is excellent. It is a soothing and healing application for poisonous
bites already received.

I have given some space to the insect question, but no more than it deserves or requires. The
venomous little wretches are quite important enough to spoil many a well planned trip to the
woods and it is best to beat them from the start. You will find that immunity from insects
and a comfortable camp are the two first and most indispensable requisites of an outing in
the woods.

And just here I will briefly tell how a young friend of mine went to the woods, some twenty-five
years ago. He was a bank clerk and a good fellow withal, with a leaning toward camp-life.

For months, whenever we met, he would introduce his favorite topics, fishing, camping out,
etc. At last in the hottest of the hot months, the time came. He put in an appearance with
a fighting cut on his hair, a little stiff straw hat and a soft skin, bleached by long confinement
in a close office. I thought he looked a little tender; but he was sanguine. He could rough
it, could sleep on the bare ground with the root of a tree for a pillow; as for mosquitoes
and punkies, he never minded them.

We went in a party of five--two old hunters and three youngsters, the latter all enthusiasm
and pluck--at first. Toward the last end of a heavy eight-mile tramp, they grew silent and
slapped and scratched nervously. Arriving at the camping spot, they worked fairly well, but
were evidently weakening a little. By the time we were ready to turn in they were reduced pretty
well to silence and suffering--especially the bank clerk, Jean L. The punkies were eager for
his tender skin and they were rank poison to him. He muffled his head in a blanket and tried
to sleep, but it was only a partial success. When, by suffocating himself, he obtained a little
relief from insect bites, there were stubs and knotty roots continually poking themselves among
his ribs, or digging into his backbone.

I have often had occasion to observe that stubs, roots and small stones, etc., have a perverse
tendency to abrade the anatomy of people unused to the woods. Mr. C.D. Warner has noticed the
same thing, I believe.

On the whole, Jean and the other youngsters behaved very well. The fact is, that the Order of
Things--rightly understood-- is not susceptible of any coercion whatever, and must be humoured
in every possible way. In the race of life, my son, you must run
cunning, reserving your sprint for the tactical moment. They did their level bravest to make a jolly thing of it;
but Jean's attempt to watch a deerlick resulted in a wetting through the sudden advent of a
shower; and the shower drove about all the punkies and mosquitoes in the neighborhood under
our roof for shelter. I never saw them more plentiful or worse. Jean gave in and varnished
his pelt thoroughly with my "punkie dope," as he called it; but, too late: the mischief was
done. And the second trial was worse to those youngsters than the first. More insects. More
stubs and knots. Owing to these little annoyances, they arrived at home several days before
their friends expected them--leaving enough rations in camp to last Old Sile and the writer
a full week. And the moral of it is, if they had fitted themselves for the the woods before
going there, the trip would have been a pleasure instead of a misery.

One other little annoyance I will mention, as a common occurrence among those who camp out;
this is the lack of a pillow. I suppose I have camped fifty times with people, who, on turning
in, were squirming around for a long time, trying to get a rest for the head. Boots are the
most common resort. But, when you place a boot-leg--or two of them--under your head, they collapse
and make a headrest less than half an inch thick. Just why it never occurs to people that a
stuffing of moss, leaves, or hemlock browse, would fill out the boot-leg and make a passable
pillow, is another conundrum I cannot answer. But there is another and better way of making
a pillow for camp use, which I will describe further on.

