The child burst into a flood of tears and sobbed piteously, but it was some minutes before
he would relent and look towards her. Eustace scolded her for making such a noise, and vexing
Harold when he was hurt, but that only made her cry the more.  I told her to say she was sorry,
and perhaps Harold would forgive her; but she shook her head violently at this.

Harold relented, unable to bear the sight of distress.  "Don't tease her," he said, shortly,
to us both.  "Hush, Dora; there's an end of it."

This seemed to be an amnesty, for she leant against his knee again.

"Dora, how could you?" I said, when we were out of the carriage, and the two young men had
gone upstairs together.

"It was Meg's ring, and I hate her," answered Dora, with the fierce wild gleam in her eyes.

"You should not hate anyone," was, of course, my answer.

"But she's dead!" said Dora, triumphantly as a little tigress.

"So much the worse it is to hate her.  Who was she?"

"His wife," said Dora.

I durst not ask the child any more questions.

"Eustace, who is Meg?"

I could not but ask that question as we sat tete-a-tete after dinner, Dora having gone to carry
Harold some fruit, and being sure to stay with him as long as he permitted.

Eustace looked round with a startled, cautious eye, as if afraid of being overheard, and said,
as Dora had done, "His wife."

"Not alive?"

"Oh, no--thank goodness."

"At his age!"

"He was but twenty when he married her.  A bad business!  I knew it could not be otherwise.
She was a storekeeper's daughter."

Then I learnt, in Eustace's incoherent style, the sad story I understood better afterwards.

This miserable marriage had been the outcome of the desolate state of the family after the
loss of all the higher spirits of the elder generation.  For the first few years after my brothers
had won their liberation, and could hold property, they had been very happy, and the foundations
of their prosperity at Boola Boola had been laid. Had Ambrose lived he would, no doubt, have
become a leading man in the colony, where he had heartily embraced his lot and shaped his career.

Poor Eustace was, however, meant by nature for a quiet, refined English gentleman, living in
his affections.  He would never have transgressed ordinary bounds save for his brother's overmastering
influence.  He drooped from the time of Ambrose's untimely death, suffered much from the loss
of several children, and gradually became a prey to heart complaint.  But his wife was full
of sense and energy, and Ambrose's plans were efficiently carried on, so that all went well
till Alice's marriage; and, a year or two later on, Dorothy's death, in giving birth to her
little girl, no woman was left at the farm but a rough though kind-hearted old convict, who
did her best for the motherless child.

Harold, then sixteen, and master of his father's half of the property, was already its chief
manager.  He was, of course, utterly unrestrained, doing all kinds of daring and desperate
things in the exuberance of his growing strength, and, though kind to his feeble uncle, under
no authority, and a thorough young barbarian of the woods; the foremost of all the young men
in every kind of exploit, as marksman, rider, hunter, and what-not, and wanting also to be
foremost in the good graces of Meg Cree, the handsome daughter of the keeper of the wayside
store on the road to Sydney, where young stock-farmers were wont to meet, with the price of
their wool fresh in their hands.  It was the rendezvous for all that was collectively done
in the district; and many were the orgies and revelries in which Harold had shared when a mere
boy in all but strength and stature, and ungovernable in proportion to the growing forces within
him.

Of course she accepted him, with his grand physical advantages and his good property.  There
was rivalry enough to excite him, her beauty was sufficient to fire his boyish fancy; and opposition
only maddened his headstrong will.  A loud, boisterous, self-willed boy, with already strength,
courage, and power beyond those of most grown men; his inclination light and unformed, as the
attachments of his age usually are, was so backed that he succeeded where failure would have
been a blessing.

My poor brother Eustace! what must not Harold's marriage have been to him!  Into the common
home, hitherto peaceful if mournful, was brought this coarse, violent, uneducated woman, jealous
of him and his family, unmeasured in rudeness, contemning all the refinements to which he clung,
and which even then were second nature to the youths, boasting over him for being a convict,
whereas her father was a free settler, and furious at any act of kindness or respect to him
from her husband.

She must have had a sort of animal jealousy, for the birth of her first child rendered her
so savagely intolerant of poor Dora's fondness for Harold, that the offer of a clergyman's
wife to take charge of the little girl was thankfully accepted by her father, though it separated
him from his darling by more than fifty miles.

The woman's plan seemed to be to persecute the two Eustaces out of her house, since she could
not persuade Harold that it was not as much theirs as his own.  They clung on, as weak men
do, for want of energy to make a change, and Eustace said his father would never complain;
but Harold never guessed how much she made him suffer. Home had become a wretched place to
all, and Harold was more alienated from it, making long expeditions, staying out as long and
as late as he could whenever business or pleasure called him away, and becoming, alas, more
headlong and reckless in the pursuit of amusement.  There were fierce hot words when he came
home, and though a tender respect for his uncle was the one thing in which he never failed,
the whole grand creature was being wrecked and ruined by the wild courses to which home misery
was driving him.

After about three years of this kind of life, Meg, much against his will, went to her father's
station for the birth of her second child; lingered in the congenial atmosphere there far longer
than was necessary after her recovery, and roused Harold's jealousy to a violent pitch by her
demeanour towards a fellow of her own rank, whom she probably would have married but for Harold's
unfortunate advantages, and whom she now most perilously preferred.

The jollification after the poor child's long-deferred christening ended in furious language
on both sides, Meg insisting that she would not go home while "the old man" remained at Boola
Boola, Harold swearing that she should come at once, and finally forcing her into his buggy,
silencing by sheer terror her parents' endeavours to keep them at least till morning, rather
than drive in his half-intoxicated condition across the uncleared country in the moonlight.

In the early morning Harold stood at their door dazed and bleeding, with his eldest child crushed
and moaning in his arms.  Almost without a word he gave it to the grandmother, and then guided
the men at hand, striding on silently before them, to the precipitous bank of a deep gulley
some twelve miles off.  In the bottom lay the carriage broken to pieces, and beside it, where
Harold had dragged them out, Meg and her baby both quite dead--where he had driven headlong
down in the darkness.

The sun was burning hot when they brought her back in the cart, Harold walking behind with
the little one in his arms, and when he had laid it down at home, the elder one waited till
he took it.  It was a fine boy of two years old, the thing he loved best in the world; but
with a broken spine there was no hope for it, and for a whole day and night he held it, pacing
the room, and calling it, speaking to and noticing no one else, and touching no food, only
slaking his thirst with the liquor that stood at hand, until the poor little thing died in
convulsions.

Unhappily, he had scarcely laid it down beside its mother and brother, when he saw his rival
in the outer room of the store, and with one deadly imprecation, and a face which Eustace could
not think of without horror, challenged him to fight, and in a second or two had struck him
down, with a fractured skull.  But the deed was done in undoubted brain fever.  That was quite
established, and for ten days after he was desperately ill and in the wildest delirium, probably
from some injury to the head in the fall, aggravated by all that followed.

Neiher magistrate nor doctor was called in, but Prometesky came to their help, and when he
grew calmer, brought him home, where his strength rallied, but his mind was for some time astray.
For weeks he alternated between moods of speechless apathy and hours of frenzy, which, from
his great strength, must have been fatal to someone if he had not always known his gentle,
feeble old uncle, and obeyed his entreaties, even when Prometesky lost power with him.

In this remote part of the country no one interfered; the Crees, whose presence maddened him,
were afraid to approach, and only Prometesky sustained the hopes of the two Eustaces by his
conviction that this was not permanent insanity, but a passing effect of the injury; and they
weathered that dreadful time till the frantic fits ceased, and there was only the dull, silent,
stoniness of look and manner, lasting on after his health had entirely returned, and he had
begun mechanically to attend to the farm and stock, and give orders to the men.

The final cure was the message that Dora was lost in the Bush. Harold had the keen sagacity
of a black fellow, and he followed up the track with his unwearied strength until, on the third
day, he found her, revived her with the food he had brought with him, and carried her home.
There was only just nourishment enough to support her, and he took none himself, so that when
he laid her down beside her father, he was so spent that, after a mouthful or two, he slept
for twenty hours without moving, as he had never rested since the accident; and when he woke,
and Dora ran up and stroked his face, it was the first time he had been seen to smile.  Ever
since he had been himself again, though changed from the boy of exuberant spirits, and the
youth of ungovernable inclinations, into a grave, silent man, happier apparently in Dora's
vehement affection than in anything else, and, at any rate, solaced, and soothed by the child's
fondness and dependence upon him. This was two years ago, and no token of mental malady had
since shown itself.

My poor brother Eustace!  My heart yearned to have been able to comfort him.  His tender nature
had been all along the victim of others, and he was entirely shattered by these last miseries;
an old man when little more than forty, and with heart disease so much accelerated by distress
and agitation, that he did not live a month after Dora's adventure; but at least he had the
comfort of seeing Harold's restoration, and being able to commit the other two to his charge,
being no doubt aware that his son was at the best a poor weak being, and that Harold's nature
would rise under responsibility which would call out its generosity.

Harold had never touched liquor since the day of his child's death, nor spoken of it; but when
his dying uncle begged him to watch over his young cousins, he took up the Bible that lay on
the bed, and, unsolicited, took a solemn oath to taste nothing of the kind for the rest of
his life.

Afterwards the three had lived on together at Boola Boola.  Then had come the tidings of the
inheritance supposed to be Harold's, and with the relief of one glad to make a new beginning,
to have a work to do, and leave old things behind, he had taken both the others with him.

So it was true!  My noble-looking Harold had those dark lines in his spectrum.  Wild ungovernable
strength had whirled him in mere boyhood at the beck of his passions, and when most men are
entering freshly upon life, he was already saddened and sobered by sin and suffering. The stories
whispered of him were more than true.  I remember I cried over them as I sat alone that evening.
Eustace had not told all with the extenuations that I discovered gradually, some even then
by cross-questioning, and much by the tuition of that sisterly affection that had gone out
from me to Harold, and fastened on him as the one who, to me, represented family ties.

I never thought of breaking with him.  No, if I had been told he might be insane that very
night, it would have bound me to him the more.  And when I went to bid him "Good-night" and
take away Dora, and saw the massive features in their stillness light up into a good-natured
smile of thanks at my inquiries, I could believe it all the less.  He was lying cornerwise
across the bed, with a stool beyond for his feet to rest on, and laughed a little as he said
he always had to contrive thus, he never found a bed long enough; and our merriment over this
seemed to render what Eustace had told me even more incongruous in one so scrupulously gentle.

That gentleness was perhaps reactionary in one who had had such lessons in keeping back his
strength.  He had evidently come forth a changed man.  But that vow of his--was it the binding
of a worse lion than that he had fought with to-day?  Yet could such things be done in the
might of a merely human will?  And what token was there of the higher aid being invoked?  My
poor Harold!  I could only pray for him!  Alas! did he pray for himself?

I was waked in early morning by Dora's vociferous despair at the disappearance of her big patient,
and then Eustace's peremptory fretful tone was heard silencing her by explaining that Harold's
hurts had become so painful that he had walked off to Mycening to have the bandages loosened.

Indeed, when we met at breakfast, Eustace seemed to think himself injured by the interruption
of his slumbers by Harold's coming to him for assistance in putting on his clothes, and stared
at my dismay at his having permitted such an exertion.  Before long, however, we saw an unmistakable
doctor's gig approaching, and from it emerged Harold and Mr. Yolland.  I saw now that he was
a sturdy, hard-working-looking young man of seven or eight and twenty, with sandy hair, and
an honest, open, weather-beaten face.  He had a rather abrupt manner, but much more gentleman-like
than that of the usual style of young Union doctors, who are divided between fine words and
affectation and Sawbones roughness.

He said he had come in to enforce on us what he could not get his patient to believe--that
it was madness to take such liberties with himself, while such serious wounds were so fresh;
and certainly Harold did not seem to suppose a two mile walk more of an exertion than a turn
on the terrace; indeed, but for Mr. Yolland, he would have set off again after breakfast for
the interrupted quest of horses at the fair. This, however, was forbidden, with a hint about
even the strongest constitution not being able to defy tetanus.  This made us all look grave,
and submission being promised, the young doctor took his leave, saying he would come in the
evening and dress the hands again for the night.

"Why did you go to that fellow?" asked Eustace.  "It is the old doctor who attends gentlemen;
he is only the partner."

"He is good enough for me," said Harold.  "I was right glad to meet him."

Then it appeared that as Harold was striding into town, half distracted with the pain of his
hands, in the sunrise of that April morning, he had had the good fortune to meet Mr. Yolland
just coming from the cottage where the poor little boy lay who had been injured by the lion.
The fright and shock had nearly killed the mother, and the young doctor had been up all night,
trying to save her, while on the floor, in a drunken sleep, lay the father, a navvy, who had
expended the money lavished on the child by the spectators of the accident, in a revel at the
public house.  If any were left, it was all in the brute's pocket, and the only hope of peace
was when he should have drunk it up.

Eustace went off to the fair to look at horses, Harold impressing on him to do nothing final
in haste; and I could see that, while proud of doing anything on his own account, he was almost
afraid of the venture alone.  Tired by his sleepless night and morning walk, Harold, when we
went into the hall for Dora's lessons, lay down on the white bear-skin, let us build a pile
of cushions for his head, and thanked us with "That's nice."  I suppose he had never been waited
on before, he smiled with such a grateful look, almost of surprise.

Have I not said that ours was a black oak-panelled hall, with a wide fireplace, a gallery and
oriel window, matted, and so fitted up as to be a pleasant resort for summer days.  Our lessons
took place there, because I had found that my old schoolroom, out of sight and sound of everything,
was such an intolerable prison to my little wild Bush girl, that she really could not learn
there, since her very limited attention could only be secured, under the certainty that Harold
did not leave the house without her.

He bade her let him hear how well she could read, but he was very soon fast asleep, and I was
persuading her that the multiplication table could not disturb his slumbers, when, at the sound
of horses' feet, she darted from my side, like an arrow from a bow, to the open front door,
and there waved her hand in command, calling to the rider in a hushed voice, "He is asleep."

I followed, expecting to see Eustace; but the rider was instead Dermot Tracy, who in unfeigned
alarm asked if he were seriously ill; and when I laughed and explained, he gave his horse,
to the groom, and came quietly enough, to satisfy Dora, into the hall with us.

There he stood transfixed, gazing at the great sleeping figure with a passion of enthusiasm
in his dark-grey eyes.  "Glorious!" he said. "Splendid fellow!  Worthy of the deed, Lucy! 
It was the most plucky thing I ever saw!"

"You distinguished yourself too," I said.

"I?  Why, I had a rifle.  I galloped down to Grice's for mine at the first, when I saw the
menagerie people were cowed.  What's that to going at him alone, and mastering him too, as
he had done before those idiots thought proper to yell?"

Being talked about, of course, awoke Harold; his eyes opened, and he answered for himself,
greeting Dermot heartily.  Only then did we understand the full history of what had happened.
The lion-tamer, whose part it was to exhibit the liberty he could take with the animals, was
ill, and his assistant, after much bravado as to his equal power, had felt his courage quail,
and tried to renew it with drink. Thus he was in no state to perceive that he had only shot-to
the bolt of the door of the cage; and his behaviour had so irritated the beast that, after
so dealing with him that he lay in a most dangerous state, he had dashed out at the door in
rage and terror, and, after seizing the hindmost of the flying crowd, had lain down between
the shafts of the waggon, as we had seen him.

The keepers had lost their heads in the panic, and no one durst go near him.  The lion-tamer
had to be called from his bed, in lodgings in the town, and only came on the scene just as
Dermot's rifle had finished the struggle.  The master had quite seen the necessity, but was
in great despair at the loss of so valuable an animal.

"I'll share in making it good to him," said Harold.

"You?  You are the last to do so.  If you had only been let alone, the beast would have been
captured unhurt.  No, no!  I settled all that, as it was I who meddled in the matter when,
I believe, you could have settled him yourself."

"I don't know that," said Harold.  "I was glad enough to see your rifle at his ear.  But I
should like to have his skin, if they would sell it."

Dermot explained that he had been bargaining for the skin, and hoped Mr. Alison would accept
it from him, but here Harold's resolution won the day, much as Dermot evidently longed to lay
the trophy at his feet. Poor Dermot, I could see hero-worship growing in his eyes, as they
talked about horses, endlessly as men can and do talk of them, and diligent inquiries elicited
from Harold what things he had done with the unbroken animal in Australia.

I went off the scene at once, but when I returned to luncheon they were at it still.  And Eustace's
return with two steeds for Harold's judgment renewed the subject with double vigour.  Dermot
gave his counsel, and did not leave Arghouse without reiterating an invitation to the cousins
to come to-morrow to his cottage at Biston, to be introduced to his stables, let doctors say
what they might, and Eustace was in raptures at the distinguished acquaintance he fancied he
had made for himself.  He had learnt something of Mr. Tracy's sporting renown, and saw himself
introduced to all the hunting world of the county, not to say of England.

It gave me a great deal to consider, knowing, as I did full well, that poor Dermot's acquaintance
was not likely to bring him into favour with society, even if it were not dangerous in itself.
And my poor mother would not have been delighted at my day, a thing I had totally forgotten
in the pleasantness of having someone to talk to; for it was six weeks since I had spoken to
anyone beyond the family, except Miss Woolmer.  Besides, it was Dermot!  And that was enough
to move me in itself.

I think I have said that his father was an Irish landlord, who was shot at his own hall-door
in his children's infancy.  Lady Diana brought them back to her old neighbourhood, and there
reigned over one of her brother's villages, with the greatest respect and admiration from all,
and viewed as a pattern matron, widow, and parent.  My mother was, I fancy, a little bit afraid
of her, and never entirely at ease with her. I know I was not, but she was so "particular"
about her children, that it was a great distinction to be allowed to be intimate with them,
and my mother was proud of my being their licensed playfellow, when Horsmans and Stympsons
were held aloof.  But even in those days, when I heard the little Tracys spoken of as pattern
children, I used to have an odd feeling of what it was to be behind the scenes, and know how
much of their fame rested on Di.  I gloried in the knowledge how much more charming the other
two were than anyone guessed, who thought them models of propriety.

In truth, Dermot did not keep that reputation much longer than his petticoats.  Ere long he
was a pickle of the first order, equalling the sublime naughtiness of Holiday House, and was
continually being sent home by private tutors, who could not manage him.  All the time I had
a secret conviction that, if he had been my own mother's son, she could have managed him, and
he would never have even wished to do what she disapproved; but Lady Diana had no sympathy
or warmth in her, and while she loved her children she fretted them, and never thawed nor unbent;
and when she called in her brother's support, Dermot's nerves were driven frantic by the long
harangues, and his relief was in antics which of course redoubled his offence.  After he had
put crackers into his uncle's boots, peppered the coachman's wig, inserted a live toad in the
centre of a fortification of clear jelly at a great luncheon, and had one Christmas painted
the two stone wild boars that guard the iron gates of Erymanth Castle into startling resemblance
of the porkers as displayed in butchers' shops, with a little tin pail at the snout of each,
labelling each sevenpence-ha'penny per pound, his uncle had little more hope of him.

Dreading his father's fate for him, Lady Diana put him into the Guards, to prevent him from
living in Ireland, and there he fell into all the usual temptations of his kind, so that everybody
came to look on him as a black sheep, and all the time I knew that, if any one had taken him
in the right way, he might have been kept out of it.  Why there was one talk that he and I
had at a picnic on Kalydon Moor, which showed me how hopeless he was of ever really pleasing
or satisfying his mother without being, what he could never be, like his uncle in his youth,
and how knowing that I cared really might make a difference to him.  But mamma and Lady Diana
were both very much vexed about that talk; mamma was angry with me; and when Dermot, in a poetical
game a little after, sent me some verses--well, with a little more blarney and tenderness than
the case required--there was a real uproar about them.  Di showed them to her mother, who apologised
in her lofty way for my having been insulted.  Oh! how angry it did make me; and mamma absolutely
cried about it.  It seems foolish to say so, but if they would have let us alone I could have
done something towards inducing him to keep straight, whereas the way he was treated by his
mother and Di only made him worse.  Poor mamma! I don't wonder at her, when even his own mother
and uncle would not stand up for him; but I knew, whenever we met afterwards at ball or party,
that it was pain and grief to her for me to speak a word to him, and that she thought me wrong
to exchange anything beyond bare civility.  He was vexed, too, and did not try; and we heard
worse and worse of him, especially when he went over to his place in Ireland.

Then came the Crimean war, and all the chances of showing what I knew he really was; but at
the Alma he was wounded, not very dangerously, but just touching his lungs, and after a long
illness in London, the doctors said he must not go back to Sebastopol, for to serve in the
trenches would be certain death to him.  He wanted to go back all the same, and had an instinct
that it would be better for him, but his mother and uncle prevented him and made him sell out,
and after that, when he had nothing to do--oh! there's no need to think of it.

In the course of this last year he had taken the shooting of Kalydon Moor, and a house with
it, with immense stables, which one of the Horsmans had made for his hunters, and had ruined
himself and died. He had not quarrelled with his mother--indeed nobody could quarrel with Dermot--and
he used to go over to see her, but he would not live at home, and since he had been at Biston
I had never once met him till I saw him run up to attack the lion, the only man in all the
fair except Harold who had courage to do so!  I could not help my heart bounding at the thought,
and afterwards enjoying the talk with him that I could not help.  But then it made me feel
undutiful to my dear mother, and then there was the further difficulty to be faced. It would
have been all very well to live with my nephews if we had been in a desert island, but I could
not expect them not to make friends of their own; and if mine chose to drop me, how would it
be for me, at my age, all alone in the house?

Harold was forced to confess that he had done too much that first day. His hand was inflamed,
and pain and weariness forbade all thought of spending a long day from home; and, besides,
there arrived letters by the morning's post which left grave lines on his brow.

So Eustace drove off alone, a good deal elated at such an expedition, and I took Harold to
my own little sitting-room, so despised by Dora, for the convenience of bathing the flesh wounds
on the right hand, which, though really the least injured, was a much greater torment than
the broken fingers, and had allowed him very little sleep.

It was the first time he had been in the room, and on the chimney-piece stood open a miniature-case
containing a portrait, by Thorburn, of my little brother Percy, in loose brown holland.  Harold
started as he came in, and exclaimed, "Where did that come from?"  I told him, and he exclaimed,
"Shut it up, please," and sat down with his back to it, resigning his hand to me, and thanking
me warmly when the fomentation brought some relief, and when I asked if I could do any more
for him he seemed undecided, extracted some letters from his pocket with his two-fifths of
a hand, and sent Dora to his room for his writing-case. I offered to write anything for him,
but he said, "Let me try," and then endeavoured; but he found that not only did the effort
hurt him unbearably, but that he could not guide the pen for more than a word or two; so he
consented to make use of me, saying, however, "Dora, it is no use your staying in; you had
better go out."

Dora, of course, wanted to stay; but I devised that she should go, under the escort of one
of the maids, to carry some broth to the wounded boy, an expedition which would last her some
time, and which Harold enforced with all his might as a personal favour, till she complied.

"Thank you," said Harold; "you see this must be done at once, or we shall have them coming
over here."

He gave me the sheet he had begun with "Dear Mother," and went on dictating.  It was not at
all after Julius Caesar's fashion of dictating.  He sat with his eyes on his own letter, and
uttered one brief but ponderous sentence after another, each complete in all its parts, and
quite unhesitating, though slowly uttered.  I gathered it up, wrote it down, said "Well," and
waited for more in silence, till, after I had looked at him once or twice to see whether he
were asleep or in a reverie, another such sentence followed, and I began to know him very much
better.

After saying "My hands have been lamed for a few days, and my aunt is so good as to write for
me," he went on to say, in forcible and not very affectionate terms, that "Smith must not think
of coming home; Eustace could do nothing for him there, but as long as the family remained
at Nelson their allowance should be increased by one hundred pounds a year."  I filled up an
order, which he signed on a Sydney bank for the first quarter.  "It must not be more," he said,
as he told me the sum, "or they will be taking their passage with it."

"No more?" I asked, when he prepared to conclude this short letter.

"No.  Smith reads all her letters."

"That is very hard on you."

"She meant to do well for me, but it was a great mistake.  If Smith comes home to prey upon
Eustace, it will be a bad business."

"But he has no claim on Eustace, whatever he may think he has on you."

"He is more likely to come now.  He knows he can get nothing out of me--" Then, as I looked
at the order, he added, "Beyond my mother's rights.  Poor mother!"

I found that the schoolmaster had been induced to marry Alice Alison in the expectation that
her share in the proceeds of Boola Boola would be much larger than it proved to be.  He had
fawned on the two Eustaces, and obtained all he could from the elder, but, going too far at
last, had been detected by the Sydney bank in what amounted to an embezzlement.  Prosecution
was waived, and he was assisted to leave Australia and make a fresh start in New Zealand, whence
he had never ceased to endeavour to gain whatever he could from Boola Boola. He could twist
Eustace round his finger, and Harold, though loathing and despising him, would do anything
for his mother, but was resolved, for Eustace's sake, to keep them at a distance, as could
only be done by never allowing them a sufficient sum at once to obtain a passage home, and
he knew the habits of Smith and his sons too well to expect them to save it.  In fact, the
letter before him, which he ended by giving me to read, had been written by the poor woman
at her husband's dictation, in the belief that Harold was the heir, to demand their passage-money
from him, and that there was a sad little postscript put in afterwards, unknown to her tyrant.
"My boy, don't do it.  It will be much better for you not;" and, brave woman as she was, she
added no entreaty that his refusal might be softened.  I asked if she had had any more children.
"No, happily," was Harold's answer.  "If I might only wring that fellow's neck, I could take
care of her."  In fact, I should think, when he wanted to come within Harold's grasp, he hardly
knew what he asked.

This finished, it appeared that Harold wanted to have a letter finished to Prometesky which
he had begun some days before.  This astonished me more, both by the questions Prometesky had
been asking, and the answers Harold was returning, as to the state of the country and the condition
of the people.  They did much to relieve my mind of the fears I had sometimes entertained of
Harold's being a ferocious demagogue incited thereto by his friend.

Who would have thought there was so much depth in his brain?  He ended by saying, "Eustace
takes kindly to his new position, and is gone today to see Mr. Tracy, nephew to Lord Erymanth,
but who does not appear disposed to carry on the same hostility to us."

I exclaimed at his having said nothing of the lion either to his mother or his friend, and
asked leave to add it, which he did not refuse, though saying there was no use in it, and that
he wanted me to do one thing more for him--namely, to write to his agent in Sydney an order
which he signed for the transmission of some money to England.  He had learnt from Mr. Yolland
that morning that the "Dragon's Head" and some adjoining houses at Mycening were for sale,
and that the purchaser could have immediate possession.

"What are you going to do with it?"

"Shut it up."

"You can't do much good by shutting up one public-house."

"Eustace will do the same with those on his property."

"I am very much afraid your crusade will not succeed, unless you can put something better into
people's minds."

"I shall see about that," he answered, thinking, I believe, that I was going to suggest religion,
from all mention of which he shrank, as if it touched a wound.  "Smith talked of religion,"
he once said, with a shudder.  Besides, he was a creature in the superabundance of all human
faculties to whom their exercise seemed for a time all-sufficient, and the dark shade of horror
and remorse in the depths of his heart made him unwilling to look back or think.  At any rate,
he silenced me on that head; but, thinking, perhaps, that he had been unkindly blunt, he resumed,
"There is no risk for Eustace in this acquaintance?"

In spite of the pang that smote me, I felt that this was the only time I might have for that
word of warning which seemed incumbent on me.  "I do not think there is danger in his going
to-day, but it does seem right to tell you that poor Dermot Tracy is said to be very extravagant,
and to lead a wild life.  And Harold, though I have known him all my life, I have been thinking
that it will not do for me to be here, if this should become a resort of the set of people
he has made friends of."

Harold answered in his steady, grave way, "I see.  But, Lucy, I suppose none of them have been
so bad as I have been?"--rather as if he were wondering over the matter.

"But you belong to me," I answered, and I saw a look of real pleasure meet my smile.

"I wish I knew what was best for Eustace," he said, after a few more moments' thought.  "Is
it doing him harm for me to be here?  I could go back to New South Wales at once, only in some
ways I don't think the old fellow could get on without me, till he is more used to it all,
and in safe hands."

I had no hesitation in answering that Eustace would be much worse off without his cousin, and
that the treatment we were receiving was chiefly on account of the fathers of both, not personal
to Harold.

"Then you think it would not help him for me to leave him?"

"I think he is far more likely to live it down with you to help him."

"But, Lucy, are you being given up by all your friends for our sakes? We did not know it meant
that when we asked you to stay with us!"

"No more did I.  But don't be uneasy about that, Harold dear.  Don't you think one's own flesh
and blood is more than all such friends?"

"I should not have thought two fellows like us could have been worth much to you," said Harold,
gravely pondering.  "That pretty little thing who was with you the night we came; she has never
been here again.  Don't you miss her?"

"It is not her fault," I said.  "Besides, nothing is like the tie of blood."

I shall never forget the look that was in Harold's eyes.  I was standing over him, putting
some fresh warm water on his hand.  He put back his head and looked up earnestly in my face,
as if to see whether I meant it, then said, "We are very thankful to you for thinking so."

I could not help bending and touching his forehead with my lips.  His eyes glistened and twinkled,
but he said nothing for a little space, and then it was, "If any one like you had been out there--"

I don't think I ever had a compliment that gave me more pleasure, for there was somehow an
infinite sense of meaning in whatever Harold said, however short it might be, as if his words
had as much force in them as his muscles.

After a good deal more of silent sponging and some knitting of his brows, either from thought
or from pain, he said, "Then, as I understand, you cast in your lot with us, and give us the
blessing of your presence and care of poor little Dora, to help to set Eustace in his proper
place in society.  I see then that it is your due that we should bring no one here of whom
you do not fully approve."

"It is not only a matter of approval," I explained.  "There are many with whom I could freely
associate in general society, or if I had any lady with me, whom I ought not to have constantly
here with only you two."

"England is different from the Bush," he answered, and meditated for ten minutes more, for
no doubt it was the Australian practice to offer free quarters to all comers without Mrs. Grundy,
who had hardly yet had her free passage.  My heart smote me lest I were acting unkindly for
her sake, but then surely I was saving my allegiance to my dead mother, and while I was still
thinking it over, Harold said:

"You are more to us than any one could be; Eustace shall see the thing rightly, and while you
are good enough to make this our home, I promise you that no one shall be invited here but
as you like."

It was a bold promise, especially as it turned out that Eustace had been making large invitations
to the Arghouse fishing to Dermot Tracy and some officer friends whom he had found at Biston,
and who seemed to have made themselves very pleasant.  I bade Harold never mind about that
sort of invitation, as it need not affect Dora or me, since we could keep out of the way of
it, being unconcerned with gentlemen's parties.  Miss Woolmer said I had done right, and gave
us a general invitation to spend the evening with her if Eustace wished to entertain his friends,
though she hinted, "Don't be too ready to leave the coast clear.  Remember that you are a wholesome
check."

CHAPTER III.

THE "DRAGON'S HEAD."

Harold's right hand healed quickly, and was free in a few days, but the left had to be kept
for some time in a sling, and be daily attended to, though he heeded it but little, walking
miles to look at horses and to try them, for he could manage them perfectly with one hand,
and in this way he saw a good deal of Dermot Tracy, who exerted himself to find a horse to
carry the mighty frame.

The catastrophe at the fair had gained him two friends, entirely unlike one another--Dermot,
who thenceforward viewed him with unvarying hero-worship, and accepted Eustace as his appendage;
and George Yolland, the very reverse of all Dermot's high-bred form of Irishism, and careless,
easy self-indulgence.

A rough-hewn, rugged young man, intensely in earnest, and therefore neither popular nor successful
was that young partner of Dr. Kingston. Had Harold been squire, the resignation of the patient
into his hands would have been less facile; but as a mere Australian visitor, he was no prize,
and might follow his own taste if he preferred the practitioner to whom club, cottage, and
union patients were abandoned.

By him Harold was let into those secrets of the lower stratum of society he had longed to understand.
Attention to the poor boy who had been torn by the lion brought him into the great village
of workmen's huts, that had risen up round the Hydriot clay works on the Lerne.

These had been set up by a company about eighteen years before, much against all our wills.
With Lord Erymanth at our head, we had opposed with all our might the breaking up of the beautiful
moorland that ran right down into Mycening, and the defilement of our pure and rapid Lerne;
but modern progress had been too strong for us.  Huge brick inclosures with unpleasant smoky
chimneys had arisen, and around them a whole colony of bare, ugly little houses, filled with
squalid women and children, little the better for the men's wages when they were high, and
now that the Company was in a languishing state, miserable beyond description.  We county people
had simply viewed ourselves as the injured parties by this importation, bemoaned the ugliness
of the erections, were furious at the interruptions to our country walks, prophesied the total
collapse of the Company, and never suspected that we had any duties towards the potters.  The
works were lingering on, only just not perishing; the wages that the men did get, such as they
were, went in drink; the town in that quarter was really unsafe in the evening; and the most
ardent hope of all the neighbourhood was, that the total ruin constantly expected would lead
to the migration of all the wretched population.

Mr. Yolland, who attended most of their sicknesses, used to tell fearful things of the misery,
vice, and hardness, and did acts of almost heroic kindness among them, which did not seem consistent
with what, to my grief and dismay, was reported of this chosen companion of Harold--that physical
science had conducted him into materialism. The chief comfort I had was that Miss Woolmer liked
him and opened her house to him.  She was one of the large-hearted women who can see the good
through the evil, and was interested by contact with all phases of thought; and, moreover,
the lad should not be lost for want of the entree to something like a home, because the upper
crust of Mycening considered him as "only Dr. Kingston's partner," and the Kingstons themselves
had the sort of sense that he was too much for them which makes a spider dislike to have a
bluebottle in his web.

She was interested, too, rather sadly in the crusade without the cross that the two young men
were trying to undertake against the wretchedness of those potters.

It was much in their favour that the landlord, who was also the owner of the "Dragon's Head,"
was invited to join a brother in America without loss of time, and was ready to sell and give
immediate possession; so that Harry actually owned it in a fortnight from first hearing of
the offer, having, of course, given a heavy price for it.

The evening it came into his possession he went down, and, standing at the door, tried to explain
why he had closed it, and why he could not bear to see its frequenters spending their wages
on degrading themselves and making their homes miserable.  In no mood for a temperance harangue,
the men drowned, or would have drowned aught but his short incisive sentences, in clamours
for their beer, and one big bully pushed forward to attack him.  His left hand was still in
the sling, but with the other he caught hold of the fellow by the collar, and swung him over
the side of the stone steps as helpless as a puppy dog, shaking him till his teeth chattered
ere setting him on his feet. "If you wish for any more," he said, "we'll have it out as soon
as this hand is well."

That made them cheer him, and the fellow slunk away; while Harold, having gained a hearing,
told them that he meant to make the former "Dragon's Head" a place where they might smoke,
read the papers, play games, and have any refreshment such as coffee, tea, or ginger-beer,
at which they hissed, and only one or two observed, "I am sure you wishes us well, sir."

It was a good-sized house, and he meant to put in a steady couple to keep it, giving up two
upper rooms to make a laboratory for Mr. Yolland, whose soul was much set on experiments for
which his lodgings gave him no space; but the very day when Harold opened his coffee-rooms,
as he went down the street, an "Original Dragon's Head" and a "Genuine Dragon's Head" grinned
defiance at him, in the full glory of teeth, fiery breath, and gilded scales, on the other
side of the way.  I believe they had been beershops before; but, be that as it may, they devoured
quite as many as their predecessor, and though newspapers and draught-boards lay all about
the place, they attracted only two clients!

And the intended closing of all the beer-houses on the Arghouse property, except the time-honoured
"Blue Boar" on the village green, seemed likely to have the same effect; for the notices to
their holders, grimly resisted by Bullock, seemed only to cause dozens of householders to represent
the absolute need of such houses whenever they did not belong to us.

"To destroy one is to produce two," sighed Harold.

"There's nothing to be done but to strike at the root," I said.

"What's that?" said Harold.

"Man's evil propensities," I said.

"Humph," said Harold.  "If I could manage the works now!  They say the shares are to be had
for an old song."

"Oh, Harry, don't have anything to do with them," I entreated.  "They have ruined every creature
who has meddled with them, and done unmitigated mischief."

Harold made no answer, but the next day he was greatly stimulated by a letter from Prometesky,
part of which he read to me, in its perfect English, yet foreign idiom.

"I long to hear of the field of combat we had to quit, because one party was too stolid, the
other too ardent.  I see it all before me with the two new champions freshly girded for the
strife, but a peaceful strife, my friend.  Let our experience be at least profitable to you,
and let it be a peaceful contention of emulation such as is alone suited to that insular nation
which finds its strongest stimulus in domestic comfort and wealth.  Apropos, has some one pursued
a small discovery of mine, that, had I not been a stranger of a proscribed nation, and had
not your English earl and the esquires been hostile to all save the hereditary plough, might
have found employment for thousands and prevented the history of your fathers and of myself?
That bed of argillaceous deposit around the course of your Lerne, which I found to be of the
same quality as the porcelain clay of Meissen, does it still merely bear a few scanty blades
of corn, or is its value appreciated, and is it occupying hundreds of those who starved and
were discontented, to the great surprise of their respectable landlords?  I wonder whether
a few little figures that I modelled in the clay for specimens, and baked in my hostess's oven,
are still in existence.  The forms of clay were there.  Alas!  I asked in vain of your English
magnates for the fire from heaven to animate the earth, or rather I would have brought it,
and I suffered."

It was amusing to see how much delighted honest Harold was with this letter, and how much honoured
he seemed by his dear old Prometesky having spent so much time and thought upon writing to
him.  It fired him with doubled ardour to investigate the Hydriot Company, and he could hardly
wait till a reasonable hour the next day.  Then he took Eustace down with him and returned
quite talkative (for him) with the discoveries he had made, from one of the oldest workmen
who had become disabled from the damp of working in the clay.

The Company had been set up by a clever speculating young attorney, but the old man remembered
that "that there foreign gentleman, the same as was sent to foreign parts with the poor young
squires," was "always a-puddling about in it; and they did say as how he tried to get my lord,
and Squire Horsman, and Squire Stympson to see to setting up summut there; but they wasn't
never for 'speriments, and there was no more talk of it not till that there young Crabbe got
hold, they say, of some little images as he had made, and never rested till he had got up the
Company, and begun the works, having drawn in by his enthusiasm half the tradesmen and a few
of the gentlemen of the place."

Three years of success; then came a bad manager; young Crabbe struggled in vain to set things
right, broke down, and died of the struggle; and ever since the unhappy affair had lingered
on, starving its workmen, and just keeping alive by making common garden pots and pans and
drain-tiles.  Most people who could had sold out of it, thanking the Limited Liabilities for
its doing them no further harm; and the small remnant only hung on because no one could be
found to give them even the absurdly small amount that was still said to be the value of their
shares.

That they would find now Harold had fallen in with young Yolland, who had been singing the
old song, first of Prometesky, then of Crabbe, and had made him listen to it.  Five pounds
would now buy a share that used to be worth a hundred, and that with thanks from the seller
that he got anything from what had long ceased to pay the ghost of a dividend.  And loose cash
was not scarce with Harold; he was able to buy up an amount which perfectly terrified me, and
made me augur that the Hydriot would swallow all Boola Boola, and more too; and as to Mr. Yolland's
promises of improvements, no one, after past experience, could believe in them.

"Now, Harold, you know nothing of all this intricate business; and as to these chemical agencies,
I am sure you know nothing about them."

"I shall learn."

"You will only be taken in," I went on in my character as good aunt, "and utterly ruined."

"No matter if I am."

"Only please, at least, don't drag in Eustace and Arghouse."

"Eustace will only have five shares standing in his name to enable him to be chairman."

"Five too many!  Harold!  I cannot see why you involve yourself in all this.  You are well
off!  You don't care for these foolish hopes of gain."

"I can't see things go so stupidly to wrack."

The truth was that he saw in it a continuation of Prometesky's work and his father's, so expostulations
were vain.  He had been thoroughly bitten, and was the more excited at finding that Dermot
and Viola Tracy were both shareholders.  Their father had been a believer in Crabbe, and had
taken a good many shares, and these had been divided between them at his death.  They could
not be sold till they were of age, and by the time Dermot was twenty-one, no one would buy
them; and now, when they were recalled to his mind, he would gladly have made Harold a present
of them, but Harold would not even buy them; he declared that he wanted Dermot's vote, as a
shareholder, to help in the majority; and, in fact, the effective male shareholders on the
spot were only just sufficient to furnish directors.  Mr. Yolland bought two shares that he
might have a voice; Eustace was voted into the chair, and the minority was left to consist
of the greatly-soured representative of the original Crabbe, and one other tradesman, who held
on for the sake, as it seemed, of maintaining adherence to the red pots and pans, as, at any
rate, risking nothing.

Of course I hated and dreaded it all, and it was only by that power which made it so hard to
say nay to Harold, that he got me down to look at the very lair of the Hydriot Company.  It
was a melancholy place; the buildings were so much larger, and the apparatus so much more elaborate
than there was any use for; and there were so few workmen, and those so unhealthy and sinister-looking.

I remember the great red central chimney with underground furnaces all round, which opened
like the fiery graves where Dante placed the bad Popes; and how dreadfully afraid I was that
Dora would tumble into one of them, so that I was glad to see her held fast by the fascination
of the never-superseded potter and his wheel fashioning the clay, while Mr. Yolland discoursed
and Harold muttered assents to some wonderful scheme that was to economise fuel--the rock on
which this furnace had split.

It has been explained to me over and over again, and I never did more than understand it for
one moment, and if I did recollect all about it, like a scientific dialogue, nobody would thank
me for putting it in here, so it will be enough to say that it sounded to me very bewildering
and horribly dangerous, not so much to the body as to the pocket, and I thought the Hydriot
bade fair to devour Boola Boola and Harold, if not Arghouse and Eustace into the bargain.

They meant to have a Staffordshire man down to act as foreman and put things on a better footing.

"I'll write to my brother to send one," said Mr. Yolland.  "He's a curate in the potteries;
has a wonderful turn for this sort of thing."

"Have you a brother a clergyman?" I said, rather surprised, and to fill up Harold's silence.

"Yes, my brother Ben.  It's his first curacy, and his two years are all but up.  I don't know
if he will stay on.  He's a right down jolly good fellow is Ben, and I wish he would come down
here."

Neither of us echoed the wish.  Harold had no turn for clergymen after the specimen of Mr.
Smith; and Mr. Yolland, though I could specify nothing against him but that he was rough and
easy, had offended me by joining us, when I wanted Harold all to myself. Besides, was he not
deluding my nephews into this horrid Hydriot Company, of which they would be the certain victims?

The Staffordshire man came, and the former workmen looked very bitter on him.  After a meeting,
in which the minority made many vehement objections, Eustace addressed the workmen in the yards--that
is to say, he thought he did; but Harold and Mr. Yolland made his meaning more apparent.  A
venture in finer workmanship, imitating Etruscan ware, was to be made, and, if successful,
would much increase trade and profits, and a rise in wages was offered to such as could undertake
the workmanship.  Moreover, it was held out to them that they might become the purchasers of
shares or half shares at the market price, and thus have an interest in the concern, whereat
they sneered as at some new dodge of the Company for taking them in.  It did not seem to me
that much was done, save making Harry pore over books and accounts, and run his hands through
his hair, till his thick curls stood up in all directions.

And Miss Woolmer herself was sorry.  She remembered the old story--nay, she had one of Prometesky's
own figures modelled in terra cotta, defective, of course, as a work of art, but with that
fire that genius can breathe into the imperfect.  She believed it had been meant for the Hope
of Poland.  Alas! the very name reminded one of the old word for despair, "Wanhope."  But Harold
admired it greatly, and both he and George Yolland seemed to find inspiration in it.

But one summer evening, when the young men were walking up and down the garden, smoking, we
heard something that caused us to look round for a thunder-cloud, though none could be seen
in the clear sky, and some quarter of an hour after, Richardson hurried out to us with the
tidings, "I beg your pardon, sir, but there is a person come up to say there has been an explosion
at the Hydriot works."

"Impossible!" said Harold.  "There's nothing to explode!"

"I beg your pardon, sir, but it is Mr. Yolland they say has blowed himself up with his experiments,
and all the old 'Dragon's Head' in Lerne Street, and he is buried under the ruins.  It is all
one mass of ruin, sir, and he under it."

Harold rushed off, without further word or query, and Eustace after him, and I had almost to
fight to hold back Dora, and should hardly have succeeded if the two had not disappeared so
swiftly that she could not hope to come up with them.

I let her put on her things and come down with me to the lodge-gate to watch.  I was afraid
to go any farther, and there we waited, without even the relief of a report, till we had heard
the great clock strike quarter after quarter, and were expecting it to strike eleven, when
steps came near at last, and Eustace opened the gate. We threw ourselves upon him, and he cried
out with surprise, then said, "He is alive!"

"Who! Harold?"

"Harold!  Nonsense.  What should be the matter with Harold?  But he is going to stay with him--Yolland
I mean--for the night!  It was all his confounded experiments.  It was very well that I went
down--nothing was being done without a head to direct, but they always know what to be at when
I come among them."

No one there knew the cause of the accident, except that it had taken place in Mr. Yolland's
laboratory, where he had been trying experiments.  The house itself had been violently shattered,
and those nearest had suffered considerably.  Happily, it stood in a yard of its own, so that
none adjoined it, and though the fronts of the two opposite "Dragon's Heads" had broken windows
and torn doors, no person within them had been more than stunned and bruised.  But the former
"Dragon's Head" itself had become a mere pile of stones, bricks, and timbers.  The old couple
in charge had happily been out, and stood in dismay over the heap, which Harold and a few of
the men were trying to remove, in the dismal search for Mr. Yolland and the boy he employed
to assist him.  The boy was found first, fearfully burnt about the face and hands, but protected
from being crushed by the boards which had fallen slantwise over him.  And under another beam,
which guarded his head, but rested on his leg, lay young Yolland.

Harold's strength had raised the beam, and he was drawn out.  He revived as the night air blew
on his face, looked up as Harold lifted him, said, "I have it," and fainted the next moment.
They had taken him to his lodgings, where Dr. Kingston had set the broken leg and bound the
damaged rib, but could not yet pronounce on the other injuries, and Harold had taken on himself
the watch for the night.

The explanation that we all held by was, that the damage was caused by an officious act of
the assistant, who, perceiving that it was growing dark, fired a match, and began to light
the gas at the critical moment of the experiment, by which the means of obtaining the utmost
heat at the smallest expense of fuel was to be attained. It was one of those senseless acts
that no one would have thought of forbidding; and though the boy, on recovering his senses,
owned that the last thing he remembered was getting the matches and Mr. Yolland shouting to
stop him, there were many who never would believe anything but that it was blundering of his,
and that he was a dangerous and mischievous person to have in the town.

Harold came home for a little while just as we were having breakfast, to bring a report that
his patient had had a much quieter night than he expected, and to say that he had telegraphed
for the brother and wanted Eustace to meet him at the station.  The landlady was sitting with
the patient now, and Harold had come home for ice, strawberries, and, above all, to ask for
help in nursing, for the landlady could not, and would not, do much.  I mentioned a motherly
woman as, perhaps, likely to be useful, but Harold said, "I could do best with Dora."

He had so far learnt that it was not the Bush as not to expect me to offer, and was quite unprepared
for the fire that Eustace and I opened on him as to the impossibility of his request.  "Miss
Alison, my sister," as Eustace said, "going down to a little, common, general practitioner
to wait on him;" while I confined myself to "It won't do at all, Harold," and promised to hunt
up the woman and to send her to his aid.  But when I had seen her, arranged my housekeeping
affairs, and called Dora to lessons, she was nowhere to be found.

"Then she has gone after Harold!" indignantly exclaimed Eustace.  "It is too bad!  I declare
I will put a stop to it!  To have my sister demeaning herself to put herself in such a situation
for a little Union doctor!"

I laughed, and observed that no great harm was done with so small a person, only I could not
think what use Harold could make of her; at which Eustace was no less surprised, for a girl
of eight or nine was of no small value in the Bush, and he said Dora had been most helpful
in the care of her father.  But his dignity was so much outraged that he talked big of going
to bring her home--only he did not go.  I was a little wounded at Harold having taken her in
the face of my opposition, but I found that that had not been the case, for Eustace had walked
to the lodge with him, and she had rushed after and joined him after he was in the town.  And
at luncheon Eustace fell on me with entreaties that I would come with him and help him meet
"this parson," whom he seemed to dread unreasonably, as, in fact, he always did shrink from
doing anything alone when he could get a helper.  I thought this would be, at least, as queer
as Dora's nursing of the other brother; but it seemed so hard for the poor man, coming down
in his anxiety, to be met by Eustace either in his vague or his supercilious mood, that I consented
at last, so that he might have someone of common sense, and walked down with him.

We could not doubt which was the right passenger, when a young clergyman, almost as rough-looking
as his brother, and as much bearded, but black where he was yellow, sprang out of a second-class
with anxious looks.  It was I who said at one breath, "There he is! Speak to him, Eustace!
Mr. Yolland--he is better--he will do well--"

"Thank--thank you--" And the hat was pushed back, with a long breath; then, as he only had
a little black bag to look after, we all walked together to the lodgings, while the poor man
looked bewildered and unrealising under Eustace's incoherent history of the accident--a far
more conjectural and confused story than it became afterwards.

I waited till Harold came down with Dora; and to my "How could you?" and Eustace's more severe
and angry blame, she replied, "He wanted me; so of course I went."

Harold said not a word in defence of her or of himself; but when I asked whether she had been
of any use, he said, smiling affectionately at her, "Wasn't she?"

Then we went and looked at the shattered houses, and Harold showed us where he had drawn out
his poor friend, answering the aggrieved owners opposite that there would be an inquiry, and
means would be found for compensation.

And when I said, "It is a bad beginning for the Hydriot plans!" he answered, "I don't know
that," and stood looking at the ruins of his "Dragon's Head" in a sort of brown study, till
we grew impatient, and dragged him home.

CHAPTER IV.

THE WRATH OF DIANA.

Harold did not like clergymen.  "Smith was a clergyman," he said, with an expressive look;
and while George Yolland had his brother and the nurse I had sent, he merely made daily inquiries,
and sometimes sat an hour with his friend.

Mr. Crosse's curate had kindred in Staffordshire, and offered to exchange a couple of Sundays
with Mr. Benjamin Yolland, and this resulted in the visitor being discovered to have a fine
voice and a great power of preaching, and as he was just leaving his present parish, this ended
in Mr. Crosse begging him to remain permanently, not much to Harold's gratification; but the
two brothers were all left of their family, and, different as their opinions were, they were
all in all to each other.

The agreement with Mr. Crosse would hardly have been made, had the brothers known all that
was coming.  George Yolland was in a strange stupefied state for the first day or two, owing,
it was thought, to the effects of the gas; but he revived into the irritable state of crankiness
which could not submit in prudent patience to Dr. Kingston's dicta, but argued, and insisted
on his own treatment of himself, and his own theory of the accident, till he as good as told
the doctor that he was an old woman.  Whether it were in consequence or not, I don't know,
but as soon as Dr. Kingston could persuade himself that a shock would do no harm, he wrote
a polite letter explaining that the unfortunate occurrence from which Mr. Yolland was suffering
had so destroyed the confidence of his patients, that he felt it due to them to take steps
to dissolve the partnership.

Perhaps it was no wonder.  Such things were told and believed, that those who had never yet
been attended by George Yolland believed him a wild and destructive theorist.  Miss Avice Stympson
asked Miss Woolmer how she could sleep in her bed when she knew he was in the town, and the
most astonishing stories of his practice were current, of which I think the mildest was, that
he had pulled out all a poor girl's teeth for the sake of selling them to a London dentist,
and that, when in a state of intoxication, he had cut off a man's hand, because he had a splinter
in his finger.

However, the effect was, that Harold summoned a special meeting of the shareholders, the same
being nearly identical with the Directors of the Hydriot Company, and these contrived to get
George Yolland, Esquire, appointed chemist and manager of the works, with a salary of 70 pounds
per annum, to be increased by a percentage on the sales! Crabbe objected vehemently, but was
in the minority.  The greater number were thoroughly believers in the discovery made on that
unlucky night, or else were led away by that force of Harold's, which was almost as irresistible
by mind, as by matter.  But the tidings were received with horror by the town.  Three nervous
old ladies who lived near the Lerne gave notice to quit, and many declared that it was an indictable
offence.

Small as the salary was, it was more than young Yolland was clearing by his connection with
Dr. Kingston; and as he would have to spare himself during the next few months, and could not
without danger undertake the exertions of a wide field of Union practice, the offer was quite
worth his acceptance.  Moreover, he had the enthusiasm of a practical chemist, and would willingly
have starved to see his invention carried out, so he received the appointment with the gruff
gratitude that best suited Harold; and he and his brother were to have rooms in the late "Dragon's
Head," so soon as it should have been rebuilt on improved principles, with a workman's hall
below, and a great court for the children to play in by day and the lads in the evening.

Of the clerical Yolland we saw and heard very little.  Harold was much relieved to find that
even before his brother could move beyond the sofa, he was always out all day, for though he
had never spoken a word that sounded official, Harold had an irrational antipathy to his black
attire.  Nor did I hear him preach, except by accident, for Arghouse chapelry was in the beat
of the other curate, and in the afternoon, when I went to Mycening old church, he had persuaded
Mr. Crosse to let him begin what was then a great innovation--a children's service, with open
doors, in the National School-room. Miss Woolmer advised me to try the effect of this upon
Dora, whose Sundays were a constant perplexity and reproach to me, since she always ran away
into the plantations or went with Harold to see the horses; and if we did succeed in dragging
her to church, there behaved in the most unedifying manner.

"I don't like the principle of cutting religion down for children," said my old friend.  "They
ought to be taught to think it a favour to be admitted to grown-up people's services, and learn
to follow them, instead of having everything made to please them.  It is the sugar-plum system,
and so I told Mr. Ben, but he says you must catch wild heathens with sugar; and as I am afraid
your poor child is not much better, you had better try the experiment."

I did try it, and the metrical litany and the hymns happily took Dora's fancy, so that she
submitted to accompany me whenever Harold was to sit with George Yolland, and would not take her.

One afternoon, when I was not well, I was going to send her with Colman, and Harold coming
in upon her tempest of resistance, and trying to hush it, she declared that she would only
go if he did, and to my amazement he yielded and she led him off in her chains.

He made no comment, but on the next Sunday I found him pocketing an immense parcel of sweets.
He walked into the town with us, and when I expected him to turn off to his friend's lodging,
he said, "Lucy, if you prefer the old church, I'll take Dora to the school.  I like the little
monkeys."

He went, and he went again and again, towering among the pigmies in the great room, kneeling
when they knelt, adding his deep bass to the curate's in their songs, responding with them,
picking up the sleepy and fretful to sit on his knee during the little discourse and the catechising;
and then, outside the door, solacing himself and them with a grand distribution of ginger-bread
and all other dainty cakes, especially presenting solid plum buns, and even mutton pies, where
there were pinched looks and pale faces.

It was delightful, I have been told, to see him sitting on the low wall with as many children
as possible scrambling over him, or sometimes standing up, holding a prize above his head,
to be scrambled for by the lesser urchins.  It had the effect of rendering this a highly popular
service, and the curate was wise enough not to interfere with this anomalous conclusion to
the service, but to perceive that it might both bless him that gave and those that took.

In the early part of the autumn, one of the little members of the congregation died, and was
buried just after the school service. Harold did not know of it, or I do not think he would
have been present, for he shrank from whatever renewed the terrible agony of that dark time
in Australia.

But the devotions in the school were full of the thought, the metrical litany was one specially
adapted to the occasion, so was the brief address, which dwelt vividly, in what some might
have called too realising a strain, upon the glories and the joys of innocents in Paradise.
And, above all, the hymns had been chosen with special purpose, to tell of those who--

          For ever and for ever
          Are clad in robes of white.

I knew nothing of all this, but when I came home from my own church, and went to my own sitting-room,
I was startled to find Harold there, leaning over the table, with that miniature of little
Percy, which, two months before, he had bidden me shut up, open before him, and the tears streaming
down his face.

In great confusion he muttered, "I beg your pardon," and fled away, dashing his handkerchief
over his face.  I asked Dora about it, but she would tell nothing; I believe she was half ashamed,
half jealous, but it came round through Miss Woolmer, how throughout the address Harold had
sat with his eyes fixed on the preacher, and one tear after another gathering in his eyes.
And when the concluding hymn was sung--one specially on the joys of Paradise--he leant his
forehead against the wall, and could hardly suppress his sobs.  When all was over, he handed
his bag of sweets to one of the Sunday-school teachers, muttering "Give them," and strode home.

From that time I believe there never was a day that he did not come to my sitting-room to gaze
at little Percy.  He chose the time when I was least likely to be there, and I knew it well
enough to take care that the coast should be left clear for him.  I do believe that, ill-taught
and unheeding as the poor dear fellow had been, that service was the first thing that had borne
in upon him any sense that his children were actually existing, and in joy and bliss; and that
when he had once thus hearkened to the idea, that load of anguish, which made him wince at
the least recollection of them, was taken off.  It was not his nature to speak in the freshness
of emotion, and, after a time, there was a seal upon his feelings; but there was an intermediate
period when he sometimes came for sympathy, but that was so new a thing to him that he did
not quite know how to seek it.

It was the next Sunday evening that I came into my room at a time I did not expect him to be
there, just as it was getting dark, that he seemed to feel some explanation due.  "This picture,"
he said, "it is so like my poor little chap."

Then he asked me how old Percy had been when it was taken; and then I found myself listening,
as he leant against the mantelpiece, to a minute description of poor little Ambrose, all the
words he could say, his baby plays, and his ways of welcoming and clinging to his father, even
to the very last, when he moaned if anyone tried to take him out of Harold's arms.  It seemed
as though the dark shadow and the keen sting had somehow been taken away by the assurance that
the child might be thought of full of enjoyment; and certainly, from that time, the peculiar
sadness of Harold's countenance diminished.  It was always grave, but the air of oppression
went away.

I said something about meeting the child again, to which Harold replied, "You will, may be."

"And you, Harold."  And as he shook his head, and said something about good people, I added,
"It would break my heart to think you would not."

That made him half smile in his strange, sad way, and say, "Thank you, Lucy;" then add, "But
it's no use thinking about it; I'm not that sort."

"But you are, but you are, Harold!" I remember crying out with tears. "God has made you to
be nobler, and greater, and better than any of us, if you only would--"

"Too late," he said.  "After all I have been, and all I have done--"

"Too late!  Harry--with a whole lifetime before you to do God real, strong service in?"

"It won't ever cancel that--"

I tried to tell him what had cancelled all; but perhaps I did not do it well enough, for he
did not seem to enter into it.  It was a terrible disadvantage in all this that I had been
so lightly taught. I had been a fairly good girl, I believe, and my dear mother had her sweet,
quiet, devotional habits; but religion had always sat, as it were, outside my daily life. 
I should have talked of "performing my religious duties" as if they were a sort of toll or
custom to be paid to God, not as if one's whole life ought to be one religious duty. That sudden
loss, which left me alone in the world, made me, as it were, realise who and what my Heavenly
Father was to me; and I had in my loneliness thought more of these things, and was learning
more every day as I taught Dora; but it was dreadfully shallow, untried knowledge, and, unfortunately,
I was the only person to whom Harold would talk.  Mr. Smith's having been a clergyman had given
him a distaste and mistrust of all clergy; nor do I think he was quite kindly treated by those
around us, for they held aloof, and treated him as a formidable stranger with an unknown ill
repute, whose very efforts in the cause of good were untrustworthy.

I thought of that mighty man of Israel whom God had endowed with strength to save His people,
and how all was made of little avail because his heart was not whole with God, and his doings
were self-pleasing and fitful.  Oh! that it might not be thus with my Harold? Might not that
little child, who had for a moment opened the gates to him, yet draw him upwards where naught
else would have availed?

As to talking to me, he did it very seldom, but he had a fashion of lingering to hear me teach
Dora, and I found that, if he were absent, he always made her tell him what she had learnt;
nor did he shun the meeting me over Percy's picture in my sitting-room in the twilight Sunday
hour.  Now and then he asked me to find him some passage in the Bible which had struck him
in the brief instruction to the children at the service, but what was going on in his mind
was entirely out of my reach or scope; but that great strength and alertness, and keen, vivid
interest in the world around, still made the present everything to him. I think his powerfulness,
and habit of doing impossible things, made the thought of prayer and dependence--nay, even
of redemption--more alien to him, as if weakness were involved in it; and though to a certain
extent he had, with Prometesky beside him, made his choice between virtue and vice beside his
uncle's death-bed; yet it was as yet but the Stoic virtue of the old Polish patriot that he
had embraced.

And yet he was not the Stoic.  He had far more of the little child, the Christian model in
his simplicity, his truth, his tender heart, and that grand modesty of character which, though
natural, is the step to Christian humility.  How one longed for the voice to say to him, "The
Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour."

And so time went on, and we were still in solitude.  People came and went, had their season
in London and returned, but it made no difference to us.  Dermot Tracy shot grouse, came home
and shot partridges, and Eustace and Harold shared their sport with him, though Harold found
it dull cramped work, and thought English gentlemen in sad lack of amusement to call that sport.
Lady Diana and Viola went to the seaside, and came back, and what would have been so much to
me once was nothing now.  Pheasant shooting had begun and I had much ado to prevent Dora from
joining the shooting parties, not only when her brother and cousin were alone, but when they
were going to meet Mr. Tracy and some of the officers to whom he had introduced them.

On one of these October days, when I was trying to satisfy my discontented Dora by a game at
ball upon the steps, to my extreme astonishment I beheld a white pony, led by Harold, and seated
on the same pony, no other than my dear little friend, unseen for four months, Viola Tracy!

I rushed, thinking some accident had happened, but Harold called out in a tone of exultation,
"Here she is!  Now you are to keep her an hour," and she held out her arms with "Lucy, Lucy,
dear old Lucy!" and jumped down into mine.

"But Viola, your mother--"

"I could not help it," she said with a laughing light in her eyes. "No, indeed, I could not.
I was riding along the lane by Lade Wood, on my white palfrey, when in the great dark glade
there stood one, two, three great men with guns, and when one took hold of the damsel's bridle
and told her to come with him, what could she do?"

I think I said something feeble about "Harold, how could you?" but he first shook his head,
and led off the pony to the stable, observing, "I'll come for you in an hour," and Dora rushing
after him.

And when I would have declared that it was very wrong, and that Lady Diana would be very angry,
the child stopped my mouth with, "Never mind, I've got my darling Lucy for an hour, and I can't
have it spoilt."

Have I never described my Viola?  She was not tall, but she had a way of looking so, and she
was not pretty, yet she always looked prettier than the prettiest person I ever saw.  It was
partly the way in which she held her head and long neck, just like a deer, especially when
she was surprised, and looked out of those great dark eyes, whose colour was like that of the
lakes of which each drop is clear and limpid, and yet, when you look down into the water, it
is of a wonderful clear deep grey.

Those eyes were her most remarkable feature; her hair was light, her face went off suddenly
into rather too short a chin, her cheeks wanted fulness, and were generally rather pale.  So
people said, but plump cheeks would have spoilt my Viola's air, of a wild, half-tamed fawn,
and lessened the wonderful play of her lips, which used often to express far more than ever
came out of them in words.  Lady Diana had done her utmost to suppress demonstrativeness, but
unless she could have made those eyes less transparent, the corners of that mouth less flexible,
and hindered the colour from mantling in those cheeks, she could not have kept Viola's feelings
from being patent to all who knew her.

And now the child was really lovely, with the sweet carnation in her cheeks, and eyes dancing
with the fear and pretence at alarm, and the delight of a stolen interview with me.

"Forth stepped the giant!  Fee! fo! fum!" said she; "took me by the bridle, and said, 'Why
haven't you been to see my Aunt Lucy?'"

"I must not," she said.

"And I say you must," he answered.  "Do you know she is wearying to see you?"

Then I fancy how Viola's tears would swim in her eyes as she said, "It's not me; it's mamma."

And he answered, "Now, it is not you, but I, that is taking you to see her."

"Should auld acquaintance be forgot!" was whistled out of the wood; and the whistle Viola knew
quite well enough to disarm me when I came to the argument what was to become of her if she
let such things be done with her; and she had quite enough of Dermot's composition in her to
delight in a "little bit of naughtiness that wasn't too bad," and when once she had resigned
herself into the hands of her captor she enjoyed it, and twittered like a little bird; and
I believe Harold really did it, just as he would have caught a rare bird or wild fawn, to please
me.

"Then you were not frightened?" I said.

"Frightened?  No.  It was such fun!  Besides, we heard how he mastered the lion to save that
poor little boy, and how he has looked after him ever since, and is going to bind him apprentice.
Oh, mind you show me his skin--the lion's, I mean.  Don't be tiresome, Lucy. And how he goes
on after the children's service with the dear little things.  I should think him the last person
to be afraid of."

"I wish your mother saw it so."

Viola put on a comically wise look, and shook her head, as she said, "You didn't go the right
way to work.  If you had come back in the carriage, and consulted her, and said it was a mission--yes,
a mission--for you to stand, with a lily in your hand, and reform your two bush-ranger nephews,
and that you wanted her consent and advice, then she would have let you go back and be good
aunt, and what-not. Oh, I wish you had, Lucy!  That was the way Dermot managed about getting
the lodge at Biston.  He says he could consult her into going out hunting."

"For shame, Viola!  O fie!  O Vi!" said I, according to an old formula of reproof.

"Really, I wanted to tell you.  It might not be too late if you took to consulting her now;
and I can't bear being shut up from you. Everything is grown so stupid.  When one goes to a
garden-party there are nothing but Horsmans and Stympsons, and they all get into sets of themselves
and each other, and now and then coalesce, especially the Stympsons, to pity poor Miss Alison,
wonder at her not taking mamma's advice, and say how horrid it is of her to live with her cousins.
I've corrected that so often that I take about with me the word 'nephews' written in large
text, to confute them, and I've actually taught Cocky to say, 'Nephews aren't Cousins.'  Dermot
is the only rational person in the neighbourhood.  I'm always trying to get him to tell me
about you, but he says he can't come up here much without giving a handle to the harpies."

I had scarcely said how good it was in Dermot, when he sauntered in. "There you are, Vi; I'm
come to your rescue, you know," he said, in his lazy way, and disposed himself on the bear-skin
as we sat on the sofa. I tried again to utter a protest.  "Oh Dermot, it was all your doing."

"That's rather too bad.  As if I could control your domestic lion-tamer."

"You abetted him.  You could have prevented him."

"Such being your wish."

"I am thinking of your mother."

"Eh, Viola, is the meeting worth the reckoning?"

"You should not teach her your own bad ways," said I, resisting her embrace.

"Come, we had better be off, Dermot," she said, pouting; "we did not come here to be scolded."

"I thought you did not come of your own free will at all," I said, and then I found I had hurt
her, and I had to explain that it was the disobedience that troubled me; whereupon they both
argued seriously that people were not bound to submit to a cruel and unreasonable prejudice,
which had set the country in arms against us. "Monstrous," Dermot said, "that two fellows should
suffer for their fathers' sins, and such fellows, and you too for not being unnatural to your
own flesh and blood."

"But that does not make it right for Viola to disobey her mother."

"And how is it to be, Lucy?" asked Viola.  "Are we always to go on in this dreadful way?"

By this time Eustace could no longer be withheld from paying his respects to the lady guest,
and Harold and Dora came with him, bringing the kangaroo, for which Viola had entreated; and
she also made him fetch the lion-skin, which had been dressed and lined and made into a beautiful
carriage-rug; and to Dora she owed the exhibition of the great scar across Harold's left palm,
which, though now no inconvenience, he would carry through life.  It was but for a moment,
for as soon as he perceived that Dora meant anything more than her usual play with his fingers,
he coloured and thrust his hand into his pocket.

We all walked through the grounds with Viola, and when we parted she hung about my neck and
assured me that now she had seen me she should not grieve half so much, and, let mamma say
what she would, she could not be sorry; and I had no time to fight over the battle of the sorrow
being for wrongdoing, not for reproof, for the pony would bear no more last words.

Eustace had behaved all along with much politeness; in fact, he was always seen to most advantage
with strangers, for his manners had some training, and a little constraint was good for him
by repressing some of his sayings.  His first remark, when the brother and sister were out
of hearing, was, "A very sweet, lively young lady.  I never saw her surpassed in Sydney!"

"I should think not," said Harold.

"Well, you know I have been presented and have been to a ball at Government House.  There's
an air, a tournure about her, such as uncle Smith says belongs to the real aristocracy; and
you saw she was quite at her ease with me.  We understand each other in the higher orders.
Don't be afraid, Lucy, we shall yet bring back your friend to you."

"I'm glad she is gone," said Dora, true to her jealousy.  "I like Dermot; he's got some sense
in him, but she's not half so nice and pretty as Lucy."

At which we all laughed, for I had never had any attempt at beauty, except, I believe, good
hair and teeth, and a habit of looking good-humoured.

"She's a tip-topper," pronounced Eustace, "and no wonder, considering who she is.  Has she
been presented, Lucy?"

Though she had not yet had that inestimable advantage, Eustace showed himself so much struck
with her that, when next Harold found himself alone with me, he built a very remarkable castle
in the air--namely, a wedding between Eustace and Viola Tracy.  "If I saw him with such happiness
as that," said Harold, "it would be all right.  I should have no fears at all for him.  Don't
you think it might be, Lucy?"

"I don't think you took the way to recommend the family to Lady Diana," I said, laughing.

"I had not thought of it then," said Harold; "I'm always doing something wrong.  I wonder if
I had better go back and keep out of his way?"

He guessed what I should answer, I believe, for I was sure that Eustace would fail without
Harold, and I told him that his cousin must not be left to himself till he had a good wife.
To which Harold replied, "Are all English ladies like that?"

He had an odd sort of answer the next day, when we were all riding together, and met another
riding party--namely, the head of the Horsman family and his two sisters, who had been on the
Continent when my nephews arrived.  Mamma did not like them, and we had never been great friends;
but they hailed me quite demonstratively with their eager, ringing voices: "Lucy!  Lucy Alison!
So glad to see you!  Here we are again.  Introduce us, pray."

So I did.  Mr. Horsman, Miss Hippolyta, and Miss Philippa Horsman--Baby Jack, Hippo, and Pippa,
as they were commonly termed--and we all rode together as long as we were on the Roman road,
while they conveyed, rather loudly, information about the Dolomites.

They were five or six years older than I, and the recollection of childish tyranny and compulsion
still made me a little afraid of them. They excelled in all kinds of sports in which we younger
ones had not had nearly so much practice, and did not much concern themselves whether the sport
were masculine or feminine, to the distress of the quiet elder half-sister, who stayed at home,
like a hen with ducklings to manage.

They spoke of calling, and while I could not help being grateful, I knew how fallen my poor
mother would think me to welcome the notice of Pippa and Hippo.

Most enthusiastic was the latter as she rode behind with me, looking at the proportions of
Harry and his horse, some little way on before, with Dora on one side, and Pippa rattling on
the other.

"Splendid!  Splendiferous!  More than I was prepared for, though I heard all about the lion--and
that he has been a regular stunner in Australia--eh, Lucy, just like a hero of Whyte-Melville's,
eh?"

"I don't think so."

"And, to complete it all, what has he been doing to little Viola Tracy? Oh, what fun!  Carrying
her off bodily to see you, wasn't it? Lady Diana is in such a rage as never was--says Dermot
is never to be trusted with his sister again, and won't let her go beyond the garden without
her.  Oh, the fun of it!  I would have gone anywhere to see old Lady Di's face!"

CHAPTER V.

THE CAPTURE IN THE SNOW.

I do not recollect anything happening for a good while.  Our chief event was the perfect success
of Mr. Yolland's concentrated fuel, which did not blow up anything or anybody, and the production
of some lovely Etruscan vases and tiles, for which I copied the designs out of a book I happily
discovered in the library.  They were sent up to the porcelain shops in London, and orders
began to come in, to the great exultation of Harold and Co., an exultation which I could not
help partaking, even while it seemed to me to be plunging him deeper and deeper in the dangerous
speculation.

We put the vases into a shop in the town and wondered they did not sell; but happily people
at a distance were kinder, and native genius was discovered in a youth, who soon made beautiful
designs.  But I do not think the revived activity of the unpopular pottery did us at that time
any good with our neighbours.

Harold and Eustace sent in their subscriptions to the hunt and were not refused, but there
were rumours that some of the Stympsons had threatened to withdraw.

I had half a mind to ride with them to the meet, but I could not tell who would cut me, and
I knew the mortification would be so keen to them that I could not tell how they would behave,
and I was afraid Eustace's pride in his scarlet coat might be as manifest to others as to us,
and make me blush for him.  So I kept Dora and myself at home.

I found that by the management of Dermot Tracy and his friends, the slight had been less apparent
than had been intended, when all the other gentlemen had been asked in to Mr. Stympson's to
breakfast, and they had been left out with the farmers; Dermot had so resented this that he
had declined going into the house, and ridden to the village inn with them.

To my surprise, Eustace chose to go on hunting, because it asserted his rights and showed he
did not care; and, besides, the hard riding was almost a necessity to both the young men, and
the Foling hounds, beyond Biston, were less exclusive, and they were welcomed there.  I believe
their horsemanship extorted admiration from the whole field, and that they were gathering acquaintance,
though not among those who were most desirable.  The hunting that was esteemed hard exercise
here was nothing to them.  They felt cramped and confined even when they had had the longest
runs, and disdained the inclosures they were forced to respect.  I really don't know what Harold
would have done but for Kalydon Moor, where he had a range without inclosures of some twelve
miles.  I think he rushed up there almost every day, and thus kept himself in health, and able
to endure the confinement of our civilised life.

A very hard winter set in unusually early, and with a great deal of snow in December.  It was
a great novelty to our Australians, and was not much relished by Eustace, who did not enjoy
the snow-balling and snow fortification in which Harold and Dora revelled in front of the house
all the forenoon.  After luncheon, when the snowstorm had come on too thickly for Dora to go
out again, Harold insisted on going to see how the world looked from the moor.  I entreated
him not to go far, telling him how easy it was to lose the way when all outlines were changed
in a way that would baffle even a black fellow; but he listened with a smile, took a plaid
and a cap and sallied forth.  I played at shuttle-cock for a good while with Dora, and then
at billiards with Eustace; and when evening had closed darkly in, and the whole outside world
was blotted out with the flakes and their mist, I began to grow a little anxious.

The hall was draughty, but there was a huge wood fire in it, and it seemed the best place to
watch in, so there we sat together, and Eustace abused the climate and I told stories--dismal
ones, I fear--about sheep and shepherds, dogs and snowdrifts, to the tune of that peculiar
howl that the wind always makes when the blast is snow-laden; and dinner time came, and I could
not make up my mind to go and dress so as to be out of reach of--I don't know what I expected
to happen.  Certainly what did happen was far from anything I had pictured to myself.

Battling with the elements and plunging in the snow, and seeing, whenever it slackened, so
strange and new a world, was a sort of sport to Harold, and he strode on, making his goal the
highest point of the moor, whence, if it cleared a little, he would be able to see to a vast
distance.  He was curious, too, to look down into the railway cutting. This was a sort of twig
from a branch of the main line, chiefly due to Lord Erymanth, who, after fighting off the railway
from all points adjacent to his estate, had found it so inconvenient to be without a station
within reasonable distance, that a single line had at last been made from Mycening for the
benefit of the places in this direction, but not many trains ran on it, for it was not much
frequented.

Harold came to the brow of the cutting, and there beheld the funnel of a locomotive engine,
locomotive no more, but firmly embedded in the snowdrift into which it had run, with a poor
little train of three or four carriages behind it, already half buried.  Not a person was to
be seen, as Harold scrambled and slid down the descent and lighted on the top of one of the
carriages; for, as it proved, the engineer, stoker, and two or three passengers had left the
train an hour before, and were struggling along the line to the nearest station.  Harold got
down on the farther side, which was free of snow, and looked into all the carriages.  No one
was there, till, in a first-class one, he beheld an old gentleman, well wrapped up indeed,
but numb, stiff, and dazed with the sleep out of which he was roused.

"Tickets, eh?" he said, and he dreamily held one out to Harold and tried to get up, but he
stumbled, and hardly seemed to understand when Harold told him it was not the station, but
that they had run into the snowdrift; he only muttered something about being met, staggered
forward, and fell into Harold's arms.  There was a carriage-bag on the seat, but Harold looked
in vain there for a flask.  The poor old man was hardly sensible.  Ours was the nearest house,
and Harold saw that the only chance for the poor old gentleman's life was to carry him home
at once.  Even for him it was no small effort, for his burthen was a sturdy man with the solidity
of years, and nearly helpless, save that the warmth of Harold's body did give him just life
and instinct to hold on, and let himself be bound to him with the long plaid so as least to
impede his movements; but only one possessed of Harold's almost giant strength could have thus
clambered the cutting at the nearest point to Arghouse and plodded through the snow.  The only
wonder is that they were not both lost.  Their track was marked as long as that snow lasted
by mighty holes.

It was at about a quarter-past seven that all the dogs barked, a fumbling was heard at the
door, and a muffled voice, "Let me in."

Then in stumbled a heap of snow, panting, and amid Spitz's frantic barks, we saw it was Harold,
bent nearly double by the figure tied to him.  He sank on his knee, so as to place his burthen
on the great couch, gasping, "Untie me," and as I undid the knot, he rose to his feet, panting
heavily, and, in spite of the cold, bathed in perspiration.

"Get something hot for him directly," he said, falling back into an arm-chair, while we broke
out in exclamations.  "Who--where did you find him?  Some poor old beggar.  Not too near the
fire--call Richardson--hot brandy-and-water--bed.  He's some poor old beggar," and such outcries
for a moment or two, till Harold, recovering himself in a second, explained, "Snowed up in
the train.  Here, Lucy, Eustace, rub his hands.  Dora, ask Richardson for something hot.  Are
you better now, sir?" beginning to pull off the boots that he might rub his feet; but this
measure roused the traveller, who resisted, crying out, "Don't, don't, my good man, I'll reward
you handsomely. I'm a justice of the peace."

Thick and stifled as it was, the voice was familiar.  I looked again, and screamed out, "Lord
Erymanth, is it you?"

That roused him, and as I took hold of both hands and bent over him, he looked up, dazzled
and muttering, "Lucy, Lucy Alison!  Arghouse! How came I here?" and then as the hot cordial
came at last, in the hand of Richardson, who had once been in his service, he swallowed it,
and then leant back and gazed at me as I went on rubbing his hands.  "Thank you, my dear. 
Is it you?  I thought I was snowed up, and I have never signed that codicil about little Viola,
or I could die easily.  It is not such a severe mode, after all."

"But you're not dying, you're only dreaming.  You are at Arghouse. Harold here found you and
brought you to us."

And then we agreed that he had better be put to bed at once in Eustace's room, as there was
already a fire there, and any other would take long in being warmed.

Harold and Eustace got him upstairs between them, and Richardson followed, while I looked out
with dismay at the drifting snow, and wondered how to send either for a doctor or for Lady
Diana in case of need.  He had been a childless widower for many years, and had no one nearer
belonging to him.  Dora expressed her amazement that I did not go to help, but I knew this
would have shocked him dreadfully, and I only sent Colman to see whether she could be of any use.

Harold came out first, and on his way to get rid of his snow-soaked garments, paused to tell
me that the old gentleman had pretty well come round, and was being fed with hot soup and wine,
while he seemed half asleep.  "He is not frost-bitten," added Harold; "but if he is likely
to want the doctor, I'd better go on to Mycening at once, before I change my things."

But I knew Lord Erymanth to be a hale, strong man of his years, little given to doctors, and
as I heard he had said "No, no," when Eustace proposed to send for one, I was glad to negative
the proposal from a man already wet through and tired--"well, just a little."

Our patient dropped asleep almost as soon as he had had his meal, in the very middle of a ceremonious
speech of thanks, which sent Eustace down to dinner more than ever sure that there was nothing
like the aristocracy, who all understood one another; and we left Richardson to watch over
him, and sleep in the dressing-room in case of such a catastrophe as a rheumatic waking in
the night.

We were standing about the fire in the hall, our usual morning waiting-place before breakfast,
and had just received Richardson's report that his lordship had had a good night, seemed none
the worse, and would presently appear, but that he desired we would not wait breakfast, when
there was a hasty ring at the door, and no sooner was it opened than Dermot Tracy, battered
and worn, in a sou'-wester sprinkled with snow and with boots up to his thighs, burst into
the hall.

"Alison, you there?  All right, I want you," shaking hands in an agitated way all round, and
speaking very fast with much emotion. "I want you to come and search for my poor uncle.  He
was certainly in the train from Mycening that ran into a drift.  Men went to get help; couldn't
get back for three hours.  He wasn't there--never arrived at home.   My mother is in a dreadful
state.  Hogg is setting all the men to dig at the Erymanth end.  I've got a lot to begin in
the Kalydon cutting; but you'll come, Alison, you'll be worth a dozen of them.  He might be
alive still, you see."

"Thank you, Dermot, I am happy to say that such is the case," said a voice from the oak staircase,
and down it was slowly proceeding Lord Erymanth, as trim, and portly, and well brushed-up as
if he had arrived behind his two long-tailed bays.

Dermot, with his eyes full of tears, which he was squeezing and winking away, and his rapid,
broken voice, had seen and heard nothing in our faces or exclamations to prepare him.  He started
violently and sprang forward, meeting Lord Erymanth at the foot of the stairs, and wringing
both his hands--nay, I almost thought he would have kissed him, as he broke out into some incoherent
cry of scarcely-believing joy, which perhaps surprised and touched the old man. "There, there,
Dermot, my boy, your solicitude is--is honourable to you; but restrain--restrain it, my dear
boy--we are not alone."  And he advanced, a little rheumatically, to us, holding out his hand
with morning greetings.

"I must send to my mother.  Joe is here with the sleigh," said Dermot. "Uncle, how did you
come here?" he added, as reflection only made his amazement profounder.

"It is true, as you said just now, that Mr. Harold Alison is equal to a dozen men.  I owe my
preservation, under Providence, to him," said Lord Erymanth, who, though not a small man, had
to look far up as Harold stood towering above us all.  "My most earnest acknowledgments are
due to him," he added, solemnly holding out his hand.

"I might have expected that!" ejaculated Dermot, while Harold took the offered hand with a
smile, and a mutter in his beard of "I am very glad."

"I'll just send a line to satisfy my mother," said Dermot, taking a pen from the inkstand on
the hall-table.  "Joe's here with the sleigh, and we must telegraph to George St. Glear."

Lord Erymanth repeated the name in some amazement, for he was not particularly fond of his heir.

"Hogg telegraphed to him this morning," and as the uncle observed, "Somewhat premature," he
went on: "Poor Hogg was beside himself; he came to Arked at ten o'clock last night to look
for you, and, luckily, I was there, so we've been hallooing half the night along the line,
and then getting men together in readiness for the search as soon as it was light.  I must
be off to stop them at once.  I came in to get the Alisons' help--never dreamt of such a thing
as finding you here.  And, after all, I don't understand--how did you come?"

"I cannot give you a detailed account," said his lordship.  "Mr. Harold Alison roused me from
a drowsiness which might soon, very probably, have been fatal, and brought me here.  I have
no very distinct recollection of the mode, and I fear I must have been a somewhat helpless
and encumbering burthen."

Dora put in her oar.  "Harry can carry anything," she said; "he brought you in so nicely on
his back--just as I used to ride."

"On his back!"

"Yes," said Dora, who was fond of Mr. Tracy, and glad to impart her information, "on his back,
with his boots sticking out on each side, so funnily!"

Lord Erymanth endeavoured to swallow the information suavely by the help of a classical precedent,
and said, with a gracious smile, "Then I perceive we must have played the part of AEneas and
Anchises--" But before he had got so far, the idea had been quite too much for Dermot, who
cried out, "Pick-a-back!  With his boots sticking out on both sides!  Thank you, Dora.  Oh!
my uncle, pick-a-back!" and went off in an increasing, uncontrollable roar of laughter, while
Harold, with a great tug to his moustache, observed apologetically to Lord Erymanth, "It was
the only way I could do it," which speech had the effect of so prolonging poor Dermot's mirth,
that all the good effect of the feeling he had previously displayed for his uncle was lost,
and Lord Erymanth observed, in his most dry and solemn manner, "There are some people who can
see nothing but food for senseless ridicule in the dangers of their friends."

"My dear Lord Erymanth," I said, almost wild, "do just consider Dermot has been up all night,
and has had nothing to eat, and is immensely relieved to find you all safe.  He can't be expected
to quite know what he is about when he is so shaken.  Come to breakfast, and we shall all be
better."

"That might be a very sufficient excuse for you or for Viola, my dear Lucy," returned Lord
Erymanth, taking, however, the arm I offered. "Young ladies may be very amiably hysterical,
but a young man, in my day, who had not trifled away his manliness, would be ashamed of such
an excuse."

There was a certain truth in what he said.  Dermot was not then so strong, nor had he the self-command
he would have had, if his life had been more regular; but he must always have had a much more
sensitive and emotional nature than his uncle could ever understand. The reproach, however,
sobered him in a moment, and he followed us gravely into the dining-room, without uttering
a word for the next quarter of an hour; neither did Harold, who was genuinely vexed at having
made the old man feel himself ridiculous, and was sorry for the displeasure with his friend.
Nobody did say much except Eustace, who was delighted at having to play host to such distinguished
guests, and Lord Erymanth himself, who was so gracious and sententious as quite to restore
Dermot's usual self by the time breakfast was over, and he saw his servant bringing back his
sleigh, in which he offered to convey his uncle either home or to Arked.  But it was still
fitfully snowing, and Lord Erymanth was evidently not without touches of rheumatism, which
made him lend a willing ear to our entreaties to him not to expose himself.  Harold then undertook
to go in search of his portmanteau either to the scene of the catastrophe or the Hall.

"My dear sir, I could not think of exposing you to a repetition of such inclement weather as
you have already encountered.  I am well supplied here, my young friend--I think I may use
the term, considering that two generations ago, at least, a mutual friendship existed between
the houses, which, however obscured for a time--hum--hum--hum--may be said still to exist towards
my dear friend's very amiable young daughter; and although I may have regretted as hasty and
premature a decision that, as her oldest and most experienced--I may say paternal--friend,
I ventured to question--you will excuse my plain speaking; I am always accustomed to utter
my sentiments freely--yet on better acquaintance--brought about as it was in a manner which,
however peculiar, and, I may say, unpleasant--cannot do otherwise than command my perpetual
gratitude--I am induced to revoke a verdict, uttered, perhaps, rather with a view to the antecedents
than to the individuals, and to express a hope that the ancient family ties may again assert
themselves, and that I may again address as such Mr. Alison of Arghouse."

That speech absolutely cleared the field of Harold and Dermot both. One strode, the other backed,
to the door, Dermot hastily said, "Good-bye then, uncle, I shall look you up to-morrow, but
I must go and stop George St. Glear," and Harold made no further ceremony, but departed under
his cover.

Probably, Richardson had spoken a word or two in our favour to his former master, for, when
Lord Erymanth was relieved from his nephew's trying presence, he was most gracious, and his
harangues, much as they had once fretted me, had now a familiar sound, as proving that we were
no longer "at the back of the north wind," while Eustace listened with rapt attention, both
to the long words and to anything coming from one whose name was enrolled in his favourite
volume; who likewise discovered in him likenesses to generations past of Alisons, and seemed
ready to admit him to all the privileges for which he had been six months pining.

At the first opportunity, Lord Erymanth began to me, "My dear Lucy, it is a confession that
to some natures may seem humiliating, but I have so sedulously cultivated candour for my whole
term of existence, that I hope I may flatter myself that I am not a novice in the great art
of retracting a conclusion arrived at under premises which, though probable, have proved to
be illusory.  I therefore freely confess that I have allowed probability to weigh too much
with me in my estimation of these young men."  I almost jumped for joy as I cried out that
I knew he would think so when he came to know them.

"Yes, I am grateful to the accident that has given me the opportunity of judging for myself,"
quoth Lord Erymanth, and with a magnanimity which I was then too inexperienced to perceive,
he added, "I can better estimate the motives which made you decide on fixing your residence
with your nephews, and I have no reluctance in declaring them natural and praiseworthy."  I
showed my satisfaction in my old friend's forgiveness, but he still went on: "Still, my dear,
you must allow me to represent that your residence here, though it is self-innocent, exposes
you to unpleasant complications.  I cannot think it well that a young lady of your age should
live entirely with two youths without female society, and be constantly associating with such
friends as they may collect round them."

I remember now how the unshed tears burnt in my eyes as I said the female society had left
me to myself, and begged to know with whom I had associated.  In return I heard something that
filled me with indignation about his nephew, Dermot Tracy, not being exactly the companion
for an unchaperoned young lady, far less his sporting friends, or that young man who had been
Dr. Kingston's partner.  He was very sorry for me, as he saw my cheeks flaming, but he felt
it right that I should be aware.  I told him how I had guarded myself--never once come across
the sportsmen, and only seen Mr. Yolland professionally when he showed me how to dress Harold's
hand, besides the time when he went over the pottery with us.  Nay, Dermot himself had only
twice come into my company--once about his sister, and once to inquire after Harold after the
adventure with the lion.

There I found I had alluded to what made Lord Erymanth doubly convinced that I must be blinded;
my sight must be amiably obscured, as to the unfitness--he might say, the impropriety of such
companions for me.  He regretted all the more where his nephew was concerned, but it was due
to me to warn, to admonish, me of the true facts of the case.

I did not see how I could want any admonition of the true facts I had seen with my own eyes.

He was intensely astonished, and did not know how to believe that I had actually seen the lion
overpowered; whereupon I begged to know what he had heard.  He was very unwilling to tell me,
but it came out at last that Dermot and Harold--being, he feared, in an improperly excited
condition--had insisted on going to the den with the keeper, and had irritated the animal by
wanton mischief, and he was convinced that this could not have taken place in my presence.

I was indignant beyond measure.  Had not Dermot told him the true story?  He shook his head,
and was much concerned at having to say so, but he had so entirely ceased to put any confidence
in Dermot's statements that he preferred not listening to them.  And I knew it was vain to
try to show him the difference between deliberate falsehood, which was abhorrent to Dermot,
and the exaggerations and mystifications to which his uncle's solemnity always prompted him.
I appealed to the county paper; but he had been abroad at the time, and had, moreover, been
told that the facts had been hushed up.

Happily, he had some trust in my veracity, and let me prove my perfect alibi for Harold as
well as for Dermot.  When I represented how those two were the only men among some hundreds
who had shown either courage or coolness, he granted it with the words, "True, true.  Of course,
of course.  That's the way good blood shows itself. Hereditary qualities are sure to manifest
themselves."

Then he let me exonerate Harold from the charge of intemperance, pointing out that not even
after the injury and operation, nor after yesterday's cold and fatigue, had he touched any
liquor; but I don't think the notion of teetotalism was gratifying, even when I called it a
private, individual vow.  Nor could I make out whether his Australian life was known, and I
was afraid to speak of it, lest I should be betraying what need never be mentioned.  Of Viola's
adventure, to my surprise, her uncle did not make much, but he had heard of that from the fountain-head,
unpolluted by Stympson gossip; and, moreover, Lady Diana had been so disproportionately angry
as to produce a reaction in him.  Viola was his darling, and he had taken her part when he
had found that she knew her brother was at hand.  He allowed, too, that she might fairly be
inspired with confidence by the voice and countenance of her captor, whom he seemed to view
as a good-natured giant.  But even this was an advance on "the prize-fighter," as Lady Diana
and the Stympsons called him.

It was an amusing thing to hear the old earl moralising on the fortunate conjunction of circumstances,
which had brought the property, contrary to all expectation, to the most suitable individual.
Much did I long for Harold to return and show what he was, but only his lordship's servant,
letters, and portmanteau came on an improvised sleigh.  He had an immense political, county,
and benevolent correspondence, and was busied with it all the rest of the day. Eustace hovered
about reverentially and obligingly, and secured the good opinion which had been already partly
gained by the statement of the police at the Quarter Sessions, whence Lord Erymanth had been
returning, that they never had had so few cases from the Hydriot potteries as during this last
quarter.  Who could be complimented upon this happy state of things save the chairman?  And
who could appropriate the compliment more readily or with greater delight?  Even I felt that
it would be cruel high treason to demonstrate which was the mere chess king.

Poor Eustace!  Harold had infected me enough with care for him to like to see him in such glory,
though somewhat restless as to the appearances of this first state dinner of ours, and at Harold's
absence; but, happily, the well-known step was in the hall before our guest came downstairs,
and Eustace dashed out to superintend the toilette that was to be as worthy of meeting with
an earl as nature and garments would permit.  "Fit to be seen?" I heard Harold growl. "Of course
I do when I dine with Lucy, and this is only an old man."

Eustace and Richardson had disinterred and brushed up Harold's only black suit (ordered as
mourning for his wife, and never worn but at his uncle's funeral); but three years' expansion
of chest and shoulder had made it pinion him so as to lessen the air of perfect ease which,
without being what is called grace, was goodly to look upon.  Eustace's studs were in his shirt,
and the unnatural shine on his tawny hair too plainly revealed the perfumeries that crowded
the young squire's dressing-table.  With the purest intentions of kindness Eustace had done
his best to disguise a demigod as a lout.

We had a diner a la Russe, to satisfy Eustace's aspirations as to the suitable.  I had been
seeking resources for it all the afternoon and building up erections with Richardson and Colman;
and when poor Harold, who had been out in the snow with nothing to eat since breakfast, beheld
it, he exclaimed, "Lucy, why did you not tell me? I could have gone over to Mycening and brought
you home a leg of mutton."

"Don't expose what a cub you are!" muttered the despairing Eustace. "It is a deena a la Roos."

"I thought the Russians ate blubber," observed Harold, somewhat unfeelingly, though I don't
think he saw the joke; but I managed to reassure him, sotto voce, as to there being something
solid in the background.  He was really ravenous, and it was a little comedy to see the despairing
contempt with which he regarded the dainty little mouthfuls that the cook viewed with triumph,
and Eustace in equal misery at his savage appetite; while Lord Erymanth, far too real a gentleman
to be shocked at a man's eating when he was hungry, was quite insensible of the by-play until
Harold, reduced to extremity at sight of one delicate shaving of turkey's breast, burst out,
"I say, Richardson, I must have some food.  Cut me its leg, please, at once!"

"Harry," faintly groaned Eustace, while Lord Erymanth observed, "Ah! there is no such receipt
for an appetite as shooting in the snow. I remember when a turkey's leg would have been nothing
to me, after being out duck-shooting in Kalydon Bog.  Have you been there to-day? There would
be good sport."

"No," said Harold, contented at last with the great leg, which seemed in the same proportion
to him as a chicken's to other men.  "I have been getting sheep out of the snow."

I elicited from him that he had, in making his way to Erymanth, heard the barking of a dog,
and found that a shepherd and his flock had taken refuge in a hollow of the moor, which had
partly protected them from the snow, but whence they could not escape.  The shepherd, a drover
who did not know the locality, had tried with morning light to find his way to help, but, spent
and exhausted, would soon have perished, had not Harold been attracted by the dog.  After dragging
him to the nearest farm, Harold left the man to be restored by food and fire, while performing
his own commission at the castle, and then returned to spend the remainder of the daylight
hours in helping to extricate the sheep, and convey them to the farmyard, so that only five
had been lost.

"An excellent, not to say a noble, manner of spending a winter's day," quoth the earl.

"I am a sheep farmer myself," was the reply.

Lord Erymanth really wanted to draw him out, and began to ask about Australian stock-farming,
but Harold's slowness of speech left Eustace to reply to everything, and when once the rage
of hunger was appeased, the harangues in a warm room after twenty miles' walk in the snow,
and the carrying some hundreds of sheep one by one in his arms, produced certain nods and snores
which were no favourable contrast with Eustace's rapt attention.

For, honestly, Eustace thought these speeches the finest things he had ever heard, and though
he seldom presumed to understand them, he listened earnestly, and even imitated them in a sort
of disjointed way. Now Lord Erymanth, if one could manage to follow him, was always coherent.
His sentences would parse, and went on uniform principles--namely, the repeating every phrase
in finer words, with all possible qualifications; whereas Eustace never accomplished more than
catching up some sonorous period; but as his manners were at their best when he was overawed,
and nine months in England had so far improved his taste that he did not once refer to his
presentation at Government House, he made such an excellent impression that Lord Erymanth announced
that he was going to give a ball to introduce his niece, Miss Tracy, on her seventeenth birthday,
in January, and invited us all thereto.

Eustace's ecstacy was unbounded.  He tried to wake Harold to share it, but only produced some
murmurs about half-inch bullets: only when the "Good-night" came did Harold rouse up, and then,
of course, he was wide awake; and while Eustace was escorting the distinguished guest to his
apartment, we stood over the hall fire, enjoying his delight, and the prospect of his being
righted with the county.

"And you will have your friends again, Lucy," added Harold.

"Yes, I don't suppose Lady Diana will hold out against him.  He will prepare the way."

"And," said Eustace, coming downstairs, "it is absolutely necessary that you go and be measured
for a dress suit, Harry."

"I will certainly never get into this again," he said, with a thwarted sigh; "it's all I can
do to help splitting it down the back. You must get it off as you got it on."

"Not here!" entreated Eustace, alarmed at his gesture.  "Remember the servant.  Oh Harold,
if you could but be more the gentleman!  Why cannot you take example by me, instead of overthrowing
all the advantageous impressions that such--such a service has created?  I really think there's
nothing he would not do for me.  Don't you think so, Lucy?"

"Could he do anything for Prometesky?" asked Harold.

"He could, more than anyone," I said; "but I don't know if he would."

"I'll see about that."

"Now, Harold," cried Eustace in dismay, "don't spoil everything by offending him.  Just suppose
he should not send us the invitation!"

"No great harm done."

Eustace was incoherent in his wrath and horror, and Harold, too much used to his childish 
selfishness to feel the annoyance, answered, "I am not you."

"But if you offend him?"

"Never fear, Eu, I'll take care you don't fare the worse."

And as he lighted his candle he added to poor Eustace's discomfiture by the shocking utterance
under his beard:

"You are welcome to him for me, if you can stand such an old bore."

CHAPTER VI.

OGDEN'S BUILDINGS.

When I came downstairs the next morning, I found Lord Erymanth at the hall window, watching
the advance of a great waggon of coal which had stuck fast in the snow half way up the hill
on which the house stood. Harold, a much more comfortable figure in his natural costume than
he had been when made up by Eustace, was truly putting his shoulder to the wheel, with a great
lever, so that every effort aided the struggling horses, and brought the whole nearer to its
destination.

"A grand exhibition of strength," said his lordship, as the waggon was at last over its difficulties,
and Harold disappeared with it into the back-yard; "a magnificent physical development.  I
never before saw extraordinary height with proportionate size and strength."

I asked if he had ever seen anyone as tall.

"I have seen one or two men who looked equally tall, but they stooped and were not well-proportioned,
whereas your nephew has a wonderfully fine natural carriage.  What is his measure?" he added,
turning to Eustace.

"Well, really, my lord, I cannot tell; mine is six feet two and five-sixteenths, and I much
prefer it to anything so out of the way as his, poor fellow."

The danger that he would go on to repeat his tailor's verdict "that it was distinguished without
being excessive," was averted by Harold's entrance, and Dora interrupted the greetings by the
query to her cousin, how high he really stood; but he could not tell, and when she unfraternally
pressed to know whether it was not nice to be so much taller than Eustace, he replied, "Not
on board ship," and then he gave the intelligence that it seemed about to thaw.

Lord Erymanth said that if so, he should try to make his way to Mycening, and he then paid
his renewed compliments on the freedom of the calendar at the Quarter Sessions from the usual
proportion of evils at Mycening.  He understood that Mr. Alison was making most praiseworthy
efforts to impede the fatal habits of intoxication that were only too prevalent.

"I shall close five beer-houses at Christmas," said Eustace.  "I look on it as my duty, as
landlord and man of property."

"Quite right.  I am glad you see the matter in its right light. Beer-shops were a well-meaning
experiment started some twenty years ago.  I well remember the debate, &c."

Harold tried with all his might to listen, though I saw his chest heave with many a suppressed
yawn, and his hand under his beard, tweaking it hard; but substance could be sifted out of
what Lord Erymanth said, for he had real experience, and his own parish was in admirable order.

Where there was no power of expulsion, as he said, there would always be some degraded beings
whose sole amusement was intoxication; but good dwelling-houses capable of being made cheerful,
gardens, innocent recreations, and instruction had, he could testify from experience, no small
effect in preventing such habits from being formed in the younger population, backed, as he
was sure (good old man) that he need not tell his young friends, by an active and efficient
clergyman, who would place the motives for good conduct on the truest and highest footing,
without which all reformation would only be surface work.  I was glad Harold should hear this
from the lips of a layman, but I am afraid he shirked it as a bit of prosing, and went back
to the cottages.

"They are in a shameful state," he said.

"They are to be improved," exclaimed Eustace, eagerly.  "As I told Bullock, I am quite determined
that mine shall be a model parish.  I am ready to make any sacrifices to do my duty as a landlord,
though Bullock says that no outlay on cottages ever pays, and that the test of their being
habitable is their being let, and that the people are so ungrateful that they do not deserve
to have anything done for them."

"You are not led away by such selfish arguments?" said Lord Erymanth.

"No, assuredly not," said Eustace, decidedly; "though I do wish Harold would not disagree so
much with Bullock.  He is a very civil man, and much in earnest in promoting my interests."

"That's not all," put in Harold.

"And I can't bear Bullock," I said.  "'Our interest' has been always his cry, whenever the
least thing has been proposed for the cottage people; and I know how much worse he let things
get than we ever supposed."

On which Lord Erymanth spoke out his distinct advice to get rid of Bullock, telling us how
he had been a servant's orphan whom my father had intended to apprentice, but, being placed
with our old bailiff for a time, had made himself necessary, and ingratiated himself with my
father so as to succeed to the situation; and it had been the universal belief, ever since
my mother's widowhood, that he had taken advantage of her seclusion and want of knowledge of
business to deal harshly by the tenants, especially the poor, and to feather his own nest.

It was only what Harold had already found out for himself, but it disposed of his scruples
about old adherents, and it was well for Eustace to hear it from such oracular lips as might
neutralise the effect of Bullock's flattery, for it had become quite plain to my opened eyes
that he was trying to gain the squire's ear, and was very jealous of Harold.

I knew, too, that to listen to his advice was the way to Lord Erymanth's heart, and rejoiced
to hear Harold begging for the names of recent books on drainage, and consulting our friend
upon the means of dealing with a certain small farm in a tiny inclosed valley, on an outlying
part of the property, where the yard and outhouses were in a permanent state of horrors; but
interference was alike resented by Bullock and the farmer, though the wife and family were
piteous spectacles of ague and rheumatism, and low fever smouldered every autumn in the hamlet.

Very sound advice was given and accepted with pertinent questions, such as I thought must convince
anyone of Harold's superiority, when he must needs produce a long blue envelope, and beg Lord
Erymanth to look at it and tell him how to get it presented to the Secretary of State.

It was graciously received, but no sooner did the name of Stanislas Prometesky strike the earl's
eyes than he exclaimed, "That rascally old demagogue!  The author of all the mischief.  It
was the greatest error and weakness not to have had him executed."

"You have not seen my father's statement?"

"Statement, sir!  I read statements till I was sick of them, absolutely disgusted with their
reiteration, and what could they say but that he was a Pole?   A Pole!" (the word uttered with
infinite loathing).  "As if the very name were not a sufficient conviction of whatever is seditious
and treasonable, only that people are sentimental about it, forsooth!"

Certainly it was droll to suspect sentiment in the great broad giant, who indignantly made
reply, "The Poles have been infamously treated."

"No more than they deserved," said Lord Erymanth, startled for once into brevity.  "A nation
who could never govern themselves decently, and since they have been broken up, as they richly
deserved, though I do not justify the manner--ever since, I say, have been acting the incendiary
in every country where they have set foot.  I would as soon hear of an infernal machine in
the country as a Pole!"

"Poles deserve justice as well as other men," said Harold, perhaps the more doggedly because
Eustace laid a restraining hand on his arm.

"Do you mean to tell me, sir, that every man has not received justice at the tribunal of this
country?" exclaimed Lord Erymanth.

Perhaps he recollected that he was speaking to the son of a convict, for there was a moment's
pause, into which I launched myself.  "Dear Lord Erymanth," I said, "we all know that my poor
brothers did offend against the laws and were sentenced according to them.  They said so themselves,
and that they were mistaken, did they not, Harold?"

Harold bent his head.

"And owing to whom?" demanded Lord Elymanth.  "I never thought of blaming those two poor lads
as I did that fellow who led them astray. I did all I could to save their lives; if they were
alive this moment I would wish nothing better than to bring them home, but as to asking me
to forward a petition in favour of the hoary old rebel that perverted them, I should think
it a crime."

"But," I said, "if you would only read this, you would see that what they wanted to explain
was that the man who turned king's evidence did not show how Count Prometesky tried to withhold
them."

"Count, indeed!  Just like all women.  All those Poles are Counts! All Thaddeuses of Warsaw!"

"That's hard," I said.  "I only called him Count because it would have shocked you if I had
given him no prefix.  Will you not see what poor Ambrose wanted to say for him?"

"Ah!" said Lord Erymanth, after a pause, in which he had really glanced over the paper.  "Poor
boys!  It goes to my heart to think what fine fellows were lost there, but compassion for them
cannot soften me towards the man who practised on their generous, unsuspecting youth.  I am
quite aware that Prometesky saved life at the fire, and his punishment was commuted on that
account, contrary to my judgment, for it is a well-known axiom, that the author of a riot is
responsible for all the outrages committed in it, and it is undeniable that the whole insurrection
was his work.  I am quite aware that the man had amiable, even fascinating qualities, and great
enthusiasm, but here lay the great danger and seduction to young minds, and though I can perfectly
understand the warm sympathy and generous sentiment that actuates my young friends, and though
I much regret the being obliged to deny the first request of one to whom, I may say, I owe
my life, I must distinctly refuse to take any part in relieving Count Stanislas Prometesky
from the penalty he has incurred."

Harold's countenance had become very gloomy during this peroration. He made no attempt at reply,
but gathered up his papers, and, gnawing his fringe of moustache, walked out of  the room,
while Eustace provoked me by volunteering explanations that Prometesky was no friend of his,
only of Harold's.  His lordship declared himself satisfied, provided no dangerous opinions
had been imbibed, and truly Eustace might honestly acquit himself of having any opinions at all.

That afternoon he drove Lord Erymanth to Mycening, whence the railway was now open.  Harold
could nowhere be found, and kind messages were left for him, for which he was scarcely grateful
when he came in late in the evening, calling Lord Erymanth intolerably vindictive, to bear
malice for five-and-twenty years.

I could not get him to see that it was entirely judicial indignation, and desire for the good
of the country, not in the least personal feeling; but Harold had not yet the perception of
the legislative sentiment that actuates men of station in England.  His strong inclination
was not to go near the old man or his house again, but this was no small distress to Eustace,
who, in spite of all his vaunting, dreaded new scenes without a protector, and I set myself
to persuade him that it was due to his cousin not to hide himself, and avoid society so as
to give a colour to evil report.

"It might be best to separate myself from him altogether and go back." On this, Eustace cried
out with horror and dismay, and Harold answered, "Never fear, old chap; I'm not going yet.
Not till I have seen you in good hands."

"And you'll accept the invitation," said Eustace, taking up one of the coroneted notes that
invited us each for two nights to the castle.

"Very well."

"And you'll come up to town, and have a proper suit."

"As you please."

Eustace went off to the library to find some crested paper and envelopes worthy to bear the
acceptance, and Harold stood musing.  "A good agent and a good wife would set him on his feet
to go alone," he said.

"Meantime he cannot do without you."

"Not in some ways."

"And even this acquaintance is your achievement, not his."

"Such as it is."

I pointed out that though Lord Erymanth refused to assist Prometesky, his introduction might
lead to those who might do so, while isolation was a sort of helplessness.  To this he agreed,
saying, "I must free him before I go back."

"And do you really want to go back?" said I, fearing he was growing restless.

His face worked, and he said, "When I feel like a stone round Eustace's neck."

"Why should you feel so?  You are a lever to lift him."

"Am I?  The longer I live with you, the more true it seems to me that I had no business to
come into a world with such people in it as you and Miss Tracy."

Eustace came back, fidgeting to get a pen mended, an operation beyond him, but patiently performed
by the stronger fingers.  We said no more, but I had had a glimpse which made me hope that
the pilgrim was beginning to feel the burthen on his back.

Not that he had much time for thought.  He was out all day, looking after the potteries, where
orders were coming in fast, and workmen increasing, and likewise toiling in the fields at Ogden's
farm, making measurements and experiments on the substrata and the waterfall, on which to base
his plans for drainage according to the books Lord Erymanth had lent him.

After the second day he came home half-laughing.  Farmer Ogden had warned him off and refused
to listen to any explanation, though he must have known whom he was expelling--yes, like a
very village Hampden, he had thrust the unwelcome surveyor out at his gate with such a trembling,
testy, rheumatic arm, that Harold had felt obliged to obey it.

Eustace, angered at the treatment of his cousin, volunteered to come and "tell the ass, Ogden,
to mind what he was about," and Harold added, "If you would come, Lucy, you might help to make
his wife understand."

I came, as I was desired, where I had never been before, for we had always rested in the belief
that the Alfy Valley was a nasty, damp, unhealthy place, with "something always about," and
had contented ourselves with sending broth to the cottages whenever we heard of any unusual
amount of disease.  If we had ever been there!

We rode the two miles, as I do not think Dora and I would ever have floundered through the
mud and torrents that ran down the lanes.  It was just as if the farm had been built in the
lower circle, and the cottages in Malebolge itself, where the poor little Alfy, so pure when
it started from Kalydon Moor, brought down to them all the leakage of that farmyard.  Oh! that
yard, I never beheld, imagined, or made my way through the like, though there was a little
causeway near the boundary wall, where it was possible to creep along on the stones, rousing
up a sleeping pig or a dreamy donkey here and there, and barked at in volleys by dogs stationed
on all the higher islets in the unsavoury lake.  If Dora had not been a colonial child, and
if I could have feared for myself with Harold by my side, I don't think we should ever have
arrived, but Farmer Ogden and his son came out, and a man and boy or two; and when Eustace
was recognised, they made what way they could for us, and we were landed at last in a scrupulously
clean kitchen with peat fire and a limeash floor, where, alas! we were not suffered to remain,
but were taken into a horrid little parlour, with a newly-lighted, smoking fire, a big Bible,
and a ploughing-cup.  Mrs. Ogden was a dissenter, so we had really no acquaintance, and, poor
thing, had long been unable to go anywhere. She was a pale trembling creature, most neat and
clean, but with the dreadful sallow complexion given by perpetual ague.  She was very civil,
and gave us cake and wine, to the former of which Dora did ample justice, but oh! the impracticability
of those people!

The men had it all out of doors, but when I tried my eloquence on Mrs. Ogden I found her firmly
persuaded not only that her own ill health and the sickness in the hamlet were "the will of
the Lord," but in her religious fatalism, that it was absolutely profane to think that cleansing
and drainage would amend them; and she adduced texts which poor uninstructed I was unable to
answer, even while I knew they were a perversion; and, provoked as I was, I felt that her meek
patience and resignation might be higher virtues than any to which I had yet attained.

Her husband, who, I should explain, was but one remove above a smock-frock farmer, took a different
line.  He had unsavoury proverbs in which he put deep faith.  "Muck was the mother of money,"
and also "Muck was the farmer's nosegay."  He viewed it as an absolute effeminacy to object
to its odorous savours; and as to the poor people, "they were an ungrateful lot, and had a
great deal too much done for them," the small farmer's usual creed.  Mr. Alison could do as
he liked, of course, but his lease had five years yet to run, and he would not consent to pay
no more rent, not for what he didn't ask for, nor didn't want, and Mr. Bullock didn't approve
of--that he would not, not if Mr. Alison took the law of him.

His landlord do it at his own expense?  That made him look knowing. He was evidently certain
that it was a trick for raising the rent at the end of the lease, if not before, upon him,
whose fathers had been tenants of Alfy Vale even before the Alisons came to Arghouse; and,
with the rude obstinacy of his race, he was as uncivil to Harold as he durst in Eustace's presence.
"He had no mind to have his fields cut up just to sell the young gentleman's drain-pipes, as
wouldn't go off at them potteries."

"Well, but all this stuff would be doing much more good upon your fields than here," Eustace
said.  "I--I really must insist on this farmyard being cleansed."

"You'll not find that in the covenant, sir," said the farmer with a grin.

"But, father," began the son, a more intelligent-looking man, though with the prevailing sickly
tint.

"Hold your tongue, Phil," said Ogden.  "It's easy to talk of cleaning out the yard; I'd like
to see the gentleman set about it, or you either, for that matter."

"Would you?" said Harold.  "Then you shall."

Farmer Ogden gaped.  "I won't have no strange labourers about the place."

"No more you shall," said Harold.  "If your son and I clean out this place with our own hands
in the course of a couple of days, putting the manure in any field you may appoint, will you
let the drainage plans be carried out without opposition?"

"It ain't a bet?" said the farmer; "for my missus's conscience is against bets."

"No, certainly not."

"Nor a trick?" he said, looking from one to another.

"No.  It is to be honest work.  I am a farmer, and know what work is, and have done it too."

Farmer Ogden, to a certain extent, gave in, and we departed.  His son held the gate open for
us, with a keen look at Harold, full of wonder and inquiry.

"You'll stand by me?" said Harold, lingering with him.

"Yes, sir," said Phil Ogden; "but I doubt if we can do it.  Father says it is a week's work
for five men, if you could get them to do it."

"Never fear," said Harold.  "We'll save your mother's life yet against her will, and make you
all as healthy as if you'd been born in New South Wales."

This was Friday, and Phil had an engagement on the Monday, so that Tuesday was fixed, much
to Eustace's displeasure, for he did not like Harold's condescending to work which labourers
would hardly undertake; and besides, he would make his hands, if not himself, absolutely unfit
for the entertainment on Thursday.  On which Harold asked if there were no such thing as water.
Eustace implored him to give it up and send half-a-dozen unemployed men, but to this he answered,
"I should be ashamed."

And when we went home he rode on into Mycening, to see about his equipment, he said, setting
Eustace despairing, lest he, after all, meant to avoid the London tailor, and to patronise
Mycening; but the equipment turned out to be a great smock-frock.  And something very different
came home with him--namely, a little dainty flower-pot and pan, with an Etruscan pattern, the
very best things that had been turned out of the pottery, adorned with a design in black and
white, representing a charming little Greek nymph watering her flowers.

"Don't you think, Lucy, Miss Tracy being a shareholder, and it being her birthday, the chairman
might present this?" he inquired.

I agreed heartily, but Eustace, with a twist of his cat's-whisker moustache, opined that they
were scarcely elegant enough for Miss Tracy; and on the Monday, when he did drag Harold up
to the tailor's, he brought down a fragile little bouquet of porcelain violets, very Parisian,
and in the latest fashion, which he flattered himself was the newest thing extant, and a much
more appropriate offering.  The violets could be made by a pinch below to squirt out perfume!

"Never mind, Harold," I said, "you can give your flower-pot all the same."

"You may," said Harold.

"Why should not you?"

He shook his head.  "I've no business," he said; "Eustace is chairman."

I said no more, and I hardly saw Harold the two following days, for he was gone in the twilight
of the January morning and worked as long as light would allow, and fortunately the moon was
in a favourable quarter; and Phil, to whom the lighter part of the task was allotted, confided
to his companion that he had been wishing to get father to see things in this light for a long
time, but he was that slow to move; and since Harold had been looking about, Mr. Bullock had
advised him not to give in, for it would be sure to end in the raising of his rent, and young
gentlemen had new-fangled notions that only led to expense and nonsense, and it was safest
in the long run to trust to the agent.

However, the sight of genuine, unflinching toil, with nothing of the amateur about it, had
an eloquence of its own.  Farmer Ogden looked on grimly and ironically for the first two hours,
having only been surprised into consent in the belief that any man, let alone a gentleman,
must find out the impracticability of the undertaking, and be absolutely sickened.  Then he
brought out some bread and cheese and cider, and was inclined to be huffy when Harold declined
the latter, and looked satirical when he repaired to wash his hands at the pump before touching
the former.  When he saw two more hours go by in work of which he could judge, his furrowed
old brow grew less puckered, and he came out again to request Mr. Harold to partake of the
mid-day meal. I fancy Harold's going up to Phil's room, to make himself respectable for Mrs.
Ogden's society, was as strange to the farmer as were to the Australian the good wife's excuses
for making him sit down with the family in the kitchen; but I believe that during the meal
he showed himself practical farmer enough to win their respect; and when he worked harder than
ever all the afternoon, even till the last moment it was possible to see, and came back with
the light the next morning, he had won his cause; above all, when the hunt swept by without
disturbing the labour.

The farmer not only turned in his scanty supply of men to help to finish off the labour, and
seconded contrivances which the day before he would have scouted, but he gave his own bowed
back to the work.  A pavement of the court which had not seen the day for forty years was brought
to light; and by a series of drain tiles, for which a messenger was dispatched to the pottery,
streams were conducted from the river to wash these up; and at last, when Harold appeared,
after Eustace had insisted on waiting no longer for dinner, he replied to our eager questions,
"Yes, it is done."

"And Ogden?"

"He thanked me, shook hands with me, and said I was a man."

Which we knew meant infinitely more than a gentleman.

Harold wanted to spend Thursday in banking up the pond in the centre of the yard, but the idea
seemed to drive Eustace to distraction. Such work before going to that sublime region at Erymanth!
He laid hold of Harold's hands--shapely hands, and with that look of latent strength one sees
in some animals, but scarred with many a seam, and horny within the fingers--and compared them
with those he had nursed into dainty delicacy of whiteness, till Harold could not help saying,
"I wouldn't have a lady's fingers."

"I would not have a clown's," said Eustace.

"Keep your gloves on, Harold, and do not make them any worse.  If you go out to that place
to-day, they won't even be as presentable as they are."

"I shall wash them."

"Wash!  As if oceans of Eau-de-Cologne would make them fit for society!" said Eustace, with
infinite disgust, only equalled by the "Faugh!" with which Harold heard of the perfume.  In
fact, Eustace was dreadfully afraid the other hunters had seen and recognised those shoulders,
even under the smock-frock, as plainly as he did, and he had been wretched about it ever since.

"You talk of not wanting to do me harm," he said, "and then you go and grub in such work as
any decent labourer would despise."

So miserable was he, that Harold, who never saw the foolery in Eustace that he would have derided
in others, yielded to him so far as only to give directions to Bullock for sending down the
materials wanted for the pond, and likewise for mending the roof of a cottage where a rheumatic
old woman was habitually obliged to sleep under a crazy umbrella.

CHAPTER VII.

THE BIRDS OF ILL OMEN.

Nothing stands out to me more distinctly, with its pleasures and pains, than the visit to Erymanth
Castle--from our arrival in the dark--the lighted hall--the servants meeting us--the Australians'
bewilderment at being ushered up to our rooms without a greeting from the host--my lingering
to give a last injunction in Eustace's ear, "Now, Eustace, I won't have Harold's hair greased;
and put as little stuff as you can persuade yourself to do on your pocket-handkerchief"--orders
I had kept to the last to make them more emphatic; then dashing after the housekeeper, leaving
them to work--my great room, where it was a perfect journey from the fire to the toilet-table--my
black lace dress, and the silver ornaments those dear nephews had brought me from London--and
in the midst of my hair-doing dear little Viola's running in to me in one of her ecstacies,
hugging me, to the detriment of Colman's fabric and her own, and then dancing round and round
me in her pretty white cloudy tulle, looped up with snowdrops.  The one thing that had been
wanting to her was that her dear, darling, delightful Lucy should be at her own ball--her birthday
ball; and just as she had despaired, it had all come right, owing to that glorious old giant
of ours; and she went off into a series of rapturous little laughs over Dermot's account of
her uncle's arrival pick-a-back.  It was of no use to look cautious, and sign at Colman; Viola
had no notion of restraint; and I was thankful when my dress was complete, and we were left
alone, so that I could listen without compunction to the story of Lord Erymanth's arrival at
Arked House, and solemn assurance that he had been most hospitably received, and that his own
observation and inquiry had convinced him that Mr. Alison was a highly estimable young man,
in spite of all disadvantages, unassuming, well-mannered, and grateful for good advice.  Dermot
had shown his discernment in making him his friend, and Lucy had, in truth, acted with much
courage, as well as good judgment, in remaining with him; "and that so horrified mamma," said
Viola, "that she turned me out of the room, so I don't know how they fought it out; but mamma
must have given in at last, though she has never said one word to me about it, not even that
you were all to be here.  What a good thing it is to have a brother!  I should never have known
but for Dermot.  And, do you know, he says that my uncle's pet is the cousin, after all--the
deferential fool of a cousin, he says."

"Hush, hush, Viola!"

"I didn't say so--it was Dermot!" said the naughty child, with a little arch pout; "he says
it is just like my uncle to be taken with a little worship from--well, he is your nephew, Lucy,
so I will be politer than Dermot, who does rage because he says Mr. Alison has not even sense
to see that he is dressed in his cousin's plumes."

"He is very fond of Harold, Viola, and they both of them do it in simplicity; Harold does the
things for Eustace, and never even sees that the credit is taken from him.  It is what he does
it for."

"Then he is a regular stupid old jolly giant," said Viola. "Oh, Lucy, what delicious thing
is this?"

It was the little flower-pot, in which I had planted a spray of lemon-scented verbena, which
Viola had long coveted.  I explained how Harold had presided over it as an offering from the
Hydriot Company to its youngest shareholder, and her delight was extreme.  She said she would
keep it for ever in her own room; it was just what she wanted, the prettiest thing she had
had--so kind of him; but those great, grand giants never thought anything too little for them.
And then she went into one of her despairs.  She had prepared a number of Christmas presents
for the people about the castle to whom she had always been like the child of the house, and
her maid had forgotten to bring the box she had packed, nor was there any means of getting
them, unless she could persuade her brother to send early the next morning.

"Is Dermot staying here?"

"Oh yes--all night; and nobody else, except ourselves and Piggy. Poor Piggy, he moves about
in more awful awe of my uncle than ever--and so stiff!  I am always expecting to see him bristle!"

There came a message that my lady was ready, and was asking for Miss Tracy to go down with
her.  Viola fluttered away, and I waited till they should have had time to descend before making
my own appearance, finding all the rooms in the cleared state incidental to ball preparations--all
the chairs and tables shrunk up to the walls; and even the drawing-room, where the chaperons
were to sit, looking some degrees more desolate than the drawing-room of a ladyless house generally
does look.

Full in the midst of an immense blue damask sofa sat Lady Diana, in grey brocade.  She was
rather a small woman in reality, but dignity made a great deal more of her.  Eustace, with
a splendid red camellia in his coat, was standing by her, blushing, and she was graciously
permitting the presentation of the squirting violet.  "Since it was a birthday, and it was
a kind attention," &c., but I could see that she did not much like it; and Viola, sitting on
the end of the sofa with her eyes downcast, was very evidently much less delighted than encumbered
with the fragile china thing.

Lord Erymanth met me, and led me up to his sister, who gave me a cold kiss, and we had a little
commonplace talk, during which I could see Viola spring up to Harold, who was standing beside
her brother, and the colour rising in his bronzed face at her eager acknowledgments of the
flower-pot; after which she applied herself to begging her brother to let his horse and groom
go over early the next morning for the Christmas gifts she had left behind, but Dermot did
not seem propitious, not liking to trust the man he had with him with the precious Jack o'Lantern
over hills slippery with frost; and Viola, as one properly instructed in the precariousness
of equine knees, subsided disappointed; while I had leisure to look up at the two gentlemen
standing there, and I must say that Harold looked one of Nature's nobles even beside Dermot,
and Dermot a fine, manly fellow even beside Harold, though only reaching to his shoulder.

I was the greatest stranger, and went in to the dining-room with his lordship, which spared
me the sight of Eustace's supreme satisfaction in presenting his arm to Lady Diana, after she
had carefully paired off Viola with her cousin Piggy--i.e., Pigou St. Glear, the eldest son
of the heir-presumptive, a stiff, shy youth in the Erymanth atmosphere, whatever he might be
out of it, and not at all happy with Viola, who was wont to tease and laugh at him.

It was a save-trouble dinner, as informal as the St. Glear nature and servants permitted. 
Lord Erymanth carved, and took care that Harold should not starve, and he was evidently trying
to turn the talk into such a direction as to show his sister what his guests were; but Eustace's
tongue was, of course, the ready one, and answered glibly about closed beershops, projected
cottages, and the complete drainage of the Alfy--nay, that as to Bullock and Ogden hearing
reason, he had only to go over in person and the thing was done; the farmyard was actually
set to rights, and no difficulty at all was made as to the further improvements now that the
landlord had once shown himself concerned.  That was all that was wanting.  And the funny part
of it was that he actually believed it.

Dermot could not help saying to Harold, "Didn't I see you applying a few practical arguments?"

Harold made a sign with his head, with a deprecatory twinkle in his eye, recollecting how infra
dig Eustace thought his exploit.  The party was too small for more than one conversation, so
that when the earl began to relate his experiences of the difficulties of dealing with farmers
and cottagers, all had to listen in silence, and I saw the misery of restless sleepiness produced
by the continuous sound of his voice setting in upon Harold, and under it I had to leave him,
on my departure with Lady Diana and her daughter, quaking in my satin shoes at the splendid
graciousness I saw in preparation for me; but I was kept all the time on the outer surface;
Lady Diana did not choose to be intimate enough even to give good advice, so that I was very
glad when the carriages were heard and the gentlemen joined us, Harold hastily handing to Viola
the squirting violets which she had left behind her on the dining-table, and which he had carefully
concealed from Eustace, but, alas! only to have them forgotten again, or, maybe, with a little
malice, deposited in the keeping of the brazen satyr on the ante-room chimney-piece.

Dermot had already claimed my first dance, causing a strange thrill of pain, as I missed the
glance which always used to regret without forbidding my becoming his partner.  Viola was asked
in due form by Eustace, and accepted him with alacrity, which he did not know to be due to
her desire to escape from Piggy.  Most solicitously did our good old host present Eustace to
every one, and it was curious to watch the demeanour of the different classes--the Horsmans
mostly cordial, Hippa and Pippa demonstratively so; but the Stympsons held aloof with the stiffest
of bows, not one of them but good-natured Captain George Stympson would shake hands even with
me, and Miss Avice Stympson, of Lake House, made as if Harold were an object invisible to the
naked eye, while the kind old earl was doing his best that he should not feel neglected.  Eustace
had learnt dancing for that noted ball at Government House, but Harold had disavowed the possibility.
He had only danced once in his life, he said, when Dermot pressed him, "and that counted for
nothing."  To me the pain on the bent brow made it plain that it had been at the poor fellow's
wedding.

However, he stood watching, and when at the end of our quadrille Dermot said, "Here lies the
hulk of the Great Harry," there was an amused air about him, and at the further question, "Come,
Alison, what do you think of our big corroborees?" he deliberately replied, "I never saw such
a pretty sight!"  And on some leading exclamation from one of us, "It beats the cockatoos on
a cornfield; besides, one has got to kill them!"

"Mr. Alison looks at our little diversion in the benevolent spirit of the giant whose daughter
brought home ploughman, oxen, and all in her apron for playthings," said Viola, who with Eustace
had found her way to us, but we were all divided again, Viola being carried off by some grandee,
Eustace having to search for some noble damsel to whom he had been introduced, and I falling
to the lot of young Mr. Horsman, a nice person in himself, but unable to surmount the overcrowing
of the elder sisters, who called him Baby Jack, and publicly ordered him about. Even at the
end of our dance, at the sound of Hippa's authoritative summons, he dropped me suddenly, and
I found myself gravitating towards Harold like a sort of chaperon.  I was amazed by his observing,
"I think I could do it now.  Would you try me, Lucy?"

After all, he was but five-and-twenty, and could hardly look on anything requiring agility
or dexterity without attempting it, so I consented, with a renewal of the sensations I remembered
when, as a child, I had danced with grown-up men, only with alarm at the responsibility of
what Dermot called "the steerage of the Great Harry," since collision with such momentum as
ours might soon be would be serious; but I soon found my anxiety groundless; he was too well
made and elastic to be clumsy, and had perfect power over his own weight and strength, so that
he could dance as lightly and safely as Dermot with his Irish litheness.

"Do you think I might ask Miss Tracy?" he said, in return for my compliments.

"Of course; why not?"

When he did ask, her reply was, "Oh, will you indeed?  Thank you." Which naivete actually raised
her mother's colour with annoyance. But if she had a rod laid up, Viola did not feel it then;
she looked radiant, and though I don't believe three words passed between the partners, that
waltz was the glory of the evening to her.

She must have made him take her to the tea-room for some ice, and there it was that, while
I was standing with my partner a little way off, we heard Miss Avice Stympson's peculiarly
penetrating attempt at a whisper, observing, "Yes, it is melancholy!  I thought we were safe
here, or I never should have brought my dear little Birdie.... What, don't you know?  There's
no doubt of it--the glaze on the pottery is dead men's bones.  They have an arrangement with
the hospitals in London, you understand.  I can't think how Lord Erymanth can be so deceived.
But you see the trick was a perfect success.  Yes, the blocking up the railway.  A mercy no
lives were lost; but that would have been nothing to him after the way he has gone on in Australia.--Oh,
Lord Erymanth, I did not know you were there."

"And as I could not avoid overhearing you," said that old gentleman, "let me remind you that
I regard courtesy to the guest as due respect to the host, and that I have good reason to expect
that my visitors should have some confidence in my discrimination of the persons I invite them
to meet."

Therewith both he and Miss Stympson had become aware of the head that was above them all, and
the crimson that dyed the cheeks and brow; while Viola, trembling with passion, and both hands
clasped over Harold's arm, exclaimed, in a panting whisper, "Tell them it is a wicked falsehood--tell
them it is no such thing!"

"I will speak to your uncle to-morrow.  I am obliged to him."

Everybody heard that, and all who had either feeling or manners knew that no more ought to
be said.  Only Lord Erymanth made his way to Harold to say, "I am very sorry this has happened."

Harold bent his head with a murmur of thanks, and was moving out of the supper-room, when Dermot
hastily laid a hand on him with, "Keep the field, Harry; don't go."

"I'm not going."

"That's right.  Face it out before the hags.  Whom shall I introduce you--There's Birdie Stympson--come."

"No, no; I don't mean to dance again."

"Why not?  Beard the harpies like a man.  Dancing would refute them all."

"Would it?" gravely said Harold.

Nor could he be persuaded, save once at his host's bidding, but showed no signs of being abashed
or distressed, and most of the male Stympsons came and spoke to him.  The whole broke up at
three, and we repaired to our rooms, conscious that family prayers would take place as the
clock struck nine as punctually as if nothing had happened, and that our characters depended
on our punctuality.  Viola was in time, and so was Eustace; I sneaked in late and ashamed;
and the moment the servants had filed out Viola sprang to Eustace with vehement acknowledgments;
and it appeared that just before she came down her missing box of gifts had been brought to
her room, and she was told that Mr. Alison had sent for them.  Eustace smirked, and Lady Diana
apologised for her little daughter's giddy, exaggerated expressions, by which she had given
far more trouble than she ever intended.

"No trouble," said Eustace.  "Harold always wants to work off his steam."

"What, it was he?" said Viola.

"Yes, of course; he always does those things," said Eustace, speaking with a tone of proprietorship,
as if Harold had been a splendid self-acting steam-engine.  "I am very glad to have gratified
you, Miss Tracy--"

"Only he did, and not you," said Viola, boldly, luckily without being heard by her mother,
while Eustace murmured out, rather bewildered, "It is all the same."

Viola evidently did not think so when Harold came in with beads of wet fringing his whiskers,
though he had divested himself of the chief evidences of the rivers of muddy lane through which
he had walked to Arked House, full four miles off.

Viola's profuse thanks were crossed by Lady Diana's curt apologies; and as poor Piggy, who
had genuinely overslept himself, entered with his apologies--poor fellow--in a voice very much
as if he was trying to say "Grumph, grumph," while he could only say "Wee, wee," they were
received solemnly by his uncle with, "The antipodes are a rebuke to you, Pigou.  I am afraid
the young men of this hemisphere have no disposition to emulate either such chivalrous attentions
or exertions as have been Mr. Harold Alison's excuse."

When so much was said about it, Harold probably wished he had let the whole matter alone, and
was thankful to be allowed to sit down in peace to his well-earned breakfast, which was finished
before Dermot lounged in--not waited for by his uncle, who offered an exhibition of his model-farm-buildings,
machines, cattle, &c.  Fain would Viola and I have gone in the train of the gentlemen, but
the weather, though not bad enough to daunt a tolerably hardy man, was too damp for me, and
we had to sit down to our work in the drawing-room, while Piggy, always happier without his
great-uncle, meandered about until Lady Diana ordered off Viola to play at billiards with him,
but kept me, for, as I perceived, the awful moment was come, and the only consolation was that
it might be an opportunity of pleading Harold's cause.

With great censure of the Stympsons' ill-breeding and discourtesy to her brother (which seemed
to affect her far more than the direct injury to Harold), and strong disclaimers of belief
in them, still my mother's old friend must inquire into the character of these young men and
my position with regard to them.  If she had been tender instead of inquisitorial, I should
have answered far more freely, and most likely the air of defiance and defence into which she
nettled me had a partisan look; but it was impossible not to remember that Miss Woolmer had
always said that, however she might censure the scandal of the Stympsons, they only required
to dish it up with sauce piquant to make her enjoy it heartily.

And really and truly it did seem as if there was nothing in the whole lives of those poor youths
on which those women had not contrived to cast some horrid stain; working backwards from the
dead men's bones in the pottery (Dermot had told her they used nothing but live men's bones),
through imputations on Mr. George Yolland's character, and the cause of the catastrophe at
the "Dragon's Head;" stories of my associating with all the low, undesirable friends they picked
up at Mycening, or in the hunting-field; and as to the Australian part of the history, she
would hardly mention to me all she had heard, even to have it confuted.

I was not sure how far she did believe my assurances, or thought me deceived, when I strenuously
denied all evil intent from Harold towards his poor wife, and explained that he had merely
driven over a precipice in the dark, and had a brain fever afterwards; all I could see was
that, though not perfectly satisfied or convinced, she found that her brother would not allow
the separation to be kept up, and therefore she resumed her favourite office of adviser.  She
examined me on the religious habits of my nephews and niece, impressing on me that it was for
the sake of the latter that my presence at Arghouse was excusable; but insisting that it was
incumbent on me to provide her with an elderly governess, both for her sake and my own.  I
was much afraid of having the governess at once thrust upon me; but, luckily, she did not happen
to have one of a chaperon kind of age on her list, so she contented herself with much advice
on what I was teaching Dora, so that perhaps I grew restive and was disposed to think it no
concern of hers, nor did I tell her that much of the direction of Dora's lessons was with a
view to Harold; but she could not have been wholly displeased, since she ended by telling me
that mine was a vast opportunity, and that the propriety of my residence at Arghouse entirely
depended on the influence I exerted, since any acquiescence in lax and irreligious habits would
render my stay hurtful to all parties.  She worried me into an inclination to drop all my poor
little endeavours, since certainly to have tried to follow out all the details of her counsel
would have alienated all three at once.

Never was I more glad than when the luncheon-bell put a stop to the conversation, and the sun
struggling out dispensed me from further endurance, and set me free to go with Viola to bestow
her gifts, disposing on the way of the overflow of talk that had been pent up for months past.
In the twilight, near the lodge of a favourite old nurse of Dermot's, we encountered all the
younger gentlemen, and not only did Viola drag her brother in but Harold also, to show to whom
was owing the arrival of her wonderful tea-pot cozy.

The good woman was just going to make her tea.  Viola insisted on showing the use of her cozy,
and making everybody stay to nurse's impromptu kettledrum, and herself put in the pinches of
tea.  Dermot chaffed all and sundry; Viola bustled about; Harold sat on the dresser, with his
blue eyes gleaming in the firelight with silent amusement and perfect satisfaction, the cat
sitting on his shoulder; and nurse, who was firmly persuaded that he had rescued her dear Master
Dermot from the fangs of the lion, was delighted to do her best for his entertainment.  Viola
insisted on displaying all the curiosities--the puzzle-cup that could not be used, the horrid
frog that sprang to your lips in the tankard, the rolling-pin covered with sentimental poetry,
and her extraordinary French pictures on the walls.  Dermot kept us full of merriment, and
we laughed on till the sound of the dressing-bell sent us racing up to the castle in joyous
guilt.  That kettledrum at the lodge is one of the brightest spots in my memory.

We were very merry all the evening in a suppressed way over the piano, Viola, Dermot, and I
singing, Harold looking on, and Eustace being left a willing victim to the good counsel lavished
by my lord and my lady, who advised him nearly out of his senses and into their own best graces.

But we had not yet done with the amenities of the Stympsons.  The morning's post brought letters
to Lady Diana and Lord Erymanth, which were swallowed by the lady with only a flush on her
brow, but which provoked from the gentleman a sharp interjection.

"Scandalous, libellous hags!"

"The rara Avis?" inquired Dermot.

And in spite of Lady Diana's warning, "Not now," Lord Erymanth declared, "Avice, yes!  A bird
whose quills are quills of iron dipped in venom, and her beak a brazen one, distilling  gall
on all around. I shall inform her that she has made herself liable to an action for libel.
A very fit lesson to her."

"What steps shall I take, my lord?" said Eustace, with much importance. "I shall be most happy
to be guided by you."

"It is not you," said Lord Erymanth.

"Oh! if it is only he, it does not signify so much."

"Certainly not," observed Dermot.  "What sinks some floats others."

Lady Diana here succeeded in hushing up the subject, Harold having said nothing all the time;
but, after we broke up from breakfast, I had a private view of Lady Diana's letter, which was
spiteful beyond description as far as we were concerned; making all manner of accusations on
the authority of the Australian relations; the old stories exaggerated into horrible blackness,
besides others for which I could by no means account.  Gambling among the gold-diggers, horrid
frays in Victoria, and even cattle-stealing, were so impossible in a man who had always been
a rich sheep farmer, that I laughed; yet they were told by the cousins with strange circumstantiality.
Then came later tales--about our ways at Arghouse--all as a warning against permitting any
intercourse of the sweet child's, which might be abused. Lady Diana was angered and vexed,
but she was not a woman who rose above the opinion of the world.  Her daughter, Di Enderby,
was a friend of Birdie Stympson, and would be shocked; and she actually told me that I must
perceive that, while such things were said, it was not possible--for her own Viola's sake--to
keep up the intimacy she would have wished.

For my part it seemed to me that, in Lady Diana's position, unjust accusations against a poor
young girl were the very reason for befriending her openly; but her ladyship spoke in a grand,
authoritative, regretful way, and habitual submission prevented me from making any protest
beyond saying coldly, "I am very sorry, but I cannot give up my nephews."

Viola was not present.  It was supposed to be so shocking that she could know nothing about
it, but she flew into my room and raged like a little fury at the cruel wickedness of the Stympsons
in trying to turn everyone's friends against them, and trumping up stories, and mamma giving
up as if she believed them.  She wished she was Dermot--she wished she was uncle Erymanth--she
wished she was anybody, to stand up and do battle with those horrid women!--anybody but a poor
little girl, who must obey orders and be separated from her friends. And she cried, and made
such violent assurances that I had to soothe and silence her, and remind her of her first duty, &c.

Lord Erymanth was a nobler being than his sister, and had reached up to clap Harold on the
shoulder, while declaring that these assertions made no difference to him, and that he did
not care the value of a straw for what Avice Stympson might say, though Harold had no defence
but his own denial of half the stories, and was forced to own that there was truth in some
of the others.  He was deeply wounded.  "Why cannot the women let us keep our friends?" he
said, as I found him in the great hall.

"It is very hard," I said, with grief and anger.

"Very hard on the innocent," he answered.

Then I saw he was preparing to set off to walk home, twelve miles, and remonstrated, since
Lake Valley would probably be flooded.

"I must," he said; "I must work it out with myself, whether I do Eustace most harm or good
by staying here."

And off he went, with the long swift stride that was his way of walking off vexation.  I did
not see him again till I was going up to dress, when I found him just inside the front door,
struggling to get off his boots, which were perfectly sodden; while his whole dress, nay, even
his hair and beard, was soaked and drenched, so that I taxed him with having been in the water.

"Yes, I went in after a dog," he said, and as he gave a shiver, and had just pulled off his
second boot, I asked no more questions, but hunted him upstairs to put on dry clothes without
loss of time; and when we met at dinner, Eustace was so full of our doings at the castle, and
Dora of hers with Miss Woolmer, that his bath was entirely driven out of my head.

But the next day, as I was preparing for my afternoon's walk, the unwonted sound of our door-bell
was heard. "Is our introduction working already?" thought I, little expecting the announcement--"The
Misses Stympson."

However, there were Stympsons and Stympsons, so that even this did not prepare me for being
rushed at by all three from Lake House--two aunts and one niece--Avice, Henny, and Birdie,
with "How is he?" "Where is he?  He would not take anything.  I hope he went to bed and had
something hot."  "Is he in the house?  No cold, I hope.  We have brought the poor dear fellow
for him to see.  He seems in pain to-day; we thought he would see him."

At last I got in a question edgeways as to the antecedents, as the trio kept on answering one
another in chorus, "Poor dear Nep--your cousin--nephew, I mean--the bravest--"

Then it flashed on me.  "Do you mean that it was for your dog that Harold went into the water
yesterday!"

"Oh, the bravest, most generous, the most forgiving.  So tender-handed! It must be all a calumny.
I wish we had never believed it. He could never lift a hand against anyone.  We will contradict
all rumours. Report is so scandalous.  Is he within?"

Harold had been at the Hydriot works ever since breakfast, but on my first question the chorus
struck up again, and I might well quail at the story.  "Lake Mill; you know the place, Miss
Alison?"

Indeed I did.  The lake, otherwise quiet to sluggishness, here was fed by the rapid little
stream, and at the junction was a great mill, into which the water was guided by a sharp descent,
which made it sweep down with tremendous force, and, as I had seen from the train, the river
was swelled by the thaw and spread far beyond its banks. "The mill-race!" I cried in horror.

"Just observe.  Dear Nep has such a passion for the water, and Birdie thoughtlessly threw a
stick some way above the weir.  I never shall forget what I felt when I saw him carried along.
He struggled with his white paws, and moaned to us, but we could do nothing, and we thought
to have seen him dashed to pieces before our eyes, when, somehow, his own struggles I fancy--he
is so sagacious--brought him up in a lot of weeds and stuff against the post of the flood-gates,
and that checked him.  But we saw it could not last, and his strength was exhausted. Poor Birdie
rushed down to beg them to stop the mill, but that could never have been done in time, and
the dear dog was on the point of being sucked in by the ruthless stream, moaning and looking
appealingly to us for help, when, behold! that superb figure, like some divinity descending,
was with us, and with one brief inquiry he was in the water.   We called out to him that the
current was frightfully strong--we knew a man's life ought not to be perilled; but he just
smiled, took up the great pole that lay near, and waded in.   I cannot describe the horror
of seeing him breasting that stream, expecting, as we did, to see him borne down by it into
the wheel.  The miller shouted to him that it was madness, but he kept his footing like a rock.
He reached the place where the poor dog was, and the fury of the stream was a little broken
by the post, took up poor Nep and put him over his shoulder.  Nep was so good--lay like a lamb--while
Mr. Alison fought his way back, and it was harder still, being upwards.  The miller and his
men came out and cheered, thinking at least he would come out spent and want help; but no,
he came out only panting a little, put down the dog, and when it moaned and seemed hurt he
felt it all over so tenderly, found its leg was broken, took it into the miller's kitchen,
and set it like any surgeon.  He would take nothing but a cup of tea, whatever they said, and
would not change his clothes--indeed, the miller is a small man, so I don't see how he could--but
I hope he took no harm.  He walked away before we could thank him.  But, oh dear! what a wicked
thing scandal is!  I will never believe anything report says again."

To the end of their days the Misses Stympson believed that it was the convenient impersonal
rumour which had maligned Harold--not themselves.

I was just parting with them when Harold appeared, and they surrounded him, with an inextricable
confusion of thanks--hopes that he had not caught cold, and entreaties that he would look at
his patient, whom they had brought on the back seat of the barouche to have his leg examined.
Harold said that his was self-taught surgery, but was assured that the dog would bear it better
from him than any one, and could not but consent.

I noticed, however, that when he had to touch the great black Newfoundland dog, a strong shudder
ran through his whole frame, and he had to put a strong force on himself, though he spoke to
it kindly, and it wagged its tail, and showed all the grateful, wistful affection of its kind,
as he attended to it with a tender skill in which his former distaste was lost; and the party
drove away entreating him to come and renew the treatment on the Monday, and asking us all
to luncheon, but not receiving a distinct answer in Eustace's absence, for he was very tenacious
of his rights as master of the house.

I was quite touched with the dog's parting caress to his preserver. "So you have conquered
the birds with iron quills!" I cried, triumphantly.

"Who were they?" asked Harold, astonished.

"Surely you know them?  I never thought of introducing you."

"You don't mean that they were those women?"

"Of course they were.  I thought you knew you were performing an act of heroic forgiveness."

Harold's unfailing politeness towards me hindered him from saying "heroic fiddlesticks," but
he could not suppress a "Faugh!" which meant as much, and that mortified me considerably.

"Come now, Harry," I said, "you don't mean that you would not have done it if you had known?"

"I should not have let the poor beast drown because his mistresses were spiteful hags."  And
there was a look on his face that made me cry out in pain, "Don't, Harry!"

"Don't what?"

"Don't be unforgiving.  Say you forgive them."

"I can't.  I could as soon pardon Smith."

"But you ought to pardon both.  It would be generous.  It would be Christian."

I was sorry I had said that, for he looked contemptuously and said, "So they teach you.  I
call it weakness."

"Oh, Harry! dear Harry, no!  The highest strength!"

"I don't understand that kind of talk," he said.  "You don't know what that Smith is to my
poor mother!"

"We won't talk of him; but, indeed, the Misses Stympson are grateful to you, and are sorry.
Won't you go to them on Monday?"

"No!  I don't like scandal-mongers."

"But you have quite conquered them."

"What do you mean?  If we are the brutes they tell those who would have been our friends, we
are not less so because I pulled a dog out of the river."

The hard look was on his face, and to my faint plea, "The poor dog!"

"The dog will do very well."  He went decisively out of the way of further persuasions, and
when a formal note of invitation arrived, he said Eustace and I might go, but he should not.
He had something to do at the potteries; and as to the dog, the less it was meddled with the
better.

"I know you hate black dogs," said Eustace; "I only wonder you ever touched it."

Harold's brow lowered at this, and afterwards I asked Eustace to account for the strange dislike.
He told me that the dogs at the store had run yelping after the buggy on that fatal drive,
and this and the melancholy howl of the dingoes had always been supposed to be the cause of
the special form of delirious fancy that had haunted Harold during the illness following--that
he was pursued and dragged down by a pack of black hounds, and that the idea had so far followed
him that he still had a sort of alienation from dogs, though he subdued it with a high hand.

He would still not go with us to Lake House, for go we did.  An invitation was stimulating
to Eustace, and though I much disliked the women, I knew we could not afford to reject an advance
if we were not to continue out of humanity's reach.

So I went, and we were made much of in spite of the disappointment.

Had not Mr. Harold Alison been so kind as to come over both Sunday and Monday morning and see
to poor Nep in his kennel before they were down? Oh, yes, they had heard of it from the stable-boy,
and had charged him to take care the gentleman came in to breakfast, but he could not persuade
him.  Such a pity he was too busy to come to-day!

Eustace gave learned and elaborate opinions on Nep, and gained the hearts of the ladies, who
thenceforth proclaimed that Mr. Alison was a wonderfully finished gentleman, considering his
opportunities; but Mr. Harold was at the best a rough diamond, so that once more his conquest
had been for Eustace rather than for himself.  They showed me, in self-justification, letters
from their relations in Melbourne, speaking of the notorious Harry Alison as a huge bearded
ruffian, and telling horrid stories of his excesses in no measured terms.  Of course we denied
them, and represented that some other man must have borne the same name, and gratitude made
them agree; but the imputation lay there, ready to revive at any time.  And there had been
something in the whole affair that had not a happy effect on Harold.  He was more blunt, more
gruff, less tolerant or ready to be pleased; Eustace's folly was no longer incapable of provoking
him; and even his gentleness towards Dora and me was with a greater effort, and he was plainly
in an irritable state of suppressed suffering of mind or temper, which only the strong force
he put upon himself kept in check.  My poor Harold, would he see that there were moral achievements
higher than his physical ones, and would he learn that even his strength was not equal to them,
unaided?

CHAPTER VIII.

BULLOCK'S CHASTISEMENT.

The next frosty day Dora and I set forth for a visit to the double cottage, where, on one side,
dwelt a family with a newly-arrived baby; on the other was Dame Jennings', with the dilapidated
roof and chimney. I was glad to see Dora so happily and eagerly interested over the baby as
to be more girl-like than I had yet seen her, though, comparing her to what she had been on
her arrival, she was certainly a good deal softened and tamed.  "Domesticated" would really
not have been so inappropriate a word in her case as it is in advertisements of companions.

We had come to the door, only divided from Mrs. Jennings's by a low fence and a few bushes,
when voices struck on our ears, and we saw Bullock's big, sturdy, John Bull form planted in
a defiant attitude in the garden-path before the door, where the old woman stood courtesying,
and mingling entreating protestations against an additional sixpence a week on her rent with
petitions that at least the chimney might be made sound and the roof water-tight.

There is no denying that I did stand within the doorway to listen, for not only did I not wish
to encounter Bullock, but it seemed quite justifiable to ascertain whether the current whispers
of his dealings with the poor were true; indeed, there was no time to move before he replied
with a volley of such abuse, as I never heard before or since, at her impudence in making such
a demand.

I was so much shocked that I stood transfixed, forgetting even to draw Dora away from the sound,
while the old woman pleaded that "Mr. Herod" had made the promise, and said nothing of increasing
her rent. Probably Bullock had been irritated by the works set on foot at Ogden's farm, for
he brought out another torrent of horrid imprecations upon "the meddling convict fellow," the
least intolerable of the names he used, and of her for currying favour, threatening her with
instant expulsion if she uttered a word of complaint, or mentioned the increase of her rent,
and on her hesitation actually lifting his large heavy stick.

We both cried out and sprang forward, though I scarcely suppose that he would have actually
struck her.  But much more efficient help was at hand.  Bullock's broad back was to the gate,
and he little knew that at the moment he raised his stick Harold, attracted by his loud railing
voice, leaped over the gate, and with one bound was upon the fellow, wresting the stick from
his hand and laying it about his shoulders with furious energy.  We all screamed out.  Dora,
it was suspected, bade him go on and give it to him well, and perhaps my wrath with the man
made me simply shriek; but the sense of our presence did (whatever we wished) check Harold's
violence so far that he ceased his blows, throwing the man from him with such force that he
fell prone into the poor dame's gooseberry-bush, and had to pick himself up through numerous
scratches, just as we had hurried round through the garden.

He had regained his feet, and was slinking up to the gate as we met him, and passionately exclaimed:
"Miss Alison, you have seen this; I shall call on you as my witness."

Dora called out something so vituperative that my energies went in silencing her, nor do I
think I answered Bullock, though at least it was a relief to see that, having a great sou'-wester
over all his other clothes, the force of the blows had been so broken that he could not have
any really serious injury to complain of.  It was not unfortunate, however, that he was so
shaken and battered that he went first to exhibit himself to Dr. Kingston's new partner, and
obtain a formidable scientific account of his sprains and bruises; so that Eustace had heard
an account of the affray in the first place, and Dora, with a child's innate satisfaction in
repeating personalities, had not spared the epithets with which Bullock had mentioned the "fool
of a squire." The said squire, touched to the quick, went out invulnerable to his interview,
declaring that the agent had been rightly served, only wishing he had had more, and indignantly
refusing Bullock's offer to abstain from prosecuting Mr. Harold Alison on receiving a handsome
compensation, and a promise never to be interfered with again.  Eustace replied--too much,
I fear, in his own coin--with orders to send in his accounts immediately and to consider himself
dismissed from his agency from that hour; and then came back to us like a conquering hero,
exulting in his own magnanimous firmness, which "had shown he was not to be trifled with."

But he did not like it at all when Richardson came in trying to look quite impassive, and said
to Harold, "Some one wants to speak to you sir."

Harold went, and returned without a word, except, "You are wanted too, Lucy," and I was not
equally silent when I found it was to serve on me an order to appear as witness before the
magistrates the next day, as to the assault upon Bullock.

Eustace was very much annoyed, and said it was disgraceful, and that Harold was always getting
into scrapes, and would ruin him with all the county people, just as he was beginning to make
way with them--a petulant kind of ingratitude which we had all learnt to tolerate as "old Eu's
way," and Dora announced that if he was put in prison, she should go too.

It was only a Petty Sessions case, heard in the justice-room at Mycening, and on the way the
prisoner was chiefly occupied in assuring the witness that there was nothing to be nervous
about; and the squire, that it would hurt nobody but himself; and, for his part, fine him as
they would, he would willingly pay twenty times as much to rid the place of Bullock.

The bench--who sat at the upper end of a table--were three or four Horsmans and Stympsons,
with Lord Erymanth in the chair par excellence, for they all sat on chairs, and they gave the
like to Eustace and me while we waited, poor Harold having put himself, in the custody of a
policeman, behind the rail which served as bar.

When our turn came, Harold pleaded "Guilty" at once, not only for truth's sake, but as meaning
to spare me the interrogation; and Crabbe, who was there on Bullock's behalf, looked greatly
baffled and disappointed; but the magistrates did not let it rest there, since the amount of
the fine of course would depend on the degree of violence, &c., so both Mrs. Jennings and I,
and the doctor, were examined as witnesses.

I came first; and at first I did not find the inquiries half so alarming as I expected, since
my neighbours spoke to me quite in a natural way, and it was soon clear that my account of
the matter was the best possible defence of Harold in their eyes.  The unpleasant part was
when Crabbe not only insisted on my declaring on oath that I did not think Bullock meant to
strike the old woman, but on my actually repeating the very words he had said, which he probably
thought I should flinch from doing; but he thereby made it the worse for himself. No doubt
he and Crabbe had reckoned on our general unpopularity, and had not judged it so as to discover
the reaction that had set in.  An endeavour to show that we were acting as spies on the trustworthy
old servant, in order to undermine him with his master, totally failed, and, at last, the heavy
fine of one shilling was imposed upon Harold--as near an equivalent as possible to dismissing
the case altogether.  Lord Erymanth himself observed to Eustace, "that he felt, if he might
say so, to a certain degree implicated, since he had advised the dismissal of Bullock, but
scarcely after this fashion." However, he said he hoped to have Eustace among them soon in
another capacity, and this elevated him immensely.

The case had taken wind among the workmen at the potteries; and as we came out at their dinner-hour,
there was a great assemblage, loudly cheering, "Alison, the poor man's friend!"

Eustace stood smiling and fingering his hat, till Captain Stympson, who came out with us, hinted,
as he stood between the two young men, that it had better be stopped as soon as possible. 
"One may soon have too much of such things," and then Eustace turned round on Harold, and declared
it was "just his way to bring all the Mycening mob after them."  Whereat Harold, without further
answer, observed, "You'll see Lucy home then," and plunged down among the men, who, as if nothing
had been wanting to give them a fellow-feeling for him but his having been up before the magistrates,
stretched out hands to shake; and as he marched down between a lane of them, turned and followed
the lofty standard of his head towards their precincts.

Bullock, in great wrath and indignation, sent in his accounts that night with a heavy balance
due to him from Eustace, which Harold saw strong cause to dispute.  But that battle, in which,
of course, Crabbe was Bullock's adviser, and did all he could to annoy us, was a matter of
many months, and did not affect our life very closely. Harold was in effect Eustace's agent,
and being a very good accountant, as well as having the confidence of the tenants, all was
put in good train in that quarter, and Mr. Alison was in the way to be respected as an excellent
landlord and improver.  People were calling on us, and we were evidently being taken into our
proper place.  Lady Diana no longer withheld her countenance, and though she only called on
me in state she allowed Viola to write plenty of notes to me.

But I must go on to that day when Harold and Eustace were to have a hunting day with the Foling
hounds, and dine afterwards with some of the members of the hunt at the Fox Hotel at Foling,
a favourite meet. They were to sleep at Biston, and I saw nothing of them the next day till
Eustace came home alone, only just in time for a late dinner, and growled out rather crossly
that Harold had chosen to walk home, and not to be waited for.  Eustace himself was out of
sorts and tired, eating little and hardly vouchsafing a word, except to grumble at us and the
food, and though we heard Harold come in about nine o'clock, he did not come in, but went up
to his room.

Eustace was himself again the next morning, but Harold was gone out. However, as, since he
had been agent, he had often been out and busy long before breakfast, this would not have been
remarkable, but that Eustace was ill at ease, and at last said, "The fact is, Lucy, he has
been 'screwed' again, and has not got over it."

I was so innocent that only Dora's passion with her brother revealed to me his meaning, and
then I was inexpressibly horrified and angry, for I did not think Harold could have broken
his own word or the faith on which I had taken up my abode with them, and the disappointment
in him, embittered, I fear, by the sense of personal injury, was almost unbearable.

Eustace muttered something in excuse which I could not understand, and I thought was only laxity
on his part.  I told him that, if such things were to happen, his house was no home for me.
And he began, "Come now, Lucy, I say, that's hard, when 'twas Harold, and not me, and all those
fellows--"

"What fellows?"

"Oh, Malvoisin and Nessy Horsman, you know."

I knew they were the evil geniuses of Dermot's life.  Lord Malvoisin had been his first tempter
as boys at their tutor's, and again in the Guards; and Ernest, or Nessy, Horsman was the mauvais
sujet of the family, who never was heard of without some disgraceful story.   And Dermot had
led my boys among these.  All that had brightened life so much to me had suddenly vanished.

It was Ash Wednesday, and I am afraid I went through my Lenten services in the spirit of the
elder son, nursing my virtuous indignation, and dwelling chiefly on what would become of me
if Arghouse were to be made uninhabitable, as I foresaw.

I was ashamed to consult Miss Woolmer, and spent the afternoon in restless attempts to settle
to something, but feeling as if nothing were worth while, not even attending to Dora, since
my faith in Harold had given way, and he had broken his word and returned to his vice.

Should I go to church again, and spare myself the meeting him at dinner?  I was just considering,
when Mr. George Yolland came limping up the drive, and the sight was the first shock to the
selfish side of my grief.  "Is anything the matter?" I asked, trying to speak sternly, but
my heart thumping terribly.

"No--yes--not exactly," he said hastily; "but can you come, Miss Alison?  I believe you are
the only person who can be of use."

"Then is he ill?" I asked, still coldly, not being quite sure whether I ought to forgive.

"Not bodily, but his despair over what has taken place is beyond us all.  He sits silent over
the accounts in his room at the office; will talk to none of us.  Mr. Alison has tried--I have--Ben
and all of us. He never looks up but to call for soda-water.  If he yields again, it will soon
be acute dipsomania, and then--" he shrugged his shoulders.

"But what do you mean?  What can I do?" said I, walking on by his side all the time.

"Take him home.  Give him hope and motive.  Get him away, at any rate, before those fellows
come.  Mr. Tracy was over at Mycening this morning, and said they talked of coming to sleep
at the 'Boar,' for the meet to-morrow, and looking him up."

"Lord Malvoisin?" I asked.

And as I walked on, Mr. Yolland told me what I had not understood from Eustace, that there
had been an outcry among the more reckless of the Foling Hunt that so good a fellow should
be a teetotaller. Dermot Tracy had been defied into betting upon the resolute abstinence of
his hero--nay, perhaps the truth was that these men had felt that their victim was being attracted
from their grasp, and a Satanic instinct made them strive to degrade his idol in his eyes.

So advantage was taken of the Australian's ignorance of the names of liqueurs.  Perhaps the
wine in the soup had already caused some excitement in the head--unaccustomed to any stimulant
ever since the accident and illness which had rendered it inflammable to a degree no one suspected.
When once the first glass was swallowed, the dreadful work was easy, resolution and judgment
were obscured, and the old habits and cravings of the days when poor Harold had been a hard
drinker had been revived in full force.  Uproarious mirth and wild feats of strength seemed
to have been the consequence, ending by provoking the interference of the police, who had locked
up till the morning such of the party as could not escape.  Happily, the stupefied stage had
so far set in that Harold had made it no worse by offering resistance, and Dermot had managed
to get the matter hushed up by the authorities at Foling.  This was what he had come to say,
but Harold had been very brief and harsh with him; though he was thoroughly angered and disgusted
at the conduct of his friends, and repeated, hotly, that he had been treated with treachery
such as he could never forgive.

So we came to the former "Dragon's Head," where Harold had fitted up a sort of office for himself.
Mr. Yolland bade me go up alone, and persuade him to come home with me.  I was in the greater
fright, because of the selfishness which had mingled with the morning's indignation, but I
had just presence of mind enough for an inarticulate prayer through the throbbings of my heart
ere knocking, and at once entering the room where, under a jet of gas, Harold sat at a desk,
loaded with papers and ledgers, on which he had laid down his head.  I went up to him, and
laid my hand as near his brow as his position would let me.  Oh, how it burnt!

He looked up with a face half haggard, half sullen with misery, and hoarsely said, "Lucy, how
came you here?"

"I came in to get you to walk home with me."

"I'll get a fly for you."

(This would be going to the "Boar," the very place to meet these men.)

"Oh no! please don't.  I should like the walk with you."

"I can't go home yet.  I have something to do.  I must make up these books."

"But why?  There can't be any haste."

"Yes.  I shall put them into Yolland's hands and go by the next mail."

"Harold!  You promised to stay till Eustace was in good hands."

He laughed harshly.  "You have learnt what my promise is worth!"

"Oh Harold! don't.  You were cheated and betrayed.  They took a wicked advantage of you."

"I knew what I was about," he said, with the same grim laugh at my folly. "What is a man worth
who has lost his self-command?"

"He may regain it," I gasped out, for his look and manner frightened me dreadfully.

He made an inarticulate sound of scorn, but, seeing perhaps the distress in my face, he added
more gently, "No, Lucy, this is really best; I am not fit to be with you.  I have broken my
word of honour, and lost all that these months had gained.  I should only drag Eustace down
if I stayed."

"Why?  Oh, why?  It was through their deceit.  Oh, Harry! there is not such harm done that
you cannot retrieve."

"No," he said, emphatically.  "Understand what you are asking.  My safeguard of an unbroken
word is gone!  The longing for that stuff--accursed though I know it--is awakened.  Nothing
but shame at giving way before these poor fellows that I have preached temperance to withholds
me at this very moment."

"But it does withhold you!  Oh, Harold!  You know you can be strong. You know God gives strength,
if you would only try."

"I know you say so."

"Because I know it.  Oh, Harold! try my way.  Do ask God to give you what you want to stand
up against this."

"If I did, it would not undo the past."

"Something else can do that."

He did not answer, but reached his hat, saying something again about time, and the fly.  I
must make another effort.  "Oh, Harold! give up this!  Do not be so cruel to Dora and to me.
Have you made us love you better than anybody, only to go away from us in this dreadful way,
knowing it is to give yourself up to destruction?  Do you want to break our hearts?"

"Me!" he said, in a dreamy way.  "You don't really care for me?"

"I?  Oh, Harry, when you have grown to be my brother, when you are all that I have in this
world to lean on and help me, will you take yourself away?"

"It might be better for you," he said.

"But it will not," I said; "you will stay and go on, and God will make your strength perfect
to conquer this dreadful thing too."

"You shall try it then," he said, and he began to sweep those accounts into a drawer as if
he had done with them for the night, and as he brought his head within my reach, I could not
but kiss his forehead as I said, "Thank you, my Harry."

He screwed his lips together, with a strange half-smile very near tears, emptied the rest of
a bottle of soda-water into a tumbler, gulped it down, opened the door, turned down the gas,
and came down with me.  Mr. Yolland was watching, I well knew, but he discreetly kept out of
sight, and we came out into a very cold raw street, with the stars twinkling overhead, smiling
at us with joy I thought, and the bells were ringing for evening service.

But our dangers were not over.  We had just emerged into the main street when a dog-cart came
dashing up, the two cigars in it looming red.  It was pulled up.  Harold's outline could be
recognised in any light, but I was entirely hidden in his great shadow, and a voice called out:

"Halloo, Alison, how do?  A chop and claret at the 'Boar'--eh?  Come along."

"Thank you," said Harold, "but I am walking home with Miss Alison--"

The two gentlemen bowed, and I bowed, and oh! how I gripped Harold's arm as I heard the reply;
not openly derisive to a lady, but with a sneer in the voice, "Oh! ah! yes!  But you'll come
when you've seen her home.  We'll send on the dog-cart for you."

"No, thank you," said Harold.  His voice sounded firm, but I felt the thrill all through the
arm I clung to.  "Good night."

He attempted no excuse, but strode on--I had to run to keep up with him--and they drove on
by our side, and Nessy Horsman said, "A prior engagement, eh?  And Miss Alison will not release
you?  Ladies' claims are sacred, we all know."

What possessed me I don't know, nor how I did it, but it was in the dark and I was wrought
up, and I answered, "And yours can scarcely be so!  So we will go on, Harold."

"A fair hit, Nessy," and there was a laugh and flourish of the whip. I was trembling, and a
dark cloud had drifted up with a bitter blast, and the first hailstones were falling.  The
door of the church was opened for a moment, showing bright light from within; the bells had ceased.

"My dear Lucy," said Harold, "you had better go in here for shelter."

"Not if you leave me!  You must come with me," I said, still dreading that he would leave me
in church, send a fly, and fall a victim at the "Boar;" and, indeed, I was shaking so, that
he would not withdraw his arm, and said, soothingly, "I'm coming."

Oh! that blessed hailstorm that drove us in!  I drew Harold into a seat by the door, keeping
between him and that, that he might not escape. But I need not have feared.

Ben Yolland's voice was just beginning the Confession.  It had so rarely been heard by Harold
that repetition had not blunted his ears to the sound, and presently I heard a short, low,
sobbing gasp, and looked round.  Harold was on his knees, his hands over his face, and his
breath coming short and thick as those old words spoke out that very dumb inarticulate shame,
grief, and agony, that had been swelling and bursting in his heart without utterance or form--"We
have erred and strayed--there is no health in us--"

We were far behind everyone else--almost in the dark.  I don't think anyone knew we were there,
and Harold did not stand up throughout the whole service, but kept his hands locked over his
brow, and knelt on. Perhaps he heard little more, from the ringing of those words in his ears,
for he moved no more, nor looked up, through prayers or psalms, or anything else, until the
brief ceremony was entirely over, and I touched him; and then he looked up, and his eyes were
swimming and streaming with tears.

We came to the door as if he was in a dream, and there a bitterly cold blast met us, though
the rain had ceased.  I was not clad for a night walk.  Harold again proposed fetching a carriage
from the "Boar," but I cried out against that--"I would much, much rather walk with him.  It
was fine now."

So we went the length of the street, and just then down came the blast on us; oh! such a hurricane,
bringing another hailstorm on its wings, and sweeping along, so that I could hardly have stood
but for Harold's arm; and after a minute or two of labouring on, he lifted me up in his arms,
and bore me along as if I had been a baby.  Oh! I remember nothing so comfortable as that sensation
after the breathless encounter with the storm.  It always comes back to me when I hear the
words, "A man shall be as a hiding-place from the tempest, a covert from the wind."

He did not set me down till we were at the front door.  We were both wet through, cold, and
spent, and it was past nine, so long as it had taken him to labour on in the tempest.  Eustace
came out grumbling in his petulant way at our absence from dinner.  I don't think either of
us could bear it just then: Harold went up to his room without a word; I stayed to tell that
he had seen me home from church, and say a little about the fearful weather, and then ran up
myself, to give orders, as Mr. Yolland had advised me, that some strong hot coffee should be
taken at once to Harold's room.

I thought it would be besetting him to go and see after him myself, but I let Dora knock at
his door, and heard he had gone to bed.  To me it was a long night of tossing and half-sleep,
hearing the wild stormy wind, and dreaming of strange things, praying all the time that the
noble soul might be won for God at last, and almost feeling, like the Icelander during the
conversion of his country, the struggle between the dark spirits and the white.

I had caught a heavy cold, and should have stayed in bed had I not been far too anxious; and
I am glad I did not, for I had not been many minutes in my sitting-room before there was a
knock at the door, and Harold came in, and what he said was, "Lucy, how does one pray?"

Poor boys!  Their mothers, in the revulsion from all that had seemed like a system of bondage,
had held lightly by their faith, and in the cares and troubles of their life had heeded little
of their children's devotions, so that the practical heathenism of their home at Boola Boola
had been unrelieved save by Eustace the elder, when his piety was reckoned as part of his weak,
gentlemanly refinement. The dull hopeless wretchedness was no longer in Harold's face, but
there was a wistful, gentle weariness, and yet rest in it, which was very touching, as he came
to me with his strange sad question, "How does one pray?"

I don't know exactly how I answered it.  I hardly could speak for crying, as I told him the
very same things one tells the little children, and tried to find him some book to help; but
my books no more suited him than my clothes would have done, till he said, "I want what they
said in church yesterday."

And as we knelt together, and I said it, the 51st Psalm came to my mind, and I went through
it, oh! how differently from when I had said it the day before.  "Ah!" he said at the end,
"thank you."

And then he stood and looked at the picture which was as his child's to him, turned and said,
"Well for him that he is out of all this!"

Presently, when I had marked a Prayer Book for him, he said, "And may I ask that the--the craving
I told you of may not come on so intolerably?"

"'Ask, and it shall be given,'" I said.  "It may not go at once, dear Harold.  Temptation does
come, but only to be conquered; and you will conquer now."

We went down to breakfast, where Eustace appeared in full hunting trim, but Harold in the rough
coat and long gaiters that meant farming work; and to Eustace's invitations to the run, he
replied by saying he heard that Phil Ogden had been to ask him about some difficulty in the
trenching work, and he was going to see to it.  So he spent the daylight hours in one of those
digging and toiling tasks of his "that three day-labourers could not end."  I saw him coming
home at six o'clock, clay up to the eyes, and having achieved wholesome hunger and wholesome
sleepiness.

Eustace had come in cross.  He had been chaffed about Harold's shirking, and being a dutiful
nephew, and he did not like it at all. He thought Harold ought to have come out for his sake,
and to show they did not care.  "I do care," said Harold.  And when Eustace, with his usual
taste, mentioned that they had laughed at the poor fellow led meekly home by his aunt, Harold
laid a kind hand on mine, which spoke more than words.  I had reason to think that his struggle
lasted some time longer, and that the enemy he had reawakened was slow of being laid to rest,
so that he was for weeks undergoing the dire conflict; but he gave as little sign as possible,
and he certainly conquered.

And from that time there certainly was a change.  He was not a man without God any longer.
He had learnt that he could not keep himself straight, and had enough of the childlike nature
to believe there was One who could.  I don't mean that he came at once to be all I could have
wished or figured to myself as a religious man.  He went to church on Sunday morning now, chiefly,
I do believe, for love of the Confession, which was the one voice for his needs; and partly,
too, because I had pressed for that outward token, thinking that it would lead him on to more;
but it generally seemed more weariness than profit, and he never could sit still five minutes
without falling asleep, so that he missed even those sermons of Mr. Ben Yolland's that I thought
must do him good.

I tried once, when, feeling how small my powers were beside his, to get him to talk to this
same Mr. Yolland, whose work among the pottery people he tried to second, but he recoiled with
a tone half scorn, half reserve, which showed that he would bear no pressure in that direction.
Only he came to my sitting-room every morning, as if kneeling with me a few moments, and reading
a few short verses, were to be his safeguard for the day, and sometimes he would ask me a question.
Much did I long for counsel in dealing with him, but I durst seek none, except once, when something
Mr. Ben Yolland said about his having expressed strong affection for me, made me say, "If only
I were fitter to deal with him," the answer was, "Go on as you are doing; that is better for
him as yet than anything else."

CHAPTER IX.

THE CHAMPION'S BELT.

After all, the fates sent us a chaperon.  A letter came addressed to my mother, and proved
to be from the clergyman of a village in the remotest corner of Devonshire, where a cousin
of my father had once been vicar.  His widow, the daughter of his predecessor, had lived on
there, but, owing to the misdoings of her son and the failure of a bank, she was in much distress.
All intercourse with the family had dropped since my father's death, but the present vicar,
casting about for means of helping her, had elicited that the Arghouse family were the only
relations she knew of, and had written to ask assistance for her.

"I will go and see about her," said Harold.  So he shouldered his bag, walked into Mycening,
and started in the tender, the only place where he could endure railway travelling.  Four days
later came this note:

                                             "Thursday.

"My Dear Lucy,--Send the carriage to meet Mrs. Alison at 4.40 on Saturday.  Your affectionate

                                                "H. A."

I handed the note to Eustace in amazement, but I perceived that he, like his cousin, thought
it quite simple that the home of the head of the family should be a refuge for all its waifs
and strays, and as I was one myself, I felt rebuked.

I went to Mycening in the carriage, and beheld Harold emerge from a first-class, extracting
therefrom one basket after another, two bird-cages, a bundle, an umbrella, a parcel, a cloak,
and, finally, a little panting apple-cheeked old lady.  "Here's Lucy! that's right." And as
both his hands were full, he honoured me with a hasty kiss on the forehead.  "She'll take care
of you, while I get the rest of it."

"But, oh!--my dear man--my pussy--and--and your wadded cloak--and, oh--my sable muff--your
poor papa's present, I would not lose it for a thousand pounds!"

I found the muff, which could not easily be overlooked, for it was as big as a portmanteau,
and stuffed full of sundries.  "Oh dear yes, my dear, thank you, so it is; but the cat--my
poor pussy.  No, my dear, that's the bantams--very choice.  My poor little Henry had them given
to him when he was six years old--the old ones I mean--and I've never parted with them.  'Take
them all,' he said--so good; but, oh dear. Tit!  Tit!  Tittie!  He was playing with her just
now.  Has anyone seen a tabby cat?  Bless me, there it goes!  So dreadful!  It takes one's
breath away, and all my things.  Oh! where is he?"

"All right," said Harold.  "There are your boxes, and here's your cat," showing a striped head
under his coat.  "Now say what you want to-night, and I'll send for the rest."

She looked wildly about, uttering an incoherent inventory, which Harold cut short by handing
over articles to the porter according to his own judgment, and sweeping her into the carriage,
returning as I was picking up the odds and ends that had been shed on the way.  "You have had
a considerable charge," said I, between amusement and dismay.

"Poor old thing, comfort her!  She never saw a train before, and is regularly overset."

He put me into the carriage, emptied his pockets of the cat and other trifles, and vanished
in the twilight, the old lady gaspingly calling after him, and I soothing her by explaining
that he always liked walking home to stretch his legs, while she hoped I was sure, and that
it was not want of room.  Truly a man of his size could not well have been squeezed in with
her paraphernalia, but I did my best to console the old lady for the absence of her protector,
and I began at last to learn, as best I could from her bewildered and entangled speech, how
he had arrived, taken the whole management of her affairs, and insisted on carrying her off;
but her gratitude was strangely confused with her new railway experiences and her anxieties
about her parcels.  I felt as if I had drifted a little bit farther from old times, when we
held our heads rather fastidiously high above "odd people."

But old Mrs. Samuel Alison was a lady, as even Lady Diana allowed; but of a kind nearly extinct.
She had only visited London and Bath once, on her wedding tour, in the days of stage-coaches;
there was provincialism in her speech, and the little she had ever been taught she had forgotten,
and she was the most puzzle-headed woman I ever encountered.  I do not think she ever realised
that it was at Harold's own expense that her rent and other little accounts had been paid up,
nor that Eustace was maintaining her.  She thought herself only on a long visit, and trusted
the assurances that Harold was settling everything for ever.  The L30 income which remained
to her out of one of L200 served for her pocket-money, and all else was provided for her, without
her precisely understanding how; nor did she seem equal to the complications of her new home.
She knew our history in a certain sort of way, but she spoke of one of us to the other as "your
brother," or "your sister," and the late Mr. Sam always figured as "your poor papa." We tried
at first to correct her, but never got her farther than "your poor uncle," and at last we all
acquiesced except Eustace, who tried explanations with greater perseverance than effect.  Her
excuse always was that Harold was so exactly like her poor dear little Henry, except for his
beard, that she could almost think she was speaking to him! She was somewhat deaf, and did
not like to avow it, which accounted for some of her blunders.  One thing she could never understand,
namely, why Harold and Eustace had never met her "poor little Henry" in Australia, which she
always seemed to think about as big as the Isle of Wight.  He had been last heard of at Melbourne;
and we might tell her a hundred times that she might as well wonder we had not met a man at
Edinburgh; she always recurred to "I do so wish you had seen my poor dear little Henry!" till
Harold arrived at a promise to seek out the said Henry, who, by all appearances, was an unmitigated
scamp, whenever he should return to Australia.

On the whole, her presence was very good for us, if only by infusing the element of age.  She
liked to potter about in the morning, attending to her birds and bantams, and talking to the
gardening men, weeding women, and all the people in the adjacent hamlet; and, afterwards, the
fireside, with her knitting and a newspaper, sufficed her.  Not the daily papers--they were
far too much for her; but the weekly paper from her own town, which lasted her till a new one
came, as she spelled it through, and communicated the facts and facetiae as she thought them
suited to our capacity.  She was a better walker than I, and would seldom come out in the carriage,
for she always caught cold when she did so.  A long nap after dinner ended in her resuming
her knitting quite contentedly in silence.  She wanted no more, though she was pleased if any
one said a few kindly words to her.  Nothing could be more inoffensive, and she gave us a centre
and something needing consideration.  I feared Dora might be saucy to her, but perhaps motherliness
was what the wild child needed, for she drew towards her, and was softened, and even submitted
to learn to knit, for the sake of the mighty labour of making a pair of socks for Harold.

The respectability her presence gave in our pew, and by our hearth, was a great comfort to
our friends of all degrees.  She was a very pretty old lady, with dark eyes, cheeks still rosy,
lovely loose waves of short snowy curls, and a neat, active little figure, which looked well
in the good black silks in which I contrived to invest her.

Good old woman, she thought us all shockingly full of worldliness, little guessing how much
gaiety was due to her meek presence among us. We even gave dinner-parties in state, and what
Richardson and I underwent from Eustace in preparation, no tongue can tell, nor Eustace's complacence
in handing down Lady Diana!

The embargo on intercourse with Arked House was over before Viola was taken to London to be
introduced.  Eustace wanted much to follow them, be at the levee, and spend the season in town.
Had he not been presented at Government House, and was it not due to the Queen?  Dora more
practically offered to follow the example of the Siberian exile, and lay a petition for Prometesky's
release at her Majesty's feet, but Harold uttered his ponderous "No" alike to both, proving,
in his capacity as agent, that Eustace had nothing like the amount this year which could enable
him to spend two or three months even as a single man in London society.  The requisite amount,
which he had ascertained, was startling, even had Eustace been likely to be frugal; nor could
this year's income justify it, in spite of Boola Boola.  The expense of coming into the estate,
together with all the repairs and improvements, had been such that the Australian property
had been needed to supplement the new.  Eustace was very angry and disappointed, and grumbled
vehemently.  It was all Harry's fault for making him spend hundreds on his own maggots, that
nobody wanted and nobody cared about, and would be the ruin of him.  Poor Bullock would have
raised the sum fast enough, and thought nothing of it.

Harry never said how much of his own funds from Boola Boola had supplemented Eustace's outlay;
he did not even say how much better it was to be a good landlord than a man about town; all
he did was to growl forth to his spoilt child, "There'll be more forthcoming next year."

Eustace protested that he did not believe it, and Harold replied, "No legacy duty--no stock
to purchase--Hydriots' dividend--"

It did not check the murmur, and Eustace sulked all the rest of the day; indeed, this has always
seemed to me to have been the first little rift in his adherence to his cousin, but at that
time his dependence was so absolute, and his power of separate action so small, that he submitted
to the decree even while he grumbled; and when he found that Lord Erymanth viewed it as very
undesirable for a young man to come up to London without either home or business, or political
views, took to himself great credit for the wise decision.

Indeed, Lord Erymanth did invite us all for a fortnight to his great old mansion in Piccadilly
to see the Exhibition, and, as he solemnly told me, "to observe enough of our institutions
as may prepare my young friends for future life."  Even Dora was asked, by special entreaty
from Viola, who undertook to look after her--rather too boldly, considering that Di--i.e. Mrs.
Enderby--was mistress of Viola's movements, and did not leave her much time to waste upon us.

In fact, Mrs. Enderby, though perfectly civil, was evidently hostile to us, and tried to keep
her sister out of our way as much as she could, thickening engagements upon her, at which Viola
made all the comical murmurs her Irish blood could prompt, but of course in vain. Eustace's
great ambition was to follow her to her parties, and Lady Diana favoured him when she could;
but Harold would have nothing to do with such penances.  He never missed a chance of seeing
Viola come down attired for them, but, as he once said, "that was enough for him."  He did
not want to see her handed about and grimaced at by a lot of fine gentlemen who did not seem
to think anything worth the trouble; and as to the crowd and the stifling, they made him feel
ready to strike out and knock everyone down.

So much Eustace and I elicited in short sentences one day, when we were rather foolishly urging
on him to let himself be taken with us to an evening party.  No, he went his own way and took
Dora with him, and I was quite sure that they were safe together, and that after his year's
experience he was to be trusted to know where it was fitting to take her.  They saw a good
deal that was more entertaining than we could venture on; and, moreover, Harold improved his
mind considerably in the matters of pottery, porcelain, and model lodging-houses.

Dermot was in London too, not staying with uncle or sister, for both of whom he was much too
erratic, though he generally presented himself at such times as were fittest for ascertaining
our movements for the day, when it generally ended in his attaching himself to some of us,
for Harold seemed to have passed an act of oblivion on the doings of that last unhappy meeting,
and allowed himself to be taken once or twice with Eustace into Dermot's own world; but not
only was he on his guard there, but he could not be roused to interest even where horseflesh
was concerned.  Some one said he was too great a barbarian, and so he was. His sports and revelries
had been on a wilder, ruder, more violent scale, such as made these seem tame.  He did not
understand mere trifling for amusement's sake, still less how money could be thrown away for
it and for fashion, when it was so cruelly wanted by real needs; and even Dermot was made uncomfortable
by his thorough earnestness.  "It won't do in 'the village' in the nineteenth century," said
he to me.  "It is like--who was that old fellow it was said of--a lion stalking about in a
sheepfold."

"Sheep!" said I, indignantly.  "I am afraid some are wolves in sheep's clothing."

Dermot shrugged his shoulders and said, "How is one to help oneself if one has been born some
two thousand years too late, or not in the new half-baked hemisphere where demigods still walk
the earth in their simplicity?"

"I want you not to spoil the demigod when he has walked in among you."

"I envy him too much to do that," said Dermot with a sigh.

"I believe you, Dermot, but don't take him among those who want to do so."

"That's your faith in your demigod," said Dermot, not able to resist a little teasing; but
seeing I was really pained, he added: "No, Lucy, I'll never take him again to meet Malvoisin
and Nessy Horsman. In the first place, I don't know how he might treat them; and in the next,
I would die sooner than give them another chance, even if he would.  I thought the men would
have been struck with him as I was; but no, it is not in them to be struck with anyone.  All
they think of is how to make him like themselves."

"Comus' crew!" said I.  "Oh! Dermot, how can you see it and be one of them?"

"I'm not happy enough to be an outer barbarian," he said, and went his way.

There was a loan exhibition of curious old objects in plate and jewellery, to which Lady Diana
took me, and where, among other things, we found a long belt crusted thickly with scales of
gold, and with a sort of medal at the clasp.

"Just look here, mamma," said Viola; "I do believe this is the archery prize."

And sure enough on the ticket was, "Belt, supposed to be of Peruvian workmanship.  Taken in
the Spanish Armada, 1588.  Champion belt at the Northchester Archery Club.  Lent by Miss Hippolyta
Horsman."

Lady Diana came to look with some interest.  She had never had an opportunity of examining
it closely before, and she now said, "I am much inclined to believe that this is the belt that
used to be an heirloom in the Jerfield family, and which ought to be in yours, Lucy."

My father's first wife had been the last of the Jerfields, and I asked eager questions.  Lady
Diana believed that "those unhappy young men" had made away with all their mother's jewels,
but she could tell no more, as our catastrophe had taken place while she was living at Killy
Marey.  Her brother, she said, could tell us more; and so he did, enough to set Eustace on fire.

Yes, the belt had been well known.  It was not taken in the Armada, but in a galleon of the
Peruvian plunder by an old Jerfield, who had been one of the race of Westward Ho! heroes. 
The Jerfields had not been prosperous, and curious family jewels had been nearly all the portion
of the lady who had married my father.  The sons had claimed them, and they were divided between
them, and given to the two wives; and in the time of distress, when far too proud to accept
aid from the father, as well as rather pleased at mortifying him by disposing of his family
treasures, Alice and Dorothy Alison had gradually sold them off.  And, once in the hands of
local jewellers, it was easy for the belt to pass into becoming the prize held by the winner
in the Archery Club every year.  Lord Erymanth would go with Eustace the next morning to identify
it; but what would be the use of that? Eustace at first fancied he could claim it, but soon
he saw that his proposal was viewed as so foolish that he devoured it, and talked of giving
an equivalent; but, as Lord Erymanth observed, it would be very difficult to arrange this with
an article of family and antiquarian value, in the hands of an archery club--an impersonal body.

"The thing would be to win it," said Viola.  "Could not some of us?"

"Well done, little Miss Tell," returned Dermot.  "Hippo has won that same belt these four years,
to my certain knowledge, except once, when Laurie Stympson scored two more."

"I'll practise every day; won't you, Lucy?  And then, between us, there will be two chances."

"I am sure I am very much nattered by Miss Tracy's kindness," put in Eustace; "but is the match
solely between ladies?"

No, for the last two years, after a match between ladies and between gentlemen, there had a
final one taken place between the two winners, male and female, in which Hippo had hitherto
always carried off the glory and the belt.  So Eustace intimated his full intention of trying
for himself, endeavouring to be very polite to Viola and me, but implying that he thought himself
a far surer card, boasting of his feats as a marksman in the Bush, until Dora broke in, "Why,
Eustace, that was Harry; wasn't it, Harry?"

"Comme a l'ordinaire," muttered Dermot.  Eustace made a little stammering about the thing being
so near that no one could tell, and Dora referred again to Harold, who put her down with a
muttered "Never mind" under his beard.

What was to be done with it if it were won?  "Get a fac-simile made, and an appropriate inscription,"
recommended Lord Erymanth. "Probably they would take that willingly."

"But what would you do with it?" asked Harold.  "You can't wear it."

"I tell you it is an heirloom," quoth Eustace.  "Have you no feeling for an heirloom?  I am
sure it was your mother who sold it away from me."

The sight of the belt, with Lord Erymanth's lecture on it, inflamed Eustace's ardour all the
more, and we made extensive purchases of bows and arrows; that is to say, Eustace and I did,
for Lady Diana would not permit Viola to join in the contest.  She did not like the archery
set, disapproved of public matches for young ladies, and did not choose her daughter to come
forward in the cause.  I did not fancy the matches either, and was certain that my mere home
pastime had no chance with Hippo and Pippa, who had studied archery scientifically for years,
and aimed at being the best lady shots in England; but Eustace would never have forgiven me
if I had not done my best.  So we subscribed to the Archery Club as soon as we went home; and
Eustace would have had me practise with him morning, noon, and night, till I rebelled, and
declared that if he knocked me up my prowess would be in vain, and that I neither could nor
would shoot more than an hour and a half a day.

His ardour, however, soon turned into vituperations of the stupid sport.  How could mortal
man endure it?  If it had been pistol or rifle-shooting now, it would have been tolerable,
and he should have been sure to excel; but a great long, senseless, useless thing like an arrow
was only fit for women or black fellows; the string hurt one's fingers too--always slipping
off the tabs.

"No wonder, as you hold it," said Harold, who had just turned aside to watch on his way down
to the potteries, and came in time to see an arrow fly into the bank a yard from the target.
"Don't you see how Lucy takes it?"

I had already tried to show him, but he had pronounced mine to be the ladies' way, and preferred
to act by the light of nature.  Harry looked, asked a question or two, took the bow in his
own hands, and with "This way, Eustace; don't you see?" had an arrow in the outer white.

"Yes," said Eustace, "of course, stupid thing, anybody can do it without any trouble."

"It is pretty work," said Harry, taking up the third arrow, and sending it into the inner white.

"Much too easy for men," was Eustace's opinion, and he continued to despise it until, being
capable of perseverance of a certain kind, and being tutored by Harold, he began to succeed
in occasionally piercing the target, upon which his mind changed, and he was continually singing
the praises of archery in the tone (whispered Viola) of the sparrow who killed Cock Robin with
his bow and arrow!

We used to practise for an hour every afternoon, and the fascination of the sport gained upon
Harold so much that he sent for a bow and arrows, and shot with us whenever he was not too
busy, as, between the agency and the potteries, he often was.  He did not join the club, nor
come to the weekly meetings at Northchester with Eustace and me, until, after having seen a
little of the shooting there, I privately hinted to him that there was not the smallest chance
of the champion belt changing hands unless he took up the family cause. Whereupon, rather than
that Eustace should be disappointed, he did ask to be admitted, and came once with us to the
meeting, when, to tell the truth, he did not shoot as well as usual, for--as afterwards appeared--in
riding into Northchester he had stopped to help to lift up a great tree that was insecure on
its timber waggon, and even his hands shook a little from the exertion.  Besides, Eustace had
discovered that Harold's new bow shot better than his, and had insisted on changing, and Harold
had not so proved the powers of Eustace's as to cure it of its inferiority.

Eustace really came to shooting so tolerably as to make him look on the sport with complacency,
and like the people he met there.  All this hardly seems worth telling, but events we little
thought of sprang from those archery practices.  For the present we found them a great means
of getting acquainted with the neighbours.  I bowed now to many more people than ever I had
done before, and we had come into great favour since the Hydriots had astonished the county
by announcing a dividend. It was only three per cent., but that was an immense advance upon
nothing, and the promise of the future was great; the shares had gone up nearly to their original
value in the most sanguine days; and the workmen--between prosperity, good management, the
lecture-room at the "Dragon's Head," and the work among them done by the clerical, as well
as the secular, Yolland--were, not models by any means, but far from the disorderly set they
had been.  They did take some pride in decent houses and well-dressed children, and Harold's
plans for the improvement of their condition were accepted as they never would have been from
one whose kindly sympathy and strength of will did not take them, as it were, captive. "Among
those workmen you feel that he is a born king of men," said Ben Yolland.

And as Bullock had been bailiff as well as agent, Harry had all the home-farming matters on
his hands, and attended to them like any farmer, so that it was no wonder that he gave little
time to the meetings for archery practice, which involved the five miles expedition, and even
to our own domestic practice, answering carelessly, when Eustace scolded him about letting
a chance go by, and his heedlessness of the honour of the family, "Oh, I take a shot or two
every morning as I go out, to keep my hand in."

"You'll get your arrows spoilt in the dew," said Eustace.

"They don't go into the dew," said Harold.  And as he was always out with the lark, even Dora
seldom saw this practice; but there were always new holes very near the centre of the target,
which Eustace said proved how true was his own aim.

Harvest came, and in the middle of it the great archery match of the year, which was held in
the beautiful grounds of Mr. Vernon, the member for Northchester, a little way from the town.

"I suppose Harry may as well go," said Eustace; "but he has not practised at all, so it will
be of little avail.  Now if I had not grazed my hand, I should have scored quite as much as
Miss Horsman last week.  It all lies in caring about it."

And severe was his lecture to Harold against foolishly walking in and making his hand unsteady.
Yet, after all, when the carriage came to the door, Harold was not to be found, though his
bow and arrows were laid ready with ours to be taken.  He endured no other apparatus. The inside
of his fingers was like leather, and he declared that tabs and guard only hampered him.  Lady
Diana had yielded to her daughter's entreaties, and brought her to see the contest, though
only as a spectator.  As I stood shy and far from sanguine among the lady archers, I felt out
of my natural place, and glad she was under her mother's wing, she looked so fair and innocent
in her delicate blue and white, and was free for such sweet ardour in our cause, all the prettier
and more arch because its demonstrations were kept down with the strong hand of her mother.

Hippolyta and Philippa Horsman were in tightly-made short-skirted dresses, pork-pie hats, and
strong boots, all black picked out with scarlet, like Hippo's own complexion.  She was tall,
with a good active figure, and handsome, but she had reached the age when the colouring loses
its pure incarnadine and becomes hard and fixed, and she had a certain likeness to all those
creatures whose names are compounded of tiger.  But she was a good-natured being, and of late
I had begun to understand better her aspirations towards doing and becoming something more
than the mere domestic furniture kind of young lady.

Her aberrations against good taste and reticence were, I began to understand, misdirected outbreaks
of the desire to be up and doing. Even now, as we ladies drew for our turn, she was saying,
half sadly, "I'm tired of it all.  What good comes of getting this belt over and over again?
If it were rifle or pistol shooting it might be of use, but one could hardly organise a regiment
of volunteers with the long bows when the invasion comes off."

Wit about the Amazonian regiment with the long bow was current all the time we ladies were
shooting, and Eustace was worrying me to such a degree, that nervousness made me perform ten
degrees worse than usual, but that mattered little, for Hippolyta, with another of her cui
bono sighs, carried off the Roman mosaic that was the ladies' prize, telling Pippa that it
should be hers when the belt was won.

"Don't be too sure."

"Bosh!  There's no one here who can handle a bow but Charlie Stympson. One Alison is a spoon,
and the other is a giant made to be conquered. When he shot before, his arrows went right over
the grounds, and stuck into a jackdaw's nest on the church tower!  I can't think why he came."

"To make a feather in your cap."

"What a substantial one!"

There I escaped to a seat by Lady Diana, where Viola could expend her enthusiasm in clutches
and squeezes of my hand.  Eustace was by this time wrought up to such a state that he hardly
knew what he was doing, and his first arrow wavered and went feebly aside.  Two or three more
shot, and then the tall figure came to the front; one moment, and the cry was "Gold," while
Viola's clap of the hands brought on her a frown from her mother, who thought demonstrativeness
improper.  She had to content herself with pinching my fingers every time one of those shafts
went home to the heart of the target, and Harold stood, only too facile princeps, while Eustace
sauntered up to us with the old story about the sun or the damp, I forget which, only it was
something that had spoilt his archery.

Hippolyta was undaunted.  The small target and longer range had thrown out many a competitor
before now, and her not very low-pitched tone was heard observing that no dumb giant should
beat her at her own tools.

Whatever had been her weariness of her successes before, it was gone now, and she shot splendidly.
Never had such shooting been known in the annals of the club, and scarcely a word passed as
the two went pacing between the two little targets, Harold with his calm, easy movement, business-like
but without effort, and Hippolyta with excitement beginning to tell on her.  Each time she
passed us we saw her step more impetuous, the glow on her cheeks deeper, and at last that her
eyes were full of tears; and after that, one arrow went into the outer white, and the last
even into the green; while Harry's final shot was into that one great confluent hole that the
centre of the target had become.

          "Heard ye the arrow hurtle through the sky?
           Heard ye the dragon monster's deathful cry?"

whispered Viola. "Mamma won't let me cheer, and I must have it out somehow."

And as I sprang up and hurried to Harold, she came with me, taking care to cast no look behind,
for fear of detaining glances; and she put out both hands to shake his, as he stood with the
smile lighting up his face as he saw the pleasure he had given; though Eustace never came forward,
unable to rejoice where he had been so palpably and publicly excelled.

Hippolyta behaved well.  She came up holding out her hand, and saying, "Well, Mr. Alison, if
one is to fall, it is a pleasure to have so mighty a victor.  But why did you never let me
see before what a Palnatoke (if I must not say Tell) I had to deal with?"

"I had no time for the practices," said Harold, puzzled as to who Palnatoke was.

"Worse and worse!  You don't mean that you shoot like this without practice?"

"Lucy taught me a little."

"Well, if heaven-born archers come down on one, there's nothing for it but submitting.  Robin
Hood must prevail," said Hippolyta, as the belt was handed over to Harold, with a sigh that
made him say in excuse, "I would not have done it, but that Eustace wanted to have it in his
hands, for family reasons."

"Then let him look to it; I mean to get it again next year.  And, I say, Mr. Alison, I have
a right to some compensation.  All you archers are coming to lunch at Therford on Thursday,
if the sun shines, to be photographed, you know.  Now you must come to breakfast, and bring
your lion's skin and your bow--to be done alone. It is all the consolation I ask.  Make him,
Lucy.  Bring him."

There was no refusing; and that was the way the photograph came to be taken.  We were reminded
by a note after we went home, including in the invitation Eustace, who, after being a little
sulky, had made up his mind that a long range was easier to shoot at than a short one, and
so that he should have won the prize if he had had the chance; and the notion of being photographed
was, of course, delightful to him.

"In what character shall you take me?" he asked of Miss Horsman, when we were going out on
the lawn, and it dawned on him that Harry was to be a Hercules.

"Oh! as Adonis, of course," said Hippo.

"Or Eurystheus," whispered her sister.

Eustace did not understand, and looked pleased, saying something about a truly classical get
up; but Harold muttered to me, "Aren't they making game of him?"

"They will take care not to vex him," I said.

But Harold could not overlook it, and took a dislike to the Horsmans on the spot, which all
Hippolyta's genuine admiration of him could not overcome.  She knew what the work of his eighteen
months in England had been, and revered him with such enthusiasm for what she called his magnificent
manhood and beneficence, as was ready on the least encouragement to have become something a
good deal warmer; but whatever she did served to make her distasteful to him.  First, she hastily
shuffled over Eustace's portrait, because, as she allowed us to hear, "he would give her no
peace till he was disposed of."  And then she not only tormented her passive victim a good
deal in trying to arrange him as Hercules, but she forgot the woman in the artist, and tried
to make him bare his neck and shoulder in a way that made him blush while he uttered his emphatic
"No, no!" and Baby Jack supported him by telling her she "would only make a prize-fighter of
him."  Moreover, he would have stood more at ease if the whole of Therford had not been overrun
with dogs.  He scorned to complain, and I knew him too well to do so for him; but it was a
strain on his self-command to have them all smelling about his legs, and wanting to mumble
the lion skin, especially Hippo's great bloodhound, Kirby, as big as a calf, who did once make
him start by thrusting his long cold nose into his hand. Hippo laughed, but Harold could do
nothing but force out a smile.

And I always saw the disgusted and bored expression most prominently in her performance, which
at the best could never have given the grandeur of the pose she made him take, with the lion
skin over his shoulder, and the arrows and bow in his hand.  He muttered that a rifle would
be more rational, and that he could hold it better, but withdrew the protest when he found
that Hippo was ready to implore him to teach her to shoot with pistol, rifle--anything.

"Your brother can show you.  You've only to fire at a mark," was all that could be got out of him.

Nor would he be entrapped into a beneficent talk.  His great talent for silence served him
well, and though I told him afterwards that he had not done Hippo justice--for she honestly
wanted an opening for being useful--he was not mollified.  "I don't like tongue," was all he
further said of her.

But whatever Hippo was, or whatever she did, I shall always be grateful to her for that photograph.

CHAPTER X.

DERMOT'S MARE.

All this time Dermot Tracy had been from home.  He had not come back after the season, but
had been staying with friends and going to various races, in which, as usual, he had heavy
stakes.  He persuaded my two nephews to meet him at Doncaster, where he ran one of the horses
bred on his Irish estate, and afterwards to go and make him a visit at Killy Marey, County
Kildare, where he used to stay about once a year, shooting or hunting, as the season might
be, and always looking after his horses and entertaining all the squires and squireens of the
neighbourhood, and many of the officers from the Curragh.  The benefit of those visits was
very doubtful both as to morals and purses, and Lord Erymanth pointedly said he was sorry when
he heard that Harold and Eustace were of the party.

I do not know whether Lady Diana viewed them as bad companions for her son, or her son as a
bad companion for them; but she was very severe about it, and when I thought of the hunt dinner
at Foling, my heart sank, even while I was indignant at any notion of distrusting Harold; and
it did indeed seem to me that he had learnt where to look for strength and self-command, and
that he had a real hatred and contempt of evil.  Yet I should have been more entirely happy
about him if he had not still held aloof from all those innermost ordinances, of which he somehow
did not feel the need, or understand the full drift.  Nor would he bow himself to give to any
man the confidence or the influence over him he had given to an incapable girl like me.  And
if I should have feared for the best brought up, most religious of young men, in such scenes
as I was told were apt to take place at Killy Marey, how could I not be anxious for my nephews?
But nothing ever turns out as one expects.

I was at Arked one day, and Lady Diana was telling me of the great rambling house at Killy
Marey, and how, when she arrived as a bride, none of the doors would shut except two that would
not open, behind one of which lived the family ghost; how the paper hung in festoons on the
walls, and the chairs were of the loveliest primrose-coloured brocade; and how the green of
the meadows was so wonderful, that she was always remembering it was the Emerald Isle; but
how hopeless and impossible it was to get anything properly done, and how no good could be
done where the Romish priests had interfered.  All the old story of course.  In the midst,
a telegraph paper was brought to her; she turned deadly white, and bade me open it, for she
could not.  I knew she thought her son had met his father's fate, and expected to astonish
her with the tidings that he was coming home by the next steamer, or that he had sent some
game, or the like.  Alas! no; the mother's foreboding had been too near the truth.  The telegram
was from Eustace: "Tracy has had a bad horse accident.  The doctor wishes for you."

There was nothing for it but to speed the mother and daughter on their hurried start to catch
the Holyhead packet and cross that night.  I went home to await in terror and trembling the
despatch I might receive, and to be enlivened by Mrs. Sam Alison's cheering accounts of all
the accidents she could recollect.  "Horses are dangerous creatures to meddle with, and your
poor papa never would let me take the reins when we kept a gig--which was when he was living,
you know, my dear. 'You never can trust their heels,' he used to say; and it was only last
week little Cocker was kicked off, but that was a donkey, and they were using him shamefully,"
&c. &c. &c.  I felt as if a swarm of bees were humming in my ears, and walked about to make
the suspense more tolerable, but I absolutely had no news at all till Viola's letter came.
It was a long one, for she could be of no service as yet, and to write letters was at once
her use and her solace.

Among the horses which Dermot's Irish agent had been buying for training purposes was a mare,
own sister to Harold's hunter--a splendid creature of three years old, of wonderful beauty,
power, and speed, but with the like indomitable temper.  She would suffer no living thing to
approach her but one little stable-boy, and her own peculiar cat, which slept on her back,
and took all sorts of liberties with her.  Her value would be great if she could be trained,
but the training was the problem.  Harold, who, partly from early familiarity, partly from
the gentleness of fearless strength, had a matchless power over horses, had made acquaintance
with her one evening, had been suffered in her box, had fed her, caressed her cat, and led
her round the stable-yard as a first stage in the conquest of horse by man.

In the early morning, Dermot, quite as fearless, and unwilling that anyone should do or dare
more than himself, had gone alone to make the same attempt, but no sooner did the mare find
him beside her, than she seized him by the shoulder with her teeth, threw him down, and kicked
and trampled on him.  None of the grooms could succeed in rescuing him, and it was only when
Eustace's cry had summoned Harold, that, grasping the mare's halter and forcing her back with
his arm of iron, he made it possible for Eustace and a groom to drag out poor Dermot's senseless
form, in a state that at first appeared to be death itself.  For several days his condition
was so extremely precarious, that Harold never once left him till his mother arrived, and even
after that was his most effective nurse.  He sent me a message, in Viola's letter, that he
had not had a moment to write, and hoped I had not been too anxious.

After this, Viola wrote every day, and told of gradual improvement in her brother, and at last
how he had been lifted to the sofa, and mamma hoped in a fortnight or three weeks he might
be able to be taken home. By the next post came a note from Harold, saying he could be spared,
and was coming home, and that very evening he walked into the house, and was welcomed by Dora
with shrieks of ecstatic joy.

He said Dermot was better, but he looked worn, and had the indefinable expression of pain which
made me sure that something had gone wrong, and presently I found out that the bite in the
shoulder was a very bad business, still causing much suffering, but that the most serious matter
was, that a kick in the side had renewed the damage left by the old Alma bullet, and that great
care would be needed all the winter. But Harold seemed more reluctant to open his mouth than
ever, and only, by most diligent pumping, did Mrs. Alison get out of him what doctors they
had called in, and whether they had used all the recipes for wounds and bruises that she had
entrusted to me to be sent, and which had for the most part remained in my blotting-book.

The next morning, to my grief and distress, he did not come to my room, but I found he had
been up and out long before it was light, and he made his appearance at eleven o'clock, saying
he had promised to go and give Lord Erymanth an account of his nephew, and wanted me to come
with him "to do the talking, or he should never stand it." If I did not object to the dog-cart
and Daniel O'Rourke immediately, we should be there by luncheon time.  I objected to nothing
that Harry drove, but all the way to Erymanth not ten words passed, and those were matters
of necessity.  I had come to the perception that when he did not want to speak it was better
to let him take his own time.

Lord Erymanth was anxious, not only about Dermot's health, and his sister's strength and spirits,
but he wanted to hear what Harold thought of the place and of the tone of the country; and,
after our meal, when he grew more confidential, he elicited short plain answers full of information
in short compass, and not very palatable.  The estate was "not going on well."  "Did Harold
think well of the agent?" "He had been spoilt."  "How?"  "By calls for supplies." "Were the
people attached to Dermot?"  "To a certain degree."  "Would it be safe for him to live there?"
"He ought."

Lord Erymanth entirely assented to this, and we found that he had all along held that his sister
had been in error for not having remained at Killy Marey, and brought up her son to his duties
as a landlord, whatever the danger; though of course she, poor thing, could hardly be expected
to see it in that light.  He evidently viewed this absenteeism as the cause of the wreck of
Dermot's youth, and those desultory habits of self-indulgence and dissipation which were overcoming
that which was good and noble in him; and the good old man showed that he blamed himself for
what he had conceded to his sister in the first shock of her misfortune.  Harold had told him
of the warm feeling shown by the tenantry when Dermot was lying in danger of his life, and
their rejoicing when he turned the corner and began to recover, and he asked anxiously whether
all this affection might not awaken a responsive chord, and draw him to "what was undoubtedly
his proper sphere."

"It will," said Harold.

"You think so?  And there is little doubt but that your cousin's influence at such a critical
period may have great effect in turning the scale?"

Harold nodded.

"More especially as, from the intelligence I have received, I have little doubt that the connection
will be drawn a good deal closer before long," said Lord Erymanth with a benignant smile at
us both. "I suppose we must not begin to congratulate one another yet, for I may conclude that
nothing had actually taken place when you came away."

"Nothing."

"When my sister became conscious of the condition of affairs and wrote to consult me, I had
no hesitation in replying that, though Viola's connections might warrant greater expectations
in a worldly point of view, yet I thought that there was every reason for promoting an attachment
to a gentleman of family equal to her own on one side at least, and whose noble exertions during
the past two years for the welfare of all concerned with him, not only obliterate all recollection
of past disadvantages, but in every way promise honour and happiness to all connected with him."

I was not a little excited, but one of the worst fits of restlessness under Lord Erymanth's
harangues had come upon Harold.  He only sat it out by pulling so many hairs out of his beard
that they made an audible frizzle in the fire when he brushed them off his knee, and stood
up, saying gruffly, "You are very good; he deserves it.  But I must get Lucy home in good time.
May I go and speak to your coachman?  Tracy gave me a message for him."

Harold was off, and Lord Erymanth observed, "A very fine young man that.  It is much to be
regretted that he did not employ the advantages he enjoyed at Sydney as his cousin Eustace
did, and left himself so rugged and unpolished."

"You must learn to like him, dear Lord Erymanth," I said.  "He is all a very dear brother could
be to me."

And allegiance to him kept back every word of that infinite superiority, which was never more
shown than by the opinion of Eustace, which his great unselfish devotion continued, without
the least deceit, to impress on most people.  Lord Erymanth rejoiced, and we agreed that it
was very lucky for me that I preferred Harold, since I should have had to yield up my possession
of Eustace.  The old gentleman was most kind and genial, and much delighted that the old breach
with the Alisons should be healed, and that his niece should make a marriage which he greatly
preferred to her sister's, and together we sung the praises of our dear Viola, where we had
no difference of opinion.

Harold only came back when the carriage came round, and no sooner had we driven off than I
broke out--"Harry, I had no notion matters had gone so far.  Fancy, Lady Diana consulting her
brother!  It must be very near a crisis.  I can't think why you did not stay to see it."

"Because I am a fool."

The horse flew on till we were nearly out at the park-gates, and a bewildered sense of his
meaning was coming before me.  "You wished it," said I rather foolishly.

"I did.  I do.  Only I don't want to see it."

"My poor dear Harold!"

"Pshaw!"--the sound was like a wild beast's, and made the horse plunge--"I shall get over it."

Then, presently, in a more natural voice, "I must go out again in the spring.  There are things
to be looked to at Boola Boola for both of us.  I shall only wait till Tracy is well enough
to go with me."

"He!  Dermot Tracy?"

"Yes.  It will be the best way to break out of the old lines."

"I can fancy that.  Oh, Harold! are you going to save him?  That will be the most blessed work
of all!" I cried, for somehow a feeling like an air of hope and joy came over me.

"I don't know about that," said he, in a smothered tone; but it was getting dark enough to
loose his tongue, and when I asked, "Was it his illness that made him wish it?" he answered,
"It was coming before. Lucy, those horses have done worse for him than that wound in his shoulder.
They had almost eaten the very heart out of him!"

"His substance I know they have," I said; "but not his good warm heart."

"You would say so if you saw the poor wretches on his property," said Harold.  "The hovels
in the Alfy Valley were palaces compared with the cabins.  Such misery I never saw.  They say
it is better since the famine.  What must it have been then?  And he thinking only how much
his agent could squeeze from them!"

I could only say he had been bred up in neglect of them, and to think them impracticable, priest-ridden
traitors and murderers.  Yes, Lady Diana had said some of this to Harold already, It was true
that they had shot Mr. Tracy, but Harold had learnt that after a wild, reckless, spendthrift
youth, he had become a Protestant and a violent Orangeman in the hottest days of party strife,
so that he had incurred a special hatred, which, as far as Harold could see, was not extended
to the son, little as he did for his tenants but show them his careless, gracious countenance
from time to time.

Yet peril for the sake of duty would, as all saw now, have been far better for Dermot than
the alienation from all such calls in which his mother had brought him up.  When her religious
influence failed with him, there was no other restraint.  Since he had left the army, he had
been drawn, by those evil geniuses of his, deep into speculations in training horses for the
turf, and his affairs had come into a frightful state of entanglement, his venture at Doncaster
had been unsuccessful, and plunged him deeper into his difficulties, and then (as I came to
know) Harold's absolute startled amazement how any living man could screw and starve men, women,
and children for the sake of horseflesh, and his utter contempt for such diversions as he had
been shown at the races, compared with the pleasure of making human beings happy and improving
one's land, had opened Dermot's eyes with very few words.

The thought was not new when the danger of death made him look back on those wasted years;
and resolution began with the dawning of convalescence, that if he could only free himself
from his entanglements--and terrible complications they were--he would begin a new life, worthy
of having been given back to him.  In many a midnight watch he had spoken of these things,
and Harold had soothed him by a promise to use that accountant's head of his in seeing how
to free him as soon as he was well enough.  Biston and the horses would be sold, and he could
turn his mind to his Irish tenants, who, as he already saw, loved him far better than he deserved.
He caught eagerly at the idea of going out to Australia with Harold, and it did indeed seem
that my brave-hearted nephew was effecting a far greater deliverance for him than that from
the teeth and hoofs of wicked Sheelah.

"But you will not stay, Harold?  You will come home?" I said.

"I mean it," he answered.

"Then I don't so much mind," said I, with infinite relief; and he added, thinking that I wanted
further reassurance, that he should never give up trying to get Prometesky's pardon; and that
this was only a journey for supplies, and to see his old friend, and perhaps to try whether
anything could be done about that other unhappy Harry. I pressed him to promise me that he
would return and settle here, but though he said he would come back, to settling at home he
answered, "That depends;" and though I could not see, I knew he was biting his moustache, and
guessed, poor dear fellow, that it depended on how far he should be able to endure the sight
of Eustace and Viola married. I saw now that I had been blind not to perceive before that his
heart had been going out to Viola all this time, while he thought he was courting her for Eustace,
and I also had my thoughts about Viola, which made it no very great surprise to me, when, in
a few days more, intelligence came that Eustace might be expected at home, and he made his
appearance in a petulant though still conceited mood, that made me suspect his wooing had not
been prosperous, though I knew nothing till Harold told me that he was not out of heart, though
Viola had cut him short and refused to listen to him, for her mother said she was a mere child
who was taken by surprise, and that if he were patient and returned to the charge she would
know her own mind better.

Harold was certainly more exhilarated than he chose to avow to himself on this discovery, and
the next week came a letter from Lady Diana, and a short note from Dermot himself, both saying
he had not been so well, and begging Harold to come and assist in the removal, since Dermot
protested that otherwise he could not bear the journey, and his mother declared that she should
be afraid to think of it for him.

Viola's hitherto constant correspondence had ceased; I drew my own auguries, but I had to keep
them to myself, for Harold started off the next day in renewed spirits, and I had Eustace on
my hands in a very strange state, not choosing or deigning to suppose himself rejected, and
yet exceedingly, angry with all young ladies for their silliness and caprices, while he lauded
Lady Diana up to the skies, and abused Dermot, who, I think, had laughed at him visibly enough
to be at least suspected by himself.  And, oddly enough, Dora was equally cross, and had a
fit of untowardness unequalled since the combats at her first arrival, till I was almost provoked
into acquiescence in Eustace's threat of sending her to school.

The journey was at last accomplished; Harold only parted with the Tracys at Arked House, after
having helped to carry Dermot to the room that had been prepared for him on the ground-floor.

I rode over the next afternoon to inquire, and was delighted to meet Viola close within the
gate.  We sent away my horse, and she drew me into her favourite path while answering my questions
that Dermot had had a good night and was getting up; I should find him in the drawing-room
if I waited a little while.  She could have me all to herself, for mamma was closeted with
Uncle Ery, talking over things--and on some word or sound of mine betraying that I guessed
what things, it broke out.

"How could you let him do it, Lucy?  You, at least, must have known better."

"My dear, how could I have stopped him, with all St. George's Channel between us?"

"Well, at any rate, you might persuade them all to have a little sense, and not treat me as
if I was one of the elegant females in 'Pride and Prejudice,' who only refuse for fun!  Is
not that enough to drive one frantic, Lucy?  Can't you at least persuade the man himself?"

"Only one person can do that, Viola."

"But I can't!  That's the horrid part of it.  I can't get rid of it. Mamma says I am a foolish
child.  I could tell her of other people more foolish than I am.  I can see the difference
between sham and reality, if they can't."

"I don't think he means to be sham,"  I rambled into defence of Eustace.

"Means it!  No, he hasn't the sense.  I believe he really thinks it was he who saved Dermot's
life as entirely as mamma does."

"No.  Now do they really?"

"Of course, as they do with everything.  It's always 'The page slew the boar, the peer had
the gloire.'"

"It's the page's own fault," I said.  "He only wants the peer to have the gloire."

"And very disagreeable and deceitful it is of him," cried Viola; "only he hasn't got a scrap
of deceit in him, and that's the reason he does it so naturally.  No, you may tell them that
borrowed plumes won't always serve, and there are things that can't be done by deputy."

And therewith Viola, perhaps perceiving what she had betrayed, turned more crimson than ever,
and hid her face against me with a sob in her breath, and then I was quite sure of what I did
not dare to express, further than by saying, while I caressed her, "I believe they honestly
think it is all the same."

"But it isn't," said Viola, recovering, and trying to talk and laugh off her confusion.  "I
don't think so, and poor Dermot did not find it so when the wrong one was left to lift him,
and just ran his great stupid arm into the tenderest place in his side, and always stepped
on all the boards that creak, and upset the table of physic bottles, and then said it was Harold's
way of propping them up!  And that's the creature they expect me to believe in!"

We turned at the moment and saw a handkerchief beckoning to us from the window; and going in,
found Dermot established on a couch under it, and Harold packing him up in rugs, a sight that
amazed both of us; but Dermot said, "Yes, he treats me like Miss Stympson's dog, you see. Comes
over by stealth when I want him."

Dermot did look very ill and pain-worn, and his left arm lay useless across him, but there
was a kind of light about his eyes that I had not seen for a long time, as he made Harold set
a chair for me close to him, and he and Viola told the adventures of their journey, with mirth
in their own style, and Harold stood leaning against the shutter with his look of perfect present
content, as if basking in sunshine while it lasted.

When the mother and uncle came in, it was manifestly time for us to convey ourselves away.
Harold had come on foot from Mycening, but I was only too glad to walk my pony along the lanes,
and have his company in the gathering winter twilight.

"You have spoken to her?" he said.

"Yes.  Harold, it is of no use.  She will never have him."

"Her mother thinks she will."

"Her mother knows what is in Viola no more than she knows what is in that star.  Has Dermot
never said anything--"

"Lady Diana made everyone promise not to say a word to him."

"Oh!"

"But, Lucy, what hinders it?  There's nothing else in the way, is there?"

I did not speak the word, but made a gesture of assent.

"May I know who it is," said Harold in a voice of pain.  "Our poor fellow shall never hear."

"Harold," said I, "are you really so ridiculous as to think any girl could care for Eustace
while you are by?"

"Don't!" cried Harold, with a sound as of far more pain than gladness.

"But why not, Harry?  You asked me."

"Don't light up what I have been struggling to quench ever since I knew it."

"Why?" I went on.  "You need not hold back on Eustace's account. I am quite sure nothing would
make her accept him, and I am equally convinced--"

"Hush, Lucy!" he said in a scarcely audible voice.  "It is profanation. Remember--"

"But all that is over," I said. "Things that happened when you were a mere boy, and knew no
better, do not seem to belong to you now."

"Sometimes they do not," he said sadly; "but--"

"What is repented," I began, but he interrupted.

"The fact is not changed.  It is not fit that the purest, gentlest, brightest creature made
by Heaven should be named in the same day with one stained with blood--aye, and deeds I could
not speak of to you."

I could not keep from crying as I said, "If I love you the more, Harry, would not she?"

"See here, Lucy," said Harry, standing still with his hand on my rein; "you don't know what
you do in trying to inflame what I can hardly keep down.  The sweet little thing may have a
fancy for me because I'm the biggest fellow she knows, and have done a thing or two; but what
I am she knows less than even you do; and would it not be a wicked shame either to gain the
tender heart in ignorance, or to thrust on it the knowledge and the pain of such a past as
mine?"  And his groan was very heavy, so that I cried out:

"Oh, Harry! this is dreadful.  Do you give up all hope and joy for ever because of what you
did as an ungovernable boy left to yourself?"

We went on for some time in silence; then he said in an indescribable tone, between wonder,
disgust, and pity, "And I thought I loved Meg Cree!"

"You knew no one else," I said, feeling as if, when Dora threw away that ring, the wild, passionate
animal man had been exorcised; but all the answer I had was another groan, as from the burthened
breast, as if he felt it almost an outrage to one whom he so reverenced to transfer to her
the heart that had once beat for Meg Cree.  There was no more speech for a long time, during
which I feared that I had merely made him unhappy by communicating my conjecture, but just
as we were reaching our own grounds he said, "You will say nothing, Lucy?"

"No, indeed."

"I thought it was all over, and for ever," he said, pausing; "it ought to have been.  But the
gates of a new world were opened to me when I saw her and you walking in the garden!  If it
had only been five or six years sooner!"

He could not say any more, for Dora, who had been watching, here burst on us with cries of
welcome, and it was long before there was any renewal of the conversation, so that I could
not tell whether he really persuaded himself that he had no hopes, or was waiting to see how
matters should turn out.

It was never easy to detect expressions of feeling or spirits on his massive face, and he could
hardly be more silent than usual; but it was noticeable that he never fell asleep after his
former wont when sitting still.  Indeed, he seldom was still, for he had a great deal of business
both for the estate and the potteries on his hands, and stayed up late at night over them;
and not only over them, for my room was next to his, and I heard the regular tramp, tramp of
his feet, and the turn at the end of the room, as he walked up and down for at least an hour
when the rest of the house were asleep, or the closing of the door when he returned from wandering
on the moor at night.  And in the early morning, long before light, he always walked or rode
over to Arked House, bestowed on Dermot's hurts the cares which both had come to look on as
essential, and stayed with him till the family were nearly ready to appear at their nine o'clock
breakfast, not seeing Viola at all, unless any special cause led to a meeting later in the
day, and then his eyes glowed, and he would do her devoted, unobserved service--no, not unobserved
by her, whom it made blush and sparkle--and utter little words of thanks, not so gay as of
old, but deeper, as if for a great honour and delight.  And then he would bow his head, colour,
and draw into the background, where, with folded arms, he could watch her.

Once, when Dora, in her old way, claimed to be his wife, Harold told her with some impatience
that she was growing too old for that nonsense.  The child looked at him with bent brows and
questioning eyes for a moment, then turned and fled.  An hour later, after a long search, I
found her crouched up in the corner of the kangaroo's stall among the straw, having cried herself
to sleep, with her head on the creature's soft back.

As soon as Dermot was able to bear any strain on mind or attention, he gave his keys to Harold.
All his long and unhappy accumulation of bills and bonds were routed out from their receptacles
at Biston, and brought over by Harold to his office, where he sorted them, and made them intelligible,
before harassing his friend with the questions he alone could explain.  An hour a day was then
spent over them--hours that cost poor Dermot more than he was equal to; but his mind was made
up, as he told me, "to face anything rather than go on in the old miserable way."  It was much
that he had learnt to think it miserable.

Lady Diana was not much obliged to Harold.  She could not think why her patient was so often
left out of spirits, and with a headache after those visits, while he was in a feverish state
of anxiety about them, that made it worse to put them off than to go through with them; and
then, when she had found out the cause, the family pride much disliked letting an outsider
into his involvments, and she thought their solicitor would have done the thing much better.

Poor woman, it was hard that, when she thought illness was bringing her son back to her, she
found his confidence absorbed by the "bush-ranger," whom she never liked nor trusted, and his
reformation, if reformation it were to prove, not at all conducted on her views of visible
repentance and conversion.  Dermot was responsive to her awakened tenderness, but he was perversely
reticent as to whether repentance or expedience prompted him.  She required so much religious
demonstration, that she made him shrink from manifesting his real feelings as "humbug," and
Viola knew far more that his repentance was real than she did.  Those proofs of true repentance--confession
and restitution--I am sure he gave, and that most bravely, when, after weeks of weary and sorrowful
work on Harold's part and his, the whole was sufficiently disentangled to make a lucid statement
of his affairs.

He made up his mind to make an arrangement with his creditors, giving up Biston, all his horses--everything,
in fact, but Killy Marey, which was entailed on his Tracy cousins.  And this second year of
George Yolland's management had made the shares in the Hydriot Company of so much value, that
the sale of them would complete the clearance of his obligations.  The full schedule of his
debts, without reserve, and the estimate of his means of paying them off, was then given by
Dermot to his mother, and sent to his uncle, who went over them with his solicitor.

Lady Diana writhed under the notion of selling Biston.  It seemed to her to be the means of
keeping her son from the place in Ireland, which she disliked more than ever, and she hoped
her brother would advance enough to prevent this from being needful; but for this Lord Erymanth
was far too wise.  He said, as Dermot felt, that Biston had never been anything but an unjustifiable
and pernicious luxury and temptation; but he did voluntarily, since it joined his property,
propose to purchase it himself, and at such a sum as secured the possibility of a real payment
of the debts when the other sales should have been effected.

And they were carried out.  It was well for Dermot that, as a convalescent in his mother's
house, he was sheltered from all counter influences, such as his easy good nature might not
have withstood; and under that shelter it was his purpose to abide until the voyage which would
take him out of reach for a time, and bring him home ready for his fresh start.

Of course Lady Diana hated the notion of the voyage, and though her brother advised her not
to oppose it, yet to the last I think she entertained hopes that it would end in Harold's going
alone.

When Harold came in and told me that Dermot Tracy's horses, English and Irish, were all sold,
and named the sum that they had realised, my spirits leaped up, and I was certain, after such
a voluntary sacrifice, the dear old companion of my childhood would be a joy and exultation
to us all, instead of a sorrow and a grief.

CHAPTER XI.

THE RED VALLEY CATTLE STEALERS.

In the Easter recess our Northchester member had his house full, and among his guests was one
of the most influential men of the day, who, though not a cabinet minister himself, was known
to have immense influence with Government and in Parliament, from his great weight and character.

Eustace and I were invited to meet him, also Lady Diana and her daughter and son, who was called
well now, though far from strong. When the gentlemen came out of the dining-room, Eustace and
Dermot came up to us, the former much excited, and saying, "Lucy, you must make preparations.
They are all coming to luncheon to-morrow at Arghouse."

"Ah!"

"Yes, Sir James (the great man himself), and Mr. Vernon, and the General, and all the party.
I asked them all.  Sir James has heard of the potteries, and of my system, and of the reformation
I have effected, and there being no strikes, and no nothing deleterious--undesirable I mean--and
the mechanics having an interest, he wants to see for himself--to inspect personally--that
he may name it in Parliament in illustration of a scheme he is about to propose.  So Mr. Vernon
will bring him over to see the Hydriot works to-morrow, and I have asked them to luncheon.
Only think--named in Parliament! Don't you think now it might lead to a baronetcy, Tracy?"

"Or a peerage," quoth naughty Viola, out of reach of mother or Harold. "My Lord Hardbake would
be a sweet title."

"I should revive the old honours of the family," said Eustace, not catching the bit of wickedness.
"Calldron of Arghouse was an old barony.  Lord Calldron of Arghouse!  Should you object, Miss
Tracy?"

"Earthen pot or copper kettle?  Which?" laughed Viola.  "Ah! there's Miss Vernon going to sing.
I want to hear her," and she jumped up.

"Sit down, Dermot, in my place; you are not to stand."

She threaded her way to the piano, followed by Eustace, who still viewed himself as her suitor.

"Poor little Vi!" said Dermot, who by this time was aware of the courtship, and regarded it
with little favour.

"She will rub him off more easily among numbers," I said, as he settled down by me.  "But is
this really so, Dermot?"

"What, is she to be my Lady Calldron?  I am afraid my hopes of that elevation are not high.
But as to the luncheon, you will really have to slaughter your turkeys, and declare war on
your surviving cocks and hens.  He has been inviting right and left.  And tell Harold from
me that if he votes the thing a bore, and keeps out of the way for fear of having to open his
mouth, he'll be doing serious damage.  If respect to the future baronetcy makes him get into
the background, tell him, with my compliments, the whole thing will be a muddle, and I'll never
speak a good word for him again."

"Then you have been speaking good words?"

"When Sir James began to inquire about the Hydriots, Mr. Alison was called on to answer him,
and you are aware that, except to certain constitutions of intellect, as my uncle would say,
certain animals cannot open their mouths without proclaiming themselves.  The most sensible
thing he said was the invite to come and see.  Really, he made such mulls with the details
that even I had to set him right, and that led to Sir James talking it out with me, when I
had the opportunity of mentioning that a certain person, not the smallest of mankind, had been
entirely overlooked.  Yes I did, Lucy.  I up and told him how our friend came over as heir;
and when he was done out of it, set to work as agent and manager and improver-general, without
a notion of jealousy or anything but being a backbone to this cousin of his, and I could not
say what besides to all that came in his way; but I flatter myself there's one man in the room
who has some notion of the difference there is between the greater and the less."

"Harold would not thank you," I said.

"Not he.  So much the more reason that you should take care he comes to the front."

Dermot did Eustace a little injustice in fancying he wanted to suppress Harold.  He never did.
He was far too well satisfied with his own great personality to think that anyone could interfere
with it; and having asked everyone in the room, ladies and all, to the inspection and the luncheon,
discoursed to me about it all the way home, and would almost have made me and all the servants
stay up all night to prepare. Harold, who was still up when we came home, received the tidings
equably, only saying he would go down to Yolland the first thing in the morning and get things
made tidy.  "And don't bother Lucy," he added, as we went upstairs.

Well, the supplies were contrived, and the table laid without anyone being quite distracted.
From Richardson downwards, we all had learnt to take our own way, while the master talked,
and Mrs. Alison was really very happy, making delicate biscuits after a receipt of her own.
Things came to a point where I was sure they would finish themselves off more happily without
either of us, and though one idle female more might not be desirable, I thought at least I
might prevent Harold's effacement, and went down to Mycening with Eustace to receive the guests.

Sure enough, Harold was not in the entrance yard, nor the superintendent's office.  Mr. Yolland
was there, looking grim and bored, and on inquiry being made, said that Mr. Harold had insisted
on his being on the spot, but was himself helping the men to clear the space whence it would
be easiest to see the action of the machinery.  I made a rush after him, and found him all
over dust, dragging a huge crate into a corner, and to my entreaty he merely replied, pushing
back his straw hat, "I must see to this, or we shall have everything smashed."

The carriages were coming, and I could only pick my way back by the shortest route, through
stacks of drain-tiles and columns of garden-pots, to Eustace, who, becoming afraid it would
seem as if he were keeping shop, was squeezing down the fingers of his left-hand glove, while
impressing on Mr. Yolland and me that everyone must understand he was only there as chairman
of the directors.

The people came, and were conducted round, and peeped about and made all sorts of remarks,
wise and foolish.  Eustace was somewhat perplexed between the needful attentions to Mrs. Vernon
and to Sir James, who, being much more interested in the men than the manufacture, was examining
Mr. Yolland on their welfare, spirit, content, &c.; and George Yolland might be trusted for
making Mr. Harold Alison the prominent figure in his replies, till at last he could say, "But
here is Mr. Harold Alison, Sir James.  He can reply better than I."  (Which was not strictly
true, for George Yolland had by far the readiest tongue.)  But he had managed to catch Harold
in the great court, moving back one of his biggest barrels of heavy ingredients, with face
some degrees redder and garments some degrees dustier than when I had seen him ten minutes
before.  It really was not on purpose, or from any wish to hide, but the place needed clearing,
there was little time, and his strength could not be spared.

I am sorry to say that a chattering young lady, who stood close to Eustace, exclaimed, "Dear
me, what a handsome young foreman!" making Eustace blush to the eyes, and say, "It is my cousin--he
is so very eccentric--you'll excuse him."

Sir James, meantime, had heartily shaken the hand which, though begrimed at the moment, Harold
held out to him, and plunged into inquiries at once, not letting him go again; for Harold,
with the intuition that nothing was idly asked, and that each observation told, answered to
the point as no man could do better, or in fewer words. When the round was over, and Eustace
was prepared with the carriage to drive the grandees the mile up to Arghouse, Sir James returned
his thanks, but he was going to walk up with Mr. Harold Alison, who was going to show him his
workmen's reading-room, cottages, &c.  Eustace looked about for someone to whom to resign the
reins, but in vain, and we all had to set off, my housewifely mind regretting that time and
Eustace had combined to make the luncheon a hot instead of a cold one.

We found the Tracys when we arrived at home.  Dermot was not equal to standing about at the
pottery, but Lady Diana had promised to come and help me entertain the party, and very kindly
she did so during the very trying hungry hour to which we had to submit, inasmuch as, when
Sir James at last appeared, it turned out that he never ate luncheon, and was in perfect ignorance
that we were waiting for him.

He offered me his arm and we went to the long-deferred luncheon. I listened to his great satisfaction
with what he had seen, and the marvel he thought it; and meanwhile I looked for Harold, and
saw him presently come in, in exactly that condition of dress, as he considered due to me,
and with the long blue envelope I knew full well in one hand, in the other the little figure
of the Hope of Poland which Miss Woolmer had given him; and oh! what a gladness there was in
his eyes. He put them both down beside Sir James, and then retreated to a side table, where
Dora had been set to entertain a stray school-boy or two.

I longed to hear Sir James's observations, but his provoking opposite neighbour began to talk,
and I got nothing more to myself, and I had to spend the next half-hour in showing our grounds
to Mrs. Vernon, who admired as if she were electioneering, and hindered me from knowing what
anybody was about, till the people had had their cups of coffee and their carriages had come.

We three found ourselves in the porch together when Eustace had handed in Mrs. Vernon, and
Sir James, turning for a last shake of Harold's hand, said, "I shall expect you this day week."
Then, with most polite thanks to the master of the house, he was driven off, while Harold,
beaming down on us, exclaimed, "It is as good as done. I am to go up and see the Secretary
of State about it next week."

I had no doubt what it was, and cried out joyfully to ask how he had done it.  "I told him
who first discovered the capabilities of the clay, and laid the state of the case before him.
He was very much touched, said it was just such a matter as needed severity at the time, but
was sure to be pardoned now."

"Pardoned!  What do you mean?" exclaimed Eustace.  "You don't mean that you have not done with
that wretched old Prometesky yet?  I thought at least, when you took up Sir James all to yourself,
spoiling the luncheon and keeping everyone waiting, you were doing something for the benefit
of the family."

As Harold seemed dumb with amazement, I asked what he could possibly have been expected to
do for the good of the family, and Eustace mumbled out something about that supposed Calldron
barony, which seemed to have turned his head, and I answered sharply that Sir James had nothing
at all to do with reviving peerages; besides, if this one had ever existed, it would have been
Harold's.  I had much better have held my tongue.  Eustace never recovered that allegation.
That day, too, was the very first in which it had been impossible for Harold to avoid receiving
marked preference, and the jealousy hitherto averted by Eustace's incredible vanity had begun
to awaken. Moreover, that there had been some marked rebuff from Viola was also plain, for,
as the Arked carriage was seen coming round, and I said we must go in to the Tracys, Eustace
muttered, "Nasty little stuck-up thing; catch me making up to her again!"

It was just as well that Harold did not hear, having, at sight of the carriage, gone off to
fetch a favourite cup, the mending of which he had contrived for Viola at the potteries.  When
we came into the drawing-room, I found Lady Diana and Mrs. Alison with their heads very close
together over some samples of Welsh wool, and Dermot lying on the sofa, his hands clasped behind
his head, and his sister hanging over him, with her cheeks of the colour that made her beautiful.

The two elder ladies closed on Eustace directly to congratulate him on the success of his arrangements,
and Dermot jumped up from the sofa, while Viola caught hold of my hand, and we all made for
the window which opened on the terrace.  "Tell her," said Viola to her brother, as we stood
outside.

Dermot smiled, saying, "Only that Sir James thinks he has to-day seen one of the most remarkable
men he ever met in his life."

"And he has promised to help him to Prometesky's pardon," I said; while Viola, instead of speaking,
leaped up and kissed me for joy. "He is to go to London about it."

"Yes," Dermot said.  "Sir James wants him to meet some friends, who will be glad to pick his
brains about New South Wales.  Hallo, Harry! I congratulate you.  You've achieved greatness."

"You've achieved a better thing," said Viola, with her eyes beaming upon him.

"I hope so," he said in an under tone.

"I am so glad," with a whole heart in the four words.

"Thank you," he said.  "This was all that was wanting."

The words must have come out in spite of himself, for he coloured up to the roots of his hair
as they ended.  And Viola not only coloured too, but the moisture sprang into her fawn-like
eyes.  Dermot and I looked at each other, both knowing what it meant.

That instant Lady Diana called, and Dermot, the first of all, stooped under the window to give
his sister time, and in the little bustle to which he amiably submitted about wraps and a glass
of wine, Lady Diana failed to look at her daughter's cheeks and eyes.  Viola never even thanked
Harold for the cup, which he put into her lap after she was seated beside Dermot's feet on
the back seat of the carriage. She only bent her head under her broad hat, and there was a
clasp of the two hands.

I turned to go up to my sitting-room.  Harold came after me and shut the door.

"Lucy," he said, "may one give thanks for such things?"

He put his hands over his face, and said presently, in a smothered voice, "I had just begun
to pray for the old man."

I could not say any more for happy tears, less for "the captive exile" than for my own Harry.

Soon he looked up again, and said with a smile, "I shan't fight against it any longer."

"I don't think it is of any use," was my answer, as if pretending to condole; and where another
man would have uttered a fervent rhapsody, he exclaimed, "Lovely little darling!"

But after another interval he said, "I don't mean to speak of it till I come back."  And on
my question, "From London?"  "No, from Boola Boola."

He had evidently debated the whole matter during his midnight tramps, and had made up his mind,
as he explained, that it would be cruel to Viola to touch the chord which would disclose her
feelings to herself. She was a mere child, and if her fancy were touched, as he scarcely allowed
himself to believe, it was hard to lay fully before her those dark pages in his history which
she must know before she could be allowed to give herself to him.  Besides, her mother and
uncle would, even if there were nothing else amiss, be sure to oppose a match with one who
had nothing in England but his cousin's agency and a few shares in the potteries; and though
Harold had plenty of wealth at Boola Boola, it was certain that he should not have a moment's
audience from the elders unless he could show its amount in property in England.  If things
went well, he would buy a piece of Neme Heath, reclaim it, and build a house on it; or, perhaps,
an estate in Ireland, near Killy Marey, where the people had gained his heart.  Till, however,
he could show that he had handsome means in a form tangible to Lady Diana, to express his affection
would only be exposing Viola to displeasure and persecution.  Moreover, he added, his character
was not cleared up as much as was even possible.  He had told Lord Erymanth the entire truth,
and had been believed, but it was quite probable that even that truth might divide for ever
between him and Viola, and those other stories of the Stympsons both cousins had, of course,
flatly denied, but had never been able otherwise to confute.

I asked whether it had ever struck him that it was possible that the deeds of Henry Alison
might have been charged on his head.  "Yes," he said, and he thought that if he could trace
this out, with Dermot as a witness, the authorities might be satisfied so far as to take him
for what he was, instead of for what he had never been.  But the perception of the storm of
opposition which speaking at present would provoke, made me allow that he was as wise as generous
in sparing Viola till his return, since I knew her too well to fear that her heart would be
given away in the meantime.  Still I did hint, "Might not she feel your going away without
saying anything?"

"Not at all likely," said Harold.  "Besides, she would probably be a happier woman if she forgot
all about me."

In which, of course, there was no agreeing; but he had made up his mind, and it was plain it
was the nobler part--nay, the only honest part, since it was plainly of no use to speak openly.
I wondered a little that his love was so self-restrained.  It was an intense glow, but not
an outbreak; but I think that having gone through all the whirlwind of tempestuous passion
for a mere animal like poor Meg made him the more delicately reverent and considerate for the
real love of the higher nature which had now developed in him.  He said himself that the allowing
himself to hope, and ceasing to crush his feelings, was so great a change as to be happiness
enough for him; and I guarded carefully against being forced into any promise of silence, being
quite determined that, if I saw Viola unhappy, or fancying herself forgotten, I would, whether
it could be called wise or foolish, give her a hint of the true state of things.

Nothing was to be said to Eustace.  He would have the field to himself, and it was better that
he should convince himself and Lady Diana that there was no hope for him.  Harold thought he
could safely be commended to George Yolland and me for his affairs and his home life; and,
to our surprise, he did not seem half so reluctant to part with his cousin as we had expected.
He had gone his own way a good deal more this winter and spring, as Harold seldom had time
to hunt, and did not often drive out, and he had grown much more independent. His share of
Boola Boola was likewise to be sold, for neither cousin felt any desire to keep up the connection
with the country where they had never had a happy home; and he gave Harold full authority to
transact the sale.

Perhaps we all had shared more or less in Dora's expectation that Harold would come home from
London with Prometesky's pardon in his pocket; though I laughed at her, and Eustace was furious
when we found she thought he was to kneel before the Queen, present his petition, and not only
receive the pardon, but rise up Sir Harold Alison!  It did fall flat when he came back, having
had very satisfactory interviews, but only with the Secretaries of State, and having been assured
that Prometesky would be certainly pardoned, but that, as a matter of form, some certificates
of conduct and recommendations must be obtained from New South Wales before the pardon could
be issued.

This precipitated Harold's departure.  Dermot was just well enough to be likely to be the better
for a voyage, and the first week in May was fixed for their setting forth.  A great box appeared
in my sitting-room, where Harold began to stow all manner of presents of various descriptions
for friends and their children, but chiefly for the shepherds' families at Boola Boola; and
in the midst, Mrs. Alison, poor thing, brought a whole box of beautifully-knitted worsted stockings,
which she implored Harold to carry to her dear Henry; and he actually let her pack them up,
and promised that, if he ever found Henry, they should be given.  "And this little Bible,"
said the good old lady; "maybe he has lost his own.  Tell him it is his poor papa's, and I
know he will bring it back to me."

"He shall if I can make him," said Harold.

"And Harold, my dear," said Mrs. Alison, with her hand on his shoulder, as he knelt by his
box, "you'll go to see your own poor mamma?"

Harold started and winced.  "My mother is in New Zealand," he said.

"Yes, my dear," said the old lady triumphantly; "but that's only the other side of the way,
for I looked in Lucy's map."

"And she has a husband," added Harold between his teeth, ignoring what the other side of the
way might mean.

"Yes, my dear, I know he is not a nice man, but you are her only one, aren't you?"

"Yes."

"And I know what that is--not that I ever married anyone but your poor uncle, nor ever would,
not if the new rector had asked me, which many expected and even paid their compliments to
me on, but I always said 'No, no.'  But you'll go and see her, my dear, and comfort her poor
heart, which, you may depend, is longing and craving after you, my dear; and all the more if
her new gentleman isn't quite as he should be."

Harold could not persuade himself to bring out any answer but "I'll see about it;" and when
we were alone, he said with a sigh, "If I should be any comfort to her poor heart."

"I should think there was no doubt of that."

"I am afraid of committing murder," answered Harold, almost under his breath, over the trunk.

"Oh, Harold!  Not now."

"I don't know," he said.

"You have not seen him for ten years.  He may be altered as much as you."

"And for the worse.  I could almost say I dare not."

"There's nothing you don't dare, God helping you," I said.

"I shall think.  If it is my duty, I suppose God will help me. Hitherto, I have thought my
rage against the brutes made it worse for her, and that I do best for her by keeping out of
the way."

"I think they would respect you now too much to do anything very bad before you."

"She would fare the worse for it afterwards."

"I am of Mrs. Alison's opinion, that she would be willing for the sake of seeing her son, and
such a son."

Harold sighed.

"But it could not have been so dreadful when Eustace lived with them, and was so fond of the man."

"He nattered Eustace to curry favour with him and his father.  He has sunk much lower.  Then
he lived like a decent clergyman.  He has thrown all that off in New Zealand, and fallen entirely
under the dominion of that son.  I could wish I had quite throttled that Dick when I so nearly
did so at school."

"If you say such things, I shall think you ought not to trust yourself there."

"That is it--I am afraid.  I have crimes enough already."

It was too great a responsibility to persuade him to put himself into temptation, even now
that he knew what prayer was.  I longed to have seen him come yet nearer, and taken the means
of strengthening and refreshing.  But he said, "I cannot; I have not time to make fit preparation."
And when I pleaded that I could not bear to think of his encountering danger without fulfilling
that to which the promise of Everlasting Life is attached, I struck the wrong key.  What he
was not ready to do for love, he would not do for fear, or hurry preparation beyond what his
conscience approved, that he might have what I was representing as the passport of salvation.
Whether he were right or wrong I know not even now, but it was probably through the error of
the very insufficient adviser the poor fellow had chosen in me.  It may seem strange, but I
had never thought of his irreligion as an obstacle with Viola, for, first, I knew him to be
a sincere learner, as far as he went; and next, her sister's husband had none of the goodness
that Lady Diana's professions would have led one to expect in her chosen son-in-law.

We all met and parted at the railway-station, whither Viola came with her brother.  Dora had
been only allowed to come upon solemn promises of quietness, and at the last our attention
was more taken up with her than anyone else, for she was very white, and shook from head to
foot with the effort at self-restraint, not speaking a word, but clinging to Harold with a
tight grip of his hand, and, when that was not attainable, of his coat.  Fortunately the train
was punctual, and the ordeal did not last long.  Harold put in all his goods and Dermot's,
and finally he lifted the poor child up in his arms, held her close, and then, as her hands
locked convulsively round his neck, Eustace unclasped them, and Harold put her down on my lap
as I sat down on the bench, left a kiss on my brow, wrung Eustace's hand, pressed Viola's,
saying, "I'll take care of your brother," and then, with one final impulse, carried the hand
to his lips and kissed it, before springing into the carriage, which was already in motion.
Poor Dora was actually faint, and never having experienced the feeling before, was frightened,
and gasped out, "Hasn't it killed me, Lucy?"

The laugh that was unavoidable did us all good, and I sent Eustace for some restorative from
the refreshment-room.  The child had to be carried to the carriage, and was thoroughly out
of order for several days.  Poor little girl, we neither of us knew that it was the beginning
of her darker days!

Of Harold's doings in Australia I can tell less than of those at home. He kept his promise,
dear fellow, and wrote regularly.  But, alas! his letters are all gone, and I can only speak
from memory of them, and from what Dermot told me.

Making no stay in Sydney, they pushed on to Boola Boola, avoiding a halt at Cree's Station,
but making at once for Prometesky's cottage, a wonderful hermitage, as Dermot described it,
almost entirely the work of the old man's ingenious hands.  There he lived, like a philosopher
of old, with the most sternly plain and scanty materials for comfort--a mat, a table, and a
chair; but surrounded by beautiful artistic figures and intricate mathematical diagrams traced
on his floor and wall, reams of essays and poems where he had tried to work out his thought;
fragments of machines, the toys of his constructive brain, among which the travellers found
him sitting like a masculine version of Albert Durer's Melancholia, his laughing jackass adding
tones of mockery to the scene, perched on the bough, looking down, as his master below took
to pieces some squatter's crazy clock.

When Harold's greeting had aroused him, Dermot said, nothing could be more touching than the
meeting with Prometesky, who looked at him as a father might look at a newly-recovered son,
and seemed to lose the joy of the prospect of his own freedom in the pride and exultation of
his own boy, his Ambrose's son, having achieved it.  The beauty of the place enchanted Dermot,
and his first ride round the property made him marvel how man could find it in his heart to
give up this free open life of enterprise for the tameness of an old civilised country.  But
Harold smiled, and said he had found better things in England.

Harold found that there were serious losses in the numbers of the sheep of the common stock,
and that all the neighbouring settlers were making the like complaint.  Bushranging, properly
so called, had been extinguished by the goldfind in Victoria, but as my brothers had located
themselves as far as possible from inhabited districts, Boola Boola was still on the extreme
border of civilisation, and there was a long, wide mountain valley, called the Red Valley,
beyond it, with long gulleys and ravines branching up in endless ramifications, where a gang
of runaway shepherds and unsuccessful gold diggers were known to haunt, and were almost certainly
the robbers.  The settlers and mounted police had made some attempts at tracking them out,
but had always become bewildered in the intricacies of the ravines, and the losing one's way
in those eucalyptus forests was too awful a danger to be encountered.

A fresh raid had taken place the very night before Harold arrived at Boola Boola, upon a flock
pasturing some way off.  The shepherds were badly beaten, and then bailed up, and a couple
of hundred sheep were driven off.

Now Harold had, as a lad, explored all the recesses of these ravines, and was determined to
put an end to the gang; and when it became known that Harold Alison was at home, and would
act as guide, a fully sufficient party of squatters, shepherds, and police rallied for the
attack, and Dermot, in great delight, found himself about to see a fight in good earnest.

