The entire party of strangers, with the young chief and several of his subordinates, were then
led into a large and lofty hall, surrounded by columns, and displaying three raised seats covered
with canopies of rich drapery and design. On the one of these, which stood at the eastern end,
sat the monarch himself, a personage of grave but benignant aspect, about sixty years of age,
arrayed in scarlet and gold, and having a golden image of the rising sun, of extraordinary
splendor, displayed on the back of his throne. On the seat on the southern side, sat a venerable
man of advanced age, not less gorgeously attired; and the seat at the western end was occupied
by a functionary of similar years and costume. Around the apartment, and especially around
the steps of the throne, sat other grave looking men, in scarlet robes. Huertis, Velasquez,
and their Indians, still carrying their loaded rifles, of which he had not suffered them to
be deprived, stood on the left side of the monarch, and the young chief and his soldiers on
the right. The latter gave his statement with truth and manly candour, although the facts which
he averred seemed to fill the whole council with amazement, and left a settled gloom upon the
imperial brow. The whole proceeding possesses great interest in Velasquez's narrative, but
we can only briefly state that it resulted in the decision, which was concurred in by the associate
councillors, that the strangers having magnanimously released and restored the company of guards,
after they had surrendered themselves prisoners; and having voluntarily entered the city in
a peaceable manner, when they might possibly have effected their escape, were entitled to their
personal freedom, within the limits of the city, and might eventually, under voluntary but
indispensable obligations, become eligible to all the privileges of citizenship, within the
same limits. In the mean time, they were to be maintained as pensioners of state, on condition
that they made no use of their dangerous weapons, nor exhibited them to terrify the people.
With this decision, Huertis and his companions were perfectly satisfied, for the latter had
undiminished confidence in his ability and determination to achieve their escape, as soon as
he should have accomplished the scientific objects of his expedition. On leaving the hall of
justice, they observed the elder military chief, of whom a slight mention has been made, brought
in with two others of inferior rank; and it was afterwards currently reported that they had
been sentenced to close imprisonment. It was, also, ascertained by Velasquez, that the four
companies of rangers, already noticed, composing a regiment of two hundred men, constituted
the whole military force of this timid and peaceful people.

From this point, our abstract of the narrative must be chiefly a brief catalogue of the most
important of the concluding events. The place of residence assigned to our travellers, was
the vacant wing of a spacious and sumptuous structure, at the western extremity of the city,
which had been appropriated, from time immemorial, to the surviving remnant of an ancient and
singular order of priesthood called Kaanas, which, it was distinctly asserted in their annals
and traditions, had accompanied the first migration of this people from the Assyrian plains.
Their peculiar and strongly distinctive lineaments, it is now perfectly well ascertained are
to be traced in many of the sculptured monuments of the central American ruins, and were found
still more abundantly on those of Iximaya. Forbidden, by inviolably sacred laws, from intermarrying
with any persons but those of their own caste, they had here dwindled down, in the course of
many centuries, to a few insignificant individuals, diminutive in stature, and imbecile in
intellect. They were, nevertheless, held in high veneration and affection by the whole Iximayan
community, probably as living specimens of an antique race so nearly extinct. Their position,
as an order of priesthood, it is now known, had not been higher, for many ages, if ever, than
that of religious mimes and bacchanals, in a certain class of pagan ceremonies, highly popular
with the multitude. This, indeed, is evident from their characteristics in the sculptures.
Their ancient college, or hospital, otherwise vacant and forlorn, was now chiefly occupied
by a much higher order of priests, called Mahaboons, who were their legal and sacerdotal guardians.
With a Yachin, one of the junior brethren of this order, named Vaalpeor, a young man of superior
intellect and attainments, Velasquez soon cultivated a friendly and confidential acquaintance,
which proved reciprocal and faithful. And while Huertis was devoting all his time and energies
to the antiquities, hieroglyphics, ethnology, science, pantheism, theogony, arts, manufactures,
and social institutions of this unknown city and people, the ear of this young pagan priest
was as eagerly imbibing, from the wiley lips of Velasquez, a similar knowledge of the world
at large, to him equally new and enchanting. If Huertis had toiled so severely, and hazarded
so much, both as to himself and companions, to acquire a knowledge of this one city and people,
it soon became clear to the penetrating mind of Velasquez, that Vaalpeor possessed enough both
of mental ambition and personal energy to incur equal toil and risk to learn the wonders of
the cities and races of the greater nations of mankind. Indeed, this desire evidently glowed
in his breast with a consuming fervor, and when Velasquez, after due observation proposed the
liberation of the whole expedition, with Vaalpeor himself, as its protected companion, the
now consciously imprisoned pagan, horror-stricken at first, regarded the proposition with complacency,
and finally, with a degree of delight, regardless of consequences. It was, however, mutually
agreed that the design should be kept secret from Huertis, until ripe for success. A serious
obstacle existed in his plighted guardianship of the Kaana children, whom he could abandon
only with his life; but even this was not deemed insurmountable.

In the meantime, Huertis, to facilitate his own objects, had prevailed upon his entire party
to conform in dress and habits with the community in which they lived. The city was surrounded
on all sides by a lofty colonade, sustaining the upper esplanade of the city walls, and forming
a broad covered walk beneath, in which the population could promenade, sheltered from sun and
shower. In these places of general resort, the new citizens appeared daily, until they had
become familiarly known to the greater part of the eighty-five thousand inhabitants of the
city. Huertis, moreover, had formed domestic and social connexions; was the welcome guest of
families of the highest rank, who were fascinated with the information he afforded them of
the external world; had made tacit converts to liberty of many influential persons; had visited
each of the four grand temples which stood in the centre of the several quadrangular divisions
of the city, and externally conformed to their idolatrous worship. He had even been admitted
into some of the most sacred mysteries of these temples, while Velasquez, more retired, and
avowedly more scrupulous, was content to receive the knowledge thus acquired, in long conversations
by the sick couch of poor Hammond, now rapidly declining to the grave.

Mr. Hammond's dreadful wound had but partially healed in the course of several months; his
constitution was exhausted, and he was dying of remittent fever and debility. His chief regret
was that he could not assist his friend Huertis in his researches and drawings, and determine
the place of the city by astronomical observations which his friends were unable to take. The
day before he died, he was visited by some of the medical priesthood, who, on seeing numerous
light spots upon his skin, where the preparation with which he had stained it had disappeared,
they pronounced him a leper, and ordered that all intercourse with the building should be suspended.
No explanation would convince them to the contrary, and his death confirmed them in their opinion.
Availing himself of this opportunity, and under the plea that it was important to their safety,
Vaalpeor removed the two orphan children in his charge to one of the country temples in the
plain, and the idle mules of the strangers were employed to carry tents, couches, and other
bulky requisites for an unprovided rural residence. It may be added that he included among
them much of the baggage of his new friends, with the greater part of their rifles and ammunition.
In the mean time Huertis, Velasquez, and about half of their party, were closely confined to
the part of the edifice assigned for their occupation. Their friend Hammond had been interred
without the walls, in a field appropriated to lepers by the civic authorities. Huertis, was
now informed of the plan of escape, but was not ready; he had more daguerreotype views to take,
and many curiosities to collect. The interdicted period of nine days having expired, the young
priest, who had free access to the city at all times, again appeared at their abode and urged
an early retreat, as the return of the orphan children would soon be required. But Huertis
was abroad in the city and could not be consulted. He remained absent all the day, and did
not return to his apartments at night. It was so all the next day and night, and Velasquez
was deeply alarmed. On searching his rooms for his papers, drawings and instruments, for secret
transmittal into the country, he found them all removed, including those of Mr. Hammond which
were among them. It was then vainly hoped that he had effected his escape with all his treasures,
but his Indians knew nothing of the matter.

