Dick Cheveley, His Adventures and Misadventures, by W.H.G Kingston.

Dick is the teenage son of an early nineteenth century vicar in England. The boy has a passionate
desire to go to sea, but his family, especially his Aunt Deb, oppose this.  One reason is that
if he were to go as a midshipman he would be required to have at least fifty pounds a year
to keep appearances up, and that money wasn't available.

He forms a friendship with another boy, Mark, who gets into trouble for being a poacher.  Dick
peaches on the local smugglers, who imprison him, and he is nearly killed by them.

Wandering out of curiosity round the decks of a ship that is about to sail he falls through
a hatchway, and right down into the lower hold. When he comes to the ship is at sea, and the
hold is battened down.  It takes him several weeks before he can attract attention.  But the
captain is a horrible man, and some of the crew are not much better. Eventually Dick jumps
ship by stealing a ship's dinghy, and lands on a tiny rocky islet.  The dinghy is lost in a
storm.  Eventually Dick is rescued and is taken back to his home town, where he vows never
to go to sea again.

The story was written as a cautionary tale to advise boys like Dick never to go to sea as a
stowaway, which is effectually what Dick did, and was inspired by a real case, in which the
boy was found dying after only thirteen days at sea.

DICK CHEVELEY, HIS ADVENTURES AND MISADVENTURES, BY W.H.G KINGSTON.

Preface.

So extraordinary are the adventures of my hero, Master Richard Cheveley, son of the Reverend
John Cheveley, vicar of the parish of S--, in the county of D---, that it is possible some
of my readers may be inclined to consider them incredible, but that they are thoroughly probable
the following paragraph which appeared in the evening edition of the Standard early in the
month of November, 1879, will, I think, amply prove.  I have no fear that any sensible boys
will be inclined to follow Dick's example; but if they will write to him at Liverpool, where
he resides, and ask his advice, as a young gentleman did mine lately, on the subject of running
away to sea, I am very sure that he will earnestly advise them to stay at home; or, at all
events, first to consult their fathers or mothers, or guardians, or other relatives or friends
before they start, unless they desire to risk sharing the fate of the hapless stowaway here
mentioned:--

  "A shocking discovery was made on board the National steamer
  England, which arrived in New York from Liverpool on the 29th
  October.  In discharging the cargo in the forehold a stowaway was
  found in a dying state.  He had made the entire passage of thirteen
  days without food or drink.  He was carried to the vessel's deck,
  where he died."

My young correspondent, in perfect honesty, asked me to tell him how he could best manage to
run away to sea.  I advised him, as Mr Richard Cheveley would have done, and I am happy to
say that he wisely followed my advice, for I have since frequently heard from him.  When he
first wrote he was an entire stranger to me.  He has had more to do with this work than he
supposes.  I have the pleasure of dedicating it to him.

                                                   WILLIAM H G KINGSTON.

CHAPTER ONE.

  Some account of my family, including Aunt Deb--My father receives an
  offer--A family discussion, in which Aunt Deb distinguishes herself--
  Her opinions and mine differ considerably--My desire to go to sea
  haunts my dreams--My brother Ned's counsel--I go a-fishing in Leighton
  Park--I meet with an accident--My career nearly cut short--A battle
  with a swan, in which I get the worst of it--A courageous mother--Mark
  Riddle to the rescue--An awkward fix--Mark finds a way out of it--Old
  Roger's cottage--The Riddle family--Roger Riddle's yarns and their
  effect on me--Mark takes a different view--It's not all gold that
  glitters--The model--My reception at home.

We were all seated round the tea-table, that is to say, my father and mother, my five sisters,
and three of my elder brothers, who were at home--two were away--and the same number of young
ones, who wore pinafores, and last, but not least, Aunt Deb, who was my mother's aunt, and
lived with us to manage everything and keep everybody in order, for this neither my father
nor mother were very well able to do; the latter nearly worn out with nursing numerous babies,
while my father was constantly engaged in the duties of the parish of Sandgate, of which he
was incumbent.

Aunt Deb was never happy unless she was actively engaged in doing something or other.  At present
she was employed in cutting, buttering, or covering with jam, huge slices of bread, which she
served out as soon as they were ready to the juvenile members of the family, while my eldest
sister, Mary, was presiding at the tea-tray, and passing round the cups as she filled them.

When all were served, my father stood up and said grace, and then all fell to with an eagerness
which proved that we had good appetites.

"I say, Aunt Deb, Tom Martin has lent me such a jolly book.  Please give me another slice before
you sit down.  It's all about Anson's voyage round the world.  I don't know whether I shall
like it as well as `Robinson Crusoe' or `Captain Cook's Voyages,' or `Gulliver's Travels,'
or the `Life of Nelson,' or `Paul Jones,' but I think I shall from the look I got of it," I
exclaimed, as Aunt Deb was doing what I requested.

"I wish, Dick, that you would not read those pestiferous works," she answered, as, having given
me the slice of bread, she sat down to sip her tea.  "They are all written with an evil intent,
to make young people go gadding about the world, instead of staying contentedly at home doing
their duty in that state of life to which they are called."

"But I don't understand why I should not be called to go to sea," I replied; "I have for a
long time made up my mind to go, and I intend to try and become as great a man as Howe, or
Nelson, or Collingwood, or Lord Cochrane, or Sir Sidney Smith.  I've just to ask you, Aunt
Deb, what England would be without her navy, and what the navy would be unless boys were allowed
to go into it?"

"Stuff and nonsense, you know nothing about the matter, Dick.  It's very well for boys who
have plenty of interest, for sons of peers or members of parliament, or judges or bishops,
or of others who possess ample means and influence, but the son of a poor incumbent of an out
of the way parish, who knows no one, and whom nobody knows, would remain at the bottom of the
tree."

"But you forget, Aunt Deb, that there are ways of getting on besides through interest.  I intend
to do all sorts of dashing things, and win my promotion, through my bravery.  If I can once
become a midshipman I shall have no fear about getting on."

"Stuff and nonsense!" again ejaculated Aunt Deb, "you know nothing about the matter, boy."

"Don't I though," I said to myself, for I knew that my father, who felt the importance of finding
professions for his sons according to their tastes, had some time before written to Sir Reginald
Knowsley, of Leighton Park,--"the Squire," as he used to be called till he was made a baronet,
and still was so very frequently, asking him to exert his influence in obtaining an appointment
for me on board a man-of-war. This Sir Reginald had promised to do.  Aunt Deb, however, had
made many objections, but for once in a way my father had acted contrary to her sage counsel,
and as he considered for the best.  Still Aunt Deb had not given in.

"You'll do as you think fit, John," she observed to him, "but you will repent it.  Dick is
not able to take care of himself at home, much less will he be so on board a big ship among
a number of rough sailors.  Let him remain at school until he is old enough to go into a counting-house
in London or Bristol, where he'll make his fortune and become a respectable member of society,
as his elder brother means to be, or let him become a master at a school, or follow any course
of life rather than that of a soldier or a sailor."

I did not venture to interrupt Aunt Deb, indeed it would have been somewhat dangerous to have
done so, while she was arguing a point, but I had secretly begged my father to write to Sir
Reginald as he had promised, assuring him that I had set my heart on following a naval career,
and that it would break if I was not allowed to go to sea.  This took place, it will be understood,
some time before the evening of which I am now speaking.

Aunt Deb suspected that my father was inclined to favour my wishes, and this made her speak
still more disparagingly than ever of the navy.

Tea was nearly over when the post arrived.  It only reached us of an evening, and Sarah, the
maid, brought in a large franked letter.  I at once guessed that it was from Sir Reginald Knowsley,
who was in London.

I gazed anxiously at my father's face as he read it.  His countenance did not, however, exhibit
any especial satisfaction.

"Who is it from?" asked my mother, in a languid voice.  "From Sir Reginald," he replied.  "It
is very kind and complimentary.  He says that he has had great pleasure in doing as I requested
him.  He fortunately, when going down to the Admiralty, met his friend Captain Grummit, who
has lately been appointed to the `Blaze-away,' man-of-war, and who expressed his willingness
to receive on board his ship the son of any friend of his, but--and here comes the rub--Captain
Grummit, he says, has made it a rule to take no midshipmen unless their parents consent to
allow them fifty pounds a year, in addition to their pay. This sum, the Captain states, is
absolutely necessary to enable them to make the appearance he desires all his midshipmen to
maintain.  Fifty pounds a year is a larger sum, I fear, than my purse can supply," observed
my father when he had read thus far.

"I should think it was, indeed!" exclaimed Aunt Deb.  "Fifty pounds a year!  Why, that's nearly
half of my annual income.  It would be madness, John, to make any promise of the sort.  Suppose
you were to let him go, and to stint the rest of his brothers and sisters by making him so
large an allowance--what will be the result, granting that he is not killed in the first battle
he is engaged in, or does not fall overboard and get drowned, or the ship is not wrecked, and
he escapes the other hundred and one casualties to which a sailor is liable?  Why, when he
becomes a lieutenant he'll marry to a certainty, and then he'll be killed, and leave you and
his mother and me, or his brothers and sisters, to look after his widow and children, supposing
they are able to do so."

"But I shall have a hundred and twenty pounds full pay, and ninety pounds a year half-pay,"
I answered; "I know all about it, I can tell you."

"Ninety pounds a year and a wife and half-a-dozen small brats to support on it," exclaimed
Aunt Deb in an indignant tone.  "The wife is sure to be delicate, and know nothing about housekeeping,
and she and the children will constantly be requiring the doctor in the house."

"But you are going very far ahead, Aunt Deb, I haven't gone to sea yet, or been made a lieutenant,
and if I had, there's no reason why I should marry."

"There are a great many reasons why you should not," exclaimed Aunt Deb.

"I was going to say that there are many lieutenants in the navy who have not got wives, and
I do not suppose that I shall marry when I become one," I answered.

"It seems pretty certain that you will never be a lieutenant or a midshipman either, if it
depends upon your having an allowance of fifty pounds a year, for where that fifty pounds is
to come from I'm sure I don't know," cried my aunt.  "As it is, your poor father finds it a
difficult matter to find food and clothing for you all, and to give you a proper education,
and unless the Bishop should suddenly bestow a rich living on him, he, at all events, could
not pay fifty pounds a year, or fifty shillings either, so I would advise you forthwith to
give up this mad idea of yours, and stay quietly at school until a profitable employment is
found for you."

I looked up at my father, feeling that there was a good deal of truth in what Aunt Deb said,
although I did not like the way she said it.

"Your aunt only states what is the case, Dick," said my father.  "I should be glad to forward
your views, but I could not venture, with my very limited income, to bind myself to supply
you with the sum which Sir Reginald says is necessary."

"Couldn't you get Sir Reginald to advance the money?"  I inquired, as the bright idea occurred
to me; "I will return it to him out of my pay and prize-money."

Aunt Deb fairly burst out laughing.

"Out of your pay, Dick?" she exclaimed.  "Why fifty pounds is required over and above that
pay you talk of, every penny of which you will have to spend, and supposing that you should
not be employed for a time, and have to live on shore.  Do you happen to know what a midshipman's
half-pay is?  Why just nothing at all and find yourself.  You talk a good deal of knowing all
about the matter, but it's just clear that you know nothing."

"I wish, my dear Dick, that we could save enough to help you," said my mother, who was always
ready to assist us in any of our plans; "but you know how difficult I find it to get even a
few shillings to spend."

My mother's remark soothed my irritated feelings and disappointment, or I should have said
something which might not have been pleasant to Aunt Deb's ears.

We continued talking on the subject, I devising all sorts of plans, and arguing tooth and nail
with Aunt Deb, for I had made up my mind to go to sea, and to go I was determined by hook or
by crook; but that fifty pounds a year was, I confess, a damper to my hopes of becoming a midshipman.

If I could have set to work and made the fifty pounds, I would have done my best to do so,
but I was as little likely to make fifty pounds as I was to make fifty thousand. When he reached
the open air, he recovered his self-possession to some extent, and holding the gold coins
fast in one hand, threw his cap up in the air with the other, uttered a loud shout of joy, and
bounded homeward again at the top of his speed.

Having reached the cottage, he put the money in a corner of the cupboard in which his father kept
his small stock of cash, locked the door, and put the key in a place of safety, and then left
the cottage again.

"Now everything is in first-rate order," said he to himself. "Father will be sure to find the
money when he comes back, and I shall have plenty of time to see how the vulture's nest is
to be got at. Mr. Seymour shall have the birds, no matter what trouble
and danger it may cost me.

He shall soon see that I am neither selfish nor unthankful to him for his generosity."

[TO BE CONTINUED.]

* * * * *

="I can Swim, Sir."=--During a terrible naval battle between the English
and the Dutch, the English flag-ship, commanded by Admiral Narborough,
was drawn into the thickest of the fight.

Two masts were soon shot away, and the mainmast fell with a fearful crash upon the deck. Admiral
Narborough saw that all was lost unless he could bring up his ships
from the right.

Hastily scrawling an order, he called for volunteers to swim across the boiling water, under
the hail of shot and shell. A dozen sailors at once offered their services, and among them
a cabin-boy. "Why," said the admiral, "what can you do, my fearless
lad?"

"I can swim, Sir," the boy replied; "if I be shot, I can be easier spared than any one else."
Narborough hesitated; his men were few, and his position desperate. The boy plunged into the
sea, amid the cheers of the sailors, and was soon lost to sight. The battle raged fiercer, and,
as the time went on, defeat seemed inevitable. But, just as hope was fading, a thundering cannonade
was heard from the right, and the reserves were seen bearing down upon the enemy. By sunset the
Dutch fleet was scattered far and wide, and the cabin-boy, the hero of the hour, was called
in to receive the honor due to him. His bearing so won the heart of the old admiral that he exclaimed,
"I shall live to see you have a flag-ship of your own."

The prediction was fulfilled when the cabin-boy, having become Admiral Cloudesley Shovel, was knighted
by the king.

THE GOLDEN GLOVE.

There was a young, rich, and beautiful lady who was about to be married to a lord. A day or
two before the wedding the lord brought his friend, a gallant and handsome young farmer, to
see the lady of his choice.

The lady fell in love at first sight with the farmer, and ere they parted, the farmer was
as deep in love with her.

When the morning of the wedding had come, the lady, love-sick for
the young farmer, instead of betaking herself to the kirk to be married,
took to her bed, and the wedding was put off.

Nevertheless, in the afternoon, she disguised her face, and dressing herself in manly apparel,
went with cross-bow on her shoulder, and with her dogs at her heels, to hunt on the grounds of
the young farmer, which were part of her own estate.

She crossed and recrossed the fields, whistled and hallooed to her dogs, without meeting the
farmer. As she was beginning to fear that he was absent, and was about to withdraw, she met him coming
up the road.

She professed to be surprised to see him, as she understood he was to be at the wedding to give away
the bride to the lord.

"Ah!" said the young farmer, with a sigh, "I would she were as poor as myself, that I might ask
her to give herself to me."

"Are you, then, in love with the promised
bride of the young lord your friend? How would you answer to him,
should the lady favor your hopes?" said she.

"With sword and axe
I would give him a meeting, and let the best man win."

At parting,
the lady drew from her pocket a glove embroidered with gold, and said
to the farmer, "Here is a glove I picked up on the way thither; as
I am a stranger here, I will leave it with you in order that you may
find the owner."

Next day she sent out the crier to say that she
had lost a glove embroidered with gold, and that she would take the
man who found it for her husband, if the man were willing.

The young
farmer heard the proclamation, and, half wild with joy, and half doubting
his good fortune, took his way to the house of the lady. He presented
the glove, and modestly reminded her of the reward promised to the
finder, and although that reward was far above his hopes, it was what
his heart most ardently desired.

Before he left her, she confirmed
the promise of the crier, and agreed to take him for her husband.

"Not if I had been out three or four hours fishing, and came home wet and dirty; and I want
to get my studies over while the day is young, and the air fresh and pure.  I can read twice
as well now as I shall be able after breakfast."

"Well, if you are so unsociable, I must go by myself," I said, getting down my rod from the
wall on which it hung with my fishing-tackle and basket.  Swinging the latter over my shoulder
I crept noiselessly out of the room and down stairs.  No one was stirring, so I let myself
out by a back door which led into the garden.  Even our old dog "Growler" did not bark, for
he was, I suppose, taking his morning snooze after having been on the watch all night.

Before setting off I had to get some bait.  I found a spade in the tool-house and proceeded
with it to a certain well-known heap in the corner of the kitchen garden, full of vivacious
worms of a ruddy hue, for which fish of all descriptions had a decided predilection.  Even
now, whenever I smell a similar odour to that which emanated from the heap, the garden and
its surroundings are vividly recalled to my mind. I quickly filled a box, which I kept for
the purpose, with wriggling worms.  It had a perforated lid, and contained damp moss.

"I ought to have thought of getting these fellows yesterday and have given them time to clean
themselves," I said to myself.  "They'll do, notwithstanding, although they will not prove
as tough as they ought." Shouldering my rod I made my way out of the garden by a wicket gate,
and proceeded across the fields on which it opened towards Leighton Park. The grass was wet
with dew, the air was pure and fresh, almost cold; the birds were singing blithely in the trees.
A lark sprang up before me, and rose into the blue air, warbling sweetly to welcome the rising
sun, which he could see long before its rays glanced over the ground on which I was walking.
I could not help also singing and whistling, the bright air alone being sufficient to raise
my spirits.  I hurried away, as I was eager to begin fishing, for I wanted the fish in the
first place, and I knew in the second that Ned would laugh at me if I came back empty handed.
The pond to which I was going, although supplied by the same stream which fed the ornamental
piece of water in the neighbourhood of the Hall, was at a distance from it, and was accessible
without having to pass through the grounds.  It was surrounded by trees, and one side of the
bank was thickly fringed by sedges which extended a considerable way into the water.  It served
as a preserve for ducks and wild fowl of various descriptions, and was inhabited also by a
number of swans, who floated gracefully over its calm surface.  As they were accustomed to
depend upon their own exertions for a subsistence, they generally kept at a distance from strangers,
and I had never been interrupted by them when fishing.  I made my way to a spot where I knew
that the water was deep, and where I had frequently been successful in fishing.  It was a green
bank, which jutted out into a point, with bushes on one side, but perfectly free on the other.
I quickly got my rod together, and my hook baited with a red wriggling worm.  I did not consider
that the worm wriggled because it did not like to be put on the hook, but if I had been asked
I should have said that it was rather pleased than otherwise at having so important a duty
to perform as catching fish for my pleasure.  I had a new float, white above and green below,
which I thought looked very pretty as I threw my line out on the water.  Up it popped at once,
there being plenty of lead.  Before long it began to move, gliding slowly over the surface,
then faster and faster.  I eagerly held my rod ready to strike as soon as it went down; now
it moved on one side, now on the other.  I knew that there was a fish coquetting with the bait,
trying perhaps to suck off the worm without letting the hook run into its jaws.  Before long
down went the float, and I gave my rod a scientific jerk against the direction in which the
float was last moving, when to my intense satisfaction I felt that I had hooked a fish, but
whether a large or a small one I could not at first tell.  I wound up my line until I had got
it of a manageable length, then drew it in gradually towards the bank.  I soon discovered that
I had hooked a fine tench.  It was so astonished at finding itself dragged through the water,
without any exertion of its fins, that it scarcely struggled at all, and I quickly hauled it
up on the bank.  It was three-quarters of a pound at least, one of the largest I had ever caught.
It was soon unhooked and placed safely in my basket.  As I wanted several more I put on a fresh
worm, and again threw my line into the water.

Some people say there is no pleasure in float-fishing, but for me it always had a strange fascination,
that would not have been the case, if I could have seen through the water, for I believe the
interest depends upon not knowing what size or sort of fish has got hold of the hook, when
the float first begins to move, and then glides about as I have described, until it suddenly
disappears beneath the surface.  I caught four or five fine tench in little more than twice
as many minutes.  I don't know why they took a fancy to bite so freely that fine bright morning.
Generally they take the hook best of a dull, muggy day, with a light drizzling rain, provided
the weather is warm.  After I had caught those four fish, I waited for fully ten minutes more
without getting another bite; at last, I came to the conclusion that only those four fish had
come to that part of the pond.  There was another place a little further on, free of trees
and bushes, where I could throw my line without the risk of its being caught in the bushes
above my head; I had not, however, generally gone there.  Tall sedges lined the shore, and
water-lilies floated on the greater part of the surface and its immediate neighbourhood.  It
was also somewhat difficult to get at, owing to the dense brushwood which covered the ground
close to it.  I waited five minutes more, and then slinging my basket behind my back, I made
my way to the spot I have described.  After catching my line two or three times in the bushes,
and spending some time in clearing it, I reached the bank and unslinging my basket quickly,
once more had my float in the water.  The ground, which was covered with moss rather than grass,
sloped quietly down to the water, and was excessively slippery. As I held my rod, expecting
every moment to get a bite, I heard a low whistling sound coming from the bushes close to me.
At first I thought it was produced by young frogs, but where they were I could not make out.
I observed that several of the swans I have before mentioned were floating on the surface not
far off.  Now one, now another would put down its long neck in search of fish or water insects.
Presently one of them caught sight of me, and came swimming rapidly towards the extreme point
of the bank.  In an instant it landed, and half-flying, half-running over the ground, came
full at me through the bushes.  To retreat was impossible, should it intend to attack me, but
I hoped it would not venture to do so.  Before, however, I had any time for considering the
matter, it suddenly spread its powerful wings, with one of which it dealt me such a blow, that
before I could recover I was sent down the slippery bank, and plunged head over heels into
the water.  In my fright I let go my rod, but instinctively held out my hands to grasp whatever
I could get hold of.

The swan, not content with its first success, came after me, when, by some means or other.
I caught hold of it by one of its legs.  To this day I don't know how it happened.  The water
was deep, and I had very little notion of swimming, and having once got hold of something to
support myself I was not inclined to let go, while the swan was as much astonished at being
seized hold of as I was.  I shouted and bawled for help, although, as no one was likely to
be at the pond at that early hour, or passing in the neighbourhood, there was little chance
of obtaining assistance.

Away flew the swan, spreading out her broad wings to enable her to rise above the surface.
Instead of seeking the land, to my horror, she dragged me right out towards the middle of the
pond; while the other swans, alarmed at seeing the extraordinary performance of their companion,
flew off in all directions.  Fortunately I was able to keep my head above the surface, but
was afraid of getting a kick from the other leg of the swan as she struck the water with it
to assist herself in making her onward way, but as I held her captive foot at arm's length,
fortunately she did not touch me.  I dared not let go with one of my hands, or I should have
tried to seize it.  Whether it was instinct or not which induced her to carry me away from
her nest I cannot tell, but that seemed to be her object.  I felt as if I was in a horrid dream,
compelled to hold on, and yet finding myself dragged forward against my will.  The pond was
a long and narrow one, but it seemed wider than it had ever done before.  The swan, instead
of going across to the opposite bank, took a course right down the centre.  My shouts and shrieks
must have filled her with alarm.  On and on she went flapping her huge wings.  I knew that
my life depended upon being able to hold fast to her foot, but my arms were beginning to ache,
and it seemed to me that we were still a long way from the end.  When we got there, I could
not tell what she might do.  Perhaps, I thought, she might turn round and attack me with beak
and wings, when, exhausted by my struggles, I should be unable to defend myself.  Still I dared
not venture to let go.  I heartily wished that I had been a good swimmer, because then, when
we got near the end, I might have released her and struck out, either for one side or the other.
As it was, my safety depended on being dragged by her to the shore.  She frequently struck
the water with her wings.  Showers of spray came flying over my head, which prevented me from
seeing how near I was to it.  At last I began to fear that I should be unable to hold on long
enough.  My arms ached, and my hands felt cramped, still the love of life induced me not to
give in.

I shouted again and again.  Presently I heard a shout in return.

"Hold on, young fellow.  Hold on, you'll be all right."  This encouraged me, for I knew that
help was at hand.  Suddenly, as I looked up, I saw the tops of the trees, and presently afterwards
I found the swan was trying to make her way up the bank, while my feet touched the muddy bottom.

I had no wish to be dragged through the bushes by the swan, so, as I was close to the shore,
I let go, but as I did so, I fell utterly exhausted on the bank, and was very nearly slipping
again into the water.  The swan, finding herself free after going a short distance, closed
her wings, and recollecting, I fancy, that I had been the cause of her alarm, came rushing
back with out-stretched neck, uttering a strange hissing sound, preparing, as I supposed, to
attack me.  I was too much exhausted to try and get up and endeavour to escape from her.  Just
as she was within a few feet of me, I saw a boy armed with a thick stick spring out from among
the bushes, and run directly towards her.  A blow from his stick turned her aside, and instead
of making for me, she again plunged into the water, and made her way over the surface in the
direction from which we had come.

"I am very much obliged to you, my fine fellow, for driving off the swan, or I suppose the
savage creature would have mauled me terribly, had she got up to me."

"Very happy to have done you a service, master; but it didn't give me much trouble to do it.
However, I would advise you not to stop here in your wet clothes, for the mornings are pretty
fresh, and you'll be catching a bad cold."

"Thank you," I said, "but I do not feel very well able to walk far just yet."

"Have you got far to go home?" he asked.

I told him.

"Well, then, you had better come home with me to my father's cottage. It is away down near
the sea, and he'll give you some hot spirits, and you can turn into my bed while your clothes
are drying."

I was very glad to accept his proposal, for I did not at all fancy having to go home all dripping,
to be laughed at by my brothers, and to get a scolding from Aunt Deb into the bargain, for
I knew she would say it was all my own fault, and that if I had not been prying into the swan's
nest, the bird would not have attacked me.  I did not, however, wish to lose my rod and basket
of fish, and I thought it very probable that if I left them, somebody else would carry them
off.  I asked my new friend his name.

"Mark Riddle," he answered.

"Before I go I must get back my rod and basket of fish; it won't take us long.  Would you mind
coming with me?"

"No, master, I don't mind; but I would advise you to be quick about it."

Mark helped me up, and as I soon got the use of my legs, we ran round outside the trees as
fast as we could go.  The basket of fish was safe enough on the bank, but the rod was floating
away at some distance.

"Oh dear, oh dear.  I shall never be able to get it," I exclaimed.

"What!  Can't you swim, master?" asked Mark.

I confessed that I was afraid I could not swim far enough to bring it in.

"Well, never you mind.  I'll have it in a jiffy," and stripping off his clothes he plunged
into the water and soon brought in the rod.

"There's a fish on the hook I've a notion," he said, as he handed me the butt end of the rod.

He was right, and as he was dressing, not taking long to rub himself dry with his handkerchief,
I landed a fine fat tench.

"That belongs to you," I said.  "And, indeed, I ought to give you all the fish I have in my
basket."

"Much obliged, master; but I've got a fine lot myself, which I pulled out of the pond this
morning, only don't you say a word about it, for the Squire, I've a notion, doesn't allow us
poor people to come fishing here."

I assured Mark that I would not inform against him, and having taken my rod to pieces and wound
up my line, I said that I was ready to set out. Mark by that time was completely dressed. 
Just as we were about to start I saw the swan--I suppose the same one which had dragged me
across the pond--come swimming back at a rapid rate towards where we were standing, in the
neighbourhood, as I well knew, of her nest.  Whether or not she fancied we were about to interfere
with her young, we could not tell, but we agreed that it was well to beat a retreat.  We accordingly
set off and ran on until we reached the further end of the pond, when Mark, asking me to stop
a minute, disappeared among the bushes, and in a few minutes returned with a rough basket full
of fine tench, carp, and eels.  I had a notion that some night-lines had assisted him to take
so many.  I did not, however, ask questions just then, and once more we set off running.  Wet
as I was, I was very glad to move quickly, not that I felt particularly cold, for the sun had
now risen some way above the trees, and as there was not a breath of air, his rays warmed me
and began to dry my outer garments.  I must have had a very draggled look, and I had no wish
to be seen by any one at home in that condition.  In little more than a quarter of an hour
we came in sight of a cottage situated below a cliff on the side of a ravine, opening out towards
the sea.  A stream which flowed from the Squire's ponds running through it.

"That is my home, and father will be right glad to see you," said Mark, pointing to it.

A fine old sailor-like man with a straw hat and round jacket came out of the door as we approached,
and began to look about him in the fashion seafaring men have the habit of doing when they
first turn out in the morning, to ascertain what sort of weather it is likely to be.  His eyes
soon fell on Mark and me as we ran down the ravine.

"Who have you got with you, my son?" he asked.

"The young gentleman from the vicarage.  He has had a ducking, and he wants to dry his clothes
before he goes home; or maybe he'd call it a swanning, seeing it was one of those big white
birds which pulled him in, and towed him along from one end of the pond to the other, eh, master?
What's your name?"

"Richard," I replied, "though I'm generally called Dick," not at all offended at my companion's
familiarity.

"You are welcome, Master Dick, and if you like to turn into Mark's bed, or put on a shirt and
pair of trousers of his, we'll get your duds dried before the kitchen fire in a jiffy," said
the old sailor.  "Come in, come in; it doesn't do to stand out in the air when you are wet
through with fresh water."

I gladly entered the old sailor's cottage, where I found his wife and a young daughter, a year
or two older than Mark, busy in getting breakfast ready.  I thought Nancy Riddle a nice-looking
pleasant-faced girl, and her mother a good-natured buxom dame.  As I had no fancy for going
to bed I gladly accepted a pair of duck trousers and a blue check shirt belonging to Mark,
and a pair of low shoes, which were certainly not his.  I suspected that they were Nancy's best.

I quickly took off my wet things in Mark's room, and getting into dry ones, made my appearance
in the room which served them for parlour, kitchen, and hall, where I found the table spread,
with a pot of hot tea, cups and saucers, a bowl of porridge, a loaf of home-made bread, and
a pile of buttered toast, to which several of Mark's freshly caught fish were quickly added.
I offered mine to Mrs Riddle, but she answered--

"Thank you kindly, but you had better take them home to your friends, they'll be glad of them,
and we've got a plenty, as you see."

I was very thankful to get a cup of scalding tea, for I was beginning to feel somewhat chilly,
though Mrs Riddle made me sit near the fire.  A saucer of porridge and milk, followed by some
buttered toast and the best part of a tench, with a slice or two of bread soon set me up.

Nancy, however, now and then got up and gave my clothes a turn to dry them faster--a delicate
attention which I duly appreciated.  Mr Riddle, who was evidently fond of spinning yarns, as
most old sailors are, narrated a number of his adventures, which greatly interested me, and
made me more than ever wish to go to sea.  Mark had already made a trip in a coaster to the
north of England, and I was much surprised to hear him say that he had had enough of it.

"It is not all gold that glitters," he remarked.  "I fancied that I was to become a sailor
all at once, instead of that I was made to clean out the cabin, attend on the skipper, and
wash up the pots and the pans for the cook, and be at everybody's beck and call, with a rope's-end
for my reward whenever I was not quick enough to please my many masters."

"That's what most youngsters have to put up with when they first go to sea," remarked his father.
"You should not have minded it, my lad."

I found that Mark's great ambition was to become the owner of a fishing-boat, when he could
live at home and be his own master.  He was fonder of fishing than anything else, and when
he could not get out to sea he passed much of his time with his rod and lines on the banks
of the Squire's ponds, or on those of others in the neighbourhood.  He did not consider it
poaching, as he asserted he had a perfect right to catch fish wherever he could find them,
and I suspect that his father was of the same opinion, for he did not in any way find fault
with him.  When breakfast was over Mark exhibited with considerable pride a small model of
a vessel which he and his father had cut out of a piece of pine, and rigged in a very perfect
manner.  I was delighted with her appearance, and said I should like to have a similar craft.

"Well, Master Cheveley, I'll cut one out for you as soon as I can get a piece of wood fit for
the purpose," said the old sailor; "and when Mark and I have rigged her I'll warrant she'll
sail faster than any other craft of her size which you can find far or near."

"Thank you," I answered, "I shall be very pleased to have her; and perhaps we can get up a
regatta, and Mark must bring his vessel.  I feel sure he or I will carry off the prize."

As I wanted to get home, dreading the jobation I should get from Aunt Deb for not making my
appearance at prayer-time, I begged my friends to let me put on my own clothes.  They were
tolerably dry by this time, though the shoes were still wet, but that was of no consequence.

"Well, Master Dick, we shall always be glad to see you.  Whenever you come this way give us
a call," said the old sailor, as I was preparing to wish him, his wife and daughter good-bye.

I shook hands all round, and Mark accompanied me part of the way home. I parted from him as
if he had been an old friend, indeed I was really grateful to him for the way in which he had
saved my life, as I believed he had done, when he drove off the enraged swan.

CHAPTER TWO.

  Aunt Deb's lecture, and what came of it--My desire to go to sea still
  further increases--My father, to satisfy me, visits Leighton Hall--Our
  interview with Sir Reginald Knowsley--Some description of Leighton
  Hall and what we saw there--The magistrate's room--A smuggler in
  trouble--The evidence against him, and its worth--An ingenious plea--
  An awkward witness--The prisoner receives the benefit of the doubt--
  Sir Reginald consults my father, and my father consults Sir Reginald--
  My expectations stand a fair chance of being realised--The proposed
  crusade against the smugglers--My father decides on taking an active
  part in it--I resolve to second him.

On reaching home, the first person I encountered was Aunt Deb.

"Where have you been, Master Dick?" she exclaimed, in a stern tone, "you've frightened your
poor father and mother out of their wits.  They have been fancying that you must have met with
some accident, or run off to sea."

"I have been fishing, aunt," I answered, exhibiting the contents of my basket, "this shows
that I am speaking the truth, though you look as if you doubted my word."

"Ned said you had gone out fishing, but that you promised to be back for breakfast," she replied,
"it has been over half an hour or more, and the things have been cleared away, so you must
be content with a mug of milk and a piece of bread.  The teapot was emptied, and we can't be
brewing any more for you."

"Thank you, aunt.  I must, as you say, be content with the mug of milk and piece of bread you
offer me," I said, with a demure countenance, glad to escape any questioning.  "I shall have
a better appetite for dinner, when I hope you will allow these fish to be cooked, and I fancy
that you will find them very good, I have seldom caught finer."

"Well, well, go in and get off your dirty shoes, you look as if you had been wading into the
pond, and remember to be home in good time another day.  While I manage the household, I must
have regularity; the want of it throws everybody out, though your father and mother do not
seem to care about the matter."

Glad to escape so easily, I hurried away.  My father had gone out to visit a sick person who
had sent for him.  My brothers and sisters were engaged in their various studies and occupations,
and my mother was still in her room.  Jane, the maid, by Aunt Deb's directions, brought me
the promised mug of milk and piece of bread, and I, without complaint, ate a small piece of
the one, and drank up the contents of the other, and then said I had had enough, and could
manage to go on until dinner-time.  It did not strike me at the time that I was guilty of any
deception, though I really was; but I was afraid if I mentioned my visit to Roger Riddle's
cottage, the rest of my adventures in the morning would come out, and so said nothing about
the matter.

When my father came home, I told him that I was sorry for being so late, but considering the
fine basket of fish I had brought home, it would add considerably to the supply of provisions
for the family, and hoped he would not be angry with me.

"No, Dick, I am not angry," he said, "but Aunt Deb likes regularity, and we are in duty bound
to yield to her wishes."

"I wish that Aunt Deb were at Jericho," I muttered to myself, "and I should not have minded
saying the same thing aloud to my brothers and some of my sisters, for we most of us were heartily
tired of her interference with all family arrangements, and were frequently on the verge of
rebellion, but my father paid her so much deference, that we were afraid of openly breaking out."

Finding that my father was disengaged, I followed him into the study, and again broached the
subject of going to sea.

"Couldn't you take me to Squire Knowsley, and talk the matter over with him," I said.  "You
can tell him that 50 pounds a year is a large sum for you to allow me, and perhaps he may induce
Captain Grummit to take me, although I may not have the usual allowance.  I promise to be very
economical, and I would be ready to make any sacrifice rather than not go afloat."

"Sir Reginald came back yesterday, I find," said my father.  "You know, Dick, I am always anxious
to gratify your wishes, and as I do not see any objection to your proposal, we will set off
at once to call on him; perhaps he will do as you desire.  If he does not, it will show him
how anxious you are to go to sea, and he may assist you in some other way."

I was very grateful to my father, and thanked him for agreeing to my proposal.

"It won't do, however, for you to go in your present untidy condition," he remarked; "go and
put on your best clothes, and by that time I shall be ready to set off."

I hurried to my room, and throwing my clothes down on my bed, rigged myself out in the best
I possessed.  I also, as may be supposed, put on dry socks and shoes.  It did not occur to
me at the time, that the condition of the clothing I threw off was likely to betray my adventure
of the morning.  I went down stairs and set off with my father.  We had a pleasant walk, although
the weather was rather hot, and in the course of about an hour arrived at Leighton Park.

Sir Reginald, who was at home, desired that we should at once be admitted to his study, or
rather justice-room, in which he performed his magisterial duties.  It was a large oak room,
the walls adorned with stags' horns, foxes' brushes, and other trophies of the chase, with
a couple of figures in armour in the corner, holding candelabra in their hands.  On the walls
were hung also bows and arrows, halberds, swords, and pikes, as well as modern weapons, and
they were likewise adorned with several hunting pictures, and some grim portraits of the Squire's
ancestors.  On one side was a bookcase, on the shelves of which were a few standard legal works,
with others on sporting subjects, veterinary, falconry, horses and dogs, and other branches
of natural history.

Sir Reginald himself, a worthy gentleman, with slightly grizzled hair and a ruddy countenance,
was seated at a writing-table covered with a green cloth, on which was a Bible and two or three
other books, and writing materials.  He rose as we entered, and received us very courteously,
begging my father and me to take seats near him on the inner side of the table.

"You will excuse me, if any cases are brought in, I must attend to them at once.  I never allow
anything to interfere with my magisterial duties.  But do not go away.  I'll dispose of them
off-hand, and shall be happy to continue the conversation.  I want to have a few words with
you, Mr Cheveley, upon a matter of importance, to obtain your advice and assistance.  By-the-bye,
you wrote to me a short time ago about a son of yours who wishes to enter the naval service.
This is, I presume, the young gentleman," he continued, looking at me, "Eh!  My lad?  And so
you wish to become a second Nelson?"

"I wish to enter the navy, Sir Reginald, but don't know whether I shall ever become an admiral;
my ambition is at present to be made a midshipman," I answered boldly.

"I am very ready to forward your wishes, although it is not so easy a matter as it was a few
years ago during the war time.  I spoke to my friend Grummit, who has just commissioned the
`Blaze-away,' and he expressed his willingness to take you.  I think I wrote to you, Mr Cheveley,
on the subject."

"That is the very matter on which I am anxious to consult you, Sir Reginald," said my father.
"You mentioned that Captain Grummit insists on all his midshipmen having an allowance from
their friends of 50 pounds a year, and although that does not appear to him probably, or to
you, Sir Reginald, a large sum, it is beyond the means of a poor incumbent to furnish, and
I am anxious to know whether Captain Grummit will condescend to take him with a smaller allowance."

"I am sorry to say he told me that he made it a rule to receive no midshipman who had not at
least that amount of private property to keep up the respectability of his position," answered
Sir Reginald, "and from what I know of him, I should think he is not a man likely to depart
from any rule he may think fit to make.  However, my dear Mr Cheveley, I will communicate with
him, and let you know what he replies.  If he still insists on your son having 50 pounds a
year, we must see what else can be done.  Excuse me for a few minutes, here come some people
on business."

Several persons who had entered the hall, approached the table.  One of them, a dapper little
gentleman in black, with a bundle of papers in his hand, took a seat at one end, and began
busily spreading them out before him.  At the same time two men, whom I saw were constables,
brought up a prisoner, who was dressed as a seafaring man, handcuffed.

"Whom have you got here?" asked Sir Reginald, scrutinising the prisoner.

"Please, your honour, Sir Reginald, we took this man last night assisting in running contraband
goods, landed, as we have reason to believe, from Dick Hargreave's boat the `Saucy Bess,' which
had been seen off the coast during the day between Milton Cove and Rock Head."

"Ah, I'm glad you've got one of them at last.  We must put a stop to this smuggling which is
carried on under our noses to the great detriment of the revenue.  What became of the rest
of the crew, and the men engaged in landing the cargo?"

"Please, your worship, the cargo was sprighted away before we could get hold of a single keg
or bale, and all the fellows except this one made their escape.  The `Preventive' men had been
put on a wrong scent, and gone off in a different direction, so that we were left to do as
best we could, and we only captured this one prisoner with a keg on his shoulders, making off
across the downs, and we brought him along with the keg as evidence against him."

"Half a loaf is better than no bread, and I hope by the punishment he will receive to induce
others now engaged in smuggling to abandon so low a pursuit.  What is your name, prisoner?"

"Jack Cope, your worship," answered the smuggler, who looked wonderfully unconcerned, and spoke
without the slightest hesitation or fear.

"Well, Mr Jack Cope, what have you to say for yourself to induce me to refrain from making
out a warrant to commit you to gaol?" asked the magistrate.

"Please, your worship, I don't deny that I was captured as the constables describe with a cask
on my shoulders, for I had been down to the sea to fill it with salt water to bathe one of
my children whose limbs require strengthening, and I was walking quietly along when these men
pounced down upon me, declaring that I had been engaged in running the cargo of the `Saucy
Bess,' with which I had no more to do than the babe unborn."

"A very likely story, Master Cope.  You were caught with a keg on your shoulders; it's very
evident that you were unlawfully employed in assisting to run the cargo of the vessel you spoke
of, and I shall forthwith make out the order for your committal to prison."

"Please, your worship, before you do that, I must beg you to examine the keg I was carrying,
for if it contains spirits I am ready to go; but if not, I claim in justice the right to be
set at liberty."

"Have you examined the keg, men," said the squire, "to ascertain if it contains spirits?"

"No, your worship, we would not venture to do that, seeing that t'other day when one of the
coastguard broached a keg to see whether it had brandy or not he got into trouble for drinking
the spirits."

"For drinking the spirits!  He deserved to be," exclaimed Sir Reginald. "However, that is not
the point.  Bring the keg here, and if you broach it in my presence you need have no fear of
the consequences.  There can be little doubt that we shall be able to convict this fellow,
and send him to gaol for twelve months.  I wish it to be understood that I intend by every
means in my power to put a stop to the proceedings of these lawless smugglers, who have so
long been carrying on this illegal traffic with impunity in this part of the country."

Jack Cope, who had kept a perfectly calm demeanour from the time he had been brought up to
the table, smiled scornfully as Sir Reginald spoke. He said nothing, however, as he turned
his glance towards the door.  In a short time a revenue man appeared carrying a keg on his
shoulders.

"Place it on the table," said Sir Reginald.  "Can you swear this is the keg you took from the
prisoner?" he asked of the constable.

"Yes, your worship.  It has never been out of our custody since we captured it," replied the man.

"And I, too, can swear that it is the same keg that was taken from me!" exclaimed the bold
smuggler in a confident tone.

"Silence there, prisoner," said Sir Reginald, "You are not to speak until you are desired.
Let the cask be broached."

A couple of glasses and a gimlet had been sent for.  The servant now brought them on a tray.
One of the officers immediately set to work and bored a couple of holes in the head and side
of the cask.  The liquid which flowed out was bright and sparkling.  The officer passed it
under his nose, but made no remark, though I thought his countenance exhibited an odd expression.

"Hand it here," said Sir Reginald.  "Bah!" he exclaimed, intensely disgusted, "why, it's salt
water."

"I told you so, your worship," said Jack Cope, apparently much inclined to burst into a fit
of laughter.  "You'll believe me another time, I hope, when I said that I had gone down to
the seaside to get some salt water for one of my children; and I think you'll allow, your worship,
that it is salt water."

"You are an impudent rascal!" exclaimed Sir Reginald, irritated beyond measure at the smuggler's
coolness.  "I shall not believe you a bit the more.  I suspect that you have played the officers
a trick to draw them away from your companions, and though you escape conviction this time,
you will be caught another, you may depend upon that; and you may expect no leniency from me.
Set the prisoner at liberty, there is no further evidence against him."

"I hope, Sir Reginald, that I may be allowed to carry my keg of salt water home," said the
smuggler demurely.  "It is my property, of which I have been illegally deprived by the officers,
and I demand to have it given to me back."

"Let the man have the keg," said Sir Reginald in a gruff voice.  "Is there any other case before
me?"

"No, your worship," replied his clerk.

And Jack Cope carried off his cask of salt water in triumph, followed by the officers and the
other persons who had entered the hall.

I had observed that Jack Cope had eyed my father and me as we were seated with the baronet,
and it struck me that he had done so with no very pleasant expression of countenance.

"These proceedings are abominable in the extreme, Mr Cheveley," observed the justice to my
father.  "We must, as I before remarked, put an effectual stop to them.  You have a good deal
of influence in your parish, and I must trust to you to find honest men who will try and obtain
information, and give us due notice when a cargo is to be run."

"I fear the people do not look upon smuggling as you and I do, Sir Reginald," observed my father.
"The better class of my parishioners may not probably engage in it, but the very best of them
would think it dishonourable to act the part of informers.  I do not believe any bribe would
induce them to do so."

"Perhaps not, but you can place the matter before them in its true light.  Show them that they
are acting a patriotic part by aiding the officers of the law in putting a stop to proceedings
which are so detrimental to the revenue of the country.  If they can be made to understand
the injury which smuggling inflicts on the fair trader, they may see it in a different light
from that in which they at present regard it.  The Government requires funds to carry on the
affairs of the nation, and duties and taxes must be levied to supply those funds.  We should
show them that smuggling is a practice which it is the duty of all loyal men to put a stop to."

"I understand your wishes, Sir Reginald, and agree with you that energetic measures are necessary;
and you may depend upon my exerting myself to the utmost."

"My great object, at present, is to capture the `Saucy Bess.'  The revenue officers afloat
will, of course, do their duty; but she has so often eluded them that my only hope is to catch
her while she is engaged in running her cargo.  I will give a handsome reward to any one who
brings reliable information which leads to that desirable result."

"I am afraid that, although one or two smugglers may be captured, others will soon take their
places; as while the present high duties on spirits, silks, and other produce of France exist,
the profit to be made by smuggling will always prove a temptation too strong to be resisted,"
observed my father.  "If the smugglers find that a vigilant watch is kept on this part of the
coast they will merely carry on their transactions in another part."

"At all events, my dear Mr Cheveley, we shall have the satisfaction of knowing that we have
done our duty in removing what I consider a disgrace to our community," observed Sir Reginald.
"As to lowering the duties, that is what I will never consent to.  I shall always oppose any
scheme of the sort while I hold my place in Parliament.  I feel that I am bound to preserve
things as they are, and am not to be moved by the brawling cries of demagogues."

"Of course, Sir Reginald, you understand these things better than I do. I have never given
my mind to politics, and have always been ready to record my vote in your favour, and to induce
as many as possible of my parishioners to follow my example."

All this time I had been sitting on the tenter-hooks of expectation, wondering if my father
would again refer to the subject which had induced him to pay a visit to the baronet.

"I must wish you good morning, Sir Reginald," he said, rising.  "You will, I feel sure, not
forget your promise regarding my son Dick, and if Captain Grummit cannot take him, I trust
that you will find some other captain who does not insist on his midshipmen having so large
an allowance."

"Of course, my dear Mr Cheveley, of course," said the baronet, rising; "although it did not
strike me as anything unreasonable.  Yet I am aware how you are situated with a numerous family
and a comparatively small income; and, believe me, I will not lose an opportunity of forwarding
the views of the young gentleman.  Good morning, my dear Mr Cheveley, good morning," and nodding
to me, he bowed us out of the hall.

"I hope Sir Reginald will get me a berth on board some other ship," I said to my father, as
we walked homeward.  "He seems wonderfully good-natured and condescending."

"I don't feel altogether satisfied as to that point," answered my father, who knew the baronet
better than I did.

CHAPTER THREE.

  The crusade against the smugglers--Sir Reginald's measures--The "Saucy
  Bess"--My father's sermon, and its effects in different quarters--Ned
  and I visit old Roger Riddle--Mr Reynell's picnic and how we enjoyed
  it--Roger Riddle tells the story of his life--Born at sea--The pet of
  the ship--Stormy times--Parted from his mother--His first visit to
  land--Loses his parents.

Day after day went by and nothing was heard from Sir Reginald Knowsley about my appointment
as a midshipman.  Aunt Deb took care to remark that she had no doubt he had forgotten all about
me.  This I shrewdly suspected was the case.  If he had forgotten me, however, he had not forgotten
the smugglers, for he was taking energetic steps to put a stop to their proceedings, though
it was whispered he was not always as successful as he supposed.

Whenever I went to the village I heard of what he was doing, yet from time to time it was known
that cargoes had been run while only occasionally an insignificant capture was made, it being
generally, as the saying is, a tub thrown to a whale.

The "Saucy Bess" appeared off the coast, but it was when she had a clean hold and no revenue
officer could touch her.  She would then come into Leighton bay, which was a little distance
to the westward of the bar, and drop her anchor, looking as innocent as possible; and her hardy
crew would sit with their arms folded, on her deck, smoking their pipes and spinning yarns
to each other of their daring deeds, or would pace up and down performing the fisherman's walk,
three steps and overboard.  On two or three occasions I caught sight of them from the top of
a rocky cliff which formed one side of the little bay, and I acknowledge that I had a wonderful
longing to go on board and become better acquainted with the sturdy looking outlaws, or rather,
breakers of the law.  As, however, I could find no boat in the bay to take me alongside, and
as I did not like to hail and ask them to allow me to pay them a visit, I had to abandon my design.

My father was busy in his way in carrying out the wishes of the baronet. He spoke to a number
of his parishioners, urging them to assist in putting a stop to the proceedings of the smugglers,
and endeavouring to impress upon them the nefarious character of their occupation.  More than
once he got into the wrong box when addressing some old sea dog, who would curtly advise him
to mind his own business, the man he was speaking to probably being in league with the smugglers.
He said and did enough indeed to create a considerable amount of odium against himself.  He
went so far as one Sunday to preach a sermon in which he unmistakably alluded to smuggling
as one of the sins certain to bring down condign punishment on those engaged in it.

Sir Reginald Knowsley, who had driven over, as he occasionally did, to attend the service,
waited for my father in the porch, and complimented him on his sermon.  "Excellent, Mr Cheveley,
excellent," he exclaimed, "I like to hear clergymen speak out bravely from the pulpit, and
condemn the sins of the people.  If the smugglers persist in carrying on their nefarious proceedings,
they will now do it with their eyes open, and know that they are breaking the laws of God and
man.  I was delighted to hear you broach the subject.  I expect some friends in a few days,
and I hope that you will give me the pleasure of your company at dinner.  I have some capital
old port just suited to your taste, and I will take care to draw your attention to it.  Good-bye,
my dear Mr Cheveley, good-bye; with your aid I have no doubt smuggling will, in a short time,
be a thing of the past;" and the squire walked with a dignified pace to his carriage and drove
off, not regarding the frowning looks cast at him by some of his fellow-worshippers.

As I afterwards went through the churchyard I passed several knots of persons talking together,
who were making remarks of a very different character to those I have spoken of on the sermon
they had just heard. They were at no pains to lower their voices even as they saw me.

"I never seed smuggling in the Ten Commandments, an' don't see it now," remarked a sturdy old
fisherman, who was looked upon as a very respectable man in the village.  "What has come over
our parson to talk about it is more than I can tell."

"The parson follows where the squire leads, I've a notion," remarked another seafaring man,
who was considered an oracle among his mates. "He never said a word about it before the squire
took the matter up. Many's the time we've had a score of kegs stowed away in his tool-house,
and if one was left behind, if he didn't get it I don't know who did."

On hearing this I felt very much inclined to stop and declare that my father had never received
a keg of spirits, or a bribe of any sort, for I was very sure that he would not condescend
to that, though I could not answer for the integrity of John Dixon, our old gardener, who had
been, on more than one occasion, unable to work for a week together; and although his wife
said that he was suffering from rheumatics, the doctor remarked, with a wink, that he had no
doubt he would recover without having much physic to take.

Some of the men were even more severe in their remarks, and swore that if the parson was going
to preach in that style, they would not show their noses inside the church.  Others threatened
to go off to the methodists' house in the next village, where the minister never troubled the
people with disagreeable remarks.

I did not tell my father all I had heard, as I knew it would annoy him. It did not occur to
me at the moment that he had introduced the subject for the sake of currying favour with Sir
Reginald, indeed I did not think such an idea had crossed his mind.

He was greatly surprised in the afternoon, when the service was generally better attended than
in the morning, to find that only half his usual congregation was present.  When he returned
home, after making some visits in the parish, on the following Tuesday, he told us he suspected
from the way he had been received that something was wrong, but it did not occur to him that
his sermon was the cause of offence.

I, in the meantime, was spending my holidays in far from a satisfactory manner.  My elder brothers
amused themselves without taking pains to find me anything to do, while Ned was always at his
books, and was only inclined to come out and take a constitutional walk with me now and then.
My younger brothers were scarcely out of the nursery, and I was thus left very much to my own
resources.  I bethought me one day of paying the old sailor Roger Riddle a visit, and perhaps
getting his son Mark to come and fish with me.

I told Ned where I was going, and was just setting off when he called out--

"Stop a minute, Dick, and I will go with you; I should like to make the acquaintance of the
old sailor, who, from your account, must be something above the common."

I did not like to refuse, at the same time I confess that I would rather have gone alone, as
I knew that Ned did not care about fishing, and would probably want to stop and talk to Roger
Riddle.

I was waiting for him outside in front of the house, when a carriage drove up full of boys,
with a gentleman who asked me if my father was at home.  I recognised him as a Mr Reynell,
who lived at Springfield Grange, some five or six miles inland.  Two of the boys were his sons,
whom I knew; the others, he told me, were their cousins and two friends staying with them.

"We are going to have a picnic along the shore, and we want you and your brother to come and
join us," said Harry Reynell, the eldest of the two.

Ned came out directly afterwards, and said he should be very happy to go.

"Can't you get any of your friends to go also?  The more the merrier."

There were two or three other boys whom I knew staying with an aunt in the village, and I offered
to run down and ask them.

"By all means," said Harry, "we have provisions enough, so that they need not stop to get anything;
but I'm afraid we cannot stow them all away; if it's not very far off we may go on foot."

"It is no distance to the prettiest part of the coast," I replied; "and I know a capital spot
where we can pick up shells and collect curiosities of all sorts, if any of you have a fancy
for that sort of thing."

"That will do," said Harry Reynell; "go and fetch your friends, and we will walk together."

I accordingly ran down the village to Mrs Parker's, whose nephews were at home.  We formed
a tolerably numerous party.  As my father was unable to go, Mr Reynell was the only grown-up
person among us.  The spot I had fixed upon was not far from Roger Riddle's cottage.  As I
had been thinking of him, I proposed asking the old sailor and Mark to join our party.

From the account I gave to Mr Reynell of Roger Riddle, he did not object to this.  As Harry
Reynell, his brother, and friends were good-natured merry fellows, we had a pleasant time as
we walked or ran along, laughing and singing, and playing each other tricks.  We soon left
Mr Reynell behind, but he told us not to mind him, as he should soon catch us up.  The carriage
followed with the prog, but as the road was in many places heavy, it did not move as fast as
we did.  We at length reached the spot I had proposed, a small sandy bay, with cliffs on either
side, out of which bubbled a stream of sparkling cold water, with rocks running out into the sea.

"This will do capitally," said Harry.  "See, the whole beach is covered with beautiful shells,
and there may be sea anemones and echini, and star-fish, and all sorts of marine creatures."

Having surveyed the place, we heard Mr Reynell shouting out to us to carry down the baskets
of pies, tarts, cold ham, and chicken, plates, knives and forks.  While the rest of the party
were so engaged, I ran on to invite old Roger.  I found him and Mark within.

"Much obliged to the young gentlemen, but I've had my dinner," he answered; "however, I'll
come and have a talk with them, if you think they'll like it.  May be, I'll spin them a yarn
or two, which will do to pass the time while they are sniffing in the breezes, which they don't
get much of while they are away up the country."

"You'll come as soon as you can," I answered, "for they will be disappointed if you don't take
a tart or two and a glass of wine."

"Never fear, I'll come before long," said old Roger.

Mark, however, looked as if he would have no objection to taste some of the good things in
our hampers, so he very readily agreed to accompany me.  We found the cloth spread out on the
smooth dry sand, and covered with pies and other dainties, and the plates and the knives and
forks. Mr Reynell was engaged in making a huge salad in a wooden bowl.  I introduced Mark in
due form.

"Come and sit down," said Harry to him in a kind way which soon made him feel quite at home.
I don't know whether he had much of a dinner before, but he did ample justice to the good things
which our friends had brought.  We had nearly finished before old Roger made his appearance.

"Your servant, gentlemen all," he said, making a bow with his tarpaulin; "Master Dick here
has asked me to come, saying it was what you wished, or I would not have intruded on you."

"Very pleased to see you, Mr Riddle," said Harry, who did the honours of the feast, "sit down,
and have some of this cherry pie, you will find it very nice, and, for a wonder, the juice
hasn't run out."

Harry chose the largest plate, and filled it with fully a third of the pie.

"Thank you, young gentleman; I may take a snack of that sort of thing;" and the old sailor
set to work, his share of the pie rapidly disappearing, as he ladled up the cherries with his
spoon.

"Take a glass of cider now, Mr Riddle," said Harry, handing him a large tumbler, which the
old sailor tossed off, and had no objection to two or three more.

Meantime the tide had been rising, and no sooner was dinner over, than we had to pack up and
beat a rapid retreat.  We soon washed the plates and dishes in the water as it rose, and Ned
packed them up.  The expectations of those of our party who hoped to pick up shells, and collect
sea curiosities were thus disappointed.

"Never mind, lads," said old Roger; "Master Dick here tells me that you would like to hear
a yarn or two; the grass here, as much as there is of it, is dry enough," and Mr Riddle seated
himself on the bank, while we all gathered round him.  Mr Reynell placed himself at a little
distance, although within earshot, when he took out his sketchbook to make a drawing of the scene.

"None of you young gentlemen have ever been to sea, I suppose?" continued the old sailor. 
"I dare say you fancy it all sunshine and smooth sailing, and think you'd like to go and be
sailors, and walk the deck in snowy-white trousers and kid gloves.  I have known some who have
taken that notion into their heads, and have been not a little disappointed when they got afloat,
to find that they had to dip their fists into the tar-bucket, to black down the rigging, and
swab up the decks, though some of them made not bad sailors after all.  If any of you young
gentlemen think of leading a seafaring life, you must be prepared for ups and downs of all
sorts, heavy gales, and rough seas, shipwrecks and disasters.  You'll be asking how I came
to go to sea, perhaps you may think I ran off, as some silly lads have done, but I didn't do
that.  If I had run, it would have been ashore, seeing as how I was born at sea.  It happened
in this wise:--My father, Bob Riddle, was bo'sun's mate of the old `Goliath,' of eighty guns,
and as in those days two or three women were allowed on board line-of-battle ships to attend
to the sick, and to wash and mend clothes, provided the captains did not object; so my mother,
Nancy Riddle, who loved her husband in a way which made her ready to go through fire and water
for his sake, got leave to accompany him to sea.  She made herself wonderfully useful on board,
and won the hearts of all the men and officers too, who held her in great respect, while the
midshipmen just simply adored her; indeed, I've heard say that she saved the lives of several
who were sick of fever by the careful way in which she nursed them.  She had had no children,
and I've a notion that if she had known what was going to happen, like a wise woman she would
have remained on shore, but as the ship was in the East India station, and she wanted her boy
to be British born, for she guessed she was going to have a boy, she had no help for it but
to remain on board and take her chance.  The `Goliath' had just been in action, and beaten
off two of the enemy's ships which wanted to take her but couldn't, when she was caught in
a regular hurricane, and had to run before it under bare poles.  During that time I came into
this world of troubles.  I can't say that I remember anything about it, but I've been in many
a typhoon and hurricane since then, with the big foaming seas roaring, the wind whistling and
howling in the rigging, the blocks rattling, the bulkheads creaking and groaning, and the ship
rolling and pitching and tumbling about in a way which made it seem wonderful that wood and
iron could hold together.  It wasn't exactly under such circumstances that the wife even of
a boatswain's mate would have chosen to bring a puling infant into the world.  The doctor thought
that mother would have died, and, as there was no cow on board, that I should have shared her
fate, but she got through it and nursed me, and I throve amazingly, so that in six months I
was as big as most children of a year or more old.  Before the ship was ordered home, I could
chew bacon and beef, and toddle about the decks.  Of course I was made much of by officers
and crew.  Mother rigged me out in a regular cut seaman's dress.  The midshipmen taught me
the cutlass exercise, and to ride a goat the captain bought as much for my use as his own.
For'ard my education was equally well attended to, and I don't remember when I couldn't dance
a hornpipe--double shuffle and all--or sing a dozen sea songs, some of them sounding rather
strange, I've a notion, coming from juvenile lips.  All went on smoothly till the ship was
paid off, and my early friends were scattered to the four winds of heaven.  My father, who
felt like a fish out of water when ashore, soon obtained another berth, with the same rating
on board the `Victorious,' seventy-four, but he had great difficulty in getting leave for my
mother to accompany him, and if another woman who was to have gone hadn't fallen ill just in
the nick of time, he would have had to sail without her.  I was smuggled on board instead of
a monkey shipped by the crew, which fell overboard and was drowned.  It was some weeks before
the captain found out that I wasn't the monkey he had given the men leave to take.  When the
first lieutenant at length reported to him that I was a human being without a tail, he was
very angry, and father was likely to have got into trouble. Still as he had done nothing against
the articles of war, which don't make mention of taking babies to sea, he couldn't be flogged
with his own cat.  The captain then swore that he would put mother and me ashore at the first
port we touched at; but the men, among whom I had many friends, begged hard that we might be
allowed to remain, and when he saw me scuttling about the rigging in a hairy coat and a long
tail, laughing heartily, he relented, and as he got a hint that the men would become very discontented
if he carried his threat into execution, father was told that he would say nothing more about
the matter.  Soon afterwards the captain fell ill, and mother nursed him in a way no man could
have done, so that he had reason to be thankful that he had allowed mother and me to remain
on board.  The `Victorious' became one of the best disciplined and happiest ships in the service,
all because she had a real live plaything on board.  She fought several bloody actions. During
one of them, when we were tackling a French eighty-gun ship, I got away from mother, who was
with the other women in the cockpit attending to the wounded, and slipped up on deck, where
before long I found father.  `Here I am,' I said, `come to see the fun.  When are you going
to finish off the mounseers?'  The round shot were flying quickly across the decks, and bullets
were rattling on board like hail, for though the French were getting the worst of it, they
were, as they always do, dying game.  `Get below, boy, get below!' shouted father, `what business
have you here?'  As I didn't go, he seized me by the arm, and dragged me to the hatchway, in
spite of my struggles and cries.  `I want to see the fight.  I want to see the mounseers licked,'
I cried out.  `Let me go, father; let me go!'  Just then there was a shout from the upper deck,
`The enemy has struck--the enemy has struck!'  Father let me go, and up I ran and cheered,
and waved my hat among the men with as hearty good will as any of them.  When I saw the men
shaking hands with each other, I ran about, and, putting out my tiny fist, shook their hands
also, exclaiming, `We've licked the mounseers, haven't we?  I knew we would.  Hoora!  Hoora!'
This amused the men greatly, and they called me a plucky little chap, though I certainly could
not boast of having contributed to gain the victory, as I was considerably too young to act
the part even of a powder-monkey.  We had lost a good many officers and men, some of whom I
saw stretched on the deck, and wondered what had come over them, as they did not move or speak.
As long as the `Victorious' remained in commission, I continued with my father and mother aboard
her; but when she was paid off, an order came out, prohibiting women from going to sea on board
men-of-war, and mother, greatly to her grief, had to live on shore.  It was now a question
whether I should accompany my father or stay with my mother and get some book-learning, of
which I was as yet utterly ignorant, as I did not even know my letters.  I was scarcely old
enough to be rated as a ship's boy, though father would have liked to take me with him, but
mother said she could not lose us both, and, fortunately for me, father consented to leave
me with her.  As the `Victorious' was paid off at Plymouth, mother remained there, and father
soon afterwards got his warrant as boatswain to the `Emerald' sloop-of-war, ordered out on
the West India station. This was the first time I had been on shore, except for a few days
when the `Goliath' was paid off, during the whole of my life, and I did not find it very easy
to get accustomed to the ways of shore-going people. At first I did not at all like them. 
There was no order or regularity, and I missed more than anything the sound of the bell striking
the hours and half-hours day and night.  However, I got accustomed to things by degrees.  I
was sent to school, where I gained a good character for regularity and obedience, just because
I had been trained to it, do ye see.  I couldn't bear not to be there at the exact time, and
I never thought of disobeying the orders of these under whose authority I was placed.  I also
was diligent, and thus made good progress in my studies. I might have become a scholar had
I remained at school, but after I had been there about two years, when I got home one day I
found mother leaning back in her chair, in a fit, it seemed to me, and the parson of the parish,
who had a letter in his hand, trying to rouse her up.  As soon as I came in, he bade me run
for the doctor, who lived not far off. He came at once with a woman, a neighbour of ours, and
while they were attending to mother, the parson, sitting down, placed me between his knees,
and looking kindly in my face, said that he had some bad news to tell me, which he had got
in a letter from the West Indies.  It was that my brave father was dead, carried off by the
yellow fever which has killed so many fine fellows on that station.  My mother was a strong
and hearty woman, and any one would have supposed that it would have taken a great deal to
kill her; but, notwithstanding her robust appearance, she had gentle and tender feelings, and
though for my sake she wished to live, within a year she died of a broken heart for the loss
of my father and I was left an orphan."

CHAPTER FOUR.

  Roger Riddle continues his story--Goes to sea as a man-o'-war's-man--
  His voyages--The Mediterranean--Toulon--Chasing the enemy--Caught in a
  trap--A hard fight for it--Escape of the frigate--Corsica--Martello
  Bay--The tower and its gallant defenders--Its capture--Origin of its
  name--San Fiorenzo--Convention redoubt--What British tars can do--
  Capture of the "Minerve"--The taking of Bastia--Nelson loses an
  eye--"Jackass" frigates--Toulon again--More fighting--The advantage of
  being small--Prepare to repel boarders--The colours nailed to the
  mast--The chase--Never despise your enemy--Teneriffe--Attack on Santa
  Cruz--Nelson loses his arm--Abandonment of the enterprise--What people
  call glory--The Hellespont--The captain steers his own ship--The
  island of Cerigotto--Breakers ahead--The ship strikes--The value of
  discipline--Their condition on the rock--The ship goes to pieces--
  Their chances of escape--The gale--A brave captain--A false hope--The
  effects of drinking sea-water--Water, water everywhere, and not a drop
  to drink--Reduced to extremities--They lose their brave captain and
  first lieutenant--They construct a raft--Cowardice of the Greek
  fishermen--The rescue of the survivors--Fresh adventures--The
  Dardanelles--Fire!--An awful spectacle--Destruction of the ship--
  Reason to be thankful--A father's love--How they took a Spanish
  sloop-o'-war--The ruse and how it succeeded--Between two fires--Good
  and bad captains--Roger quits the navy--Becomes mate of a merchantman
  and retires on his laurels--His marriage and settlement--Our picnic
  breaks up.

"Mother had a good many friends, old shipmates of hers and father's, but most of them having
families of their own were not able to do much for me.  I was now, however, big enough to go
to sea, and of course there was no question but that I should be a sailor.  England had been
at peace for some time, but she and France were once more at loggerheads, and ships were fitting
out with all despatch at every port in the kingdom.  There was no difficulty therefore in finding
a ship for me, and an old messmate of father's, Andrew Barton, having volunteered on board
the `Juno' frigate, of thirty-two guns, took me with him.  He was rated as captain of the maintop
and I as ship's boy, having to do duty as powder-monkey.  I quickly found myself at home, and
those who didn't know that I had been to sea before, wondered how well I knew my way everywhere
about the decks and aloft.  I soon took the lead among the other boys, many of them much bigger
and older than myself.  `Why, one would suppose that you had been born at sea,' said Tom Noakes,
a big hulking fellow, who never could tell which was the stem, and which the stern.  `And so
I was,' I answered.  I then told him how many storms and battles I had been in, and all that
I remembered about my early life. This made my messmates treat me with wonderful respect, and
they never thought of playing me the tricks they did each other.

"Our frigate was bound out to the Mediterranean to join the fleet under Lord Hood.  She was,
I should have said, commanded by Captain Samuel Hood, a relation of the Admiral's.  We knew
that we should have plenty of work to do.  When we sailed, it was understood that an English
force had possession of Toulon, which was besieged by the republicans, who had collected a
large army round the city, but it was supposed that they would be kept at bay by the English
and royalists.  We had been cruising off Toulon, when we were despatched to Malta to bring
up supernumeraries for the fleet.  We were detained, however, at the island for a considerable
time, by foul winds.  At length we sailed, and steered direct for Toulon.  We arrived abreast
of the harbour one evening, some time after dark.  The captain, anxious to get in, as we had
no pilot on board, nor any one acquainted with the dangers of the place, stood on, hoping by
some means or other, to find his way.  The officers with their night-glasses were on the look-out
for our ships, but they were nowhere to be seen.  Our captain, however, concluded that as a
strong easterly wind had been blowing, they had run for shelter into the inner harbour. We
accordingly shortened sail, and stood on, under our topsails.  As at last several ships could
be distinguished, it was supposed that we were close up to the British fleet.  We soon afterwards
made out a brig, and in order to weather her, the driver and topsail were set.  As we were
tacking under the brig's stern, some one on board her hailed, but not being able to make out
what was said, Captain Hood shouted, `This is His Britannic Majesty's frigate "Juno."' `Viva,'
cried the voice from the brig, and after this we heard the people on board her jabbering away
among themselves.  At last one of them shouted out, `Luff, luff.'  The captain on this, ordered
the helm to be put down, but before the frigate came head to wind, she grounded.  The breeze,
however, was light, and the water perfectly smooth, and the sails were clewed up and handed.
While this was being done, we saw a boat pull away from the brig, towards the town.  Her heel,
however, was still on the shoal, and the rudder immovable.  To get her off, the launch was
hoisted out, and the kedge anchor with a hawser, was put into her.  While we were engaged in
hauling the frigate off the shoal, a boat appeared coming down the harbour, and being hailed
some one in her answered `Ay, ay.'  She quickly came alongside, and the crew, among whom were
two persons apparently officers, hurried on deck; one of the latter addressed our captain,
and said he came to inform him that according to the regulations of the port, the frigate must
go to the other part of the harbour, and perform ten days' quarantine.  The Frenchmen, who
were supposed to be royalists, were jabbering away together, when one of our midshipmen, a
sharp young fellow, cried out, `The chaps have national cockades in their hats.'  The moon
which shone out brightly just then, threw a gleam of light on the Frenchmen's hats, and the
three colours were distinctly seen.  The entrance to the harbour is guarded by heavy forts
on either side, between which we had run some distance, and their guns pointed down on our
decks might sink us before we could get outside again.  The officers, on hearing the report,
hurried aft, scarcely able to believe that it was true.  They found, however, on seeing the
Frenchmen, that there was no doubt about the matter.  Just then a flaw of wind came down the
harbour, when our third lieutenant, Mr Webbley, hurrying up to the captain, said, `I believe,
sir, if we can get her under sail, we shall be able to fetch out.'  `We will try it at all
events!' cried the captain; `send the men to their stations, and hand those French gentlemen
below.'  The mounseers, on finding that they were not yet masters of the ship, began to bluster
and draw their sabres, but the marines quickly made them sound another note, and in spite of
their `Sacres!' they were hurried off the deck under a guard.  The men flew aloft, and in three
minutes every sail was set, and the yards braced up for casting.  The frigate was by this time
completely afloat, the cable was cut; her head paid off, the sails filled, and away she stood
from the shore.  The wind freshening, she quickly gathered way.  The launch and the French
boat were cut adrift, and we had every hope of escape. Directly we began to loose sails, we
saw lights appear in the batteries, and observed a stir aboard the brig.  She soon afterwards
opened fire on us, as did the fort on the starboard bow, and in a short time every fort which
could bring a gun to bear on us, began to blaze away.  We were now, however, going rapidly
through the water, but there was a chance of our losing a topmast, as the shot came whistling
through our sails, between our rigging.  The wind shifting, made it seem impossible that we
could get out without making a tack, but our captain was not a man to despair, and I am pretty
sure that there was no one on board who would have given in, as long as the frigate was afloat.
Fortunately the wind again shifted and blew in our favour.  Blocks and ropes came falling from
aloft, we could see the holes made in the canvas, by the shot passing through them.  Several
of the masts and spars were badly wounded, and two thirty-six pound shot came plump aboard,
but no one was hurt.  As soon as the hands came from aloft, they were ordered to their quarters,
and we began firing away in return at the forts, as well as at the impudent little brig, which
we at length silenced.  As may be supposed, we gave a right hearty cheer when we saw the shot
the Frenchmen were firing at us fall far astern, and we found that we were well clear of the
harbour.  We made sail for Corsica, where we found a squadron under Commodore Linzee, engaged
in attempting to drive the French from that island. 'With heavenly weapons I have fought The
battles of my Lord; Finished my course, and kept the faith, And wait the sure reward.'

In a few years, the words of this exquisite hymn were fulfilled; the old man fell asleep, full
of years and of honors, going to the grave like a shock of corn in its season. His funeral was
one of imposing simplicity, and he was buried just at the entrance of that church where he had
been so long a faithful attendant.

Mrs. Irving, who survived him several years, was of a different type of character, which, by
its peculiar contrast, seemed to perfect the harmony of a well-matched union. She was of elegant
shape, with large English features, which were permeated by an indescribable life and beauty.
Her manners were full of action, and her conversational powers were of a high order. All of
these graces appeared in the children, and were united with the vigor of intellect which marked
the character of the father.

It would have been surprising if the offspring of such a union should not have been distinguished,
and it is only the peculiar relation which the biographer sustains to it which prevents him
from bringing this feature out more prominently.

It was, however, acknowledged, at an early day, that the family of William Irving had no equal in
the city, and when we consider its number, its personal beauty, its moral excellence, its varied talents,
without a single deficient or unworthy member, we can not wonder
at the general admiration which it commanded.

From the eldest son, William, and Ann, the eldest daughter, whom her father fondly termed Nancy,
to Washington, the youngest, all were endowed with beauty, grace, amiability, and talent, yet
in the latter they seemed to effloresce with culminating fullness. Nancy Irving was the cynosure
of William street, concerning whose future destiny many a youth might have confessed an impassioned
interest. Her brother William had become connected commercially with a young revolutionary soldier,
(General Dodge,) who had opened a trading-station on the Mohawk frontier, and the latter bore away the
sister as his bride. The union was one of happiness, and lasted twenty years, when it was terminated
by her death. Of this, Washington thus speaks, in a letter in 1808: 'On the road, as I was traveling
in high spirits, with the idea of home to inspire me, I had the shock of reading an account of
my dear sister's death, and never was a blow struck so near my heart before.... One more heart
lies cold and still that ever beat toward me with the warmest affection, for she was the tenderest,
best of sisters, and a woman of whom a brother might be proud.' Little did the author of this
letter then dream of that more crushing blow which within one year was to fall upon him, and from
whose weight he was never wholly to recover.

William Irving, the brother of the biographer, was a model of manly beauty, and early remarkable for
a brilliant and sparkling intellect, which overflowed in conversation,
and often bordered on eloquence.

Had he been bred to the law, he would have shone among its brightest
stars; but those gifts, which so many envied, were buried in trade,
and though he became one of the merchant-princes of the city, even
this success could not compensate for so great a burial of gifts.

As one of the contributors to Salmagundi, he exhibits the keenness of a flashing wit, while, in
subsequent years, he represented New-York in Congress, when such an office was a distinction.

Peter Irving, like his brother, united personal elegance with talents,
and conducted the Morning Chronicle, amid the boisterous storms of
early politics.

This journal favored the interests of Burr; but it must be remembered that at that time Burr's name
was free from infamy, and that, as a leader, he enjoyed the highest prestige, being the centre
of the Democracy of New-York. Burr's powers of fascination were peculiarly great, and he had
surrounded himself with a circle of enthusiastic admirers. Indeed, such was his skill in politics,
that in 1800 he upset the Federalists, after a pitched battle of three days, (the old duration
of an election,) which was one of the most exciting scenes I ever witnessed. Horatio Gates,
of Saratoga fame, was one of his nominees for the State Legislature, (Gates was then enjoying those
undeserved laurels which posterity has since taken away,) and it was surprising to see the veterans
of the Revolution abandoning their party to vote for their old comrade and leader. The result
was, that the Federalists were most thoroughly worsted, and the party never recovered from the
blow. Such were the exciting events which identified the young politicians of the metropolis,
and which inspired their speeches and their press. Burr's headquarters were at Martling's Tavern,
87 Nassau street. On being torn down, the business was removed to Tammany Hall, which has inherited
a political character from its predecessor. Besides this, he used to meet his friends in more
select numbers at a Coffee-house in Maiden Lane. His office was Number 30 Partition street, (now
Fulton,) and his residence was at Richmond Hill. This place has lately been pulled down; it stood
far away from the city, in a wild, secluded neighborhood, and in bad going was quite an out
of the way spot, though now it would be in the densest part of the city. As there were no public
vehicles plying in this direction, except the Chelsea (Twenty-eighth street) stage, which was very
unreliable, one either had to hire a coach or else be subjected to a walk of two miles. But
such as had the entrée of this establishment would be well rewarded, even for these difficulties,
by an interview with Theodosia Burr, the most charming creature of her day. She was married
early, and we saw but little of her. From the interest which the Irvings felt in Burr's fortunes,
it might have been expected that they should sympathize with him in his subsequent reverses.

The
biographer presents Washington Irving as an attendant at the famous trial at Richmond, where his indignation
at some of Burr's privations are expressed in a most interesting letter. This sympathy is
the more touching from the fact that Washington was a Federalist, and in this respect differed
from his brothers. We have an idea that his youthful politics were in no small degree influenced
by those of that illustrious personage for whom he was named. Another of the sons was John
T., who became a successful and wealthy jurist, and for many years presided at New-York Common
Pleas, while Ebenezer was established in trade at an early day. Such was the development of that family,
which in rosy childhood followed William Irving to the old Brick Church, and whose early progress
he was permitted to witness. The biographer passes lightly over the scenes of boyhood, and there
was hardly any need for his expatiating on that idolatry which surrounded the youngest. He
was no doubt the first child ever named after the father of his country, and the touching incident
of Lizzie's presenting the chubby, bright-eyed boy to Washington, is hit off in a few touches.
It was, however, in itself a sublime thing. Nearly seventy years afterward, that child, still feeling
the hand of benediction resting upon him, concludes his Life of Washington by a description of
his reception in New-York, of which he had been a witness. Why does he not (it would have been a
most pardonable allusion) bring in the incident referred to above? Ah! modesty forbade; yet,
as he penned that description, his heart must have rejoiced at the boldness of the servant who
broke through the crowd and presented to the General a boy honored with his name. Glorious
incident indeed!

As the family grew up, the young men took to their different professions, which we have briefly
designated. Peter read medicine, and hence received the title of 'doctor;' though he hated and finally
abjured it, yet, as early as 1794, he had opened an office at 208 Broadway. This, however,
was more a resort for the muses than for Hygeia, notwithstanding its sign, 'Peter Irving,
M.D.' In 1796, William Irving, who had been clerk in the loan office, established himself in
trade in Pearl--near Partition--street, and from his energy and elegance of manners, he became
immediately successful, while farther up the street, near Old Slip,
John T. opened a law office, which was subsequently removed to Wall
street, near Broadway.

We mention these facts to show that Irving entered life surrounded by protecting influences,
and that the kindness which sheltered him from the world's great battle had a tendency to increase
his natural delicacy and to expose him to more intense suffering, when the hand of misfortune
should visit him. One who had 'roughed it' with the world would have better borne the killing
disappointment of his affections; but he was rendered peculiarly sensitive to suffering by
his genial surroundings.

This fact sets off in remarkable contrast, the noble resolution with which such an one as he,
when he had buried all the world held in the tomb with the dead form of his beloved, rose above
his sorrows. It is well observed by his biographer, that 'it is an affecting evidence how little
Mr. Irving was ever disposed to cultivate or encourage sadness, that he should be engaged during
this period of sorrow and seclusion in revising and giving additional touches to his History of
New-York.' Those who may smile at the elegant humor which pervades the pages of that history,
will be surprised to learn that they were nearly complete, yet their final revision and preparation
for the press was by one who was almost broken of heart, and who thus cultivated a spirit of cheerfulness,
lest he should become a burden to himself and others.

But to return from this digression, or rather anticipation of our subject. At the time of which
we now write, New-York was comparatively a small town; true, it was the chief commercial city
in America, and yet its limits proper could be described by a line drawn across the island some
distance below Canal street. Yet even then New-York was full of life, and seemed to feel the promise
of subsequent greatness. Her streets echoed to the footsteps of men whom the present generation,
with all its progress, can not surpass. At Number 26 Broadway, might have been daily seen the
light-built but martial and elegant form of Alexander Hamilton, while
his mortal foe, Aaron Burr, as we have stated, held his office in
Partition street.

John Jacob Astor was just becoming an established and solid business man, and dwelt at 223
Broadway, the present site of the Astor House, and which was one of the earliest purchases
which led to the greatest landed estate in America. Robert Lenox lived in Broadway, near Trinity
Church, and was building up that splendid commerce which has made his son one of the chief
city capitalists. De Witt Clinton was a young and ambitious lawyer, full of promise, whose
office (he was just elected Mayor) was Number 1 Broadway. Cadwallader D. Colden was pursuing
his brilliant career, and might be found immersed in law at Number 59 Wall street. Such were the
legal and political magnates of the day; while to slake the thirst of their excited followers,
Medcef Eden brewed ale in Gold street, and Janeway carried on the same business in Magazine street;
and his empty establishment became notorious, in later years, as the 'Old Brewery.'

About this time young Irving was developing as one of the most interesting youth of the city. His
manners were soft without being effeminate, his form finely molded, and his countenance singularly
beautiful. To this might be added the general opinion that he was considerably gifted in the use of
the pen. Yet with all these promising features, the future was clothed with shadows, for his health
was failing, and his friends considered him too lovely a flower to last. Little did his brothers
and sisters think that that delicate youth would, with one exception, outlive the whole family.
It was at this time that he first went abroad; and his experiences of travel are given by Pierre
Irving in the sparkling letters which he wrote to his brothers.

In 1807 I used to meet him once more in social gatherings in the city,
for he had returned in full restoration of health, his mind expanded,
and his manners improved by intercourse with the European world, while
Salmagundi had electrified the city and given him the first rank among
its satirists.

The question of profession crowded on him, and he alternated between the law and the counting-room,
in either of which he might find one or more of his brothers.

The former of these was a road to distinction, the latter was one to wealth; but feeling the
absence of practical business gifts, he shrank from trade, and took refuge in the quiet readings
of an office. Josiah Ogden Hoffman, of whose daughter so much has recently been written, was
a family friend, as well as a lawyer of high character. He lived first at Number 68 Greenwich
street, but afterward moved up-town, his office being in Wall street, first Number 47, and
afterward Number 16. Young Irving finished his studies with Mr. Hoffman, and immediately took
office with his brother John, at Number 3 Wall street. To these two was soon added the presence
of Peter, who was still connected with the press, and thus might have been found for a short time a most
interesting and talented, as well as fraternal trio.

Washington was still, to a considerable degree an habitué of Mr. Hoffman's office, and it seems quite
amusing that one who was so dull at reading law that he makes merry with his own deficiencies,
should have a connection with two offices. But the name of Matilda was the magnet which drew
him to one where he vainly struggled to climb Alp on Alp of difficulties in hope of love's fruition,
while at the other he might smile at the bewilderments of Coke, brush away the cobwebs from
his brain, and recreate himself with the rich humors of Salmagundi.

The place and time where this remarkable attachment had its inception, are not known; but like
all such affairs, it arose, no doubt, from felicitous accident. In one of his sketches, Irving
speaks of a mysterious footprint seen on the sward of the Battery, which awoke a romantic interest
in his breast. This youthful incident comes to our mind when we remember that Mr. Hoffman
lived at Number 68 Greenwich street, not a stone's throw from the Battery, and we have sometimes
thought that the mysterious footprint might have been Matilda's. At any rate, the Battery was at
that day a place of fashionable resort, and hence the fair but fragile form of Matilda Hoffman
could almost any day have been seen tripping among bevies of city girls in pursuit of health or
pleasure. But whatever be the history of its origin, the attachment became one of mutual strength;
and while young Irving was surrounded by piles of lawbooks and red tape, his hope of success
was identified with the name of Matilda. My remembrance of Matilda (her name was Sarah Matilda,
but the first was dropped in common intercourse) revives a countenance of great sweetness, and
an indescribable beauty of expression. Her auburn hair played carelessly in the wind, and her features,
though not of classic outline, were radiant with life. Her eye was one of the finest I have
ever seen--rich, deep-toned, and eloquent, speaking volumes in each varying expression, and generally
suggestive of pensive emotion. Irving was about eight years her senior, and this difference
was just sufficient to draw out that fond reliance of female character which he has so beautifully
set forth in the sketch of 'The Wife.' The brief period of this courtship was the sunny hour of
his life, for his tender and sensitive nature forbade any thing but the most ardent attachment.
What dreams of future bliss floated before his intoxicated vision, soon to change to the stern
realities of grieving sorrow!

In 1809, Mr. Hoffman removed to a suburban residence in Broadway, (corner of Leonard street,)
and the frequent walks which the young lover took up that sequestered avenue may have suggested
some of the descriptions of the same street in the pages of the History of New-York, and his
allusions to the front-gardens so adapted to ancient courtship. While at this mansion, amid all
the blandishments of hope, Matilda's health began to fail beyond the power of restoratives,
and the anxious eye both of parent and betrothed, marked the advance of relentless disease.
The maiden faded away from their affections until both stood by her bed and saw her breathe her
last.

The biographer informs us that after Mr. Irving's death, there was found in a repository of
which he always kept the key, a memorial of this affair, which had evidently been written to some
friend, in explanation of his single life.

'This passion was terribly against my studies. I felt my own deficiency, and despaired of ever
succeeding at the bar. I could study any thing else rather than law, and had a fatal propensity
to belles-lettres. I had gone on blindly like a boy in love, but now I began to open my eyes
and be miserable. I had nothing in purse or in expectation. I anticipated nothing from my legal
pursuits, and had done nothing to make me hope for public employment, or political elevation.
I had begun a satirical and humorous work, (The History of New-York,) in company with one of
my brothers; but he had gone to Europe shortly after commencing it, and my feelings had run in
so different a vein that I could not go on with it. I became low-spirited and disheartened,
and did not know what was to become of me. I made frequent attempts to apply myself to the law;
but it is a slow and tedious undertaking for a young man to get into practice, and I had, unluckily,
no turn for business. The gentleman with whom I studied saw the state of my mind. He had an
affectionate regard for me--a paternal one, I may say. He had a better opinion of my legal capacity
than it merited.

He urged me to return to my studies, to apply myself, to become well acquainted with the law,
and that in case I could make myself capable of undertaking legal concerns, he would take me into
partnership with him and give me his daughter. Nothing could be more generous. I set to work
with zeal to study anew, and I considered myself bound in honor not to make farther advances with
the daughter until I should feel satisfied with my proficiency with the law. It was all in
vain. I had an insuperable repugnance to the study; my mind would not take hold of it; or rather,
by long despondency had become for the time incapable of any application. I was in a wretched
state of doubt and self-distrust. I tried to finish the work which I was secretly writing,
hoping it would give me reputation and gain me some public employment. It proves how deeply
he felt the pangs of a rooted sorrow, and how impossible it was, amid all the attractions of
society, for him to escape the power of one who had bidden to all earthly societies an everlasting
farewell. That his regrets over his early bereavement did not arise from overwrought dreams
of excellence in the departed, is evident from the character she bore with others; and this
is illustrated by the following extract from a faded copy of the Commercial Advertiser, which reads
as follows:

'OBITUARY,

'Died, on the 26th instant, in the eighteenth year of her age, Miss Sarah Matilda Hoffman, daughter
of Josiah Ogden Hoffman. Thus another youthful and lovely victim is added to the ravages of that
relentless and invincible enemy to earthly happiness, the consumption. In the month of January
we beheld this amiable and interesting girl in the glow of health and spirits, the delight of
her friends, the joy and pride of her family; she is now cold and lifeless as the clod of the valley.
So falls the tender flower of spring as it expands its bosom to the chilling blight of the
morning frost. Endowed by nature with a mind unusually discriminating, and a docility of temper
and disposition admirably calculated to reap profit from instruction, Miss Hoffman very early
became an object of anxious care and solicitude to the fondest of fathers. That care and solicitude
he soon found richly rewarded by the progress she made in her learning, and by every evidence
of a grateful and feeling heart. After completing the course of her education in a highly respectable
seminary in Philadelphia, she returned to her father's house, where she diligently sought every
opportunity to improve her mind by various and useful reading. She charmed the circle of her
friends by the suavity of her disposition and the most gentle and engaging manners. She delighted
and blessed her own family by her uniformly correct and affectionate conduct. Though not formed
to mingle and shine in the noisy haunts of dissipation, she was eminently fitted to increase
the store of domestic happiness, to bring pleasure and tranquillity to the fireside, and to gladden
the fond heart of a parent.

'Religion, so necessary to our peace in this world and to our happiness in the next, and which
gives so high a lustre to the charms and to the virtues of woman, constantly shed her benign influence
over the conduct of Miss Hoffman, nor could the insidious attempts of the infidel for a moment
weaken her confidence in its heavenly doctrines. With a form rather slender and fragile was united
a beauty of face, which, though not dazzling, had so much softness, such a touching sweetness
in it, that the expression which mantled over her features was in a high degree lovely and interesting.
Her countenance was indeed the faithful image of a mind that was purity itself, and of a heart where
compassion and goodness had fixed their abode. To the sweetest disposition that ever graced
a woman, was joined a sensibility, not the fictitious creature of the imagination, but the glowing
offspring of a pure and affectionate soul.

'Tenderness, that quality of the heart which gives such a charm to every female virtue, was
hers in an eminent degree. It diffused itself over every action of her life. Sometimes blended
with a delicate and happy humor, characteristic of her nature, it would delight the social
circle; again, with the most assiduous offices of affection, it would show itself at the sick couch
of a parent, a relative, or a friend. In this manner the writer of this brief memorial witnessed
those soothing acts of kindness which, under peculiar circumstances, will ever be dear to his memory.
Alas! little did she then dream that in one short year she herself would fall a sacrifice to
the same disease under which the friend to whom she so kindly ministered, sunk to the grave.'
This testimony to departed worth bears the impress of deep sincerity,
and its freedom from the fulsome praise, which so often varnishes
the dead, seems to add to its force. Peter Irving, also, pays a tribute
to her character in the following utterance, in a letter to his bereaved
brother: 'May her gentle spirit have found that heaven to which it
ever seemed to appertain. She was too spotless for this contaminated
world.'

The biographer states that 'Mr. Irving never alluded to this
event, nor did any of his relatives ever venture in his presence to
introduce the name of Matilda,' 'I have heard,' he adds, 'of but one
instance in which it was ever obtruded upon him, and that was by her
father, nearly thirty years after her death, and at his own house.
A granddaughter had been requested to play for him some favorite piece
on the piano, and in extricating her music from the drawer, she accidentally
brought forth a piece of embroidery with it. 'Washington,' said Mr.
Hoffman, picking up the faded relic, 'this is a piece of poor Matilda's
workmanship.' The effect was electric.
Few people, however, have suffered as much as we did during the six days we were on the rock,
without food or water.  As soon as I was recovered, I was drafted on board the `Ajax,' seventy-four,
commanded by Captain Sir Henry Blackwood.  We lay off the mouth of the Dardanelles, forming
one of the squadron of Vice-Admiral Sir John Duckworth.  I'm fond of old England, as I hope
all of you young gentlemen are, but I must own that the spot where we lay is a very beautiful one.

"It had just gone four bells in the first watch, and all hands except those on duty were asleep,
when we were roused up by the cry of fire! Directly afterwards the drum beat to quarters, and
the guns were fired, as signals of distress.  A boat was also sent off with one of the lieutenants
and a midshipman, to summon assistance from the other ships. We all stood ready to obey the
orders we might receive.  The captain and one of the officers at once went down to the cockpit,
from which clouds of smoke were bursting out.  They quickly had to beat a retreat. We then,
forming a line, passed the buckets along full of water, to pour down upon the seat of the fire,
as far as it could be discovered.  So dense was the smoke, that several of the men who were
closest and whose duty it was to heave the water, were nearly suffocated.  It was soon evident
that the flames had the mastery of the ship.  The carpenter endeavoured to scuttle the after
part, but had to abandon the attempt.  There we were nearly six hundred human beings huddled
together on the forecastle, bowsprit, and sprit-sail yard, while the after part, from the mainmast
to the taffrail, was one mass of fire.  Smoke in thick columns was now rising from all parts
of the ship, while the flames crackled and hissed, then they caught some of the poor fellows
who had taken refuge in the tops. Some kept silent, but others shrieked aloud for mercy.  Above
the roar of the flames, and the cries of the men, the sound of the guns could be heard when
they went off as the fire reached them.  Captain Blackwood retained his composure and cheered
us up by reminding us, that the boats of the squadron would soon arrive.  They came at last.
It was no easy matter to get on board.  Many of the men jumped into the sea, in their eagerness
to reach them.  Others stood, shouting and shrieking to them to come nearer.  I, at last seeing
a boat which had not as yet taken many men aboard her, and thinking it was time to save myself,
leapt overboard, and was soon picked up.  Many who had imitated my example were of necessity
left swimming or floating, and would have perished had not other boats arrived and saved them.
The ship's cable had some time before this been burnt through.  One of the men in the boat
had been hurt.  I took his oar.  I found that the boat I was aboard of belonged to the `Saint
George,' and was under the command of Lieutenant Willoughby.  As soon as we fell in with another
boat, we put the rest of the people on board her, and rowed back again, to try and save some
more.  This we succeeded in doing.  The third time we returned to our burning ship. Just then
she rounded-to, and we saw several men hanging by ropes under her head.  The brave Lieutenant
resolved to rescue these poor fellows before she again fell off.  Straining at our oars, we
dashed up to her, and succeeded in taking all of them on board, but before we could get clear
of the ship she again fell off, carrying us with her, and as she surged through the water nearly
swamping us.  At the same time flames reached the shank and stopper, when her remaining bower
anchor fell over her sides, very nearly right down upon us.  The flames were at the same time
raging above our heads, and rushing out from her bow-ports.  Our destruction seemed certain;
we might have left the boat to try and save ourselves by swimming, but we were too much exhausted
to try and reach any of the other boats; all we could do was to try and keep the flames from
off our own.  Just as we had given up all expectation of escape, the anchor took the ground,
and though the cable was nearly burnt through, it had strength sufficient to check the ship's
head, which enabled us to clear ourselves; though we were somewhat scorched, no one was otherwise
much hurt.  In a short time the wreck drifted on shore on the north side of the island of Tenedos,
where she blew up with a tremendous explosion, which must have been heard miles away.  We who
were saved had reason to be thankful, but of the ship's company two hundred and fifty perished
that night by fire or water, including several of the officers, together with the greater number
of the midshipmen, who, being unable to swim, were drowned before they could reach the boats.
There were three women on board, one of whom was saved by following her husband down a rope
from the jibboom. The boatswain had two sons on board.  When the alarm of fire was given, he
had rushed down, and bringing up one of them, had thrown him into the sea, where he was picked
up by the jolly-boat.  He then descended for the other, but never returned, being, as several
of the midshipmen probably were, suffocated by the dense smoke rising from that part of the
ship.  I could go on into the middle of next year, as the saying is, telling you of my shipwrecks
and adventures, but I have a notion that you would get tired of listening before I had brought
my yarn to an end."

"Oh, no!  No!  Go on, Mr Riddle, go on, go on!" we shouted out.

"Well, then, young gentlemen, I'll just tell you the way we once took a Spanish sloop-of-war.

"I belonged at the time to the `Niobe' frigate out in the West Indies. We had been cruising
for some weeks without taking a prize, when we captured a Spanish merchant schooner, after
a long chase.  From some of her crew our captain learnt that a Spanish corvette, of twenty
guns, lay up a harbour in Cuba.  He determined to cut her out.  He had intended sending the
boats away for that service, when our second lieutenant, as gallant an officer as ever stepped,
proposed to take in our prize under Spanish colours, and running alongside the corvette, to
capture her by boarding.  Having shifted the prisoners to the frigate, the second lieutenant,
with three midshipmen and thirty volunteers, I being one of them, went on board the schooner.
There were batteries on either side, with heavy guns which would have opened fire upon us had
it for a moment been suspected what we really were.  The lieutenant and one of the midshipmen
blackened their faces, and rigged themselves out in check shirts and handkerchiefs bound round
their heads.  The rest of the crew wanted to do the same, but the lieutenant would only allow
me and another man to rig up as he had done, and regular blackamoors we made of ourselves.
We laughed, I can tell you, as we looked at each other and talked the nigger lingo, so that
even if a boat had come alongside they would not have discovered who we were.  We had besides
a real black and mulatto on board belonging to our crew.  The rest of the people were sent
below, with their cutlasses and pistols ready for the moment they were wanted.  Everything
was prepared by the time we got near the mouth of the harbour.  The midshipman, a fine young
fellow, taking the helm, the lieutenant sat on the companion-hatch smoking a cigarette, and
Sutton, the other man, and I, with the mulatto and negro, lolled about the deck with our arms
folded.  On we stood close under the batteries, which, if we had been discovered, would have
sunk us in pretty quick time, but as the schooner was very well-known in the harbour, her real
character was not suspected.  As soon as we got inside the harbour, we saw the corvette anchored
right in the centre.  The breeze headed us. That would be all in our favour, we knew, when
we had to come out again. We made four or five tacks, taking care not to do things too smartly.
The lieutenant turned his eye every now and again on the batteries.  I think he expected, as
I can tell you I did, that the Spaniards would before long smell a rat, and begin blazing away
at us.  They seemed, however, to have no suspicion, and we were allowed to beat up the harbour
without being interfered with.  We had got nearly up to the corvette, when we saw two or three
boats coming off from the shore towards us.  We well knew that if they got alongside they would
soon find out that the schooner had changed hands.  We could see only a few people on the deck
of the corvette, and the rest of her crew we guessed were either below or gone ashore.  In
the latter case we hoped soon to master her.  As the boats drew near us the breeze freshened,
and the lieutenant ordering the helm to be put down, we luffed up alongside the corvette, before
those on board suspected what we were about to do.  No sooner did they discover what we were
up to, than they began shouting and shrieking, some running to the guns, others to get hold
of muskets and cutlasses, while numbers of the crew came swarming up from below. Several officers
made their appearance.  We didn't give them much time, you may be sure, to defend themselves,
before, led by our brave lieutenant, we threw ourselves upon their deck, and were soon slashing
away with our cutlasses.  But few of them stopped to meet us, so completely did we surprise
them, but leaped below faster than they had come up.  The officers for a few seconds held out,
but they were quickly disarmed and placed under a couple of sentries in the after part of the
poop.  Three or four hands only had been left on board the schooner, and the lieutenant at
once ordered her to lead the way down the harbour, while the corvette's cable was cut and the
topsails loosed.  We had made such quick work of it, that the soldiers in the fort didn't discover
what had happened until the corvette was under way, with her topsails and courses set, following
the schooner.  They then began to open a hot fire on us and the schooner, but the breeze freshening,
we made such good way, that they could not get a proper range; their shot, however, came pretty
thickly on board, passing through the sails, cutting away a rope now and then, and several
times hulling us, but not a man was hurt. As soon as we could get some powder and shot from
below, we fired in return, though there was but little use in doing that, you may be sure.
We gave three hearty cheers when we at last got clear of the harbour, and sailed away with
our prize for Jamaica, accompanied by our frigate. Our lieutenant and all engaged gained great
credit for the way the enterprise had been accomplished.

"Had I been a wise man, I should have stuck to the navy; but soon after this, I had the misfortune
to belong to a ship commanded by a very different sort of officer to any I had before served
under.  If ever there was a hell afloat she was one.  Well-nigh a quarter of the crew at a
time were on the black list.  Not a day passed that one or more were not flogged.  At last,
two other men and I, when off the coast of America, leaped into a boat alongside and made for
the shore.  If we had been caught, we should have been well-nigh flayed alive.  So we took
good care to keep in hiding till the ship had sailed.  I afterwards shipped on board an American
merchantman, but I would not join Uncle Sam's navy on any account.  I can't say that I found
myself in a perfect paradise, and I was not sorry, after two or three years, to get on board
an English merchant vessel.  I became mate of her, and in one way or another saved money enough
to buy my cottage here, with a boat and nets, and to settle down with my wife and family. 
I mustn't keep you any longer, young gentlemen, listening to what befell me in the meantime;
but if you'll pleasure me by coming here another day, I'll go on with my yarn."

"Thank you, my friend," said Mr Reynell, getting up, "it's time for all of us to be returning
home, but I am very sure these young gentlemen will be very much obliged to you, if we can
manage to make another excursion here, to listen to some more of your adventures."

While some of us gathered round the old sailor, asking him questions, the rest were employed
carrying the baskets of provisions to the carriage, which set off on its return, we soon afterwards
following on foot.  Although many of the party declared that they had no wish to go to sea,
the accounts I had heard only strengthened my desire to become a sailor, and I determined more
resolutely than ever to use every means to accomplish my object.

CHAPTER FIVE.

  I form plans against the smugglers--Ned's brotherly advice--I continue
  to visit old Riddle--He presents me with a cutter--My first lessons in
  sailing--Reception of my present at home--Aunt Deb again gives her
  opinion--A present in return--Sudden disappearance of Mark, which
  leads to a further expression of sentiments on the part of Aunt Deb--I
  visit Leighton Hall--My interview with the Squire--I obtain permission
  to visit Mark in prison--"Better than doing nothing"--I console Old
  Roger--"A prison's a bad place for a boy"--Returning homewards, I
  unexpectedly gain some important information--The barn--The smuggler's
  conference--Rather too near to be pleasant--I contrive to escape--Am
  pursued and captured by the smugglers, but finally released--Aunt
  Deb's disapproval of my friendship for Mark Riddle.

I have taken up so much space in describing the adventures of old Riddle, that I must be as
brief as I can with my own.  Although I had been inclined to think smugglers very fine fellows,
I had lately heard so much against them that I began to consider it would be a very meritorious
act if I could gain information which might lead to the capture of some of them; besides which,
I flattered myself Sir Reginald would be so highly pleased at my conduct that he would exert
himself more than he at present seemed inclined to do, to obtain me an appointment as midshipman
on board a man-of-war.  I kept my ideas to myself; I didn't venture to mention them even to
the old sailor, as I suspected that if not actually in league with the smugglers, he was friendly
to them.  I thought it better also to say nothing about it to my father, for although I knew
that he would be pleased should I succeed, he might very naturally dread the danger I should
have to run in my undertaking.  How to set about the matter was the difficulty.  I had no intention
of acting a treacherous part, or to try to become friendly with the smugglers, for the purpose
of betraying them.  My plan was to hunt about to try and find out their hiding-places, and
where any cargoes were to be run; then to give information to the baronet.  The only person
to whom I confided my plan was Ned, under a promise of secrecy.  He tried to dissuade me, pointing
out that it was a very doubtful proceeding at the best, and that, should I succeed, the smugglers
would be sure to take vengeance on me.

"They will either shoot you or carry you off to sea, and drown you, or put you on board some
outward-bound ship going to the coast of Africa, or round Cape Horn; and it may be years before
you get back, if you ever return at all," said Ned.

Still his arguments didn't prevail with me, and I only undertook to be cautious.  Had he not
given his promise to keep my intentions secret, he would, I suspect, have told our father or
Aunt Deb, and effectual means would have been taken to prevent me from carrying out my plan.
A considerable time passed by, and although I was on the watch, I could gain no information
regarding the proceedings of the smugglers.  During this period I paid several visits to old
Riddle, who always seemed glad to see me.  I was highly delighted one day when he presented
me with a cutter, which he had carved out and rigged expressly for me.  It was about two feet
long and of a proportionable width, fitted with blocks, so that I could lower or hoist up the
sails, and set such canvas as the wind would allow.  The inside was of a dark salmon colour,
the bottom was painted and burnished to look like copper, while the rest was of a jet black.
Altogether I was highly delighted with the craft--the first I had ever possessed--and I only
wished she was large enough to enable me to go aboard her, so that I might sail in her.

Near old Rogers' house was a lagoon of considerable length and breadth, filled by the sea at
high tide.  It was open to all winds, and was thus a capital place for sailing a model.  He
and Mark at once accompanied me to it, and they having trimmed the sails, and placed the rudder
in the proper position, the model vessel went as steadily as if the ship had had a crew on
board.  When she had finished her voyage across the lagoon, the old sailor, taking her out,
showed me how to trim the sails. I then, carrying her back to the place whence she started,
set her off myself.  I had fancied that I could make her sail directly before the wind; but
he explained the impossibility of doing this without a person on board to steer, as she would
have a tendency to luff up to the wind. He evidently took a pleasure in teaching me, and I
didn't grow weary of learning, so that at the end of the first day I fancied I could manage
my little craft to perfection.  I called her "The Hope."  He promised to have the name painted
on her stern by the next day I came.  I went almost day after day for a week or more.  At last
old Roger declared I could sail "The Hope" as well as he could.  Sometimes Mark came with me,
but he didn't take as much interest in the amusement as I did, he being more accustomed to
practical sailing; besides which he had other employments into which he didn't think fit to
initiate me.  As I before said, he frequently went fishing on the Squire's ponds, and from
a light fowling-piece which I saw in his room, together with several nets and other contrivances
for catching game, I suspected that he also spent some of his time in the Squire's preserves. Now
go and arrange with Mr. PODBURY.

Culch. (to himself, as he retires). It is most unsatisfactory; but at least PODBURY is disposed of!

The
same Scene, a quarter of an hour later. PODBURY and Miss PRENDERGAST.

Podbury (with a very long face).

No, I say, though! RUSKIN doesn't say all that?

Miss P. I am not in the habit of misquoting. If you wish to verify the quotation, however, I daresay
I could find you the reference in Fors Clavigera.

Podb. (ruefully). Thanks--I won't trouble you.

Only it does seem rather rough on fellows, don't you know. If everyone went on his plan--well,
there wouldn't be many marriages! Still, I never thought you'd say "Yes" right off. It's like
my cheek, I know, to ask you at all; you're so awfully clever and
that.

And if there's a chance for me, I'm game for anything in the way of a trial. Don't make it stiffer
than you can help, that's all!

Miss P. All I ask of you is to leave me for a short time, and go and travel with Mr. CULCHARD again.

Podb.
Oh, I say, Miss PRENDERGAST, you know. Make it something else. Do!

Miss P. That is the task I require, and I can accept no other. It
is nothing, after all, but what you came out here to do.

Podb. I
didn't know him then, you see. And what made me agree to come away
with him at all is beyond me. It was all HUGHIE ROSE's doing--he said
we should get on together like blazes. So we have--very like blazes!

Miss
P. Never mind that. Are you willing to accept the trial or not?

Podb.
If you only knew what he's like when he's nasty, you'd let me off--you
would, really. But there, to please you, I'll do it. I'll stand him
as long as ever I can--'pon my honour I will. Only you'll make it
up to me afterwards, won't you now?  "The Hope" just as I had expected, met with
general admiration from my brothers and sisters. They were much astonished to see me unfurl
the sails, and all wished to come and see her sail.  I promised to give them that pleasure,
provided they would undertake to carry the cutter between them.  Aunt Deb was the only person
who turned up her nose at seeing my model.

"Mr Riddle might have thought of some other present to give the boy," she observed; "there
was no necessity indeed for his giving a present at all.  Dick's head is already too much turned
towards sea matters, and this will only make him think of them more than ever.  I shall advise
your father to return the vessel to the old sailor, with the request that he will dispose of
it to some one else.  In my opinion, it was very wrong of him to make such a present without
first asking leave."

I thought it better to say nothing, and Aunt Deb didn't carry out her intentions.  My mother,
who was always generously inclined, gave me leave to take a few pots of jam in return.  A few
days afterwards Ned and I, and two of my sisters, set out to carry our present.  They had been
interested in what I had told them about the old sailor and his pretty daughter, and wanted
to see them.  On our arrival they received us in a friendly way, and Mrs Riddle and Mary hurried
to place chairs for my sisters.  They thanked us much for the present we had brought.  I observed
that they all looked graver than usual.  I inquired for Mark.

"He hasn't come home since yesterday evening," answered his father.  "I don't fancy that any
harm has befallen him; but still I can't help thinking all sorts of things.  If he doesn't
come back soon, I must set out to look for him."

I found that Mark had taken his gun, and said that he was going along the shore to get a shot
at a gull, but it was not as yet the season for wild fowl to visit the coast.  Still I could
not help fancying that old Roger knew more about Mark's intended proceedings than he thought
fit to tell me.  It struck me that perhaps the smugglers had something to do with the matter.
Had I been alone I should have offered to have accompanied him; but he didn't ask me, and indeed
seemed to wish that we should take our departure.  Telling my sisters, therefore, that it was
time to go home, we wished the family good-bye, and set out on our return.  At tea that evening
my sisters mentioned the disappearance of Mark.

"Depend upon it that boy has got into mischief of some sort," observed Aunt Deb; "though I
never saw him that I know of, I am very sure from the remarks Dick has made that he is a wild
monkey, and a very unfit companion for a young gentleman."

I defended Mark, and asserted that it was just as likely that he had met with some accident.

"At all events, I intend to go over to-morrow morning, and inquire what has happened to him,"
I said.  "I don't remember making any remarks which would lead you Aunt Deb, to suppose that
he was otherwise than a well-conducted fellow.  He seems much attached to his family, and they're
evidently very fond of him."

"Perhaps his father spoils him as other parents are apt to do," remarked Aunt Deb, glancing
at the Vicar.  "The sooner you break off your intimacy with him the better in my opinion--and
now you are aware of my sentiments."

The latter was a remark Aunt Deb usually made at the conclusion of an argument, by which she
intended it to be understood that her opinion was not to be disputed.

Next morning, without waiting for breakfast, taking only a crust of bread and a cup of milk,
I set off, anxious to learn what had happened to my friend Mark.  On nearing the cottage I
saw Mary at the door.

"Oh!  Master Dick, I'm so glad you're come," she exclaimed.  "Father and mother are in a great
taking.  Mark has got into trouble.  When he went out yesterday evening he met Jack Quilter
and Tom Bass, and they persuaded him to go shooting where he ought not to have gone, and all
three were caught by Sir Reginald's keepers.  They had a fight for it, and Quilter and Bass
knocked one of the keepers down, and would have treated him worse if Mark had not interfered.
Three other keepers coming up, they were all carried off to the Hall, where they have been
locked up ever since.  Father only heard of it yesterday evening after you went.  He at once
set off to try and see Sir Reginald, and he only got back late last night, or rather this morning,
so he has only just now got up.  He said that the Squire was very savage with him, and threatened
to send Mark off to sea.  It was with great difficulty that father got leave to see Mark, who
told him how he had saved the keeper's life, but the Squire would not believe it, and said
that he had been caught poaching, and must take the consequences."

"I'm very sorry to hear this," I said to Mary; "but don't despair of your brother getting off.
I'll ask my father to plead for him; and if he won't do that, I'll go myself and tell the Squire
what a capital fellow Mark is.  It would be a shame to send him to sea against his will, although
he might be ready enough to go of his own accord."

After I had talked the matter over with Mary for some time, I went into the cottage, where
I found Mrs Riddle looking very downcast, and soon afterwards old Roger made his appearance.
He repeated what Mary had said, and added that he intended to engage the services of Lawyer
Roe to defend Mark, though the expenses would be greater than he could well bear.  I was afraid,
however, that Lawyer Roe could do nothing for Mark, taken as he had been with a gun in his
hands, in Sir Reginald's preserves, should the baronet resolve to prosecute.  I again offered
to go off at once to see Sir Reginald.  I however much doubted that my father would undertake
the mission, especially as Aunt Deb would endeavour to persuade him to have nothing to do with
the matter.  Mrs Riddle and Mary pressed me to take some breakfast, which they had just prepared,
and as by this time I was very hungry, I gladly accepted their invitation.  As it was important
to get early to the Hall, directly breakfast was over I started, resolved to employ every means
I could to get Mark liberated.  It didn't occur to me that probably Sir Reginald would pay
no attention to my request, or that he would consider my interference as a piece of impertinence.
I made up my mind to speak boldly and forcibly, and felt very confident that I should gain
my object.  Old Roger accompanied me part of the way, but he thought it was better not to be
seen near the Hall, lest it should be supposed I had been influenced by him.  I was but a little
fellow, it must be remembered, and without any experience of the world, or my hopes would not
have risen so high.

"Never fear, Mr Riddle," said I, as I parted from the old sailor. "I'll manage, by hook or
by crook, to get Mark set free, so tell Mrs Riddle and Mary to keep up their spirits."

When I reached the Hall, I walked boldly up to the front porch, and gave a sturdy pull at the
bell.  A powdered footman opened the door.  In a firm voice I asked to see Sir Reginald.

"He is at breakfast."

"Then say Mr Richard Cheveley has called, and begs to see him on an important matter."

The footman gave an equivocal smile down at me, and went into the breakfast-room at one side
of the Hall.

I heard a lady's voice say--

"Oh!  Do let him come in."

The servant reappearing, showed me into the breakfast-room, in which several ladies were at
one end of a well-covered table.  Lady Knowsley was seated, presiding at the tea-urn, with
several young ladies on either side, and Sir Reginald at the foot.

I made my bow as I entered.  Lady Knowsley held out her hand without rising, and Sir Reginald
turned partly round in his chair and gave me a nod, then went on eating his breakfast, while
the young ladies smiled. The footman placed a chair for me in a vacant place at the table.

"You have had a long walk, and must be ready for breakfast," said Lady Knowles, in a kind tone.

"Thank you, I took some on my way," I answered, not wishing to loose time by having to repeat
an operation I felt that I could not perform in the presence of so many young ladies with my
accustomed appetite.

"You must have got up another appetite by this time," observed Sir Reginald.  "Come youngster!
Here is an egg and some ham.  Julia, cut him a slice of bread, and Lady Knowles will supply
you with tea.  Fall to, now, and let me see what sort of a man you are."

Thus pressed, I was compelled to eat what was set before me, which I did without any great
difficulty.  Sir Reginald was too polite to ask me the object of my visit till I had finished.
He pressed me to take more, but I declined, and I then told him that I had heard that Mark
Riddle had been taken poaching with some other lads who had led him astray.

"That is your opinion, Master Cheveley," observed Sir Reginald, with a laugh; "why the fellow
is the most arrant young poacher in the neighbourhood.  My people have been aware of it for
a long time, but have hitherto been unable to capture him."

"I hope that they are mistaken, Sir Reginald," I observed; "I have seen a good deal of Mark
Riddle, and his father is a very fine old sailor."

"He may be that, although I have reason to believe that he is, besides, as determined a smuggler
as any on the coast, though he is too cunning to be caught," answered the baronet.  "No, no,
Master Cheveley; young Mark must be sent to prison unless he is allowed as a favour to go to
sea instead."

I was determined not to be defeated, notwithstanding what the baronet had said.  I still pleaded
for Mark, and the ladies, who are generally ready to take the weaker side joined with me.

"Suppose he is guilty.  He is very young.  If he would promise not to poach again, will it
not be kind to let him off?" said Lady Knowles.

"It would be kinder to give him a lesson which he will not forget," said Sir Reginald; "notwithstanding
all his promises, he would be certain to poach again.  He might end by killing a keeper, and
have to be sent to the gallows, as has been the fate of many.  Poachers and smugglers must
be put down at all costs."

In spite of my intention to persevere, I found that I hadn't the slightest chance of moving
the feelings of the baronet.  I, however, supported by the ladies, got leave to pay Mark a
visit, and I learned from them that he and the other men were not to be sent off to prison
until the following day, when the constables would come to carry them away.  I stayed for some
time, the young ladies chatting pleasantly with me, till at length thinking that I ought to
take my departure, I asked to be allowed to go to Sir Reginald's study, to obtain an order
for me to visit Mark.

"I'll get it for you," said Miss Julia; "we all feel compassion for the poor lad, who has evidently
been led astray by bad companions."  In a short time she returned, with an order to the constable
in charge of the prisoners. 

Theodore saluted them with profound respect, and his presence had the power to smooth for a moment
even the stern brow of the Superior.

She asked several questions respecting his Parents, his religion,
and what had reduced him to a state of Beggary.

To these demands his answers were perfectly satisfactory and perfectly false. He was then asked
his opinion of a monastic life: He replied in terms of high estimation
and respect for it.

Upon this, the Prioress told him that his obtaining an entrance into a religious order was
not impossible; that her recommendation would not permit his poverty
to be an obstacle, and that if She found him deserving it, He might
depend in future upon her protection.

Theodore assured her that to merit her favour would be his highest ambition; and having ordered
him to return next day, when She would talk with him further, the Domina quitted the Parlour.

The
Nuns, whom respect for the Superior had till then kept silent, now crowded all together to the
Grate, and assailed the Youth with a multitude of questions.

He had already examined each with attention: Alas! Agnes was not amongst them. The Nuns heaped
question upon question so thickly that it was scarcely possible for him to reply. One asked
where He was born, since his accent declared him to be a Foreigner:
Another wanted to know, why He wore a patch upon his left eye: Sister
Helena enquired whether He had not a Sister like him, because She
should like such a Companion; and Sister Rachael was fully persuaded
that the Brother would be the pleasanter Companion of the Two.

Theodore amused himself with retailing to the credulous Nuns for
truths all the strange stories which his imagination could invent.

He related to them his supposed adventures, and penetrated every Auditor with astonishment, while
He talked of Giants, Savages, Ship-wrecks, and Islands inhabited

'By
Anthropophagi, and Men whose heads Do grow beneath their shoulders,'

With
many other circumstances to the full as remarkable.

He said, that He was born in Terra Incognita, was educated at an Hottentot University, and
had past two years among the Americans of Silesia.

'For what regards the loss of my eye' said He, 'it was a just punishment upon me for disrespect
to the Virgin, when I made my second pilgrimage to Loretto.

I stood near the Altar in the miraculous Chapel: The Monks were proceeding to array the Statue
in her best apparel

.
  As I had told Ned where
I was going I knew that they would not be anxious about me, and therefore did not hurry my
steps.  I had got about half way, when feeling tired I sat myself down to rest, with my back
against the side of an old barn, at a spot whence I could obtain a good view of the sea.  I
sat for some time watching the vessels passing up and down channel, and observing a few boats
putting out for their night's fishing from Leighton Cove.  The weather was warm, and I was
sheltered from the light breeze which blew off the land.  I had been on foot all day since
early dawn, and very naturally became drowsy.  Instead of at once jumping up I sat on, and
in consequence fell fast asleep.  When I awoke I found that the sun had set, and that the daylight
was fast departing.  I was just going to get up, when I heard voices proceeding from the inside
of the barn.  Though not intending to play the part of an eavesdropper, I could not help listening
to what they said.  The men spoke in low voices, so that I didn't catch everything, but I heard
enough to convince me that the speakers were smugglers arranging a spot where a cargo was to
be run the first night when there would be no moon, and the wind blowing off shore.  As far
as I could make out, it was to be close to where I then was.  Below me was a little sandy bay,
where the boats could come ashore even should there be a heavy sea running outside.

One of the speakers, whom I knew to be Ned Burden, lived in a cottage hard by, and he was to
show a light in his window should the coast be clear.  At present the weather was far too favourable
for their purpose, but they counted on a change in four or five days.  At last I heard them
fix on the following Wednesday.  I was afraid of moving lest the smugglers should hear me,
and I knew that if they discovered my whereabout they would look upon me as a spy, especially
as everybody was aware of the way my father, had been speaking against smuggling.  Still they
went on talking, and I heard some more of their designs.

In order to draw off the Revenue-men from the spot, it was proposed to set one or two hayricks
on fire at a large farm near Sandgate, when it was supposed that they would collect to try
and extinguish the flames, so as to prevent the fire communicating with the other surrounding
ricks.  As this was sure to be no easy work, it was calculated that the smugglers would have
time to run the cargo, and carry the goods away into the interior.  It was an opportunity I
had long been looking for. I could now, by giving the information I possessed, secure the favour
of Sir Reginald, and thus induce him to further my object.  I sat on, scarcely daring to breathe,
lest I should be heard, and heartily wishing that the men would go away.  They had evidently,
however, met there for the purpose of discussing various subjects.  Ned Burden probably didn't
wish to go far from home, and apparently was unwilling to receive his visitors in his own cottage.
He had therefore fixed upon this spot.  At last I began to think that they intended to spend
the night there.  I heard footsteps approaching, and I now feared that I should be discovered;
but the new comers followed the path which led to the opposite side of the barn to that where
I was sitting.  I judged by the voices that there were three of them.  They once more went
over the matters that the others had before discussed, having apparently no fear of being overheard.
They all spoke in their ordinary voices, only occasionally dropping them.  "Now is the time,"
I thought, "of making my escape; while they are talking they will not hear me, and I may creep
away to a distance without being discovered."  I put my plan into execution.  The men continued
talking on; their voices sounded fainter and fainter as I got farther away from the barn. 
Fancying that I was safe, I at last rose to my feet, intending to run as fast as my legs could
carry me.  Scarcely, however, had I began to move forward, when I heard a shout, followed by
the sound of footsteps.  I fully expected, should the smugglers fancy that I had overheard
them to get a knock on the head if I was overtaken.  I had always been tolerably fleet of foot,
and as I had no desire to be so treated, I set off running as hard as I could.  I hadn't got
far, however, before I fancied I heard some one coming.  In a short time I was nearly certain
of it, but I didn't stop to listen.  In daylight I should have had no difficulty in keeping
ahead of my pursuers, but the ground was rough, and I had to turn aside to avoid bushes and
rocks.  Still the impediments in my way would also assist to stop them, and I didn't despair
of escaping.  I had to cross over a ridge, at the top of which I was exposed to view.  I had
just reached it, when I heard some one shout.  "You may shout as loud as you like," thought
I, "but I'm not going to stop in consequence."  Down the hill I rushed, hoping soon to find
shelter, so as to be able to turn off to one side or the other, and thus to evade my pursuers.
I knew that a little way on was a lane which led directly to the village, and that if I could
once get into it I might run on without much chance of being overtaken.  I could see before
me a thick hedge, through which I should have to get into the lane.  I was making my way towards
it, when down I came into a deep ditch or watercourse, the existence of which I had forgotten.
It was perfectly dry, but I was severely hurt by the fall, and for some seconds I lay unable
to move.  I soon, however, recovered, and attempted to scramble out on the opposite side. 
But the bank was steep, and the top was above my reach.  I fancied that it would be lower farther
down, and ran or rather scrambled on in that direction.  It didn't occur to me at the time
that it would be wiser to remain perfectly still, when my pursuers, if they were continuing
the chase, would have passed me unobserved in the darkness.  I at last reached a part where
the bank was broken away, and began climbing up, when I heard footsteps close to me; and, as
I gained the top, I saw a man coming along at full speed on the opposite side.  I determined,
however, not to be caught if I could help it; but to my dismay, when I began to run, I found
that I had sprained my ankle.  This, though it didn't stop me altogether, prevented me from
running as fast as before; but if I could get through the hedge I thought that I might keep
ahead, or that the smugglers would not venture to follow me.  To ascertain how far off they
were I gave a glance over my shoulder.  This was fatal to my success, for my foot caught in
a low bush and down I came.  In vain I endeavoured to regain my feet.  Next instant I found
myself in the grasp of two men.

"Hulloa!  Youngster; what made you try to get away from us?" asked one of them, in an angry tone.

"I am on my way home, and wish to get there as soon as possible," I answered.

"Who are you?" asked the man.

I told him without hesitation.

"And your father has joined Sir Reginald and the other squires about here in persecuting the
smugglers."

"I don't see what that has to do with my being in a hurry to get home," I replied.

"Maybe not; but we want to know where you were lying hid just before you took to running,"
said the other man.

"I was not lying hid anywhere," I answered.  "I was going along from paying a visit to Roger
Riddle, after seeing his son Mark, who was caught by the Squire's keepers, and accused of poaching,
when being tired I sat down to rest and fell asleep."

"Whereabouts were you sleeping?" asked the smuggler.

"On the ground," I answered.

"So I suppose," said the man, with a laugh.  "But whereabouts on the ground?"

"Not far from the old barn, to the best of my recollection; but it was too dark when I started
to make out where I had been."

This answer seemed to satisfy my interrogator.  I was afraid that he would inquire every moment
whether I had heard the conversation going on within the building.

"Well, my lad," he said, "take care you don't shove your nose into places where you're not
wanted.  If you're a friend of old Riddle's, I don't suppose you'll have any ill-feeling against
the smugglers.  So now, good-night.  You would have saved us a long run if you hadn't been
in such a hurry to get home."

Thankful to escape so easily, I told the men I was sorry to have given them so much trouble.
They accompanied me to a gate not far off, over which I climbed into the lane.  I then, as
fast as my sprained ankle would let me, made the best of my way home.  I found that my family
had been somewhat alarmed at my non-appearance.  My father, who always took matters coolly,
accepted my excuses, but Aunt Deb scolded me roundly for having played truant.

"What business had you to go to trouble Sir Reginald about that young scapegrace Riddle?" she
asked, in her usual stern manner.  "He'll consider that you and your friend are alike.  He'll
not be far wrong either.  You have lost all chance, if you ever had one, of interesting Sir
Reginald in your favour.  You may as well give up all hope at once of being a midshipman. 
Now I suppose you want some supper, though you don't deserve it.  You're always giving trouble
to Betsy in coming home at irregular hours."

"Thank you," I said, "I'm not so very hungry.  I'll go into the kitchen and get some bread
and cheese; that is all I want before I go to bed."

So thus I made my escape.  I had no opportunity that night of informing my father of what I
had heard, but when we went to our room I gave Ned an account of my adventures.

"I would advise you, Dick, not to interfere in the matter," said Ned. "It's all very well for
our father to preach against smuggling; the smugglers themselves don't mind it a bit; but were
he to take any active measures they would very likely burn the house down, or play us some
other trick which would not be pleasant."

Notwithstanding what Ned said, I determined to inform Sir Reginald of what I had heard, still
hoping that by so doing I should gain his favour.

CHAPTER SIX.

  I revisit the baronet--My information and its worth--Am somewhat taken
  aback at my reception--Well out of it--Mark's escape--Old Riddle's
  gratitude--A night of adventure--The run--Night attack on Kidbrooke
  Farm--The fire--My curiosity overcomes my prudence--The struggle on
  the beach--The luck of the "Saucy Bess," and ill-luck of Mark--I am
  again captured by the smugglers--Buried in a chest--My struggle for
  freedom, and its result--A vault in the old mill--My explorations in
  the vault.

The next morning I found my father in his study before breakfast.  I told him of my having
overheard the smugglers arranging the plans for running a cargo shortly, and asked him whether
he wished me to let Sir Reginald know.

"You are in duty bound to do so," he answered.  "At the same time you must take care it is
not known that you gave the information.  He'll certainly be pleased, and will be more inclined
than before to assist you.  You had better set off directly breakfast is over, and I will write
a note for you to deliver, which will be an excuse for your appearance at the Hall.  Do not
say anything about the matter to any one else, as things that we fancy are known only to ourselves
are apt to get abroad."

I followed my father's advice, and said nothing during breakfast.  As soon as it was over I
set out.  Aunt Deb saw me, and shouted out, asking me where I was going; but pretending not
to hear her, I ran on.  I suspect I made her very irate.  I noted the people I met on my way,
and among others I encountered Ned Burden.  He looked hard at me, but said nothing beyond returning
my "Good morning, Mr Burden," with "Good morning, Master Dick," and I passed on.  I looked
back shortly afterwards for a moment, and saw that he had stopped, and was apparently watching
me.  As soon as I reached the Hall I gave my father's note to a servant, saying that I was
waiting to see Sir Reginald.  In a short time the man came back and asked me to follow him
into the study.

"Well, Master Richard Cheveley," remarked the baronet, without inviting me to sit down, "I
wonder you have the face to show yourself here after what has occurred."

"What have I done, sir?"  I asked with astonishment.

"Connived or assisted at the escape of the poachers I had shut up in my strong room yesterday
evening, waiting the arrival of the constables to convey them to prison."

"I beg your pardon, Sir Reginald.  You must be under a mistake," I exclaimed.  "I have in no
way assisted any poachers to escape.  I merely yesterday, with your permission, visited the
boy Mark Riddle.  He had been captured with two persons much older than himself, and he was,
I believe, led astray by them."

"You, or somebody else, left them some tools--a file and a small saw-- with which they managed
to cut away a bar in the strong room and effect their escape.  Here are the instruments, which
they must have dropped as they were getting off.  Do you recognise them?"

As Sir Reginald was speaking I recollected giving the knife and file and saw to Mark, that
he might amuse himself by cutting out some blocks. When I saw them I at once acknowledged them
as mine, telling the baronet my object in giving them to Mark.

"It was thoughtless, to say the least of it, and a very suspicious circumstance, young gentleman,"
remarked Sir Reginald.

"Have they not been retaken?"  I inquired, anxious to know what had become of my friend Mark.

"No, there is but little chance of that," he answered, in a tone of vexation.  "Now, let me
know what you have come about.  Your father gives no reason for your visit."

Without claiming any merit, I at once gave a clear account of all I had heard on the previous
evening.  Sir Reginald appeared much interested, and his manner became more friendly than at first.

"I am ready to believe that you had no intention to assist young Riddle to escape," he said
at last, after taking notes of all I told him.  "Now return home, and keep your own counsel."

I confess that I was secretly very glad Mark had made his escape.  I hoped that he would return
to his father, and keep in hiding till the affair had blown over, and also give up poaching
for the future.  I wanted as soon as possible to go and see the old sailor, and learn what
had become of Mark, but I knew that my father would be expecting me; and accordingly, after
leaving the Hall, went directly home.  My father complimented me more than I deserved on the
way I had conducted the matter.  I didn't tell him just then of my having unintentionally assisted
Mark and the other poachers to make their escape.

"If the smugglers and their cargo are taken, you will deservedly have the credit of the affair,
and Sir Reginald will, I hope, feel bound to assist you as you desire," he observed.

I had to wait till the next day to go over and see old Roger.  I almost expected to find that
Mark had returned home, and was concealed in the house; but none of his family knew anything
about him, except that he had escaped from Sir Reginald's strong room.  They all thanked me
warmly for the assistance I had given him, and of which they had heard by some means or other.
They would not believe that I had had no intention, when I lent him my knife and other things,
of helping him to get out.  I took care to return home at an early hour, as I had no wish to
encounter Ned Burden or the other men on the way.  I waited somewhat impatiently for the result
of the information I had given.  I was very sure the baronet would take the necessary steps
for capturing the smugglers.  The weather, which had for a long time been fine, now completely
changed.  A strong westerly gale sprung up, the sky was clouded over, and as there was no moon
the nights were very dark.  The evening on which I had heard the smugglers propose to run the
cargo arrived.  I should have been wise to have gone to bed at the regular hour, as if I had
had nothing to do in the matter.  Instead of that, as soon as Ned was asleep I slipped on my
clothes and went out by the back door, which I carefully closed behind me.  As soon as I got
clear of the village, and could see to a distance, I turned my eyes towards Kidbrooke Farm,
which the smugglers had planned to attack in order to draw off the coastguard-men from the
spot where the cargo was to be run.  In a few minutes I observed a bright light burst forth
from the surrounding darkness, and rapidly increase until it assumed the appearance of a huge
bonfire.  I then knew that the outlaws had carried out the first part of their plan, as I concluded
they would the second.  It seemed to me that the whole farm and all the stacks would speedily
be in a blaze.  Eager to see the fire, I ran towards the farm.  On getting nearer, the hum
of human voices showed me that a number of people had assembled, some of whom were engaged
in throwing water over the stacks, others in pulling down the burning one.  As I got up to
them, I found that they were mostly labourers from Leighton, together with those belonging
to the farm, with a few of the villagers from Sandgate.  There were, I remarked, none of the
revenue-men present, by which I concluded that they had not been drawn away from the coast,
as the smugglers expected they would be. Precautions having been taken in time, and there being
plenty of hands to extinguish the flames, the fire didn't communicate to the other ricks; and,
as far as I could see, even a portion of the first was saved.

It would have been better for me had I returned home and gone to bed again; but I was curious
to know if the "Saucy Bess" had succeeded in running her cargo, or whether Sir Reginald had
acted on the information I had given him, and had sent the coastguard-men to watch for the
smugglers and capture them.  Without stopping, therefore, in the neighbourhood of the burning
rick, I hurried away towards the spot at which I had heard Ned Burden and his companions propose
to run the cargo.  I must have been running on for twenty minutes or so when I heard a pistol-shot
fired; it was succeeded by two or three others. This made me more than ever eager to ascertain
what was going forward. I doubled my speed.  The path was tolerably good, and I knew the way.
All the time I had not met a single person.  After some time I heard more shouts, sounding
much nearer, and cries mingled with the clashing of cutlasses, so it seemed to me.  I had no
doubt that the coastguard-men and the smugglers were having a desperate fight, the latter endeavouring
to defend their property, and the former to capture it.  Which would succeed in their object
seemed doubtful.  I pictured the whole scene, though as yet I could see nothing.  This I was
eager to do, forgetting that bullets flying about were no respecters of persons. At last I
reached the top of a cliff overlooking the bay, whence I could see a lugger, which I guessed
to be the "Saucy Bess," with her sails loose, a short distance from the shore, and two or three
boats near her; while on the sands were a number of men, who from their movements, and the
babel of tongues arising from the spot, were evidently struggling. That the revenue-men had
the best of it, I had no doubt.  It appeared to me that they had captured part of the cargo,
and some of the smugglers, and that others were endeavouring to rescue their comrades.  That
this was the case I had little doubt, when I saw the lugger's head turned seawards, and presently
she disappeared in the gloom of night I was now satisfied that Sir Reginald had acted on the
information I had given him, and that he would find it had been correct.  I was at last about
to return home, when, just as I reached a lane leading from the cliffs, I heard footsteps close
to me, and, turning round, saw three men approaching.  Whoever they were I thought it better
to keep out of their way, and began to run.  But they must have seen me, and at once made chase.
I could easily have kept ahead, but unfortunately stepping into a deep rut, I stumbled, and
before I got under weigh again the men were upon me.

"Where are you bound for, youngster?" cried one of them, whom I recognised by the voice to
be Ned Burden.

"I came to see what was going forward," I answered.

"Not the first time you have done that, young gentleman," said one, in an angry voice.  "We
know who you are.  Somebody gave information about the run which was to be made to-night, and
putting two or three things together no one will doubt that it was you.  Shall we heave him
over the cliffs, or what shall we do with him, mates?"

"Let us take him along with us, at all events," said one of the other men.  "If he has spoiled
our plans to-night, he deserves to be knocked on the head."

"Spoilt our plans indeed he has," said Burden; and he presently detailed to his companions
how he had caught me listening at the old barn, and how, not supposing that I had heard anything
of importance, he had let me go.

I could not deny this, and I saw that it would be useless to attempt to defend myself.  My
captors, without more ado, proceeded to tie my arms behind my back, and to bind a handkerchief
over my eyes.

"Remember, youngster," said Burden, "if you shout out or utter a word we'll send a bullet through
your head."

From the fierce way in which he spoke I thought he was very likely to do this.  I did not tell
him that I knew who he was, as I was sure that this would only make matters worse for me. 
I did not, however, believe that they really meant to kill me; but what they would do was more
than I could guess.  Two of them taking me one by each arm led me along the road, without wasting
another word on me.  They walked very fast indeed. Had they not supported me I should have
fallen several times.  Every moment I thought they would stop.  I tried to ascertain in what
direction they were leading me, but very soon lost all means of doing so.  At length they made
me sit down on what I supposed was a bank.  I tried to judge from what quarter the wind was
blowing, but the spot was sheltered, and sometimes it blew on one cheek and sometimes on the
other.  I could hear the roar of the waves, by which I knew that I could be at no great distance
from the shore.  While one of them held me tightly by the arm, the others withdrew to a distance
to consult as to how they should proceed.  After a time they came back, and we continued our
march at the same rate as before.  On and on we went.  I was getting very tired, and would
gladly have again sat down.  When I complained, the men laughed at me.

"You'll soon have time enough to rest yourself, youngster," said one of them.  "You may consider
yourself fortunate that things are no worse with you."

Finding that it would be useless to say anything more, I held my tongue. I must own that I
now bitterly regretted having interfered against the smugglers.  They were fully convinced
that I had done so, and I could not defend myself.  I had heard of the fearful punishment that
they had at times inflicted on informers; and even should they spare my life, I thought it
too probable that they would ship me off to some distant part of the world, or shut me up in
a cavern or some other place from which I could not make my escape.  It seemed to me that several
hours had passed since I was captured, and that it must now be broad daylight; but the bandage
was so tightly secured over my eyes that I could not move it with my eyebrows, nor could I,
from my arms being fastened behind my back, get my hands free to do so.  Again and again I
begged my captors to listen to me and loosen my arms, as the ropes hurt me.  When I declared
that I could go no farther, one of the men answered fiercely:--

"We'll soon see that, youngster."

He gave me a prod with the point of a knife or cutlass, I could not tell which.  It showed
me that they were not likely to treat me very ceremoniously.  "I must make the best of a bad
matter, I suppose," I thought, and did not attempt to stop.  Suddenly the men brought up, and
then turning sharp round told me to lift my feet, and I found that we were walking up some
wooden steps.  This I could judge of by the sound made by our feet.  Then we went along a level
floor.  Presently, after passing through two or three doorways, as I supposed, we descended
also by wooden steps, till I felt convinced, by the closeness of the atmosphere, that we had
reached a vault.

"You may make yourself comfortable here, young gentleman, for the rest of your life," said
one of the men, with a hoarse laugh.  "I've a notion that you'll not again be inclined to go
and inform against poor fellows who are carrying on their business without wishing to do you
or any one else harm."

"Stay; that jacket of his, and his waistcoat, are a great deal too good for him," observed
another man.

And forthwith, having released my arms, they took off the garments they spoke of.

My first impulse, on getting my hands free, was to try and get the bandage from my eyes, but
one of the men caught hold of my hands and prevented me from accomplishing my object.  I, however,
clutched hold of my clothes with the other, unwilling to give them up; but they quickly mastered
me, leaving me only my shirt and trousers.  I now began to fear that they intended some serious
violence.  In vain I struggled; I felt myself lifted up by the shoulders and feet, and placed
on a rough board. As I now had my hands free, I immediately tore off the bandage.  A gleam
of light, which came from one side, showed me that I was in what appeared to be a large chest,
placed on its side; but before I could turn myself round the lid was shut down, and I heard
the men securing it.  I was thus imprisoned in, so far as I could tell, a living tomb.  I shouted
and shrieked, and tried to force open the lid.  My captors were holding it on the outside,
and it seemed to me were driving in screws. I could hear them talking outside, but what they
said I could not make out.  Could it be possible that they intended to leave me here to perish
by hunger?  The act would be too diabolical for the worst of wretches to think of, and yet
what other reason could they have for shutting me up in such a place?  Finding that I could
not release myself, I thought I would try to move their feelings.

"I am very sorry if I have brought you or any others into trouble," I said.  "If you'll ask
Roger Riddle, he'll tell you that I have no ill-feeling towards smugglers.  I was the means
of getting his son Mark out of prison.  If you keep me here you'll make my father and mother
very miserable, for they won't know what has become of me.  You can't be so cruel, surely."

The men went talking on.  I was sure they heard me, though they made no answer.  It then occurred
to me that perhaps they had shut me up in the chest for the purpose of carrying me on board
a vessel, and that I should then be set free and enjoy the light of heaven and the warmth of
the sun.  Then I recollected having read how cruelly boys are treated on board ship, and that
if I were sent under such circumstances I should have to lead a dog's life at the best.  Well,
it was some consolation to have reason to hope that I was not to be murdered as I at first
feared, or to be kept shut up in this horrible vault for an indefinite period, when I might
be forgotten, and possibly be allowed to die of starvation.

These thoughts passed rapidly through my mind.  As soon as I grew calm, I listened to ascertain
what the men were about.  As far as I could judge, in a short time they quitted the vault,
and I was left alone.  I listened and listened.  No sound could I hear.  A sufficient amount
of air came through the chinks in the chest, and enabled me to breathe without difficulty.
I had no notion of staying where I was without some endeavour to extricate myself.  I knew
that after a time I should grow weak from want of food.  I was in total darkness, and the chest,
for so I supposed it, was large enough to enable me to move about.  It struck me, as I was
feeling round the sides, that it was perhaps a bunk, such as is fitted on board ship for the
men to sleep in.  If my captors had not taken away my jacket I should have had my knife, and
I might then, I thought, have cut my way out; but they left me without any means of effecting
my purpose.  The only way of freeing myself was to knock out by main strength either the top
or one side of the bunk or chest.  I feared that if I at once commenced doing this the noise
I should have to make would attract the attention of my jailers.  I therefore lay still for
some time, listening attentively.  Not a sound of any description reached my ears.  I thought
that it must now be day, though no light penetrated into the vault.  If it had I should have
seen it, I thought, through the chinks of the chest.  It was very roughly put together, and
this circumstance gave me better hope of being able to force it open. At length I determined
to commence operations, and placing myself on my back, with one hand to defend my head, and
one foot against the end, I struck out with the other on the part above me.  A cracking sound
encouraged me to go on.  Each time I struck out the planks appeared to move slightly.  I used
so much force that every nerve in my body was jarred, and I was afraid of laming myself.  Notwithstanding
that, I persevered, stopping every now and then to listen, lest my captors should return; but
as no one came I was satisfied that they had gone away, and now redoubled my efforts.  Several
loud cracks were the result; and at length, to my intense satisfaction, the planks above me
fell off, shattered by my foot.

I was thankful for my success.  At all events I should not have to die shut up in a chest.
But I was very far from being free.  Getting up on my feet I thrust my head through the hole
I had made, and tore back the broken pieces of plank.  Had I possessed a light I should have
seen how next to proceed, but I was still in total darkness.  I could not tell what I might
find outside the chest.  Moving carefully I climbed out, moving about with my feet to find
the ground, which was lower I thus ascertained than the bottom of the chest, but how much lower
I could not tell.  I therefore held tight on with my hands while I let myself down, and I then
discovered that it had been placed on another chest of about the same size; but I had to move
very cautiously, as there might be still some lower depth beneath my feet, though I didn't
think that very likely.  The ground was dry and hard, without either bricks or flagstones.
This I found out by stopping down and touching it with my hand.  I now began to move on very
carefully, feeling my way from chest to chest.  I discovered in my progress not only chests,
but casks and bales.  I had little doubt, therefore, that I had been conveyed to the smugglers'
store, but where it was situated I was totally unable to surmise.  That it was some way inland
I thought probable, as I could not hear the sound of the surf breaking on the sea shore, which
I thought I should have done had I been near the coast.  I tried to think if I recollected
any building which it was at all probable would be thus used by the smugglers.  There were,
I at last remembered, two mills not far from the coast, but one was in the possession of too
respectable a farmer to allow any lawless proceedings to be carried on in his premises.  The
other was an old windmill that had been abandoned the last two or three years; two of the arms
had fallen down, and the whole building was in a very ruinous and tottering condition.  The
property I had heard was in Chancery, the exact meaning of which I didn't understand, but knew
no one was ever seen about the place, and that the villagers from the neighbouring hamlet were
unwilling to approach it after dark, there being a report that it was haunted by a headless
miller, who had been killed while in a fit of drunkenness by his own machinery.  Could this
be the place, I thought.  The idea didn't make me feel more comfortable, not that I had any
strong belief in ghosts or other spirits walking the earth in bodily shape; but yet I didn't
feel perfectly certain that such beings did not exist, and I confess to having had an indefinite
dread of seeing the headless miller appear out of the darkness surrounded by a blue light.
I tried to banish the idea, and felt much more at my ease.  I suddenly recollected that although
I was in darkness it was daylight outside, and that the headless miller was possibly resting
quietly in his grave in the churchyard a mile away.

One thing I had to do, and that was to get out of my prison as soon as possible.  I felt round
and round the vault.  My great object was to discover the steps by which my captors and I had
descended, but to my dismay I could not find them.  Either they had been drawn up through a
trap-door above, or we had come through a door in the side of the vault which had been closed
by them when they went out.  I searched and searched in vain for such a door, one side consisting
of a blank wall partly of stone and partly of perpendicular timbers, which I concluded supported
the superstructure.  This made me more certain than before that I was in a vault beneath the
old mill.  I was in hopes by this time that the smugglers had gone away, and that I should
thus be able to make my escape without interruption.  How to do so was the question.  I remembered
that we had descended the building by steps to the bottom of the vault.  I concluded, therefore,
that the roof must be a considerable height above my head.  There were numerous boxes, chests,
and bales, as far as I could judge, in the vault, and if I had had light I should have found,
I thought, little difficulty in piling one upon another, and thus reaching the top; but in
the dark this was a difficult and hazardous undertaking.  I could scarcely expect to place
them with sufficient evenness to make a firm structure, and they might, after I had got up
some distance, topple down again with me under them, and perhaps an arm or a leg broken.  Still
I could think of no other way of getting out.  I again felt about, and tried to lift some chests
and bales, but they were mostly too heavy for my strength; I might, however, discover some
which I could tackle.

It must be remembered that all this time I was perfectly ignorant of my surroundings.  I was,
indeed, in the position of a blind man suddenly placed in a position which he had never before
visited without any one to give him a description of the scenery.  The only knowledge that
I had obtained of the vault was from the sense of touch.  I now determined to take a further
survey, if so I could call it, of my prison, to start from a certain point to feel my way round,
and reach as high as I could, to extend my arms, and to grope along the floor from one side
to the other.  One point I considered was to my advantage.  My captors would suppose that I
was shut up in the chest, and would therefore not have taken much trouble to secure the outlet
to the vault.  Probably, indeed, they had gone away, as they would certainly avoid being seen
in the neighbourhood of the old mill during daylight.  I didn't suppose that they intended
to murder me, and I therefore expected that they would come back again at night to bring me
some food, or perhaps to carry me off and ship me on board some vessel, for such I was convinced
was their intention.  I must therefore effect my escape before nightfall.  The necessity of
obtaining food would alone induce me to do this, though as yet I did not feel very hungry.

Serious as the situation was, I did not give way to despair.  I could not believe that I was
doomed to die, but how my deliverance was to be effected was more than I could tell.  Again
starting from the chest in which I had been shut up, and which I could distinguish by the short
fragments of the top, I continued groping my way round and round the vault.  My first object
was to try and find the door, which I was persuaded existed, as I thought I had previously
missed it.  Any one who has played at blind man's buff may have a faint idea of my situation.
Only the objects round me remained stationary, whereas in the game people run away from the
blinded person, and he has to try and catch them as they run round him.  I had the advantage
over the blinded man in the game.  I was sure that in time I should gain a knowledge of my
locality.  Time, however, was precious, and it would not do for me to delay my search.

I would have given anything for a tinder-box and flint and steel, so that I might light up
the vault even for a few seconds; but as that was not to be had, I tried to make use of my
other senses.  Stretching out my arms and feet as I went along, touching one place with my
left hand, while I felt about my head as far as I could reach straight out with my right; I
then brought my left up to the spot my right had last touched, and so I went on.  Occasionally
my right foot struck against a bale or chest which extended beyond the others above it.  Had
there been an opening in the pile of goods I was sure that I could not have missed it. For
the supposed door I searched in vain, and at length came to the conclusion that the only entrance
to the vault was from the roof above. It did not occur to me that there might be one above
my reach by which my captors might have made their exit with the assistance of a short ladder.
Though I had moved slowly, what with the exercise I had taken during the night, and the efforts
I had made to get out of the chest, I felt very tired; and, discovering a bale of convenient
height, I sat down to rest myself, and to consider with such calmness as I could command, what
I should next do.

CHAPTER SEVEN.

  A prisoner in the vault--The headless miller--I continue my
  explorations--My perilous position--My further attempts at escape--The
  recess--An unexpected shower-bath--A glimpse of light--I escape from
  the vault, but not from prison--A lower chamber in Old Grime's mill--
  The result of my further endeavours to escape--My signal of distress--
  The Revenue-men--My rescue--The search for the smugglers' goods--My
  hunger relieved--On guard--Meeting with my father--The last of old
  Grime's mill.

Strange as it may seem, I fell asleep.  How long my eyes had been closed I could not tell.
I fancied I heard the voices of people coming down through the roof.  A door directly opposite
to me opened, through which a pale light streamed, when what was my amazement to see "Old Grimes"
the miller dressed in his short frock, his iron-grey hair streaming over his shoulders, and
holding on his head with both hands, proving that it could not retain its position without
such assistance.  He glared at me with his saucer-eyes; his lips moved, but what he said I
could not make out.  Had he approached I thought I would have spoken to him and asked what
he wanted, but he did not advance beyond the doorway.  Presently he faded from my sight.  The
light grew dimmer and dimmer.  I thought that I got up and tried to make a straight course
for the door; but when I reached the wall opposite I could not find it, and so groped my way
back to my seat.

It was not until fully a minute after I was awake that I became aware that I had been dreaming.
I was soon convinced that the vision of Old Grimes was a mere dream, but I was not quite so
well satisfied about the voices I had heard.  I listened, expecting to hear them again, but
all was silent as before.  I now got up, resolving to try and make my way out.  Though I had
not previously experienced any inconvenience from the want of breakfast, I began to feel excessively
hungry; and if I had come across a package of hams or tongues, or a cask of salted herrings,
I should have eaten them raw with considerable satisfaction.  The more hungry I felt the more
desperate I became.  I at last fixed on a place for commencing operations.  There appeared
to be more woodwork there than anywhere else, or else the chests were piled upon each other.
At all events they would afford me a foothold.  That I might have less chance of slipping I
had kicked off my boots, supposing that I could easily find them again.  I climbed up and up.
Of course I had to move very cautiously, not leaving go with one hand until I had a firm grasp
of some fixed object with the other.  I got up a considerable distance, and pressing against
a board, it gave way, and a tremendous crash followed, as if a number of boxes filled with
bottles had fallen to the ground.  Putting up my hand, I felt a beam above my head; could it
be one of the rafters, or the roof?  I was for some time afraid to move, lest I should fall
headlong down.  I passed my hand along the beam, but could not reach the floor it supported.
I now tried to crawl cautiously along on the top of the woodwork or the pile of chests, for
I could not determine which they were.  Every now and then I stopped and stretched out my hand,
but could feel nothing above me.

I must again beg my readers to try and picture to themselves my unpleasant position.  The only
wonder to myself is that I kept up my spirits.  I did not forget that any moment something
might give way below me, and that I might pitch down to the floor of the vault on my head.
I had gone on some way, when, stretching out my hand, I discovered nothing beyond me.  I was
on the very edge of the erection. The only thing I could do was to go back the way I had come,
or to descend to the floor.  Fearing that I should be unable to pass the spot where I had thrown
over the cases, I resolved to adopt the latter alternative.

I bethought me that if I had had a pole it would have assisted me greatly to discover the trap-door
leading to the vault.  It was easier to climb up than to climb down, as I could not feel with
my feet as I could with my hands.  The attempt, however, must be made.  Having got to the edge
of the plank and ascertained that it was secure, I gradually let myself down, when I found
myself resting on another plank or the edge of a chest, I could not tell which.  Let any one
try in the dark to do what I was attempting to do, and it will be found no easy matter. Could
I have stood securely, I might have crouched down till I could have got hold of the plank on
which my foot rested, but there was scarcely room for that, and if I let go the plank above
me I might tumble over on my back; yet there was no other way of descent, so holding on with
my left hand I tried to find something which I might grasp with my right lower down.

My satisfaction was considerable when my hand came in contact with the rope-handle of a large
chest.  It appeared to be secure, and holding it I was able to stoop down and fix my other
hand on the ledge on which my feet rested.  One stage of my descent was thus accomplished.
I now held the ledge tight with both hands, let my legs slip off, and felt about with my feet
for another resting-place.  For some seconds I was swinging about, holding on by my hands.
There might be another ledge not half an inch below my feet.  I stretched down my toes to the
utmost.  I could not discover it.  Should I let go I might have a serious fall.  I worked my
way on, hoping to be more fortunate.  At last my feet struck against the end of a chest, and
after making a little further exertion I found that it was secure, and that I could venture
to stand upon it.

I was still uncertain how far I was off the ground; all the difficulty I experienced arose
from being in darkness.  I could probably, I knew, have scrambled over the whole of the building
with perfect ease had there been light.  I might already be close to the ground, but at the
same time I might be many feet above it, and I therefore could not venture to step down without
going through the same process as before. Leaning on my elbows, I stretched my arms along the
top of the chest.  I slipped off, and unexpectedly found my feet touch the ground.  I was too
eager to escape to allow myself time to rest after my exertions.  I once more began to search
round the vault, hoping to find an oar, a boat's mast or spar, or somewhat that might serve
my purpose.  I felt about in vain; indeed it was not likely that the smugglers should have
placed such things in the vault.

I at last reached the part where the boxes or chests, as I supposed they were, rested, and
I began to stumble among them.  The region in which I had spent the last two or three hours
was considerably disarranged.  I fancied that I knew every part, and now I was completely thrown
out in my calculations.  One chest stood up on end on another.  I feared, should I move it,
that I might bring others down on my head.  I should have liked to have put them all back in
their places, but that was impossible.  By great care I made my way among them; when I at last
reached the walls, it was the part I had not before examined.  How I could have passed it I
could not account for, unless I had been prevented reaching it by the chests piled up in front,
and which I had displaced.  As I was extending my arms my hands touched what felt like a wooden
latch.  There was no doubt about it; it was the latch of a door. I lifted it up and pulled
it towards me.  The door opened, but all was dark within the recess.  I felt sure that it must
be the entrance to the vault.  I was going to step forward when it occurred to me that it might
lead to a lower vault and that I should be precipitated into an unknown depth should I move
without feeling my way.  I knelt down, extending my hands, when they touched the ground as
far as I could reach.  This satisfied me that my first conjecture was correct.

Cautiously feeling my way, I stepped forward and explored the recess as I had the larger vault.
Contrary to my expectation, I could discover no ladder.  I was thus no nearer to my deliverance
than before.  I felt round and round this smaller vault, without being able to decide as to
its object.  That it was the entrance to the vault I thought very likely.  I wished that I
could find out the height of the roof, and of what it was composed.  It seemed probable that
it was lower than that of the larger vault.  I thought that I might drag in some of the smaller
chests and place one on another against the wall and climb up.  I made my way accordingly back
to the large vault, in search of some which I could move.

In going along my foot struck an object on the ground.  It was a long spar--the very thing
I was in search of.  I supposed it had fallen down with the boxes, having either been placed
upon them or assisting to support them.  It appeared, as far as I could judge, to be twelve
or fourteen feet long, and was thick enough to enable me to swarm up it, and thus to serve
the purpose of a ladder.  I first tried to reach the roof of the large vault with it, but it
was not long enough, though I lifted it as high as I could; and then carrying it in my hands
went back to the recess, and, eager to ascertain the height, I struck upwards.  It at once
met with resistance, not as I supposed, from a beam or vaulted roof, but from some soft object.
That soft object must be removed.

I poked and poked again and again, now in one part, now in another, when suddenly down came
a shower of powder, which, before I could make my escape, covered me from head to foot.  I
was certain that it was, from the smell and feel, flour, though old and musty.  The flour filled
my nose, eyes, and mouth, nearly suffocating me.  I, however, willingly endured this dry shower-bath,
for as it fell a glimpse of light came through a hole which I had burst in the upper part of
the sack, which had evidently been drawn across the trap leading to the vault for the purpose
of concealing it.  I worked away with my pole until I had pretty nearly emptied the sack of
flour, and then, with a little more exertion, I brought the whole down, and had a clear view
upwards.  For a minute or so my eyes, long accustomed to darkness, were so dazzled with the
light that I could not make out anything distinctly.  They were, besides, so full of flour
that it took me some time to clear them.

After this I did not delay in endeavouring to get out of the vault. Having placed the upper
end of the pole against the corner of the trap, I tried to swarm up it.  At first my exertions
made the pole slip, and I ran the risk of having a disagreeable fall; but descending, I placed
the half rotten sack with some of the flour round the foot, and then drew in several pieces
of wood, with which I further secured it.

I now made another determined effort to climb up it by twining my arms and legs round it. 
With considerable effort I succeeded in catching hold of the edge or sill of the trap, and
then getting up my knees I was out of the vault, but not out of prison.  I was, however, far
better off than before.  Instead of darkness, I had light--instead of a close vault, an airy
chamber, on the lower floor of which sacks of flour had evidently been kept.  There were no
regular windows, but only a few slits high up above my head to admit light and air.  The door
was securely closed.  The room was in much better order than I should have supposed from the
generally ruinous appearance of the building from the outside.

Of course, having thus far freed myself, I did not despair of getting out by some means or
other.  I was in a hurry to do so lest the smugglers should come back, and thrust me back into
my prison, or treat me even worse.  Looking round the room I observed an opening on one side
opposite the windows.  It struck me that if I could get to it I might make my way into the
main part of the building.  Once there, there could be no difficulty in escaping.  In the last
few minutes I had forgotten my hunger, but it again came upon me; and as I had no other food,
I thought I would try some of the flour, which would stay my appetite, even though eaten raw.
I believe that a person eating nothing else for several days would make himself ill, if he
did not die.  I made a hole in one of several sacks leaning against the wall, and which had
been there probably since the occupant's death.  It was excessively musty, but hunger prevented
me from being particular, and rolling it up into little balls I swallowed several in rapid
succession.  Having eaten on till I had sated my appetite, I hauled up the pole with which
I had made my escape from the vault below.

I then placed it against the foot of the small door high up in the wall. It was sufficiently
long.  But then the thought occurred to me, will the door be closed so that I shall be unable
to open it?  That point must be settled by experiment; so having assured myself that the upper
end would not slip, I began to ascend.  It was not at all an easy task, and I did not feel
satisfied that it would not give way.  Up and up I went, remembering what my father often used
to say, that "fortune favours the brave."  I gained the top, and holding on to the sill beneath
the door, pressed against it.  It moved, and, contrary to my expectation, opened.  It was a
difficult matter notwithstanding to get in; but I managed at last to get my knee on the sill,
and then creeping forward I found myself in a gallery in the main part of the mill, in the
centre of which was the shaft and the machinery for working the grindstones beneath.  I ran
round the gallery till I came to a ladder leading to the floor below, expecting that I should
find the main door open.  It was firmly closed and locked, so that I could not get out. This
was a disappointment.

Having in vain tried to find any other outlet, I ran up the steps again to the gallery, looked
out of one of several windows to ascertain if I could reach the ground by any of the woodwork;
but the height was too great to allow me to drop out without danger of breaking my legs.  I
observed several people in the distance passing along by a path which led by the foot of a
hill on which the mill was situated.  My first thought was that they were smugglers; but then
I recollected that such characters were not likely to be abroad in a body during daylight,
and the glitter of the gold lace round the cap of one of them convinced me that they were the
revenue-men.  I shouted at the top of my voice. Hungry and faint as I was, it did not sound
as loud as usual.  They did not hear me.  I was afraid they would go on.  Again and again I
shouted. One of the men turned his head.  Having no handkerchief, in a moment I stripped off
my shirt, and waved it wildly out of the window.  The men saw it, and came hurrying up the hill.

"Who are you, youngster?" shouted one of the men as they came near.

"Master Cheveley, son of the Vicar of Sandgate," I answered.

"Why, he looks more like the ghost of a miller," said one of the men.

"How did you get up there?" inquired the first speaker a head boatman in charge of the party.

"I got up out of a vault where the smugglers put me," I answered.  "Make haste and come in,
for I'm almost starved."

"Here's a door," cried the head boatman; "but I say, mates, it's locked. Is there no other
way in?" he shouted.

"None that I know of," I answered.  "I have been trying to open the door, but could not."

"We'll see what we can do," said the man.

And he with two others placing their shoulders to it quickly sent it flying inward shattered
into fragments, the rotten wood giving way before their sturdy shoves.

I ran down to meet them.  The head boatman, a strong seamanlike-looking man, at once began
to question me as to what had happened.  I told him as briefly as I could adding--

"But, I say, I'm desperately hungry, as I've only had some lumps of musty flour to eat for
several hours, and thirsty too.  I shall faint if I don't have some food."

"We'll get you that, youngster; and then you must try and show us the way into the vault,"
said the speaker.  "We may get a better haul than we've had for many a day if it should prove
one of the smugglers' hiding-places."

He then directed one of the men to run down to the next farmhouse and bring up some bread and
cheese, or anything else he could obtain, and a jug of milk, or if that was not to be procured,
some water.

I thanked him, begging the man to make haste, for now that the excitement was over I could
scarcely stand.

"Do you know you are whitened all over?" he asked.  "You look as if you had come out of a flour-bin!"

I had for the moment forgotten how I must have looked.  The man good-naturedly began to brush
the flour off my clothes and hair, and one of them lent me his handkerchief to wipe my face.
They inquired what had become of my jacket and waistcoat.  I told them how the smugglers had
taken them from me.

"Perhaps the fellows may have hidden them somewhere about here.  They wouldn't like to have
the things found on them.  Jenkins and Brown, do you go and search all round.  Maybe we'll
come upon another opening into the vault."

The two men hurried off to obey the orders they had received, while the others examined the
mill; and the chief boatman sat by me fanning my face, for he evidently thought me in a bad
way.  The time appeared very long since the man had started for the provisions, but I believe
he was not absent many minutes.  I was thankful when he returned, bringing a basket with some
eggs, and ham, and cheese, and some delicious bread, and a bottle of milk.  I fell to immediately
like a hungry wolf, and felt very much better by the time I had finished.

"We'll keep the remainder in case you want any more, my lad.  And now we must get you to show
us the way into the vault," said the officer.

I was quite ready to do this, for I confess that I had a bitter feeling against the smugglers
on account of the treatment I had received.  We soon reached the trap which had been covered
over by the sacks of flour. The men looked down, not quite liking to descend into the darkness.
The spar by which I had got up was still in its place.  I offered to go down first, but this
the chief boatman would not allow, and he and another man at once lowered themselves to the
bottom.  It was, however, so dark beyond the smaller vault, that they declared they could see
nothing, and they had to wait until a man was sent to the farm for a lantern.  We then too
descended, but as the lantern only dimly lighted up the vault, I could scarcely believe that
it was the same place in which I had spent so many hours.  I had fancied that it was of immense
size and height, and crowded with piles of boxes, and bales, and casks. Instead of this there
were only a few old packing-cases, in one of which I found I had been shut up.  There were
besides about a dozen bales, most of them apparently damaged, and what the revenue-men considered
of more value, nearly half-a-hundred small casks of spirits, and some boxes of tobacco.  These
had been covered over with planks.  I had not felt them on my exploring expeditions in the
dark.  The revenue-men were well satisfied with their haul, as they called it, though they
had thought that it was possible they might find some articles of value.

As I was anxious to return home to relieve the anxiety of my father and mother, I begged the
chief boatman to let me do so at once.

"We cannot let you go alone; some of these smugglers might meet you and give you a clout on
the head for having shown us their hiding-place. Wait a bit until I can send one of the men
with you.  We must first get these casks up.  We can't spare a hand at present, as one of the
men must go on to the station to give information of our find, and to procure some carts for
carrying the things away."

In hunting about the men had discovered a coil of rope and some blocks, which had evidently
been used for lowering the casks into the vault. The seamen were not long in fitting up a tackle
to hoist them out. While one of the men was sent off as proposed, the rest worked away with
a will.  In a short time the chief contents of the vault were hoisted up and rolled outside.

"Here's a job for you, my lad," said the chief boatman.  "You stay by these things, and give
us notice if you see any suspicious characters coming, while we get up the remainder."

This task I gladly undertook, for I was heartily sick of the vault where I had spent so many
unpleasant hours, and glad to breathe the fresh air outside.  I sat down on the cask, nibbling
away at some of the contents of the basket, for my appetite had returned.  At last a drowsiness
stole over me, and slipping off the cask, against which I placed my back, I fell fast asleep.
I was awakened by hearing some one shouting, and looking up I saw a person running towards
me.  I sprang to my feet, when what was my surprise to see my father, who rushed forward, and
at the joy of seeing him I leaped into his arms.

"Why, Dick, my boy," he exclaimed, "we have been in fearful anxiety about you.  How have you
got into this plight?  Where have you been? What has happened?"

I answered him as fast as I could.

"I won't find fault with you now, though you had no business to steal out of the house at night.
You have had a narrow escape.  Though the ruffians who carried you off and put you into the
vault might not have intended to leave you to starve, they most probably would have been unable
to return.  Several have been captured, and so hot is the hue and cry after the rest that they
would have been afraid to come back to the spot to bring you food, or to carry you off, as
you fancy they intended to do."

The chief boatman now came out of the mill, and was evidently well pleased to hand me over
to my father, who thanked him for the attention he had paid me.

Just as we were setting off the carts arrived with a party of revenue-men, armed to the teeth,
to carry off the smugglers' goods, for it was thought likely that a rescue might be attempted.
We had got to no great distance, when on looking back I saw a cloud of smoke issuing from the
old building.  It increased in density, and presently flames burst out.

"Could they have set the place on fire?"

"Not intentionally," said my father; "but it is very evident that the mill is burning, and
from the nature of the materials of which it is composed there is not the slightest chance
of its escaping destruction."

Tired as I was, I persuaded him to go back to see what had happened.  As we got nearer the
building we saw that the whole of it was enveloped in flame.  The revenue-men were busily engaged
in loading the carts.  They had soon found that any attempt to save the mill would be useless,
and that they would only run the risk of losing their lives.  We were at some short distance
when a tremendous roar was heard, the ground shook beneath our feet, and the whole building
came toppling down, a vast heap of burning ruins; while planks, and beams, and masses of earth,
were thrown up into the air, showing that an explosion had taken place in the vault where I
had been confined.  No one suspected that any casks of powder had been deposited there, but
that such was the case there was no doubt.  I had now reason to be very thankful that I had
not found a tinder-box, for I should certainly have tried to light a fire in the vault, and
probably the sparks would have communicated to the powder. How the fire originated no one could
tell, but I suspected that one of the men had lit his pipe, and that the ashes had fallen out
upon some loose grains of powder.  We, as well as the revenue-men, had a narrow escape from
being crushed by the ruins which fell close to us.

Such was the end of Old Grime's mill.

CHAPTER EIGHT.

  My reception at home--Aunt Deb again gives her advice--My father and I
  pay another visit to Leighton Hall--Our guard--Interview with Sir
  Reginald--A score that was not settled to my satisfaction--My awkward
  position--My father receives a threatening letter--Aunt Deb decides on
  action--Preparations for my departure--The journey in the coach--Our
  fellow-travellers--A false alarm--My aunt's character further comes
  out--Our arrival at Liverpool--Our reception--Mr Butterfield--I
  explore Liverpool--My first visit to the "Emu"--I gain some
  information--I lose my way--Aunt Deb's anxiety on my account--A small
  difficulty well got out of--I pay another visit to the "Emu"--My ideas
  as to officers and seamanship receive a somewhat rude check--I make
  the acquaintance of Gregory Growles--I lose my cutter--"Thief!
  Thief!"--I speak to Mr Butterfield as to my going to sea--His
  opinions on the subject--He makes me a kind offer--Matters still
  unsettled--A reference to Aunt Deb.

My father supported me as we walked home; for, now that the excitement was over, I felt so
exhausted that without his assistance I could not have got along.  Before we had got far, however,
we fortunately fell in with some of the people who had been sent by my father to look for me.
They, taking me in their arms, saved me from the necessity of making further exertions.  As
we went on we met several seafaring men, boatmen and others, who I thought scowled at me as
I passed.

The news of the capture of the goods having got abroad, it had been reported that I had given
the information.  My mother and sisters received me affectionately.  To my satisfaction I found
that Aunt Deb was out in the village.  On her return, having heard some account of my adventures,
looking at me sternly she said--

"Well, Master Richard; and so you have been continuing your foolish pranks, and throwing us
all out of our wits.  Depend upon it, nephew, you'll come to a bad end if you don't manage
to act with more discretion during your future course in life."

I felt too tired just then to reply to Aunt Deb's remarks as I should have liked to do.  I
merely said--

"I could not help being carried off by the smugglers; and as I have been the means of getting
a good many of them captured, and also of enabling the revenue-men to seize their stores, I
hope that Sir Reginald will now feel anxious to reward me by obtaining for me the appointment
I have so long wished for."

"If it suits Sir Reginald's convenience he may do so," said my aunt. "We shall see; we shall see."

I had to give an account of my adventures to every one in the house, and I was very thankful
when I was able to go to bed, feeling no inclination to put myself in the way of going through
any fresh adventures.

Next morning, after breakfast, I asked my father if he would accompany me to Leighton Park,
that I might make another appeal to Sir Reginald.

"You'll only get a flea in your ear, John," remarked Aunt Deb.  "Sir Reginald will just consider
you troublesome.  You are much more likely to succeed if you let him alone."

My father, however, for a wonder, ventured to differ with Aunt Deb, and agreed to take me to
see the baronet.  He had become, I found, very anxious about my safety, being convinced that
the smugglers would, if they had the opportunity, punish me severely for having interfered
in their affairs.  This made him more than ever anxious to get me away from home.  Not satisfied
that even during the walk to Leighton Park we might not be attacked, he directed old Thomas,
the gardener, to arm himself with a blunderbuss and a brace of pistols, and to follow, keeping
us always in sight.  He didn't think it would become him as a minister of the gospel to carry
fire-arms through his own parish, and he was afraid to entrust them to me.

"Remember, Thomas, that if you see any smugglers come near, you are to march up and point your
blunderbuss at their heads."

"You may be sure, sir, as I'll do that," answered Thomas.  "I have been a man of peace all
my life, but I'm ready to fight in your cause, and I believe the Lord will forgive me if I
kill any one."

"I don't think there is much chance of that," said my father.  "Your appearance with your blunderbuss
loaded up to the muzzle will be sufficient to deter any of the ruffians from attacking us."

We set out together.  Thomas gradually dropped behind to the required distance.  As we walked
along I looked every now and then over my shoulder to be sure that he was following, for I
had an uncomfortable feeling that the smugglers would be on the watch for me.  We, however,
reached the park without any adventure.

Sir Reginald kept us waiting longer than usual before we were admitted into his presence.

"Well, Mr Cheveley, we have succeeded at last in giving a blow to the smugglers which will
put a stop to their proceedings for some time to come at all events.  Though the `Saucy Bess'
got off, we captured some of her crew and several of the men assisting them."

"I congratulate you, Sir Reginald," said my father; "and I ventured to call on you to explain
that my son Richard has rendered considerable service to the cause.  It was through him that
information of the intended run the other night was obtained, and he also discovered one of
the smugglers' hiding-places, `Grime's Mill,' and was the means of enabling the revenue-men
to capture a considerable store of their contraband goods."

Sir Reginald smiled.

"I'm glad to hear this," he observed; "for to say the truth, I have had strong doubts as to
your son's connexion with the smugglers.  He is intimate, I find, with an old sailor, Roger
Riddle, who though too cunning to be caught is known to aid and abet them in their proceedings.
By his means young Mark Riddle, who is both smuggler and poacher, made his escape from my lock-up
room only last week.  Had it not been for my respect for you, I could not have passed the matter
over, and I am happy now to be able to set the services you say he has rendered against his
former conduct.  I am the more willing to do this as young Riddle was taken just as he landed
from the `Saucy Bess,' and we shall now get rid of him, as he will be either committed to prison
for two years or sent off to sea to serve his Majesty for seven years."

I was very sorry when I heard this, but of course did not express my feelings to Sir Reginald.
My father looked rather uncomfortable; he was a nervous man, and Sir Reginald always awed him.
He, however, mustered courage to proceed.

"I hope, Sir Reginald, that my son's good conduct will induce you to interest yourself in his
favour, and that you will forward his views by exerting yourself to obtain the appointment
he so greatly desires.  I am very anxious to get him away from the neighbourhood, as I am afraid
the smugglers, who are aware that he has been instrumental in the capture of their friends
and goods, will revenge themselves on his head.  I dare not let him leave the house alone,
and even coming here I was obliged to bring an armed attendant for his protection."

"I have told you, Mr Cheveley, that I consider his late conduct is a set-off against his unpardonable
proceeding.  I will, however, remember his wish; and, should an opportunity occur, will forward
his views.  I must now wish you good morning, for my time is much occupied with my magisterial
and parliamentary duties, and you must excuse me."

The baronet prepared to bow us out of the room.  He shook hands with my father, who took the
hint and backed towards the door, and gave me only a formal nod, without allowing a smile to
irradiate his features.

We found old Thomas waiting at the hall door with his blunderbuss on his shoulder.  My father
walked on with hurried steps some distance, not uttering a word.  At last he said--

"To what did Sir Reginald allude when he talked of your connexion with young Riddle?"

I told him how Mark had been seized and locked up and how I had unintentionally assisted him
to escape.

"I believe what you say, Richard; but you can't be surprised at the baronet being annoyed,
and I'm afraid from his tone that we must not expect much from him."

We had got about two-thirds of the way home when we saw three men coming towards us, one of
whom I recognised as Burden.  I had not yet told my father that I believed him to be one of
the men who had shut me up in the old mill.  He started as he saw me, and then scanned me narrowly,
as if uncertain whether it could really be myself.

Though I knew that old Thomas and his blunderbuss were close behind us, I felt very uncomfortable,
as I could not tell how the men might be inclined to act.  Mustering courage at last, I looked
Burden in the face.  My father nodded to him and the other men, as he was accustomed to do
to his parishioners.  They hesitated for a moment, and then passed on.  I looked back and saw
them watching old Thomas, but they didn't speak to him, and he trudged sturdily after us without
paying them any attention.

"I wonder what was the matter with Burden?" asked my father, as we got to some distance.

I then told him it was my belief that he was one of my captors.

"We can't prove it, even if he were," said my father. My Mother, my excellent Mother lies upon
the bed of sickness.

A sudden and dreadful malady seized her last night; and so rapid has been its progress, that
the Physicians despair of her life. Human aid fails me; Nothing remains for me but to implore
the mercy of Heaven. Father, all Madrid rings with the report of your piety and virtue. Deign to
remember my Mother in your prayers: Perhaps they may prevail on the
Almighty to spare her; and should that be the case, I engage myself
every Thursday in the next three Months to illuminate the Shrine of
St. Francis in his honour.'

'So!' thought the Monk; 'Here we have
a second Vincentio della Ronda.

Rosario's adventure began thus,' and He wished secretly that this might have the same conclusion.

He
acceded to the request. The Petitioner returned him thanks with every mark of gratitude, and
then continued.

'I have yet another favour to ask. We are Strangers in Madrid; My Mother needs a Confessor,
and knows not to whom She should apply.

We understand that you never quit the Abbey, and Alas! my poor Mother is unable to come hither!
If you would have the goodness, reverend Father, to name a proper
person, whose wise and pious consolations may soften the agonies of
my Parent's deathbed, you will confer an everlasting favour upon hearts
not ungrateful.'

With this petition also the Monk complied.

Indeed, what petition would He have refused, if urged in such enchanting accents? The suppliant
was so interesting! Her voice was so sweet, so harmonious! Her very tears became her, and her
affliction seemed to add new lustre to her charms. He promised to send to her a Confessor that
same Evening, and begged her to leave her address. The Companion presented him with a Card on
which it was written, and then withdrew with the fair Petitioner,
who pronounced before her departure a thousand benedictions on the
Abbot's goodness.

His eyes followed her out of the Chapel. It was not till She was out of sight that He examined
the Card, on which He read the following words.

'Donna Elvira Dalfa, Strada di San Iago, four doors from the Palace
d'Albornos.'

The Suppliant was no other than Antonia, and Leonella
was her Companion.

The Latter had not consented without difficulty to accompany her Niece to the Abbey: Ambrosio
had inspired her with such awe that She trembled at the very sight
of him.

Her fears had conquered even her natural loquacity, and while in his presence She uttered not
a single syllable.

The Monk retired to his Cell, whither He was pursued by Antonia's image. He felt a thousand new emotions
springing in his bosom, and He trembled to examine into the cause which gave them birth. They
were totally different from those inspired by Matilda, when She first declared her sex and her
affection.

He felt not the provocation of lust; No voluptuous desires rioted in his bosom; Nor did a burning
imagination picture to him the charms which Modesty had veiled from his eyes. On the contrary, what He
now felt was a mingled sentiment of tenderness, admiration, and respect. A soft and delicious
melancholy infused itself into his soul, and He would not have exchanged it for the most lively
transports of joy. Society now disgusted him: He delighted in solitude, which permitted his indulging
the visions of Fancy: His thoughts were all gentle, sad, and soothing,
and the whole wide world presented him with no other object than Antonia.

'Happy

Man!' He exclaimed in his romantic enthusiasm; 'Happy Man, who is destined to possess the heart
of that lovely Girl! What delicacy in her features! What elegance in her form! How enchanting
was the timid innocence of her eyes, and how different from the wanton expression, the wild luxurious
fire which sparkles in Matilda's! Oh! sweeter must one kiss be snatched from the rosy lips of the
First, than all the full and lustful favours bestowed so freely by the Second. Matilda gluts
me with enjoyment even to loathing, forces me to her arms, apes the Harlot, and glories in her
prostitution. Disgusting! Did She know the inexpressible charm of Modesty, how irresistibly
it enthralls the heart of Man, how firmly it chains him to the Throne
of Beauty, She never would have thrown it off.

What would be too dear a price for this lovely Girl's affections? What would I refuse to sacrifice,
could I be released from my vows, and permitted to declare my love in the sight of earth and
heaven? While I strove to inspire her with tenderness, with friendship and esteem, how tranquil
and undisturbed would the hours roll away!

Gracious God! To see her blue downcast eyes beam upon mine with timid fondness! To sit for days,
for years listening to that gentle voice!

To acquire the right of obliging her, and hear the artless expressions of her gratitude! To watch
the emotions of her spotless heart! To encourage each dawning virtue! To share in her joy when
happy, to kiss away her tears when distrest, and to see her fly to
my arms for comfort and support!

Yes; If there is perfect bliss on earth, 'tis his lot alone, who becomes that Angel's Husband.'

While
his fancy coined these ideas, He paced his Cell with a disordered air. His eyes were fixed upon vacancy:
His head reclined upon his shoulder; A tear rolled down his cheek,
while He reflected that the vision of happiness for him could never
be realized.

'She is lost to me!' He continued; 'By marriage She cannot be mine: And to seduce such innocence,
to use the confidence reposed in me to work her ruin.... Oh! it would be a crime, blacker than
yet the world ever witnessed! Fear not, lovely Girl! Your virtue runs no risque from me. Not
for Indies would I make that gentle bosom know the tortures of remorse.'

Again He paced his chamber hastily. Then stopping, his eye fell upon the picture of his once-admired
Madona. He tore it with indignation from the wall: He threw it on the ground, and spurned it
from him with his foot.

'The Prostitute!'

Unfortunate Matilda! Her Paramour forgot that for his sake alone She had forfeited her claim to
virtue; and his only reason for despising her was that She had loved him much too well.

He threw himself into a Chair which stood near the Table. He saw the card with Elvira's address.
He took it up, and it brought to his recollection his promise respecting
a Confessor.

He passed a few minutes in doubt: But Antonia's Empire over him was already too much decided
to permit his making a long resistance to the idea which struck him. He resolved to be the Confessor
himself. He could leave the Abbey unobserved without difficulty: By wrapping up his head in
his Cowl He hoped to pass through the Streets without being recognised: By taking these precautions,
and by recommending secrecy to Elvira's family, He doubted not to keep Madrid in ignorance
that He had broken his vow never to see the outside of the Abbey walls. Matilda was the only person
whose vigilance He dreaded: But by informing her at the Refectory
that during the whole of that day, Business would confine him to his
Cell, He thought himself secure from her wakeful jealousy.

Accordingly, at the hours when the Spaniards are generally taking their Siesta, He ventured
to quit the Abbey by a private door, the Key of which was in his possession. The Cowl of his
habit was thrown over his face: From the heat of the weather the Streets were almost totally deserted:
The Monk met with few people, found the Strada di San Iago, and arrived without accident at
Donna Elvira's door. He rang, was admitted, and immediately ushered into an upper apartment.

It
was here that He ran the greatest risque of a discovery. Had Leonella been at home, She would have
recognized him directly: Her communicative disposition would never have permitted her to rest
till all Madrid was informed that Ambrosio had ventured out of the Abbey, and visited her Sister.
Fortune here stood the Monk's Friend.

On Leonella's return home, She found a letter instructing her that a Cousin was just dead,
who had left what little He possessed between Herself and Elvira. To secure this bequest She
was obliged to set out for Cordova without losing a moment. Amidst all her foibles her heart
was truly warm and affectionate, and She was unwilling to quit her Sister in so dangerous a state.
But Elvira insisted upon her taking the journey, conscious that in her Daughter's forlorn
situation no increase of fortune, however trifling, ought to be neglected. Accordingly, Leonella
left Madrid, sincerely grieved at her Sister's illness, and giving
some few sighs to the memory of the amiable but inconstant Don Christoval.

She was fully persuaded that at first She had made a terrible breach in his heart: But hearing
nothing more of him, She supposed that He had quitted the pursuit, disgusted by the lowness of
her origin, and knowing upon other terms than marriage He had nothing to hope from such a Dragon
of Virtue as She professed herself; Or else, that being naturally capricious and changeable, the remembrance
of her charms had been effaced from the Conde's heart by those of some newer Beauty. Whatever
was the cause of her losing him, She lamented it sorely.

She strove in vain, as She assured every body who was kind enough to listen to her, to tear
his image from her too susceptible heart. She affected the airs of a lovesick Virgin, and carried
them all to the most ridiculous excess. She heaved lamentable sighs, walked with her arms folded,
uttered long soliloquies, and her discourse generally turned upon some forsaken Maid who expired
of a broken heart! Her fiery locks were always ornamented with a garland of willow; Every evening
She was seen straying upon the Banks of a rivulet by Moonlight; and
She declared herself a violent Admirer of murmuring Streams and Nightingales;

'Of
lonely haunts, and twilight Groves, 'Places which pale Passion loves!'

Such
was the state of Leonella's mind, when obliged to quit Madrid.

Elvira was out of patience at all these follies, and endeavoured at persuading her to act like
a reasonable Woman. Her advice was thrown away: Leonella assured
her at parting that nothing could make her forget the perfidious Don
Christoval.

In this point She was fortunately mistaken. An honest Youth of Cordova, Journeyman to an Apothecary,
found that her fortune would be sufficient to set him up in a genteel Shop of his own: In
consequence of this reflection He avowed himself her Admirer. Leonella was not inflexible.
The ardour of his sighs melted her heart, and She soon consented to make him the happiest of Mankind.
She wrote to inform her Sister of her marriage; But, for reasons which will be explained hereafter,
Elvira never answered her letter.

Ambrosio was conducted into the Antichamber to that where Elvira was
reposing.

The Female Domestic who had admitted him left him alone while She
announced his arrival to her Mistress.

Antonia, who had been by her Mother's Bedside, immediately came to him.

'Pardon me, Father,' said She, advancing towards him; when recognizing
his features, She stopped suddenly, and uttered a cry of joy.

'Is it possible!' She continued;

'Do not my eyes deceive me? Has the worthy Ambrosio broken through his resolution, that He may
soften the agonies of the best of Women? What pleasure will this visit give my Mother! Let me
not delay for a moment the comfort which your piety and wisdom will afford her.'

Thus saying, She opened the chamber door, presented to her Mother
her distinguished Visitor, and having placed an armed-chair by the
side of the Bed, withdrew into another department.

Elvira was highly gratified by this visit: Her expectations had been raised high by general report,
but She found them far exceeded.

Ambrosio, endowed by nature with powers of pleasing, exerted them
to the utmost while conversing with Antonia's Mother.

With persuasive eloquence He calmed every fear, and dissipated every scruple: He bad her reflect
on the infinite mercy of her Judge, despoiled Death of his darts
and terrors, and taught her to view without shrinking the abyss of
eternity, on whose brink She then stood.

Elvira was absorbed in attention and delight: While She listened to his exhortations, confidence
and comfort stole insensibly into her mind. She unbosomed to him without hesitation her cares and
apprehensions. The latter respecting a future life He had already quieted: And He now removed the
former, which She felt for the concerns of this. She trembled for Antonia. She had none to
whose care She could recommend her, save to the Marquis de las Cisternas and her Sister Leonella.
The protection of the One was very uncertain; and as to the Other,
though fond of her Niece, Leonella was so thoughtless and vain as
to make her an improper person to have the sole direction of a Girl
so young and ignorant of the World.

The Friar no sooner learnt the cause of her alarms than He begged her to make herself easy
upon that head. He doubted not being able to secure for Antonia a safe refuge in the House
of one of his Penitents, the Marchioness of Villa-Franca: This was a Lady of acknowledged virtue,
remarkable for strict principles and extensive charity.

Should accident deprive her of this resource, He engaged to procure Antonia a reception in some respectable
Convent: That is to say, in quality of boarder; for Elvira had declared herself no Friend to
a monastic life, and the Monk was either candid or complaisant enough to allow that her disapprobation
was not unfounded.

These proofs of the interest which He felt for her completely won
Elvira's heart.

In thanking him She exhausted every expression which Gratitude could
furnish, and protested that now She should resign herself with tranquillity
to the Grave.

Ambrosio rose to take leave: He promised to return the next day at the same hour, but requested
that his visits might be kept secret.

'I am unwilling' said He, 'that my breaking through a rule imposed
by necessity should be generally known.

Had I not resolved never to quit my Convent, except upon circumstances as urgent as that which
has conducted me to your door, I should be frequently summoned upon insignificant occasions:
That time would be engrossed by the Curious, the Unoccupied, and the fanciful, which I now pass
at the Bedside of the Sick, in comforting the expiring Penitent, and clearing the passage to Eternity
from Thorns.'

Elvira commended equally his prudence and compassion, promising to conceal carefully the honour of his
visits. The Monk then gave her his benediction, and retired from the chamber.

In the Antiroom He found Antonia: He could not refuse himself the
pleasure of passing a few moments in her society.

He bad her take comfort, for that her Mother seemed composed and tranquil, and He hoped that She
might yet do well.

He enquired who attended her, and engaged to send the Physician of his Convent to see her, one
of the most skilful in Madrid. He then launched out in Elvira's commendation, praised her purity
and fortitude of mind, and declared that She had inspired him with the highest esteem and reverence.
Antonia's innocent heart swelled with gratitude: Joy danced in her eyes, where a tear still
sparkled. The hopes which He gave her of her Mother's recovery, the lively interest which He seemed
to feel for her, and the flattering way in which She was mentioned
by him, added to the report of his judgment and virtue, and to the
impression made upon her by his eloquence, confirmed the favourable
opinion with which his first, appearance had inspired Antonia.

She replied with diffidence, but without restraint: She feared not
to relate to him all her little sorrows, all her little fears and
anxieties; and She thanked him for his goodness with all the genuine
warmth which favours kindle in a young and innocent heart.

Such alone know how to estimate benefits at their full value.

They who are conscious of Mankind's perfidy and selfishness, ever receive an obligation with
apprehension and distrust: They suspect that some secret motive must lurk behind it: They express
their thanks with restraint and caution, and fear to praise a kind
action to its full extent, aware that some future day a return may
be required.

Not so Antonia; She thought the world was composed only of those who resembled her, and that
vice existed, was to her still a secret.

The Monk had been of service to her; He said that He wished her well; She was grateful for his
kindness, and thought that no terms were strong enough to be the vehicle of her thanks. With what
delight did Ambrosio listen to the declaration of her artless gratitude!

The natural grace of her manners, the unequalled sweetness of her voice, her modest vivacity,
her unstudied elegance, her expressive countenance, and intelligent
eyes united to inspire him with pleasure and admiration, While the
solidity and correctness of her remarks received additional beauty
from the unaffected simplicity of the language in which they were
conveyed.

Ambrosio was at length obliged to tear himself from this conversation
which possessed for him but too many charms.

He repeated to Antonia his wishes that his visits should not be made known, which desire She
promised to observe.

He then quitted the House, while his Enchantress hastened to her Mother, ignorant of the mischief
which her Beauty had caused. She was eager to know Elvira's opinion of the Man whom She had praised
in such enthusiastic terms, and was delighted to find it equally favourable, if not even more
so, than her own.

'Even before He spoke,' said Elvira, 'I was prejudiced in his favour:
The fervour of his exhortations, dignity of his manner, and closeness
of his reasoning, were very far from inducing me to alter my opinion.

His fine and full-toned voice struck me particularly; But surely, Antonia, I have heard it before.
It seemed perfectly familiar to my ear.

Either I must have known the Abbot in former times, or his voice
bears a wonderful resemblance to that of some other, to whom I have
often listened.

There were certain tones which touched my very heart, and made me feel sensations so singular,
that I strive in vain to account for them.'

'My dearest Mother, it produced the same effect upon me: Yet certainly neither of us ever heard
his voice till we came to Madrid. I suspect that what we attribute to his voice, really proceeds
from his pleasant manners, which forbid our considering him as a Stranger. I know not why, but
I feel more at my ease while conversing with him than I usually do with people who are unknown
to me. I feared not to repeat to him all my childish thoughts; and somehow I felt confident
that He would hear my folly with indulgence. Oh! I was not deceived in him! He listened to
me with such an air of kindness and attention!

He answered me with such gentleness, such condescension! He did not call me an Infant, and
treat me with contempt, as our cross old Confessor at the Castle
used to do.

I verily believe that if I had lived in Murcia a thousand years, I never should have liked
that fat old Father Dominic!'

'I confess that Father Dominic had not the most pleasing manners in
the world; But He was honest, friendly, and well-meaning.'

'Ah! my
dear Mother, those qualities are so common!'

'God grant, my Child,
that Experience may not teach you to think them rare and precious:
I have found them but too much so!

But tell me, Antonia; Why is it impossible for me to have seen the
Abbot before?'

'Because since the moment when He entered the Abbey,
He has never been on the outside of its walls.

He told me just now, that from his ignorance of the Streets, He had
some difficulty to find the Strada di San Iago, though so near the
Abbey.'

'All this is possible, and still I may have seen him BEFORE
He entered the Abbey: In order to come out, it was rather necessary
that He should first go in.'

'Holy Virgin!

As you say, that is very true.--Oh! But might He not have been born in the Abbey?'

Elvira smiled.

'Why, not very easily.'

'Stay, Stay! Now I recollect how it was.

He was put into the Abbey quite a Child; The common People say that
He fell from heaven, and was sent as a present to the Capuchins by
the Virgin.'

'That was very kind of her.

And so He fell from heaven, Antonia?

He must have had a terrible tumble.'

'Many do not credit this, and I fancy, my dear Mother, that I must
number you among the Unbelievers.

  My cutter was gone.  There was no one to whom I could
appeal for help--no watchman, no constable.  Some persons I met said it was a great shame,
but they didn't help me.  Others only laughed, and observed that such things were very common.
I waited about.  A number of boys joined me and shouted "Thief!  Thief!" but, as may be supposed,
I could not find him, and had to return home very disconsolate at my loss.  That evening, much
to my satisfaction, Aunt Deb had a bad headache, and could not make her appearance at dinner.
This gave me an opportunity of speaking to Mr Butterfield.

"I should be happy to further your views, my lad, but I have promised your Aunt Deborah to
take you into my counting-house, and I have only been waiting a day or two until a boy has
left, whose place I intend you to fill.  You'll begin low down, but by perseverance and industry
you will, in the course of a few years, rise to a respectable position. Many lads fancy they
would like to go to sea, and bitterly repent it afterwards.  You will have a far more comfortable
life on shore, and the position of an English merchant is as honourable a one as a man could
desire to follow."

These remarks didn't at all suit my taste.  I thanked Mr Butterfield, but told him that my
heart had long been set on going to sea, and that I didn't expect to be happy in any other calling.

"That's what many lads say, but afterwards find out that they have made a very great mistake,"
he remarked.

"But they don't all do that, or we should have no sailors," I argued.  I then told him that
I had been on board the "Emu," which, I concluded, would sail in a few days, and that I should
much like to go in her.

"She's not my vessel," he answered, "though I know something of the captain.  He is a good
sailor, though he is not the man under whom I should wish to place a lad.  However, when your
aunt is better, I'll talk the matter over with her; and should she consent, then I'll see what
can be done."

I fancied that I had made some way; and, in spite of the loss of my cutter, I went to bed more
contented in my mind than I had been for some time.

CHAPTER NINE.

  Mr Butterfield's office--My future prospects--I again visit the
  "Emu"--Aunt Deb's good advice--I rebel--All sailors are not beggars--
  My next visit to the "Emu"--Shall I stow myself away?--Conflicting
  ideas--Looking over the ship, I meet with an accident--Once more a
  prisoner--The hold of the "Emu"--Not a stowaway--My possible fate--No
  bones broken--"The blue above and the blue below"--Perseverance
  conquers all difficulties--On the high seas--Sea-sick--On the kelson--
  I give way to despair--"Help!  Help!"--The yarn of Sam Switch's
  ghost--I feel the pangs of hunger--I review my past life--Never say
  die--Water, water everywhere, but not a drop to drink--My efforts meet
  with some success.

Aunt Deb made her appearance at the breakfast-table, but nothing was said about my plans for
the future.  As soon as I had finished, Mr Butterfield, looking at his watch, told me to run
out for a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes, and said that when I came back he would take
me down with him to his office.

"I shall not keep you there," he remarked; "you will afterwards come back to your aunt, who
will probably find something for you to do."

I obeyed, and as soon as I got out of the house I ran off in the direction of the country.
I wanted to see green fields and hedges and trees.  I enjoyed the fresh air and exercise, and
was longer away than I intended.  On my return I found Mr Butterfield waiting for me at the door.

"Punctuality is the soul of business.  Remember that," he remarked. "You have kept me waiting
for ten minutes.  Come along."

I begged pardon, saying that the time had passed faster than I had expected.

He walked along with sedate steps, for he was not given to rapid locomotion, his gold-headed
cane heavily striking the ground as he went. He had not spoken since we left the house, and
I felt that I was passing from the position of a guest to that of a junior clerk.  Still, not
being overwhelmed with bashfulness at any time, and as I was anxious to know what had passed
between him and Aunt Deb regarding my future career, I looked up and asked him.

"Your aunt will communicate her wishes to you," he answered.  "You will see presently the sort
of work you will be expected to perform in my office.  Let me tell you that many lads would
consider themselves fortunate if they had the opportunity I am ready to give you."

He said no more.  His manner, it struck me, was far less cordial than it had been, and I could
not help thinking that I was indebted for this to Aunt Deb, who had probably given him an account
of my adventures at home.  Now I am bound to say that I consider Mr Butterfield was right;
but I did not think so at the time.

We at length reached Water Street, and entered the office of Tallow, Candlemas, and Co.  It
was a dingy-looking place, consisting of a small outer room, the walls covered over with posters
announcing the sailing of ships and other information. He was also caught by the rising cult
of sublimity in his two great pindaric odes, and by the cult of the picturesque in his flirtations
with Scandinavian materials. In these later poems he broadened the field of poetic material notably;
but in them he hardly deepened the imaginative or emotional tone: his manner, rather, became
elaborate and theatrical. The "Elegy" is the language of the heart sincerely perfected.

The poem has pleased many and pleased long--throughout two centuries. In part it works through "pleasing
melancholy"; in part it appeals to innumerable humble readers conscious
of their own unheralded merit.

Inevitably, since the industrial revolution, modernist critics have tended to stress its appeal
to class consciousness. This appeal, real though it is, can be overemphasized.

The rude forefathers are not primarily presented as underprivileged. Though poverty-stricken
and ignorant, they are happy in family life and jocund in the field.

"Nature is nature wherever placed," as the intellectuals of Gray's time loved to say, and the
powers of the village fathers, potentially, equal the greatest; their virtue is contentment.
They neither want nor need "storied urn or animated bust." If they are unappreciated by Ambition,
Grandeur, Pride, et al., the lack of appreciation is due to a corruption of values. The value commended
in the "Elegy" is that of the simple life, which alone is rational
and virtuous--it is the life according to nature.

Of course I ought to have returned home; but instead of that I made my way down to the docks
to amuse myself as before, by looking at the vessels.  I was not long in finding out the "Emu."
She was now considerably lower in the water, having apparently got most of her cargo on board,
although there were still some bales and packages lying alongside ready to be shipped.  I had
a great longing to go on board and try to see the captain, and to ask him if he would take
me.  I could see no one, however, whom I could imagine to be the captain; and I therefore,
after walking up and down the quay for some time, and looking at a number of other vessels,
guessed by my hunger that it must be near luncheon-time, and took my way homewards.  On entering
the house I met Aunt Deb, who was coming down into the dining-room, by which I knew that I
was not late.

"I am glad to find that you are more punctual than usual, Dick," she said.  "You will soon,
I hope, become regular in your habits.  Follow the example of so excellent a man as my cousin,
Godfrey Butterfield. You are pleased with your excellent prospects in his office, I hope?"

To this remark I made no reply, but said, "I thought, Aunt Deb, that Mr Butterfield was going
to speak to you about my wish to go to sea.  He told me that he would do so, and that he would
have no difficulty in getting me on board a ship."

"Fiddle-de-dee about going to sea!" replied Aunt Deb.  "My cousin did speak to me on the subject,
and I told him at once that I would never consent to your doing so, and that I felt sure your
father would not do so either.  What!  To throw away the brilliant prospects which through
my means have been opened out to you?  What!  Desert your family and me, your affectionate
aunt, and the kind friend who so generously consents to become your patron from the regard
he has for me?  What!  Go and run all the risks of a turbulent ocean, and perhaps lose your
life, and cause sorrow to those who have an affection for you, merely to gratify an insane
fancy?  No, Dick--no!  I told my cousin Godfrey Butterfield, at once, that if he had any regard
for me he would never encourage you in so mad a proceeding; and I begged him, as soon as possible,
to give you employment in his office, so as to turn your mind away from the silly ideas you
have entertained."

"I'm not at all obliged to you, Aunt Deb, for what you have done," I said, my choler rising.
"It was no idle fancy in my mind, but my fixed resolution to become a sailor; and a sailor
I'll be, notwithstanding your opposition."

"Hoity-toity!" exclaimed Aunt Deb, who was not accustomed to be set at defiance.  "You will
understand, Dick, that you were placed in my charge, and must obey my directions; and that
I intend you to go into Mr Butterfield's office, and to work hard there, so that you may do
credit to my recommendation some day, and render support to your family. In case of your father's
death, what would become of you all?  I, who have devoted my life to your family, should have
the charge of their maintenance."

"Sailors are not beggars, and I should very likely make as much money by going to sea as by
any other means."

"Fiddle-de-dee," again exclaimed Aunt Deb; "eat your luncheon, and don't talk nonsense."

As I was very hungry, I obeyed her, but at first I felt as if the food I put in my mouth would
choke me.  Ultimately, however, I was able to get on as well as usual.  Aunt Deb's behaviour
to me during the next few days did not contribute to reconcile me to my proposed lot.  She
kept me working at writing and adding up long columns of figures, not failing to scold me when
I made mistakes.  I pictured to myself my future dreary life--to have to sit in a dull office
all day, and then to have to come home with no other society than that of Mr Butterfield and
Aunt Deb as long as she remained at Liverpool.  I knew nobody at Liverpool, and did not see
how I was to form any acquaintances of my own.  After luncheon, on Saturday, Aunt Deb, in consideration,
she said, of my diligence, allowed me to go and take a walk by myself, as she felt indisposed
to leave the house.  I very naturally wandered down to the docks to have a look at the "Emu"
before she sailed, and to inspect any other vessels that might take my fancy.  I much missed
my cutter yacht, as I found there existed places where I could have sailed her.  I had spent
some time in walking about, when I again got back to the quay where the "Emu" was moored. 
As I was pacing to and fro, I thought of the high stool in the dark corner of Mr Butterfield's
office; the dreary, dreary days I was doomed to sit there; the dull, dull evenings in the society
of Aunt Deb and her cousin, and the not more lively Sundays, with attendances at three services,
for Aunt Deb was very strict in this respect.  Hapless fate, with nothing better to expect
than a head clerkship.  The business I knew I should detest.  Then I thought of the free life
on the ocean, the strange lands I should visit, the curious people I should see, and the liberty
I fancied I should enjoy.

As I had had a fair education, and knew that I could master navigation, I expected without
difficulty to work my way up till I became an officer, and then to have the command of such
a fine ship myself, just such a one as the "Emu."  But how was I to get to sea?  Mr Butterfield
positively refused to obtain an appointment for me without the consent of Aunt Deb and that
of my father, and I was confident such would not be given.  Would the captain take me without
further introduction, if I should offer myself?  I had sense enough to know that that was very
unlikely.

Suddenly the idea seized me, should I stow myself away on board, and not appear until the ship
had sailed out to sea?  I had a notion, notwithstanding, that this would not be a wise proceeding.
I should certainly not be treated as an officer, and should very probably be sent forward to
become a drudge to the crew.  Still, what other chance had I to get to sea?  I thought and thought.

Well, I'll go on board at all events.  The blue Peter was flying at the masthead, besides which
there was a board announcing that she would sail with the morning's tide.  It was the custom,
in those days especially, for merchantmen to sail on a Sunday.  The stages leading on board
had been removed, with the exception of a single plank to the gangway.  My longing to go on
board increasing, I indulged it.  None of the crew were moving about aft.  The officers, if
any were on board, were, I supposed, in their cabins.  I looked forward, where I saw a few
of the crew, who were preparing for their supper.  The cook just then made his appearance from
the caboose with a large bowl containing a smoking mess of some sort.  I had never been below
on board ship.  I thought I should like to look round and see what sort of place the hold was.
The tackle which had been used for lowering the cargo was not yet unrove, and hung over the
main hatchway, which had been left open for stowing some goods which, as it turned out, had
not yet arrived.  Seeing that no one was observing me, I seized the rope, and swung myself
down till my head disappeared below the coamings of the hatchway.

Now at this place space had been left to permit of the lower hold being reached.  The rope
I grasped was not as long as I thought it was, and suddenly the end slipped through my fingers,
and down I fell, hurting myself so much that I was unable to rise.  Afraid of calling out for
assistance, I lay there for some time, till the pain increased so much that I fainted away.
When I came to my senses, what was my horror to find myself in total darkness, and on lifting
up my hand as high as I could reach I discovered that some planks had been placed across the
aperture through which I had fallen, and I was shut in.  Though I had been doubtful about acting
the stowaway, here I was, shut up against my will.  Had I carried out the idea which occurred
to me, I intended to have done it in a very different fashion, as I expected to find some comfortable
place where I might obtain air, if not light and access to the store-room and water-casks.
I had no notion of running the risk of starving myself, having had sufficient experience of
the uncomfortable sensations accompanying inanition when I was shut up in the mill.  I had
thought myself very badly off then, but I was now in a much worse condition, and suffering
great pain, and, as far as it appeared to me, with more than one limb broken.  I tried to move,
to ascertain whether this was the case.  First I moved one arm, and then another.  They were
sound, though they hurt me.  Then I tried my right leg, and then my left.  They were certainly
unfractured.

I was doubtful about one of my ankles.  It pained me more than any other part of my body. 
I drew it up and felt it all over.  It was tender to the touch, but none of the bones appeared
to be out of their places. This examination occupied some time.  I did not call out for fear
of the consequences.  The pain which had hitherto prevented me thinking about what would follow
now decreased, and I began to consider the awkward position in which I was placed.  I tried
to persuade myself that I had not positively intended to act the part of a stowaway.  I could
not but know that I had thought about it, yet I had only gone below for the sake of seeing
the hold of a ship.  I could say that when I was discovered, with a tolerably clear conscience,
so I fancied.  Should I be discovered?  That was the question.  For what I could tell I might
be entombed beneath the cargo and be unable to get out till I was starved to death.  The thought
was too dreadful for contemplation, and I tried to put it from me.  I remembered how I had
escaped from the old mill and the way I got out without any one to help me.

"Perseverance conquers all difficulties," I said to myself as I said then.  My situation in
some respects was very similar, only on that occasion I had expected, on obtaining my freedom,
to meet my friends, and now I should find myself confronted by a rough crew and an irate captain,
who might send me on shore, and, for what I could tell, have me put into jail if there was
time for doing so.  I had, at first, no idea of the size of the place in which I was shut up.
I only knew that I could touch the boards above my head by extending my hand when sitting upright.
I thereby knew that there would not be room for me to stand. I now crawled about and ascertained
that I was in a tolerably wide place, extending fore and aft and from side to side.  I was,
in fact, in the lower hold or bottom of the ship, far, far down beneath a mass of cargo.  How
long I had been there was also a mystery to me.  I might have remained in a fainting state
only for a few minutes, or hours might have passed.  I knew that I began to feel hungry, though
I had had an ample luncheon--for on Saturdays Mr Butterfield dined early--which showed that
I could not be very much hurt, and that I must have been some considerable time on board. 
I had, however, as I intended to stay out till dark, put a couple of buns, which I had bought
at a pastrycook's, into my pocket.  I refrained, as yet, from eating them, not knowing how
long I might have to remain below.  I thought that it must now be night, and as I supposed
the crew would be asleep forwards and the captain and officers aft, they would not hear me,
even if I shouted out at the top of my voice.  I therefore concluded that it would be foolish
to exhaust myself uselessly.  "I'll wait for daylight, when they're moving about, and I shall
have a better chance of making myself heard," I thought.

The place where I lay was dry and clean, though it smelt horribly of tar and other odours from
which the hold of a vessel is seldom free, and was besides disagreeably close.  After a considerable
period had elapsed, and when the pain had much gone off, a drowsiness stole over me, and having
got into a comfortable position, I fell fast asleep.  I think I must have awoke at intervals,
for I remember hearing a curious rippling sound beneath me.  It must have had a lulling effect,
for I dropped off again.

The next time I woke I heard not only a rippling sound, but a dashing of water against the
sides, and presently the ship began to pitch slowly and gently.  The idea at once occurred
to me that I must be at sea.  If so, it was where I had long wished to be, though the circumstances
accompanying my entrance into a naval life differed greatly from such as I had intended them
to be.  Could it then be daylight?--if so, I had been much longer below than I had calculated
on.  The ship, I remembered, was to sail with the morning tide.  That might have meant one
or two o'clock, for how the tides ran I didn't know.  There must have been time, at all events,
for her to get away from the wharf, and to descend the Mersey.  In that case the day must now
be well advanced. Probably, I thought, the ship has had a fair wind, and with a favourable
tide must have got rapidly along.  I could not sing:--

  "I'm on the sea, I'm on the sea,
  I am where I would ever be;
  With the blue above, and the blue below,
  In silence wheresoe'er I go."

Silence there certainly was, but instead of the blue above and the blue below, there was pitchy
darkness.  The long sleep and the perfect rest had taken away all the pain which I had at first
felt, except an uncomfortable sensation in one of my ankles.

When I was fairly aroused I again began to feel very hungry, so I ate one of my buns.  I could
have bolted the other, but I was becoming wonderfully prudent, and I knew that if I did so
I might have nothing else to eat.  All this time I had remained perfectly silent, for the reasons
I have before given.  I had become accustomed to the atmosphere, and I suppose that some fresh
air must have come through some unseen apertures which enabled me to breathe without difficulty.
It was sufficiently close, however, to make me feel drowsy, and having eaten the bun, I again
dropped off to sleep.

I awoke with a horrible nausea, such as I had never before experienced. The sensations I experienced
in the old vault were nothing to it.  The air there, as I mentioned, was perfectly pure, besides
which I was then upon solid ground; now I felt an unpleasant movement, sometimes a sort of
plunging forward, then a rise and fall, and then a rolling from side to side, though being
close to the keel I didn't experience this so much as if I had been on deck.  It was quite
sufficient, however, to make me feel terribly sick.

Oh how wretched I was!  Didn't I repent of having gone down into the hold.  I would ten thousand
times sooner have been perched on the highest stool in the darkest corner of Mr Butterfield's
counting-house than have been where I was.  I was too miserable to cry out.  I only wished
that the ship would strike a rock and go down, and thus terminate my misery.

I need not describe what happened.  For hours I was prostrate; but at length the feeling of
sickness wore off, and I again became not only hungry but thirsty in the extreme.  I would
have given anything for a draught of water; but how was I to obtain it.  One thing I felt was,
that if I could not I should die.  Though I was hungry I could not masticate the smallest portion
of my bun, but I tried to arouse myself and began once more to move about.  As I did so my
hand came in contact with what appeared to be a large cask.  I felt it all over.  Yes, I was
certain of it.  It must be one of the ship's water-casks stowed in the lower tier.

I thought I might possibly find some outlet through which I might make my way into the upper
part of the ship, but none could I discover.  I was, in reality, right down on the kelson,
though I didn't know what it was called at the time.  It is just above the keel, the object
of it being to strengthen the vessel lengthways, and to confine the floors in their proper
position.  It is placed above the cross-pieces and half-floors, and a bolt is driven right
through all into the main keel. The half-floors, it must be understood, are not united in the
centre, but longitudinally on either side.

Of course I was not aware of this at the time.  All that I knew was, that I was down in the
bottom of the ship in a horrible dark confined space, where I should be starved to death or
suffocated could I not find some way out.  Again and again I made the attempt, but in every
direction met with obstructions.  Stretching out my arms, I found I could touch each side of
my prison.

Resolute as I had hitherto been, I at length gave way to despair, and shrieked and shouted
for help.  I bawled till my voice was hoarse and my strength exhausted; then I sat down in
a state of apathy, resigned to my fate.  But the love of life soon returned.  I got up and
crawled to the further end of my prison-house, where I met with some stout boarding which effectually
prevented my further progress.  After this I turned round and crawled to the other end along
the kelson, but was stopped by a strong bulkhead.

Once more I stopped to listen, half expecting to hear the sailors making their way down to
the hold to ascertain whence my shouts and cries proceeded, but no sound except the creaking
of the bulkheads reached my ears.  "I won't give in yet," I said to myself; "perhaps the crew
are on deck or in the fore part of the ship, and the officers in their cabins, and my voice
could not reach them; but somebody must, before long, be coming into the hold, and then, if
I shout at the top of my voice, I cannot fail to be heard."

The question, however, was, when would any one come down?  I had no means of ascertaining,
though the steward must be getting up provisions, or the boatswain or carpenter stores from
their store-room, and yet no sound might reach me, or perhaps my voice might not penetrate
as far as where they were at work.  Still, there was nothing like trying.  Placing my hands
to my sides, I shouted out, "Help, help!  I'm shut up below.  I shall die if you don't let
me out.  Oh, do come, sailors.  Don't you hear me?  Help!  Help!  Help!"

Then I gave way to a loud roar of agony and despair.  After this I stopped for a few minutes
listening as before, then putting my hands to my mouth, as if by so doing I should increase
the loudness of my voice, I shouted with all the strength of my lungs.  Suddenly the idea occurred
to me that the sailors would hear my voice, but not knowing whence it proceeded would fancy
the ship was haunted and would be in a dreadful fright.  Strange as it may seem the thought
amused me, and I gave way to an hysterical laugh.  "Now I'll warrant not one of them will like
to come below on account of the supposed ghost.  They will be spinning all sorts of yarns to
each other about hobgoblins appearing on board."  Old Riddle had spun several such yarns, and
they came to my recollection. One was about a boy named Sam Smitch.  Sam was the dirtiest fellow
on board, and could never understand what cleanliness meant.  He was constantly, therefore,
being punished.  That didn't mend his ways, and he was a nuisance to all the crew, who, of
course, gave him a frequent taste of the rope's-end and bullied him in all sorts of ways. 
At last Sam declared that he would jump overboard and end his misery.  The men laughed at him,
and said that he hadn't the courage to do it.

"Haven't I?" said Sam, "you'll see that I'll do it, and my blood will be upon your heads."

Still none would believe that Sam would do away with himself, till one morning his jacket and
hat were found in the head, and when the ship's company was mustered at divisions, Sam didn't
answer to his name.  He was searched for everywhere, but could not be discovered, and at length
it became very evident to all that Sam must have put his threat into execution and thrown himself
overboard during the night.  Whether any of the men recollected that it was their cruelty that
had driven him to this act of desperation I can't say, but probably it didn't much trouble
their consciences; they only considered he was a fool for his pains. Two or three days passed
away, when Sam Smitch was well-nigh forgotten.

One night, however, one of the carpenter's crew was going along the lower-deck, when he saw
a figure in white gliding past him in the distance.  The figure for a moment turned its head,
when, as the light of the lantern fell on it, he recognised the face of Sam Smitch.  It was
more than his nerves could stand, and he bolted like a shot up the ladder.  Night after night
some one of the crew had a similar occurrence to relate, till one and all were convinced that
the ship was haunted by Sam Smitch's ghost.  At last the men, gallant fellows as they were,
were afraid to go below even when sent on duty.  Many of them swore that even when in their
hammocks they had seen Sam Smitch's ghost gliding noiselessly about the deck.  The whole crew
were in a very nervous state, and many were actually placed on the sick list by the doctor.
At last the circumstance reached the ear of the purser, who happened not to be a believer in
ghosts.

"Whew!" he exclaimed, when he heard it; "that accounts for the mysterious disappearance of
some of my stores."

He informed the first lieutenant, who placed a watch in the neighbourhood where the ghost had
appeared.  The next night, in bodily form, the ghost of Sam Smitch was captured, dirtier than
ever, but yet fat and sleek, though rather pallid.  Not, however, till he was brought on deck,
to be well scrubbed under the superintendence of the master at arms, were the crew convinced
that the ghost was no ghost at all, but that dirty Sam, fool as he was, had been bamboozling
them effectually, while he enjoyed his ease and plenty to eat below with nothing to do.

It is curious that this yarn should have occurred to me, but I suppose it did so from my case
being somewhat similar to that of Sam Smitch, only he had voluntarily stowed himself away and
had plenty to eat, while I was shut up against my will without a particle of food, except the
buns I had in my pockets.  It served also to draw me for a few minutes from the thoughts of
my own misfortunes.  The exertion of shouting increased the thirst I had already begun to feel.
I was at the same time very hungry, but when I again tried to eat a piece of my remaining bun
I could not get down the mouthful.  I became rapidly more and more thirsty.  The sea-sickness
had worn off, but I felt more thoroughly uncomfortable in my inside than I had ever before
done in my life.  If any of my readers have at any time suffered from thirst, they will understand
my sensations better than I can describe them.  My mouth and throat felt like a dust-bin, and
my tongue like the end of a burnt stick.  I moved my mouth about in every possible way to try
and produce some saliva, but so dry were my lips that they only cracked in the attempt.

I had scarcely hitherto believed that I should die, but now so terrible were my sensations
that I didn't expect to live many hours unless I should be released.  I thought over my past
life.  The numberless wrong and foolish things I had done came back to my recollection, while
not a single good deed of any sort occurred to me.  I thought of how often I had vexed my father
and mother, how impudent I had been to Aunt Deb, how frequently unkind and disagreeable to
my brothers and sisters.  I tried to be very sorry for everything, but all the time I was conscious
that I was not as sorry as I ought to have been.

Exhausted by my efforts as well as by my hunger and thirst, I lay stretched upon the kelson
till I had, I suppose, somewhat recovered. Once more I said to myself, "It will not do to give
in; out of this I must get."  I managed again to get on my feet, feeling about in all directions.
As I was doing so my hands touched what appeared to me like the side of a large cask.  I was
certain of it.  I could make out the hoops which went round the cask, and the intervening spaces.
Suddenly it occurred to me that it was one of the water-casks of the ship stowed in the lower
tier.  I put my ear to it, and as the ship rolled I could hear the water move about.  I felt,
however, very much like the fellow I had read about at school, who was placed when dying of
thirst in the midst of water which remained up to his chin, but into which he could never get
his mouth.  Here was the water, but how I was to reach it was the question.

I felt about in the hope that some moisture might be coming through; even a few drops would
help to cool my parched tongue, though I could have drunk a gallon without stopping, but the
cask was strong and perfectly dry outside.  I considered whether it would be possible to knock
a hole in the cask, but I had no instrument for the purpose, and should not have had strength
to use it even if I had found it.  It was indeed tantalising to hear the water washing to and
fro, and yet not be able to obtain a drop.  By chance I happened to put my hands in my pockets,
which always contained a knife, bits of string, and all sorts of things.  Suddenly I recollected
that I had been making a stand for my cutter before she was stolen, and that I had had a gimlet
to bore holes in the wood.  To my joy I found that I had fixed a cork on the end of it and
had thrust it into my pocket.  There it was.  I might, by boring a hole in the cask, reach
the water.  How anxiously I clutched the gimlet. How fearful I was that in attempting to bore
a hole I might break it. Feeling as far as I could judge for the centre of the cask, I began
boring a hole, using the greatest care.  At length the gimlet went right through.  As I drew
it forth I put it to my mouth.  It was wet.  How deliciously cool it felt.  I then applied
my mouth to the hole, but bitter was my disappointment when no water came out.  I sucked and
sucked at the hole, and then I blew into it, but with no satisfactory result.

I was again almost driven to despair.  I tried the hole with the gimlet. It passed through
it, and the iron was again wet.  "What a fool!"  I exclaimed, just then recollecting that to
get liquor out of a cask two holes are necessary, the one to serve as a vent-hole to let in
the air and the other to let out the liquid.  I accordingly set to work and began boring a
hole as high as I could reach above the former one.  I soon accomplished my task, and as the
air rushed in the water from the lower hole rushed out.  I eagerly applied my mouth to it and
sucked and sucked away until I was almost choked.  Still I didn't feel as if I had had enough.

How delicious was the sensation as it wetted my lips, moistened my mouth, and flowed down my
parched throat.  I felt very much like a pitcher being filled at a fountain.  The hole was
small, so that only a thin stream came out.  It was fortunate for me that it was no larger,
or I believe that I should have killed myself by over-drinking.  Not until I had withdrawn
my mouth did I recollect that I must find some means of stopping the flow of water.  Feeling
in my pocket, I found some pieces of wood, one of which I thought I could form into a plug.
In doing so I nearly cut my fingers.

After a time I succeeded, and shutting up my knife, I knocked the plug I had made in with the
handle.  The vent-hole was not so important to stop, so I let it alone.  I was now able to
eat my remaining bun, though I recollected that it was the last article of food I possessed.
I afterwards took another pull at the water-cask.  I had no longer any fear of suffering from
thirst, which was some comfort, but I had serious apprehensions about the means of obtaining
food, should I fail to make my escape from my prison.  I was, however, wonderfully hopeful.
I remembered how I had fed myself on the musty flour in the old mill.  I kept up my spirits,
in the hopes of finding something to eat among the cargo.  I was aware that few edibles were
exported from England, our teeming population consuming the whole produce of the country, and
as much more as they can get.

I could not tell all this time whether it was night or day, as I had no means of calculating
how long I had been in the ship's hold.  Had I been told that a week or more had passed, I
should not have been surprised, the time appeared to me so long.  I now began to feel excessively
sleepy, and creeping about until I discovered where the planks, if not soft, were less rough
than in other parts, I lay down, and in a few seconds was fast asleep.

CHAPTER TEN.

  Dreamland--A vision of home--Strange proceedings of my brother Ned--
  Roughish weather--I make a slight progress--A ray of light--The
  cargo--The wooden case--A disappointment--In darkness again--A welcome
  draught--My bed--My slumbers interrupted by ugly visitors--I determine
  to catch some rats--My further efforts at escape--My ill-success--My
  conscience troubles me, but I succeed in quieting it--My visions--
  Tantalising Aunt Deb and Mr Butterfield--The conference of the rats--
  Their opinion of mankind--Their grievances and proposed remedies--A
  sneeze and its effects.

My slumbers were far from tranquil.  I think, indeed, that sometimes I must have been half
awake, for I was convinced that creatures were running over me; but when I put my hand out
they escaped.  Then I began to dream, and I fancied I was at home again in my own room.  How
I got there I could not tell.

Suddenly my brother jumped out of bed, and began scrambling about the room, overturning the
chairs and table, and then got behind the chest of drawers, and sent them down with a loud
crash to the ground, laughing heartily as he did so.  It was very unlike his mode of proceeding,
as he was the quietest and best conducted member of the family.  When he got tired of this
sort of amusement he began pulling the bed about, and lifting it from side to side.

Naturally I expected to be tumbled out.  I begged him to let me alone, as I had gone through
a great deal of fatigue, and wished to be quiet. But he would not listen to me, and only shook
the bed more violently than before.  Losing patience, I was going to jump up and seize him,
when I awoke.

I found that the movement was real, for the ship was rolling and pitching more heavily than
she had before done, and I could hear the bulkheads creaking, and the timbers complaining,
and the heels of the mast working, and the dull sound of the water dashing against the sides
of the ship.  There was still less chance than ever of being heard should I again shout out,
so I refrained from exhausting my strength by the exercise of my voice.  So much did the stout
ship tumble about that I could not attempt to make another exploring expedition.  I therefore
lay still, waiting till the ship would again be quiet.  I didn't know then that a storm sometimes
lasts for days, and that I might be starved to death before it was over.  Though the bun and
draught of cold water had somewhat satisfied my appetite, I again began to feel hungry, though
not so hungry as I might have been without them.  Having nothing to eat, I went off again to sleep.

When I once more roused up I began to think of the astonishment and alarm my disappearance
would cause to Aunt Deb and Mr Butterfield. Would they have any suspicion of what had become
of me?  Perhaps they would fancy that I had fallen off the quay into the river; but then Aunt
Deb would most likely insinuate that such was not to be my case.  I confess that any anxiety
she might feel didn't trouble me, but I regretted the anxiety my disappearance would cause
my parents, and brothers and sisters at home.  However I could not help it, so I put the thought
from me.  Hunger at last induced me to make another attempt to escape, in spite of the way
the ship was tumbling about.  I fancied that one of the bulkheads against which I had come
was not so stout and strong as the others.  I thought I would try and force my way through,
but with only my hands how was that to be done.

Whilst creeping about I shoved my legs or arms into any opening I came across.  In doing so
I kicked against some object which moved.  I worked my foot on till I came to the end of it,
and then contrived to draw from under one of the casks what proved to be a handspike, which
had probably on some occasion dropped down into the hold.  I can't express the satisfaction
the possession of this instrument gave me.  I felt it all over, and tried its strength by a
blow on the kelson, for at first I was afraid it might be rotten.  It proved sound.  Armed
with it I returned to the bulkhead, against which I determined to make my attack.  Standing
as firmly as I could, I dealt blow after blow as high up as I was able to reach.

I suspected that had it not been for the noises which were constantly issuing from all parts
of the ship the sound of my blows would have been heard.  At last, to my joy, I felt something
give way.  This encouraged me to proceed.  On feeling with my hands I found that I was working
against a small upright door, which opened, I concluded, into another part of the hold.  I
redoubled my efforts, and getting in the handspike worked away till the door yielded still
more.  This further encouraged me to proceed, but the operation took me a long time.  Occasionally
no progress was made, but, like the dropping of water on a hard rock, ultimately prevailed.

Now one nail was drawn, now another, and I was sure that the door was giving way.  A strong
man would with one or two wrenches have forced it open.  Weak as I was for want of food, it
now seems surprising to me that my exertions should have produced any effect.  I had begun
at the top.  By working the handspike lower and lower down I by degrees tore away the door,
or as I may more properly say the panel, as there were no hinges that I could discover.  I
was exerting all my strength in another effort when it gave way, and down I fell with my head
almost through the aperture I had made.  A faint light which came down from an opening far-away
revealed the sort of place I was in.  Had I not been so long accustomed to darkness I don't
think that its strength would have been sufficient for me to discover the objects around. 
I made out several bales, cases, and packages, stowed tightly together; but still I failed
to see any outlet.

After recovering from my fall, by which I was somewhat hurt, I crept out, endeavouring to move
some of the huge packages; but I did so in vain.  I tried one and then another, but they did
not yield to the utmost efforts I could make.  Though I could not move the packages, I determined
to try if any of them contained something edible.  I first felt the packages.  I was convinced
they were bales of canvas or loose cloth.  At last I came upon a wooden case.  This I hoped
might prove to be full of biscuits or hams.  I accordingly got out my knife, expecting by patience
to make a hole sufficiently large to admit my hand.  As I was completely in the dark I had
to be very cautious not to cut myself or break my knife, an accident which I knew was very
likely to occur, I cut out, therefore, only a small piece at a time.  Then I felt with my left
hand to ascertain how I had got on.  The case was very thick, and it must have taken me a couple
of hours or more before I could make a hole an inch square.  Even then I was not through it.
I cut and cut away, till to my satisfaction my knife went through.  I now made fast progress,
and before long, as I ran in the blade it struck against a hard substance.  Still I went on,
and at last found to my bitter regret that the case contained iron goods of some sort.  In
spite of all the care I had taken I had much blunted my knife, and I was afraid I might not
be able to make a hole in any other case I might find.  I was ready to cry with vexation, but
it would be of no use to do that, so I shut up my knife until I could discover some promising
package to attack.  I felt about in vain for another case.  By this time the faint light I
had observed had faded away, and I thus knew that evening had come on.  I had had only two
buns all this time.  Unless I could get some food I fancied that I must die.  Though I had
nothing to eat I had plenty to drink, and to refresh myself I returned to the part of the ship
out of which I had clambered.  I soon discovered the water-cask, to which, pulling out the
plug, I eagerly applied my mouth.  The huge draught of water I swallowed greatly refreshed
me, and prevented me feeling the pangs of hunger.  I now went back once more to that part of
the hold to which I had just gained access.

Feeling about, I came upon a piece of canvas, and I thought to myself that it would somewhat
add to my comfort could I make use of it to sleep on.  I dragged it out, and found that it
was of sufficient size for my purpose.

The exertions I had made had greatly exhausted my strength.  I should have lain down on the
packages, but when I felt about I found that they would not form an easy couch.  There was
no room to stretch myself, and they were secured by hard ropes.  Besides this I thought it
possible that from the working of the ship some of them might slip out of their places, and
come down upon me.  I therefore dragged the piece of canvas into the lower part of the hold,
and, stretching it under one of the water-casks, lay down to rest, intending before long to
be up again and at work.

I quickly dropped off to sleep, but was soon awakened by feeling some creatures crawling over
me.  That they were rats I could have no doubt, from their weight and the loud thud they made
as they jumped off and on the kelson.  I lay perfectly quiet.  Now I felt a fellow running
up my leg--now scrambling over my body.  But the rogues did not venture near my hands, their
instinct telling them that they would have their necks wrung if they did so.  My object was
to catch one or two of them, and, disgusting as the idea would have been at any other time,
I determined if I could to get hold of one forthwith to eat him.

I had often grumbled at home of having on a Monday morning to consume the dry bread which had
remained over from the previous week.  This system had commenced on the arrival of Aunt Deb,
who would not allow a scrap of food to be lost, and she therefore persuaded my mother to give
up the hot rolls which we previously had for breakfast on that day.  It was the first of the
many reforms introduced by our respected aunt which didn't endear her to us.

The rats continued their gambols.  Now I felt a fellow perched on my leg--now he would run
along my arm, and before I could lift up my hand he was off again.  I kept my feet covered
up in the canvas, for I had no wish to have them nibbling at my toes.  Somehow or other none
of them came near my face, or I should certainly have caught one.

At length I jumped up determined to make chase, but the moment I moved they were off in all
directions.  Perhaps they thought they had a hungry enemy to deal with.  I felt about everywhere,
thinking I might find one of them stowed away under a cask, or in some hole or corner, but
they had gone off, like imps of darkness as they were, at sunrise.

I wished more than ever for light.  I thought that I could then infinitely better have endured
my confinement.

Fortunately for me, the ship must have been well cleaned out before the cargo was taken on
board; and as she was as tight as a bottle, there was no bilge-water in her.  Had there been,
I could not have existed so long far down in the depths of her hold.

The chase after the rats had aroused me, and I felt less inclination than before to sleep,
so I got up, resolved to have another search for food of some sort.  I was not very particular.
A pound of tallow candles would have been welcome as a meal.  I did not stop to consider whether
I could have digested them.  They would at all events have allayed the gnawing of hunger. 
I remembered reading of people suffering from hunger when navigating the ocean in open boats,
and how much a flying-fish, or a booby, or a lump of rancid grease, had contributed to keep
body and soul together.  But neither booby nor flying-fish could I possibly obtain.  I tried
to think of all the various articles with which the ship was likely to be freighted.  During
my numerous visits to the quay alongside which she had been moored, I had had the curiosity
to try and ascertain the contents of the packages about being hoisted on board.  I had in some
places observed large packages of raisins, dried figs, and hams, and kegs of butter, and dried
fish, but they were being landed.  I had, however, seen no things of the same description alongside
the "Emu."

Still, unless I searched I was sure not to find; so, again crawling through the opening I had
made, I once more began to feel my way about, and to try every package I could reach.

The cases I felt were all rough and strong.  The packages were covered with a stout material,
showing the nature of the goods within.  Again I tried to move some of them so that I might
make my way onwards, but I found as before that they were all firmly jammed in their proper
positions.  It was difficult to divine how the space I had got into had been left vacant.

I might have spent two or three hours in the search, for of course I was obliged to move slowly
and with the greatest caution to avoid knocking my head against any object, or falling down
again and injuring myself. I no longer felt any pain from my sprained ankle.  The enforced
rest I had given it had contributed to restore it to use.

How little those on deck supposed that a human being was creeping about so far down beneath
their feet.

Before I gave in I tried another case, which seemed more promising than any of those I had
hitherto discovered.  I got out my knife.  I carved and cut, feeling each little chip as I
got it off; the case was of soft deal, so that I had no great difficulty in cutting it, but
I did so without much hope of reaching food after all, and began to feel that I should have
to fall back on raw rat for supper.  That was if I could manage to catch the said rat.  As
before, I was disappointed.  I got into the case, but could only feel a mass of hay serving
to pack china or crockeryware of some sort.  I had had hopes of success, and I could not help
feeling much disappointed.

The desire of sleep, which I had for some time thrown off, returned, and I crept back to the
spot which I had selected for my couch.  I wrapt myself up in the canvas, taking care to guard
my feet, and putting one hand over my nose, and the other under me, so that the rats should
not be able to nibble any of my extremities, which I thought it likely they would try to do.
I hoped, however, that if they made the attempt I should be more successful in catching one.

For some time hunger prevented me from going to sleep.  Again I thought over my past life--my
childhood's days--the time I spent at school--my various companions--my chums and enemies--the
tricks I had played--the canings and floggings I had received--for instruction at that period
was imparted with a much larger proportion of the fortiter in re than of the suaviter in modo.
I used then to wish heartily to get away from school, but now I would very gladly have found
myself back there again, even with the floggings in prospect, provided I could be sure of an
ample breakfast, even though that breakfast might have consisted of larded bread and sugarless
tea.  Though I had often had quarrels with my brothers and sisters, I would willingly have
entered into a compact never to quarrel again.  I would gladly have endured one of the longest
lectures Aunt Deb had ever given me, repeated ten times over, always provided I was sure of
obtaining a lump of bread and cheese after it.  I would thankfully have listened to the driest
of some of my father's dry sermons, with the expectation of obtaining a cold dinner on my return
home from church.  But I knew that regrets were unavailing, and that as I had made my bed so
I must lie in it.

I thought and thought till my thoughts became confused.

The sound of voices struck on my ear.  People were talking in whispers all round me, but I
could not distinguish what they said.  Then even the consciousness of where I was faded from
me, and I was fast asleep.  Even when I was sleeping I still suffered the painful sensations
of hunger. I was tantalised by seeing in my dreams tables spread out, sometimes for breakfast,
and at others for dinner or supper.  My brothers and sisters were seated round them, laughing
and talking merrily, and eating the good things with excellent appetite.  Once Mr Butterfield
brought me a bowl of turtle-soup, and assuring me of its excellence, ladled it into his mouth
before my eyes, and then disappeared with a hop, skip, and a jump.

In the same way Aunt Deb appeared with a plate of crumpets, her favourite dish, and swallowed
them one after the other, making eyes at me all the time they vanished down her throat.  This
done, she went off waltzing round and round the room, till she popped up the chimney.  I cannot
now remember one-tenth of the sensations which presented themselves to my imagination, showing,
as I opine, that the stomach is in intimate connexion with the brain.  Among others, by-the-bye,
I fancied I was wandering about the streets of Liverpool, looking into cookshops and eating-houses,
where people were engaged devouring food, which they in the most provoking manner held up to
me on the ends of their forks, and instead of allowing me to take it, put it down their own
throats.

Again all was a blank.  Silence reigned around; when suddenly a faint light streamed across
the space before me, and I saw armies of rats tripping from all directions and assembling not
five feet from my nose. Over the casks and bales and packages they streamed in countless numbers,
whisking their tails, leaping and tumbling over each other; some making somersaults, others
playing at leapfrog.  Numbers climbed up from beneath the kelson; some came from the fore part
of the ship, others from aft.  "Why, she must be perfectly overrun with the brutes," I thought.
"I wonder how any human being can exist on board.  It's surprising that they should never molest
me."  They were merry fellows. I could not help laughing at the curious antics they played.

Presently I heard a voice shout "Silence!"  A buck rat had seated himself on the top of a plank,
which I had not before observed.  Much to my surprise he held a note-book in his hand, and
opening it began to read.  He was too keen-sighted, I suppose, to require spectacles, though
how he managed to see in that light I could not tell.

"Silence!" he again cried; and he then shouted at the top of his voice, which was somewhat
squeaky for an orator, "Friends, Romans, countrymen,--Lend me your ears."

I thought this a very odd way for a rat to commence an oration.  As he spoke, all the rats,
cocking up their ears, sat on their tails--some on the tops of the casks, others round and
below me.

"Thank you for the attention you seem inclined to pay me, brother rats," he continued.  "I
wish to impress on your minds the serious fact that we, as a race, have been maligned, abused,
hunted, and ill-treated in all varieties of ways.  We have had traps set for us, and although
we are not often caught in them, it serves to exhibit the malice of our enemies.  Adding insult
to injury, they have, as I have only lately discovered, designated us in one of their popular
dictionaries as troublesome vermin of the mouse kind.  Why should they not have described us
as rodents of graceful form, endowed with wonderful sagacity and activity to which the smaller
animal called the mouse is allied?  These human beings have also the audacity to malign our
character, to insinuate that we are fickle and undependable, besides being fierce and savage.
Thus, when one of their own race changes sides, they say that the wretched biped has `ratted,'
Not content with abusing us, they make savage war against our race by every cruel mode they
can devise.  They chase us with cats and dogs.  Not that we care much for the cats, who seldom
venture into our haunts; but those horrid, keen-scented terriers, are, it must be confessed,
justly to be dreaded. Still more so are those cunning little ferrets which insinuate themselves
into our abodes.  The hatred of our enemies is exhibited in their use.  Nowhere are we safe
from them.  They make their way through the narrowest crevices, dive down to the lowest depths
we can reach, disturb our domestic happiness, watch for us on our hunting expeditions, and
rout us out of our securest strongholds.  This fearful persecution is originated, aided, and
abetted by our malignant persecutors, who, besides the traps I have already spoken of, even
attempt our destruction by mixing poison in the food they leave in our way.  We have only the
melancholy satisfaction of creeping beneath the boardings of their rooms, there to die, and
to allow our decaying bodies to fill the air with noxious odours.  Friends, Romans, countrymen,"
he went on, repeating his former curious style of address, "we have met to devise means to
assert our rights among created beings, and to revenge ourselves for the injuries we have for
so many centuries of the world's history suffered.  We are now decidedly in the majority on
board this ship.  We hold possession of her chief strongholds.  Her captain, officers, and
crew exist only on sufferance; so then, brother rats and sister rats, young and old, as it
is our glorious privilege to belong to a free republic, express your opinions without fear.
It is my business to note and record them."

Directly the speaker ceased, even for a moment, the rats began frisking and whisking about,
biting at one another's tails and leaping over one another, till he again shouted "Silence!"

"Has no one any opinion to offer?" he asked.

On this a grave-looking rat from the top of a cask answered, "Yes, I have an idea, which I'll
propound as soon as those frolicsome young fellows at the bottom of the hold will keep quiet."

On this the president again cried out, "Be quiet, you young rascals, or I'll singe your whiskers.
Now, Brother Snout, let us hear what your idea happens to be," he said, turning to the rat
on the top of the cask.

The last-mentioned rat accordingly spoke, curiously using the same expressions as the former
one had done.  "Friends, Romans, countrymen: we are resolved on revenge.  Revenge is sweet.
Is it not so?"

To which all the rats, in chorus, shouted out "Yes, yes."

"But the mode in which we shall execute our vengeance is the question. Now I have an idea--a
bright idea.  I propose that we should sharpen our teeth, and having sharpened them, that we
should begin to gnaw a hole in the bottom of this ship.  We can make our way, as we know by
experience, through the stoutest cases.  Why should we not do so through whole planks?  `Perseverance
conquers all difficulties.'  It will undoubtedly take time, but if we all work together and
with a will we may bore not only one hole, but a thousand holes, when to a certainty the water
will rush in and carry the captain, officers, and crew, our cruel tyrants, to the bottom, and
our vengeance will be complete.  So, brother rats, is not mine a bright idea, a grand idea,
a superb idea?  Who will second me?"

There was silence.  When a grey-headed rat from the further end of the platform, lifting himself
up, rose in his eagerness not only on his legs but on his tail, and said--

"Brethren and sisters.  Has it not occurred to you that when we have succeeded--should we be
so foolish as to make the attempt--in cutting holes through the ship's bottom, we ourselves
should be involved in the same catastrophe as the captain, officers, and crew?  When the water
rushes in, what will become of us?  Why, we should be whirled round and round, and to a certainty
become the first victims, perhaps the only ones, for there are boats on deck by which the captain,
officers, and crew may make their escape, if they don't happen to be loaded up with all sorts
of lumber so that they can't be cleared in time."

"Ah, but I have a resource for that.  Let us first nibble holes in the boats; it will be good
practice, and we should succeed in the course of the night in effecting our purpose," exclaimed
the previous speaker.

"Brother Snout, with all due deference to your opinion, you are talking nonsense," said the
grey-headed orator.  "To my certain knowledge there are two dogs on board--one a Newfoundland,
the other a terrier; I don't much care for the big fellow, but the terrier would be at us,
let the night be ever so dark, and a good many of our race would lose the number of their mess.
Let me observe, in the politest way possible, that your plan is not worth the snuff of a candle."

The orator on the top of the cask was thus effectually shut up.

"Has no one else an opinion to give?" asked the president.

"I have," exclaimed a ferocious-looking rat with long whiskers, which he twirled vigorously
as he sat upright.  "I propose that we marshal our forces, one division to march aft to the
captain and officers, and the other to the part where the crew are berthed.  That at a given
signal we set upon them and let the blood out of their jugulars.  We shall thus gain the mastery
of the ship, and be able to enjoy unlimited freedom."

"General Whiskerandos, your remarks savour very much of war, but pardon me remarking, very
little of wisdom," remarked the aged orator.  "You have omitted to mention several important
matters.  In the first place, let me observe that the crew of a ship never sleep all at one
time. Supposing a complete victory were gained over those below, the rest would discover the
cause of their death, and would wage ruthless war against us.  And what about the terrier?
He sleeps at the door of the captain's cabin.  He would not be idle, depend on that.  He would
be delighted to encounter our leading column.  It would be rare fun to him, but a disastrous
circumstance for us.  Let me advise you, Brother Whiskerandos, that your idea is a foolish
one.  Suppose just for one moment that we should succeed, and that we should put to death every
human being on board, what would become of the ship? By its smell and colour I guessed it to be
Champagne; But some grains of powder floating upon the top convinced me that it was not unadulterated.
However, I dared not to express my repugnance to drinking it; I lifted
it to my lips, and seemed to be swallowing it: Suddenly starting from
my chair, I made the best of my way towards a Vase of water at some
distance, in which Marguerite had been rinsing the Goblets.

I pretended to spit out the wine with disgust, and took an opportunity
unperceived of emptying the liquor into the Vase.

The Banditti seemed alarmed at my action. Jacques half rose from his chair, put his hand into
his bosom, and I discovered the haft of a dagger. I returned to my seat with tranquillity, and
affected not to have observed their confusion.

'You have not suited my taste, honest Friend,' said I, addressing myself to Baptiste. 'I never
can drink Champagne without its producing a violent illness. I swallowed a few mouthfuls ere
I was aware of its quality, and fear that I shall suffer for my imprudence.'

Baptiste and Jacques exchanged looks of distrust.

'Perhaps,' said Robert, 'the smell may be disagreeable to you.'

He quitted his chair, and removed the Goblet. I observed, that He examined, whether it was nearly
empty.

'He must have drank sufficient,' said He to his Brother in a low voice, while He reseated himself.

Marguerite
looked apprehensive, that I had tasted the liquor: A glance from my eye reassured her.

I waited with anxiety for the effects which the Beverage would produce upon the Lady. I doubted
not but the grains which I had observed were poisonous, and lamented
that it had been impossible for me to warn her of the danger.

But a few minutes had elapsed before I perceived her eyes grow heavy;
Her head sank upon her shoulder, and She fell into a deep sleep.

I affected not to attend to this circumstance, and continued my conversation with Baptiste,
with all the outward gaiety in my power to assume. But He no longer
answered me without constraint.

He eyed me with distrust and astonishment, and I saw that the Banditti were frequently whispering
among themselves. My situation became every moment more painful; I sustained the character of confidence
with a worse grace than ever. Equally afraid of the arrival of their Accomplices and of their
suspecting my knowledge of their designs, I knew not how to dissipate the distrust which the Banditti
evidently entertained for me. In this new dilemma the friendly Marguerite again assisted me.
She passed behind the Chairs of her Stepsons, stopped for a moment opposite to me, closed her
eyes, and reclined her head upon her shoulder. This hint immediately dispelled my incertitude.
It told me, that I ought to imitate the Baroness, and pretend that the liquor had taken its
full effect upon me. I did so, and in a few minutes seemed perfectly overcome with slumber.

'So!' cried Baptiste, as I fell back in my chair; 'At last He sleeps! I began to think that He
had scented our design, and that we should have been forced to dispatch
him at all events.'

'And why not dispatch him at all events?' enquired
the ferocious Jacques.

'Why leave him the possibility of betraying our secret? Marguerite, give me one of my Pistols:
A single touch of the trigger will finish him at once.'

'And supposing,' rejoined the Father, 'Supposing that our Friends should not arrive tonight,
a pretty figure we should make when the Servants enquire for him
in the Morning!

No, no, Jacques; We must wait for our Associates. If they join us, we are strong enough to dispatch
the Domestics as well as their Masters, and the booty is our own; If Claude does not find the
Troop, we must take patience, and suffer the prey to slip through
our fingers.

Ah! Boys, Boys, had you arrived but five minutes sooner, the Spaniard would have been done
for, and two thousand Pistoles our own. But you are always out of the way when you are most
wanted.

You are the most unlucky Rogues!'

'Well, well, Father!' answered Jacques; 'Had you been of my mind, all would have been over by this
time. You, Robert, Claude, and myself, why the Strangers were but double the number, and I warrant
you we might have mastered them.

However, Claude is gone; 'Tis too late to think of it now. We must wait patiently for the
arrival of the Gang; and if the Travellers escape us tonight, we must take care to waylay them
tomorrow.'

'True! True!' said Baptiste; 'Marguerite, have you given the sleeping-draught to the Waiting-women?'

She
replied in the affirmative.

'All then is safe.

Come, come, Boys; Whatever falls out, we have no reason to complain
of this adventure.

  We run no danger, may gain much, and can lose nothing.'
  
  At this moment I heard a trampling of Horses. Oh! how dreadful was the
  sound to my ears. A cold sweat flowed down my forehead, and I felt all
  the terrors of impending death. I was by no means reassured by hearing
  the compassionate Marguerite exclaim in the accents of despair,

'Almighty
God!

They are lost!'

Luckily the Wood-man and his Sons were too much occupied by the arrival
of their Associates to attend to me, or the violence of my agitation
would have convinced them that my sleep was feigned.

'Open! Open!' exclaimed several voices on the outside of the Cottage.

'Yes! Yes!' cried Baptiste joyfully; 'They are our Friends sure enough! Now then our booty is
certain. Away! Lads, Away! Lead them to the Barn; You know what is to be done there.'

Robert hastened to open the door of the Cottage.

'But first,' said Jacques, taking up his arms; 'first let me dispatch these Sleepers.'

'No, no, no!' replied his Father; 'Go you to the Barn, where your presence is wanted. Leave
me to take care of these and the Women above.'

Jacques obeyed, and
followed his Brother.

They seemed to converse with the New-Comers for a few minutes: After which I heard the Robbers
dismount, and as I conjectured, bend their course towards the Barn.

'So! That is wisely done!' muttered Baptiste; 'They have quitted their Horses, that They may fall
upon the Strangers by surprise. Good! Good! and now to business.'

I heard him approach a small Cupboard which was fixed up in a distant part of the room, and unlock
it. At this moment I felt myself shaken gently.

'Now! Now!' whispered Marguerite.

I opened my eyes. Baptiste stood with his back towards me.

No one else was in the room save Marguerite and the sleeping Lady. The Villain had taken a
dagger from the Cupboard and seemed examining whether it was sufficiently
sharp.

I had neglected to furnish myself with arms; But I perceived this to be my only chance of escaping,
and resolved not to lose the opportunity. I sprang from my seat, darted suddenly upon Baptiste,
and clasping my hands round his throat, pressed it so forcibly as
to prevent his uttering a single cry.

You may remember that I was remarkable at Salamanca for the power of my arm: It now rendered me
an essential service. Surprised, terrified, and breathless, the Villain was by no means an equal
Antagonist. I threw him upon the ground; I grasped him still tighter; and while I fixed him
without motion upon the floor, Marguerite, wresting the dagger from
his hand, plunged it repeatedly in his heart till He expired.

No sooner was this horrible but necessary act perpetrated than Marguerite called on me to follow
her.

'Flight is our only refuge!' said She; 'Quick! Quick! Away!'

I hesitated not to obey her: but unwilling to leave the Baroness a victim to the vengeance of
the Robbers, I raised her in my arms still sleeping, and hastened
after Marguerite.

The Horses of the Banditti were fastened near the door: My Conductress sprang upon one of them.
I followed her example, placed the Baroness before me, and spurred on my Horse. Our only hope
was to reach Strasbourg, which was much nearer than the perfidious Claude had assured me. Marguerite
was well acquainted with the road, and galloped on before me. We were obliged to pass by the
Barn, where the Robbers were slaughtering our Domestics.

The door was open: We distinguished the shrieks of the dying and imprecations of the Murderers!
What I felt at that moment language is unable to describe!

Jacques heard the trampling of our Horses as we rushed by the Barn. He flew to the Door with
a burning Torch in his hand, and easily recognised the Fugitives.

'Betrayed! Betrayed!' He shouted to his Companions.

Instantly they left their bloody work, and hastened to regain their Horses. We heard no more.
I buried my spurs in the sides of my Courser, and Marguerite goaded on hers with the poignard,
which had already rendered us such good service. We flew like lightning, and gained the open plains.
Already was Strasbourg's Steeple in sight, when we heard the Robbers pursuing us. Marguerite looked
back, and distinguished our followers descending a small Hill at
no great distance.

It was in vain that we urged on our Horses; The noise approached nearer with every moment.

'We are lost!' She exclaimed; 'The Villains gain upon us!'

'On! On!' replied I; 'I hear the trampling of Horses coming from the Town.'

We redoubled our exertions, and were soon aware of a numerous band of Cavaliers, who came towards
us at full speed. They were on the point of passing us.

'Stay! Stay!' shrieked Marguerite; 'Save us! For God's sake, save us!'

The Foremost, who seemed to act as Guide, immediately reined in his Steed.

''Tis She! 'Tis She!' exclaimed He, springing upon the ground; 'Stop, my Lord, stop! They are
safe!

'Tis my Mother!'

At the same moment Marguerite threw herself from her Horse, clasped him in her arms, and covered him
with Kisses. The other Cavaliers stopped at the exclamation.

'The Baroness Lindenberg?' cried another of the Strangers eagerly; 'Where is She? Is She not
with you?'

He stopped on beholding her lying senseless in my arms. Hastily He caught her from me. The profound
sleep in which She was plunged made him at first tremble for her
life; but the beating of her heart soon reassured him.

'God be thanked!' said He; 'She has escaped unhurt.'

I interrupted his joy by pointing out the Brigands, who continued to approach. No sooner had
I mentioned them than the greatest part of the Company, which appeared to be chiefly composed
of soldiers, hastened forward to meet them. The Villains stayed not to receive their attack:
Perceiving their danger they turned the heads of their Horses, and fled into the wood, whither
they were followed by our Preservers. In the mean while the Stranger, whom I guessed to be the
Baron Lindenberg, after thanking me for my care of his Lady, proposed our returning with all speed
to the Town.

The Baroness, on whom the effects of the opiate had not ceased to operate, was placed before
him; Marguerite and her Son remounted their Horses; the Baron's Domestics followed, and we soon
arrived at the Inn, where He had taken his apartments.

This was at the Austrian Eagle, where my Banker, whom before my quitting
Paris I had apprised of my intention to visit Strasbourg, had prepared
Lodgings for me.

I rejoiced at this circumstance. It gave me an opportunity of cultivating the Baron's acquaintance,
which I foresaw would be of use to me in Germany. Immediately upon our arrival the Lady was
conveyed to bed; A Physician was sent for, who prescribed a medicine likely to counteract the
effects of the sleepy potion, and after it had been poured down her throat, She was committed
to the care of the Hostess. The Baron then addressed himself to me, and entreated me to recount
the particulars of this adventure. I complied with his request instantaneously; for in pain
respecting Stephano's fate, whom I had been compelled to abandon to the cruelty of the Banditti,
I found it impossible for me to repose, till I had some news of him. I received but too soon
the intelligence, that my trusty Servant had perished.

The Soldiers who had pursued the Brigands returned while I was employed in relating my adventure
to the Baron. By their account I found that the Robbers had been overtaken: Guilt and true courage
are incompatible; They had thrown themselves at the feet of their Pursuers, had surrendered themselves
without striking a blow, had discovered their secret retreat, made known their signals by which
the rest of the Gang might be seized, and in short had betrayed ever mark of cowardice and
baseness. By this means the whole of the Band, consisting of near sixty persons, had been made
Prisoners, bound, and conducted to Strasbourg. Some of the Soldiers hastened to the Cottage,
One of the Banditti serving them as Guide. Their first visit was to the fatal Barn, where
they were fortunate enough to find two of the Baron's Servants still alive, though desperately
wounded.

The rest had expired beneath the swords of the Robbers, and of these my unhappy Stephano was
one.

Alarmed at our escape, the Robbers in their haste to overtake us, had neglected to visit the Cottage.
In consequence, the Soldiers found the two Waiting-women unhurt, and buried in the same death-like
slumber which had overpowered their Mistress. There was nobody else found in the Cottage, except
a child not above four years old, which the Soldiers brought away with them. We were busying
ourselves with conjectures respecting the birth of this little unfortunate, when Marguerite
rushed into the room with the Baby in her arms.

She fell at the feet of the Officer who was making us this report, and blessed him a thousand
times for the preservation of her Child.

When the first burst of maternal tenderness was over, I besought her to declare, by what means
She had been united to a Man whose principles seemed so totally discordant
with her own. She bent her eyes downwards, and wiped a few tears from
her cheek.

'Gentlemen,' said She after a silence of some minutes,
'I would request a favour of you: You have a right to know on whom
you confer an obligation. I will not therefore stifle a confession
which covers me with shame; But permit me to comprise it in as few
words as possible.

'I was born in Strasbourg of respectable Parents;
Their names I must at present conceal: My Father still lives, and
deserves not to be involved in my infamy; If you grant my request,
you shall be informed of my family name. A Villain made himself Master
of my affections, and to follow him I quitted my Father's House. Yet
though my passions overpowered my virtue, I sank not into that degeneracy
of vice, but too commonly the lot of Women who make the first false
step. I loved my Seducer; dearly loved him! I was true to his Bed;
this Baby, and the Youth who warned you, my Lord Baron, of your Lady's
danger, are the pledges of our affection. Even at this moment I lament
his loss, though 'tis to him that I owe all the miseries of my existence.

'He
was of noble birth, but He had squandered away his paternal inheritance.
His Relations considered him as a disgrace to their name, and utterly
discarded him. His excesses drew upon him the indignation of the Police.
He was obliged to fly from Strasbourg, and saw no other resource from
beggary than an union with the Banditti who infested the neighbouring
Forest, and whose Troop was chiefly composed of Young Men of family
in the same predicament with himself. I was determined not to forsake
him. I followed him to the Cavern of the Brigands, and shared with
him the misery inseparable from a life of pillage. But though I was
aware that our existence was supported by plunder, I knew not all
the horrible circumstances attached to my Lover's profession. These
He concealed from me with the utmost care; He was conscious that my
sentiments were not sufficiently depraved to look without horror upon
assassination: He supposed, and with justice, that I should fly with
detestation from the embraces of a Murderer. Eight years of possession
had not abated his love for me; and He cautiously removed from my
knowledge every circumstance, which might lead me to suspect the crimes
in which He but too often participated. He succeeded perfectly: It
was not till after my Seducer's death, that I discovered his hands
to have been stained with the blood of innocence.

'One fatal night
He was brought back to the Cavern covered with wounds: He received
them in attacking an English Traveller, whom his Companions immediately
sacrificed to their resentment. He had only time to entreat my pardon
for all the sorrows which He had caused me: He pressed my hand to
his lips, and expired. My grief was inexpressible. As soon as its
violence abated, I resolved to return to Strasbourg, to throw myself
with my two Children at my Father's feet, and implore his forgiveness,
though I little hoped to obtain it. What was my consternation when
informed that no one entrusted with the secret of their retreat was
ever permitted to quit the troop of the Banditti; That I must give
up all hopes of ever rejoining society, and consent instantly to accepting
one of their Band for my Husband! My prayers and remonstrances were
vain. They cast lots to decide to whose possession I should fall;
I became the property of the infamous Baptiste. A Robber, who had
once been a Monk, pronounced over us a burlesque rather than a religious
Ceremony: I and my Children were delivered into the hands of my new
Husband, and He conveyed us immediately to his home.

'He assured
me that He had long entertained for me the most ardent regard; But
that Friendship for my deceased Lover had obliged him to stifle his
desires. He endeavoured to reconcile me to my fate, and for some time
treated me with respect and gentleness: At length finding that my
aversion rather increased than diminished, He obtained those favours
by violence, which I persisted to refuse him.  I therefore carried
them down to my sleeping-place, where I had left the handspike, and there soon broke in the
head of the cask.  It contained some small, round, hard and greasy fruit, I eagerly tasted
one.  They were olives.  I knew this because Mr Butterfield a few days before gave me some
at dessert.  I then thought them very bitter and nasty, but as I saw him eating them I nibbled
at two or three.  In the end I liked them rather better than at first, or rather, I didn't
dislike them so much.

Having eaten half-a-dozen, I was very glad that I had found them.  They were at all events
a change from rat's flesh.  I next took the bottle in hand, and with my knife scraped away
the sealing-wax with which it was covered.  Instead of trying to force out the cork I cut into
it until I had made a hole big enough to insert my fingers, when I pulled it out. The bottle
contained pickles.  These, though they would not satisfy hunger would render the food I was
doomed to live upon more palatable and wholesome.  Having put them away in the most secure
place I could think of, I returned to the crate.

By tearing off another plank I found that I could creep inside.  It contained all sorts of
things, apparently thrown in before the vessel began to be loaded to be out of the way, and
afterwards forgotten.  I came across two or three old brooms or scrubbing-brushes, a kettle
with the spout broken, several large empty bottles, and other things I cannot enumerate.  At
last, when I thought I had turned everything over, my hand came against another cask, considerably
larger than the first.  I dragged it out.  It was not so heavy as I should have supposed it
would be from its size.  It was too big to carry, so I rolled it along before me.  From the
first I fancied it must contain biscuits, but I was almost afraid to too soon congratulate
myself on my good fortune.  A few blows with the handspike shattered the top, and eagerly plunging
in my hand, to my intense satisfaction I drew forth a captain's biscuit.  I ate it at once
and thought it deliciously sweet, though it was in reality musty and mouldy.  I had now a store
of food to last me for days, and even weeks, should I not obtain my liberation, provided I
used the strictest economy.  All I wanted was fresh air.  To obtain that, supposing I could
not work my way out or make myself heard, was now my chief object.

Before setting out on another expedition, I placed my provisions where I hoped the rats would
not be able to get at them, after carefully corking down the bottles of pickles and the jar
of olives, and closing the keg of biscuits.  I thought it very likely that the rats would try
to make their way through the latter, but I intended to examine it frequently to ascertain
whether they had commenced operations.  I had been turning in my mind a better means of catching
the rats than the one I had before adopted.  I thought and thought over the matter, but could
not arrive at any conclusion.  Being no longer pressed by hunger, I was less in a hurry than
I should have been had I only rats' flesh to depend on.  I pined for fresh air, but at the
same time I was most inconvenienced for want of light.  I was, however, already able to find
my way about in a wonderful manner.

I had pictured in my mind's eye all the objects around, and had the whole of my prison mapped
out clearly in my brain, as I supposed it to exist.  Perhaps it was not exactly according to
reality.  There were the kelson and the stout ribs of the ship, the planking over them, the
water-butts on either side, the stout bulkheads.  At one end my bed-place; the opening which
I had formed at the other end, the bales, the packing-cases, the casks, and last of all the
crate.  Into this last I intended soon again to return, in the faint hope that I might force
my way through it into some upper region.  It was, I judged from the ease with which I had
torn off the planks, old and rotten, and I could not therefore suppose that any heavy weight
had been placed above it.  I should have observed that I had reason to congratulate myself
the ship was new and well caulked, and that not a leak existed throughout her length, for had
any bilge-water been in her the stench would have been insufferable, and would soon either
have deprived me of life or produced a serious sickness.  As it was, considering what ships'
holds generally are, the air was comparatively pure, and I did not suffer much from the confinement.
The fact I have mentioned would account for the number of rats in the hold, for being sagacious
animals they are said always to desert a ship likely to go down.  Probably, being inconvenienced
by the water in the regions to which they are quickly driven when discovered, they take their
departure on the earliest opportunity.  I have known ships to founder with rats on board, so
that they cannot be said to be a preventative to such a disaster.

I now set out on another expedition.  As I got through the hole in the bulkhead a brighter
light than I had before enjoyed came down into the open space, not directly, however, but through
the various crevices among the numerous casks and cases piled up in the hold, so that I was
able to distinguish the objects around me more clearly than I had hitherto done.  I could not
have read a book, but I could see my hands as I held them up before me, and they were as black
as those of a negro. Probably my face was much in the same condition.  I knew that my feet
and my clothes also were begrimed with dirt.  Strange as it may seem, I was so busy in taking
a survey of the locality, that I forgot to shout out, for as the light came down my voice would
certainly have been heard, as without doubt one of the hatches had been opened.  My impulse
was to take the opportunity of working my way upwards.  I saw the crate close against the bulkhead
and the place where I had torn off the plank. I eagerly scrambled in that direction, but could
see no way over it.  I must get inside, as I first intended.  I thought then, if I could force
off the top, I might make my way through it to an upper stratum of the cargo.  I did as I proposed.
In vain I tried with my back and hands to force up the top.  I had forgotten to bring the handspike.
It occurred to me that with that as a lever I should succeed.  I returned for it.

The atmosphere I fancied had already become fresher, or at all events the foul air had escaped,
and its place had been supplied by purer air through unseen openings.  The light, dim as it
was, which my eyes had enjoyed for a short period, made the darkness of the hold still darker.
My senses were for a few moments confused, and for some time I searched in vain for the handspike.
I was sure, however, that I remembered where I had left it.  At last my hand touched the instrument,
and I dragged it back to the scene of my intended operations.  As I reached the spot, what
what was my dismay to find all in darkness.  The hatch, had been replaced, and I had lost the
opportunity of making myself heard.  Only then did it occur to me that I ought, immediately
on seeing the light, to have shouted out.  My wits, generally keen enough, were, I suspect,
becoming somewhat confused.

I had so long been accustomed to do things with the greatest deliberation, that I had lost
the impulse to prompt action which was otherwise natural to me.  I now shouted, but it was
too late, no one heard me.  The seamen had gone to their usual occupations at a distance from
the hatchway.  For some minutes I sat down, vexed with my stupidity and dilatoriness.

On recovering myself I resolved never again to lose a similar opportunity.  I had for so long
worked in the dark, that I was not to be deterred from carrying out my intention.  Armed with
the handspike, I entered the crate.  I first felt in each corner, to try and find an opening
in which I could insert the end of my implement.

Not one was to be found.  I next drove it against the ends of the planks; they were too firmly
nailed down to yield.  I next knocked away in the centre, hoping that one of the planks might
prove rotten, and that I should be able to force it upwards.  Again I was disappointed, and
at last, tired with the exertions I had made, I was obliged to abandon the attempt; but I did
not give it up altogether.  I resolved, as soon as I had regained my strength and stretched
my limbs, which had become cramped from being so long in a confined position, to set to work
once more.  I had been employed, I fancy, three or four hours; it may have been longer.  At
all events, I had become very hungry, and with a store of food near at hand I could not resist
the temptation of eating. I accordingly retired to my berth and sat down.  I had not contrived
to catch a rat, so I had to content myself with a musty biscuit and a dozen olives for dinner,
washed down by a copious draught of water.  I was thankful for the food, though it could not
be called a luxurious banquet.

CHAPTER TWELVE.

  Still in the hold--Conscience again troubles me--My new food and its
  effect on my health--I picture to myself the crew on deck--Rather
  warm--Another storm--My sufferings and despair--A cold bath--I lose my
  stock of provisions--The rats desert me--The storm subsides--My fancy
  gives itself rein.

Days, possibly weeks, may have passed by; I had no means of calculating the time.  The ordinary
sounds from the deck did not reach my ear, or I might have heard the bells strike, or the voice
of the boatswain summoning the watch below on deck.  I scarcely like to describe this part
of my adventures, for fear that they should not be believed.  I have since read of similar
accounts of young stowaways being shut down in the hold of ships, but whether they were true
or not I cannot say. Perhaps they were written with the purpose of deterring boys running off
to sea.  If so, they had a good object in view, for from my own experience I can say that a
more mad or foolish act a silly youth cannot commit.  A sailor's life is not without its attractions;
but to enjoy it he must have a good conscience, and be able to feel that he went to sea with
his parents' or friends' consent; and then when disaster occurs, he has not bitterly to repent
having acted contrary to their wishes.  For my own part I tried to persuade myself that I was
an unwilling stowaway, that I had only gone on board to take a look into the hold; but conscience
whispered to me over and over again, "You know you thought of hiding yourself, and thus getting
away to sea in spite of your Aunt Deb, and the kind old gentleman who was ready to do what
he considered best for your advancement in life."

I tried to silence conscience by replying, "I didn't intend it, I should never have actually
concealed myself in the hold if I could have helped it.  I am simply an unfortunate individual,
who is undergoing all this suffering through no fault of his own.  Though I had no wish to
become a merchant, I would, with all the contentment I could muster, have taken my seat in
Mr Butterfield's office, and done my duty to the best of my ability."

Though I said this to myself over and over again, I found it more convenient to satisfy conscience
and to think only of the present.  I had plenty to do, much of my time being spent in endeavouring
to catch rats.  I seldom killed more than one in a day, though occasionally I was more successful.
I ate them without the slightest disgust, taking some of the pickles at the same time with
a piece of biscuit, my dessert consisting of three or four olives.  I was afraid of exhausting
my supply, or I could have swallowed many more.  The rats' flesh was tolerably tender.  I suspect
that I generally caught the young ones, for at length I caught one which must have been the
father, or grandfather for that matter, of the tribe, as he was so tough that it was only with
considerable difficulty I could masticate him.  This food, however unattractive according to
the usual ideas, must be wholesome, for I kept my health in an extraordinary manner.  I was
much indebted for this, I believe, to the olives, which prevented my being attacked by that
horrible disease, scurvy.  I was not aware at the time of its existence, but I have since witnessed
its horrible ravages among crews insufficiently supplied with antiscorbutics, or who have neglected
the ordinary precautions against it.

I every day made excursions to try and effect my liberation.  The crate must have had something
weighty on the top of it, I thought, or I should have been able to force it open.  It had hitherto
resisted all my efforts, though I frequently spent an hour within it.

The ship all this time was gliding on smoothly, and I supposed was making a prosperous passage.
I occasionally pictured to myself what was going on over my head, canvas spread below and aloft,
the ship under her courses, topsails, topgallant sails and royals with studdingsails rigged
out on either side.  The sea glittering in the rays of the sun, the sky bright, the captain
and officers walking the deck or reading in their cabins.  The crew lolling about with folded
arms, smoking their pipes or spinning yarns.  I forgot that some of them would be employed
in spinning very different sorts of yarns to what I fancied, and that chief mates are not apt
to allow man to spend their time with their arms folded, doing nothing.  On and on sailed the
ship.  The atmosphere was becoming sensibly warmer.  I supposed that we should soon get into
a tropical climate, and that then I might find it disagreeably hot even down below.  But I
didn't allow myself to think of the future, as I was beginning to abandon all hope of working
my way out.

My desire now was that the ship might reach a port in safety, and begin to discharge her cargo;
when I should have the chance of liberating myself.  I did not, however, abandon altogether
my efforts, and the exercise I thus took every day contributed to keep me in health.  During
the time I was sitting down and not sleeping, I employed myself in repeating all the English
poetry and Latin speeches I had learnt, and sometimes I even attempted to sing the sea songs
of which I had been so fond--"Cease, rude Boreas," "One night it blew a hurricane," "Come,
all ye jolly sailors bold," "Here a sheer hulk lies poor Tom Bowling," and many others; but
my voice was evidently not in singing trim, and I failed to do what Orpheus might have accomplished,
to charm the rats from their hiding-places.

The sea continued calm for some time; at all events I felt no movement to indicate that it
was otherwise; but whether the ship was moving fast or slowly I could not tell.  I expected
that she would continue her steady progress to the end of the voyage.  I had gone to sleep,
and I now generally slept on for eight or ten hours at a stretch, so I could not say whether
it was night or day.  All was the same to me.  Suddenly I was awakened by a fearful uproar,
and I found myself jerked off my sleeping-place on to the hard boards.  From the noises I heard
I fancied the ship must be going to pieces, or that the masts were falling.  She heeled over
so much on one side it seemed impossible that the water-butts could keep their positions, and
I thought every instant I should be crushed to death by the one on the weather side falling
upon me.  A fearful storm was raging.  My ears were deafened by the dashing of the fierce waves,
and the howling and whistling of the wind, which reached me even down where I was; and by the
incessant creaking of the bulkheads.  Crash succeeded crash; the whole cargo seemed to be tossed
about, now to one side now to the other.  I could feel the ship rise to the summit of a sea,
and then plunge down again to the depths below.  I had hitherto retained my composure, but
I now almost gave way to despair.  It seemed that the ship, stout as she was, would not be
able to survive the fierce contest in which she was engaged with the raging elements.  Not
for a moment was she quiet; now she appeared to be rolling as if she would roll the masts out
of her, had they not already gone; now she surged forward and went with a plunge into the sea,
which made her quiver from stem to stern.  I thought that ribs and planks could not possibly
hold together.  I expected every moment to be my last.  It would have been bad enough to have
had to endure this on deck, surrounded by my fellow-creatures--down in the dark hold it was
terrible.

I now wonder that my senses did not desert me, but matters had not yet come to their worst.
I dared not move, for fear of being dashed against the casks.  There I lay helpless and almost
hopeless, while the violence of the movements increased.  I did not feel sick, as before. 
Terror banished all other sensations.  Suddenly I heard a loud crash close to me, and I found
myself nearly overwhelmed by a strong rush of water. The instinct to live made me spring to
my feet, for I should have been drowned had I remained where I was.  I fully believed that
the side of the ship had been forced in, and that before many seconds had passed I and all
on board would be carried down to the bottom of the sea.  Still I endeavoured to escape from
the water, which in large masses came rushing against me, though my efforts would have been
utterly useless had what I had supposed occurred.  I made frantic efforts to escape out of
the way of the torrent, and endeavoured to reach the only opening I was aware of by which I
might escape if I could find egress to the upper deck.  In my hurry, not using the caution
I had generally exercised, I ran my head against a cask with so much force that I fell back
senseless on the kelson.  There I lay unable to rise, and believing that the water would soon
cover me up and terminate my sufferings.

I was not altogether senseless; I should have been saved much wretchedness and suffering had
I been so.  I continued to feel the violent motion of the ship; to hear the uproar, the crashing
of the cargo, the casks and chests being hurled against each other.  I expected that the bulkhead
near me, which had hitherto served as my protection, would give way, and that some of the huge
cases would be hurled down upon me; but I had no strength to shriek out, and lay silent and
motionless.  Suddenly the rush of water ceased, and I heard only a little washing about beneath
me.  This surprised me greatly.  I began to recollect that it must have been impossible that
the side of the ship should have been smashed in, or the water would have continued entering
with as much force as at first.  This idea made me fancy that matters might not be so bad as
I had at first supposed.  By slow degrees I recovered my courage.  "The ship is not going to
sink, I may yet survive," I thought, and I got up to try and ascertain the cause of the rush
of water.  I was not long in doing this.  In groping my way about I came upon one of the huge
butts, which, from the large fracture I felt in its side, had evidently burst and let out the
whole of its contents.

It was fortunately not the water-cask from which I drew my supplies of the necessary element,
but I guessed that it would prove ultimately of serious consequence to the crew, who would
probably be depending on it when their stock in the other part of the ship had been exhausted.
Still that at the time did not give me much concern.  I was wet through, bruised, and exceedingly
uncomfortable.  I feared, too, that as one butt had given way, the others might before long
follow its example, and that I should then have no water on which to support my life.  Having
made this discovery, I crept back to my sleeping-place.

As I had no other means of drying my clothes, I took them off and wrung them out, then wrapped
myself in the sail, which being in a higher position had only been slightly wetted by the splash
of the water. Unpleasant as my life was, this altogether was the most miserable period of my
existence in the hold of the "Emu."  I thought that the storm would never end.  Hour after
hour the ship went plunging and rolling on, every timber shaking and quaking, my heart beating
I must confess in sympathy.  Regrets were useless.  My only consolation now was that should
the ship in the meantime not founder or be driven on the rocks, this state of things must come
to an end.

I tried to forget where I was and what was happening and to bring my senses into a state of
stupor.  I would willingly have gone to sleep, but that seemed impossible.  I was mistaken,
however.  After some time, in spite of the violent movements and the terrific uproar, I began
to doze off, and an oblivion of all things, past and present, came over me. It was sent in
mercy, for I do not think I could otherwise have endured my sufferings.  When I awoke to the
present matters had not improved, so I endeavoured, and successfully, to go to sleep again.
This occurred several times.  At last, in spite of my painful feelings, I found that I had
become very hungry, and to my surprise my clothes, which I had hung up against the bulkhead
on some nails stuck in the upper part, were very nearly dry.  I put them on, unwilling to be
without garments should I be discovered.  I had no rats in store, so intended to make my meal
off biscuits and olives.  I put my hand down to where I had stowed them, when what was my dismay
not to be able to find either the cask of biscuits or the jars of olives and pickles.  I felt
about in all directions, hoping that I had made a mistake as to their position.  I was at length
convinced that they had gone.

I then recollected that the chief volume of water out of the butt must have washed them away.
Still they could not be far off.  I lay down on the kelson and felt about with my hand on every
side.  My search for a moment was in vain.  At last I picked up an olive, and then another.
My fear was that the jar was broken.  What if the pickles and biscuits had shared the same
fate?  That this was the case was too probable, and if so my stock of provisions, would be
spoiled, if not lost altogether.

After further search I came upon the jar broken in two.  It was especially strong, so that
the bottle of pickles would have had no chance of escaping.  I had fortunately my handkerchief,
and I managed to pick up several olives, which I put into it.  Creeping along I came at last
upon the pickle-bottle, and nearly cut my hand in feeling for it. A few pickles were near it.
I drew them out of the water which had escaped from the butt.  Their flavour I guessed would
be gone and all the vinegar which was so cooling and refreshing; but almost spoiled as they
were, I was glad to recover them.  I found, however, scarcely a fourth of the olives and pickles.
The loss of the biscuits was the most serious.  They, if long in the water, would be mashed
up into a pulp, and perhaps dispersed throughout the bottom of the ship.  The sooner I could
recover whatever remained the better.  I ate three or four olives and a piece of pickle to
stay the gnawings of hunger, and went on with my search.

The ship, it must be remembered, was all this time rolling to and fro. I searched and searched,
my hopes of recovering the biscuits in a form fit to be eaten growing fainter and fainter;
still I knew that the keg, either entire or broken, must be somewhere within my prison-house,
for so I must call it.  I stopped at last to consider in what direction it could have been
thrown.  Perhaps being lighter and of larger bulk than the other things, it might have been
jerked farther off, and rolling away got jammed in the casks or cases.  My search proved to
me that it could not be close beneath the kelson; I therefore felt backwards and forwards everywhere
I could get my hand.  I tried to recollect whether I had, when last taking a biscuit out, fixed
on the head tightly or not. Having smashed it in, in order to broach the cask, it was not very
easy to do so, and I had an unpleasant feeling that I had put on the top only sufficient to
prevent the rats jumping down into the inside.  If so, the chance of the biscuits having escaped
was small indeed.

At length I touched the cask, which had been thrown from one end of the hold to the other.
It was on its side.  With trembling eagerness I put in my hand.  Alas!  Only a few whole biscuits
and a few broken ones remained.  These I transferred to my pocket-handkerchief with the olives
and pickles, for fear of losing them.  The remainder must be somewhere on the way.  I tried
back in a direct line, but could not find even a mashed biscuit.  I then recollected that the
cask had probably been jerked from side to side before it had found its last resting-place.
It was a wonder that any of its contents remained in it.

Without loss of time, I enlarged the field of my search, and picked up several large pulpy
masses which had once been biscuit.  They were too precious to be thrown away.  I put them
into the bottom of the cask.  I got back also several bits, which, though wet, had not lost
their consistency.  I was grateful for them; for though they would not keep, they would assist
me to prolong existence for some few days.  I ate some of the pulp, and a couple of olives
to enable me to digest it.  The other pieces of biscuit and the olives and pickles had been,
I suppose, washed away out of my reach, for I felt about in every direction, but could lay
my hands on nothing more.  It may be supposed that the exertions I had made were not very fatiguing,
but it must be remembered that the ship was tossing about all this time, and that I had to
hold on with one hand while I felt with the other, to prevent myself from being jerked about
and battered and bruised.  As it was, I slipped and tumbled several times, and hurt myself
not a little.  I therefore crawled back to my couch, and rolled myself up in the sail, to go
to sleep.  I had not for some time been annoyed by the rats, who I suspect sat quaking and
trembling in their nests as much alarmed as I was, and possibly more so, and I was amused at
thinking that they must have heartily regretted having come to sea, and wished themselves safe
back on shore in the houses or barns from which they had emigrated.  I hoped, however, that
when the storm was over they would come forth again, and give me the opportunity of catching
them.  I expected that it would quickly cease, but in this I was disappointed.  There came
a lull, and the ship did not toss about as much as before.  I was contemplating getting up
and making an excursion among the cargo, supposing that I might do so without much risk, when
I was again thrown off my couch by a sudden lurch; and from the sounds I heard, and the violent
pitching and rolling, I had good reason to suppose that the hurricane was once more raging
with redoubled force.  With the greatest difficulty I crawled back to my couch, and drawing
the canvas round me, tried to retain my position.  Every minute I imagined that one or the
other water-butts would give way, and that I should be either crushed by its falling on me,
or half-drowned by its contents.  Then I thought what would be my fate should the fearful buffeting
the ship was receiving cause her to start a plank.  The water would rush in, and before I could
possibly make my escape to a higher level I should be drowned, even should the ship herself
keep above water, and that I thought was not very likely.

I had read enough about shipwrecks and disasters at sea to be aware that such a circumstance
sometimes occurs.  The end of a plank called a butt occasionally starts away from the timber
to which it has been secured, and the water pressing its way in, opens the plank more and more,
till the sea comes in like a mill-sluice; and unless the damage is at once discovered, and
a thrummed sail is got over the spot, there is little chance of a ship escaping from foundering.
When a butt starts from the fore end, and she is going rapidly through the water, her destruction
is almost certain, as a plank is rapidly ripped off, and no means the crew possess can prevent
it.  Though I had heard crashing noises which had made me fear that the masts had been carried
overboard, yet I judged from the movement of the ship that they were standing.  She was seldom
on an even keel, but when she heeled over it was always on one side.  As yet all the strain
to which she had been subjected had produced no leaks, as far as I could judge from the small
quantity of water in the hold, and that was chiefly what had come out of the butt.  Had I not
put the remnants of the olives and biscuits in my pockets I should have starved.  When hunger
pressed, I took a small portion, sufficient to stop its gnawings.  I suffered chiefly from
thirst, as I was afraid of getting up to go to the water-butt, lest I should be thrown over
to the opposite side after I had drawn out the spile, before I could catch any water as it
spouted out, and that much of it would be lost.  I felt the necessity of economising my store,
for I so mainly depended on it for existence, as it enabled me to subsist on a much smaller
quantity of food than I could have done without it.  At length I could bear my tortures no
longer, but getting up, cautiously crawled towards the butt, stopping to hold on directly I
felt the ship beginning to give a lurch.

I must again observe, that close down to the keel as I was, I felt this much less severely
than I should have done at a higher level.  I went on, until I believed that I was close to
the butt, then waiting for another lurch.  Directly it had taken place, I drew myself carefully
up, and searched about for the spile.  I found it, and drew it out, and let the water spout
out into my mouth.  How I enjoyed the draught.  It restored my strength and sadly flagging
spirits.  I stopped to breathe, and then again applied my mouth to the hole.  I should have
been wiser had I refrained, for before I could drive in the spile I was hove right away to
the opposite side of the hold, almost into the opening of the water-butt which had burst. 
I could hear the water rushing out, and it was some time before I could recover myself sufficiently
to crawl back to try and stop it.  I was almost wet through before I could accomplish this,
though I had to mourn the loss of no small quantity of the precious fluid.  My purpose accomplished,
I made my way back to my couch.  Hours passed by.  Sometimes I would fancy that the storm was
never to end.  In my disordered imagination, I pictured to myself the ship, officers, and crew
under some dreadful doom, destined to be tossed about on the wide Atlantic for months and years,
then perhaps to be dismasted and lie floating motionless in the middle of the Sargasso Sea,
of which I had read, where the weeds collect, driven by the current thrown off by the gulf-stream,
till they attain sufficient thickness for aquatic birds to walk over them.

I remembered the description that Mr Butterfield had given me of the captain of the "Emu."
I thought, perhaps, that he had committed some dreadful crime, and was being thus punished
for it.  The only one of the crew whom I remembered, Gregory Growles, was certainly a bad specimen
of humanity.  Perhaps, though pretending to be honest traders, they were pirates; and even
when I had obtained my liberty they would not scruple to make me walk the plank, should my
presence be inconvenient.  I cannot, however, describe the hundred-and-one gloomy ideas which
I conjured up.  How far they were from the truth time only was to show. The ship continued
her eccentric proceedings with more or less violence. The tempest roared above my head.  Crashing
sounds still rose from the cargo which had shifted, and which it appeared to me must ere long
be smashed to atoms.  The worst of the matter was, that I had no one to blame but myself. 
Had I been seized and shut up in the hold by a savage captain, I should have felt myself like
a martyr, and been able to lay my sufferings on others.  When I was able to reflect more calmly
on my situation, I remembered that the storm must inevitably some day or other come to an end.
I had read of storms lasting a week, or even a fortnight, and sometimes longer, but if I could
hold out to its termination, as by means of the biscuits and olives I might do, I hoped that
I should at last effect my liberation.  I must not, however, take up more time by further describing
the incidents of this memorable portion of my existence.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

  Still in the hold--Dreamland again--Chicken-pie--Return of the rats--I
  improve my plans for catching them--Two rats at one meal--My state of
  mind--"Mercy!  Mercy!"--While there's life there's hope--I recommence
  my exertions to get out of the hold with some success--Purer air--My
  weakness returns--I recover my strength--Still no outlet--I perform my
  ablutions--My desire to live at all hazards returns--"Where ignorance
  is bliss 'tis folly to be wise"--The yarn of Toney Lawson--The evil
  effects of getting drunk--The "Viper"--Toney obliged to give in--
  Toney's thoughts of escape--The fate of the "Viper" determines the
  question--Toney's wonderful escape.

Perhaps one of the most painful circumstances connected with my imprisonment was the impossibility
of calculating how the time went by.

I remember that I suddenly awoke after dreaming that I was at a jolly picnic with old friends
near Roger Riddle's cottage.  That the cloth was spread with pies and tarts, a cold sirloin
of beef, a dish of fowls, and a tempting ham, and that we were eating and drinking, and laughing
and singing, in the merriest way possible.  I had just had the breast and wing of a chicken
and a slice of ham placed on my plate, and was running over to get the mustard-pot, when to
my surprise it became covered with feathers, and off it flew.  I was jumping up to catch hold
of it, not wishing thus to lose my dinner, but instead found myself in total darkness, and
gradually came to the disagreeable consciousness that I was in the hold of the "Emu," and that
I had only a few small biscuits and three olives remaining of my stock of provisions, independent
of the pickles in the corner of my handkerchief.

The ship, however, was perfectly quiet.  The gale must have ceased some time before, to allow
the sea to go down.  By putting my ears to the planks I could catch the sound of a gentle ripple
as she glided along, but no other noise was to be heard.  The bulkheads had ceased to creak,
the masts to complain, the cargo to crash, and all was perfectly quiet overhead.

My hunger showed me that I must have been a long time asleep, and I could not resist the temptation
of eating the remainder of my biscuits and olives.  I had thus only the pickles to exist on,
unless I could catch some rats with which to eat them.  I took a draught of water, and then
sat down to consider the plans I had before thought of to trap my game.

One occurred to me as the most feasible.  Though I could not see I could feel, and my idea
was to form a bag with a piece of the canvas, and give it a small mouth so contrived that I
could close it suddenly with a string.  Among the articles in my pocket was a stock of string
of various thicknesses; I found on measuring it that I had not only sufficient to make the
bag, but enough to gather in the mouth with an additional piece to hold in my hand.  My gimlet
would serve as an awl or sailmaker's needle, though not an efficient substitute.  I had been
so long accustomed to the darkness that I fancied I could pass the string through the holes
I had made without difficulty.  My hunger was an incentive to perseverance.

With my knife I first of all cut a piece off my canvas of sufficient size for my purpose. 
I am sure that I could not have done it so well at any time before, had I attempted to perform
the operation in the dark. I then turned in the edges, and passing the string through the holes
I had made, united the two sides.  Sometimes I could not get the string through without another
boring, at others I succeeded at the first attempt, tying the string at each stitch.  It was
a slow operation, but the result was beyond my most sanguine expectations.

I had a long, thickish piece of hard twine, which I devoted to the mouth of the bag.  I had
to make the holes for these with great regularity, so as not to leave an opening large enough
for a rat to jump out at.  I worked on without stopping till my task was accomplished, as I
was anxious to ascertain whether it would answer the object I had in view.

While I was working I heard the rats running about, and two or three knocked their noses against
my feet, showing that they had again come out of their holes, and were either hunting for food
or gambolling for their pleasure.

I had, however, retained a small piece of biscuit in my pocket, which, although I longed to
eat it up, I had sufficient resolution to devote as a bait to the rats.

Placing myself near the shattered butt, which seemed to be the spot most numerously frequented
by them, I put down the bag with my foot at one end of it, holding the string in my hands,
and leaving only a very small opening, which I could close of a sudden.

I waited eagerly.  Rats ran about near my feet, leapt over the bag, and skipped and frolicked,
uttering squeaks of delight.  Still none came actually into the bag.  At last one more curious
than his fellows poked his nose into the opening.  I felt him running along inside, having
discovered a biscuit within.  With a sudden jerk I quickly closed the mouth of the bag.  I
felt about with my fingers, and soon came upon Master Rat inside.  As I didn't wish to give
him the opportunity of biting me, I grasped him tightly by the neck, and squeezed out his life.

After drawing him out, I again put down the bag to tempt some more of his kindred, while I
held him up by the tail.  In a few minutes I felt others approaching, curious to explore the
interior of the bag.  I again gave a sudden jerk, and found that I had caught no less than
three, who, as they felt themselves drawn up, began fighting and biting at each other, and
would, I believe, had I not speedily put them out of existence, have been like the Kilkenny
cats, and left only their tails behind them.

I had now ample food, though not of the character most people would have desired, and had also
a bag to keep it in.  I soon disposed of the first rat, with which I ate some small pieces
of pickle as a relish, and I must confess that I enjoyed my meal amazingly.  To me it appeared
of a peculiarly delicate character.  I could have eaten another rat with perfect satisfaction,
but I considered it prudent to wait, so as not to give myself a surfeit.

Before long, however, I was again hungry, and on this occasion I ate two rats with some small
pieces of pickle and drank a pint or more of water. 

Fear not that!--Do you attend at all to this new Laudism of ours? It spreads far and wide among our
Clergy in these days; a most notable symptom, very cheering to me many ways; whether or not
one of the fatalest our poor Church of England has ever exhibited, and betokening swifter
ruin to it than any other, I do not inquire.

Thank God, men do discover at last that there is still a God present in their affairs, and must
be, or their affairs are of the Devil, naught, and worthy of being sent to the Devil! This
once given, I find that all is given; daily History, in Kingdom and in Parish, is an experimentum
crucis to show what is the Devil's and what not. But on the whole are we not the formalest
people ever created under this Sun? Cased and overgrown with Formulas, like very lobsters
with their shells, from birth upwards; so that in the man we see only his breeches, and believe
and swear that wherever a pair of old breeches are there is a man!

I declare I could both laugh and cry. These poor good men, merciful, zealous, with many sympathies
and thoughts, there do they vehemently appeal to me, Et tu, Brute? Brother, wilt thou too insist
on the breeches being old,--not ply a needle among us here?--To the naked Caliban, gigantic,
for whom such breeches would not be a glove, who is stalking and groping there in search of
new breeches and accoutrements, sure to get them, and to tread into
nonentity whoever hinders him in the search,--they are blind as if
they had no eyes.

Sartorial men; ninth-parts of a man:--enough of them.

The second Number of the Dial has also arrived some days ago. I like it decidedly better than the
first; in fact, it is right well worth being put on paper, and sent circulating;--I find only,
as before that it is still too much of a soul for circulating as
it should.

I wish you could in future contrive to mark at the end of each Article who writes it, or give
me some general key for knowing. Your Paper on Literature is incomparably the worthiest thing
hitherto; a thing I read with delight. Speak out, my brave Emerson; there are many good men
that listen! Even what you say of Goethe gratifies me; it is one of the few things yet spoken
of him from personal insight, the sole kind of things that should be spoken! Ah yes! one day
you will find that this sunny-looking, courtly Goethe held veiled in him a Prophetic sorrow deep as
Dante's,--all the nobler to me and to you, that he could so hold it.

I believe this; no man can see as he sees, that has not suffered and striven as man seldom did.--
Apropos of this, Have you got Miss Martineau's Hour and Man? How curious it were to have the
real History of the Negro Toussaint, and his black Sansculottism in Saint Domingo,--the most
atrocious form Sansculottism could or can assume!

This of a "black Wilberforce-Washington," as Sterling calls it, is decidedly something. Adieu,
dear Emerson: time presses, paper is done. Commend me to your good wife, your good Mother,
and love me as well as you can. Peace and health under clear winter skies be with you all.

--T. Carlyle

My Wife rebukes me sharply that I have "forgot her love."

She is much better this winter than of old.

Having mentioned Sterling I should say that he is at Torquay (Devonshire) for the winter, meditating
new publication of Poems. I work still in Cromwellism; all but desperate of any feasible issue
worth naming. I "enjoy bad health" too, considerably!

LX. Carlyle to Mrs. Emerson

Chelsea, London, 21 February, 1841

Dear Mrs. Emerson,--Your Husband's Letter shall have answer when some moment of leisure is granted
me; he will wait till then, and must. But the beautiful utterance which you send over to me; melodious
as the voice of flutes, of Aeolian Harps borne on the rude winds
so far,--this must have answer, some word or growl of answer, be there
leisure or none!

The "Acadia," it seems, is to return from Liverpool the day after tomorrow. I shove my paper-whirlpools
aside for a little, and grumble in pleased response.

You are an enthusiast; make Arabian Nights out of dull foggy London Days; with your beautiful
female imagination, shape burnished copper Castles out of London Fog! It is very beautiful of
you;--nay, it is not foolish either, it is wise. I have a guess what of truth there may be in that;
and you the fair Alchemist, are you not all the richer and better that you know the essential
gold, and will not have it called pewter or spelter, though in the shops it is only such? I honor
such Alchemy, and love it; and have myself done something in that
kind.

Long may the talent abide with you; long may I abide to have it exercised on me! Except the
Annandale Farm where my good Mother still lives, there is no House in all this world which I
should be gladder to see than the one at Concord. It seems to stand as only over the hill, in the next
Parish to me, familiar from boyhood. Alas! and wide-waste Atlantics roll between; and I cannot
walk over of an evening!--I never give up the hope of getting thither some time. Were I a little
richer, were I a little healthier; were I this and that--!--One has no Fortunatus' "Time-annihilating"
or even "Space-annihilating Hat": it were a thing worth having in this world.

My Wife unites with me in all kindest acknowledgments: she is getting stronger these last two years;
but is still such a sailor as the Island hardly parallels: had she the Space- annihilating
Hat, she too were soon with you. Your message shall reach Miss Martineau; my Dame will send
it in her first Letter. The good Harriet is not well; but keeps a very courageous heart. She
lives by the shore of the beautiful blue Northumbrian Sea; a "many-sounding" solitude which I often
envy her. She writes unweariedly, has many friends visiting her. You saw her Toussaint l'Ouverture:
how she has made such a beautiful "black Washington," or "Washington-Christ-Macready," as I have
heard some call it, of a rough-handed, hard-headed, semi- articulate gabbling Negro; and of
the horriblest phasis that "Sansculottism" can exhibit, of a Black Sansculottism, a musical
Opera or Oratorio in pink stockings! It is very beautiful. Beautiful as a child's heart,--and in
so shrewd a head as that. She is now writing express Children's-Tales, which I calculate I shall
find more perfect.

Some ten days ago there went from me to Liverpool, perhaps there will arrive at Concord by
this very "Acadia," a bundle of Printed Sheets directed to your Husband: pray apprise the man
of that. They are sheets of a Volume called Lectures on Heroes; the Concord Hero gets them without
direction or advice of any kind. I have got some four sheets more ready for him here; shall
perhaps send them too, along with this. Some four again more will complete the thing. I know not
what he will make of it;-- perhaps wry faces at it?

Adieu, dear Mrs. Emerson. We salute you from this house. May all good which the Heavens grant
to a kind heart, and the good which they never refuse to one such, abide with you always. I
commend myself to your and Emerson's good Mother, to the mischievous Boys and--all the Household.
Peace and fair Spring- weather be there!

Yours with great regard, T. Carlyle

LXI. Emerson to Carlyle

Concord, 28 February, 1841

My Dear Carlyle,--Behold Mr. George Nichols's
new digest and exegesis of his October accounts.

The letter seems to me the most intelligible of the two papers, but I have long been that man's
victim, semi-annually, and never dare to make head against his figures. You are a brave man,
and out of the ring of his enchantments, and withal have magicians of your own who can give
spell for spell, and read his incantations backward.

I entreat you to set them on the work, and convict his figures if you can. He has really taken
pains, and is quite proud of his establishment of his accounts. In a month it will be April,
and be will have a new one to fender. Little and Brown also in April promise a payment on French
Revolution,--and I suppose something is due from Chartism. We will hope that a Bill of Exchange
will yet cross from us to you, before our booksellers fail.

I hoped before this to have reached my last proofsheet, but shall have two or three more yet. In a fortnight
or three weeks my little raft will be afloat.* Expect nothing more of my powers of construction,--no
shipbuilding, no clipper, smack, nor skiff even, only boards and logs tied together. I read
to some Mechanics' Apprentices a long lecture on Reform, one evening, a little while ago. They asked
me to print it, but Margaret Fuller asked it also, and I preferred the Dial, which shall have
the dubious sermon, and I will send it to you in that.--You see the bookseller reverendizes me notwithstanding
your laudable perseverance to adorn me with profane titles, on the
one hand, and the growing habit of the majority of my correspondents
to clip my name of all titles on the other.

I desire that you and your wife will keep your kindness for

--R. W. Emerson

---------- * The first series of Essays. ----------

LXII. Emerson to Carlyle

Boston, 30 April, 1841

My Dear Carlyle,--Above you have a bill of exchange for one hundred
pounds sterling drawn by T.W. Ward & Co. on the Messrs. Barings, payable
at sight.

Let us hope it is but the first of a long series. I have vainly endeavored to get your account
to be rendered by Munroe & Co. to the date of the 1st of April.

It was conditionally promised for the day of the last steamer (15 April). It is not ready for
that which sails tomorrow and carries this. Little & Co. acknowledge a debt of $607.90 due to you
1st of April, and just now paid me; and regret that their sales have
been so slow, which they attribute to the dulness of all trade among
us for the last two years.

You shall have the particulars of their account from Munroe's statement of the account between
you and me. Munroe & Co. have a long apology for not rendering their own account; their book
keeper left them at a critical moment, they were without one six weeks, &c.;--but they add, if
we could give you it, to what use, since we should be utterly unable to make you any payment
at this time? To what use, surely? I am too much used to similar statements from our booksellers
and others in the last few years to be much surprised; nor do I doubt their readiness or their
power to pay all their debts at last; but a great deal of mutual
concession and accommodation has been the familiar resort of our tradesmen
now for a good while, a vice which they are all fain to lay at the
doors of the Government, whilst it belongs in the first instance,
no doubt, to the rashness of the individual traders.

These men I believe to be prudent, honest, and solvent, and that
we shall get all our debt from them at last.

They are not reckoned as rich as Little and Brown. By the next steamer they think they can
promise to have their account ready.

I am sorry to find that we have been driven from the market by the New York Pirates in the affair
of the Six Lectures.* The book was received from London and for sale in New York and Boston
before my last sheets arrived by the "Columbia." Appleton in New York braved us and printed it,
and furthermore told us that he intends to print in future everything of yours that shall be
printed in London,--complaining in rude terms of the monopoly your publishers here exercise,
and the small commissions they allow to the trade, &c., &c. Munroe
showed me the letter, which certainly was not an amiable one.

In this distress, then, I beg you, when you have more histories and lectures to print, to
have the manuscript copied by a scrivener before you print at home, and send it out to me, and I
will keep all Appletons and Corsairs whatsoever out of the lists. Not only these men made a book
(of which, by the by, Munroe sends you by this steamer a copy, which you will find at John Green's,
Newgate Street), but the New York newspapers print the book in chapters, and you circulate
for six cents per newspaper at the corners of all streets in New York and Boston; gaining in
fame what you lose in coin.--The book is a good book, and goes to
make men brave and happy.

I bear glad witness to its cheering and arming quality.

--------- * "Heroes and Hero-Worship." ---------

I have put into Munroe's box which goes to Green a Dial No. 4 also,
which I could heartily wish were a better book.

But Margaret Fuller, who is a noble woman, is not in sufficiently vigorous health to do this
editing work as she would and should, and there is no other who can
and will.

Yours affectionately, R.W. Emerson

LXIII. Carlyle to Emerson

Chelsea, London, 8 May, 1841

My Dear Emerson,--Your last letter found me on the southern border of Yorkshire, whither Richard
Milnes had persuaded me with him, for the time they call "Easter Holidays" here. I was to shake
off the remnants of an ugly Influenza which still hung about me; my little portmanteau, unexpectedly
driven in again by perverse accidents, had stood packed, its cowardly owner, the worst of all
travelers, standing dubious the while, for two weeks or more; Milnes offering to take me as
under his cloak, I went with Milnes. The mild, cordial, though something dilettante nature of
the man distinguishes him for me among men, as men go. For ten days I rode or sauntered among Yorkshire
fields and knolls; the sight of the young Spring, new to me these seven years, was beautiful,
or better than beauty. Solitude itself, the great Silence of the Earth, was as balm to this weary,
sick heart of mine; not Dragons of Wantley (so they call Lord Wharncliffe, the wooden Tory man),
not babbling itinerant Barrister people, fox-hunting Aristocracy, nor Yeomanry Captains cultivating
milk-white mustachios, nor the perpetual racket, and "dinner at eight o'clock," could altogether
countervail the fact that green Earth was around one and unadulterated
sky overhead, and the voice of waters and birds,--not the foolish
speech of Cockneys at all times!--On the last morning, as Richard
and I drove off towards the railway, your Letter came in, just in
time; and Richard, who loves you well, hearing from whom it was, asked
with such an air to see it that I could not refuse him.

We parted at the "station," flying each his several way on the wings of Steam; and have not
yet met again. I went over to Leeds, staid two days with its steeple-chimneys and smoke-volcano
still in view; then hurried over to native Annandale, to see my aged excellent Mother yet again
in this world while she is spared to me. My birth-land is always as the Cave of Trophonius
to me; I return from it with a haste to which the speed of Steam is slow, --with no smile on
my face; avoiding all speech with men! It is not yet eight-and-forty hours since I got back;
your Letter is among the first I answer, even with a line; your new
Book--But we will not yet speak of that....

My Friend, I thank you
for this Volume of yours; not for the copy alone which you send to
me, but for writing and printing such a Book.

Euge! say I, from afar. The voice of one crying in the desert;--it is once more the voice of
a man. My blessing on you, good Ralph Waldo!

I read the Book all yesterday; my Wife scarcely yet done with telling
me her news.

It has rebuked me, it has aroused and comforted me. Objections of all kinds I might make, how many
objections to superficies and detail, to a dialect of thought and
speech as yet imperfect enough, a hundred-fold too narrow for the
Infinitude it strives to speak: but what were all that?

It is an Infinitude, the real vision and belief of one, seen face to face: a "voice of the heart
of Nature" is here once more. This is the one fact for me, which
absorbs all others whatsoever.

Persist, persist; you have much to say and to do. You are a new era, my man, in your new huge country:
God give you strength, and speaking and silent faculty, to do such
a work as seems possible now for you!

And if the Devil will be pleased to set all the Popularities against you and evermore against
you,--perhaps that is of all things the very kindest any Angel could do.

Of myself I have nothing good to report. Years of sick idleness and barrenness have grown wearisome
to me. I do nothing.

I waver and hover, and painfully speculate even now as to health, and where I shall spend
the summer out of London!

I am a very poor fellow;--but hope to grow better by and by. Then this alluvies of foul lazy stuff
that has long swum over me may perhaps yield the better harvest.

Esperons!--Hail to all of you from both of us.

Yours ever, T. Carlyle

LXIV. Carlyle to Emerson

Chelsea, London, 21 May, 1841

My Dear Emerson,--About a week ago
I wrote to you, after too long a silence.

Since that there has another Letter come, with a Draft of L100 in
it, and other comfortable items not pecuniary; a line in acknowledgment
of the money is again very clearly among my duties.

Yesterday, on my first expedition up to Town, I gave the Paper to Fraser; who is to present
the result to me in the shape of cash tomorrow. Thanks, and again thanks. This L100, I think,
nearly clears off for me the outlay of the second French Revolution; an ill-printed, ill-conditioned
publication, the prime cost of which, once all lying saved from the
Atlantic whirlpools and hard and fast in my own hand, it was not perhaps
well done to venture thitherward again.

To the new trouble of my friends withal!

We will now let the rest of the game play itself out as it can; and
my friends, and my one friend, must not take more trouble than their
own kind feelings towards me will reward.

The Books, the Dial No. 4, and Appleton's pirated Lectures, are still expected from Green. In
a day or two he will send them: if not, we will jog him into wakefulness,
and remind him of the Parcels Delivery Company, which carries luggage
of all kinds, like mere letters, many times a day, over all corners
of our Babylon.

In this, in the universal British Penny Post, and a thing or two of that sort, men begin to take
advantage of their crowded ever-whirling condition in these days,
which brings such enormous disadvantages along with it unsought for.--
Bibliopolist Appleton does not seem to be a "Hero,"--except after
his own fashion.

He is one of those of whom the Scotch say, "Thou wouldst do little
for God if the Devil were dead!"

The Devil is unhappily dead, in that international bibliopolic province, and little hope of his
reviving for some time; whereupon this is what Squire Appleton does.

My respects to him even in the Bedouin department, I like to see a complete man, a clear decisive
Bedouin.

For the rest, there is one man who ought to be apprised that I can
now stand robbery a little better; that I am no longer so very poor
as I once was.

In Fraser himself there do now lie vestiges of money! I feel it a great relief to see, for
a year or two at least, the despicable bugbear of Beggary driven out of my sight; for which
small mercy, at any rate, be the Heavens thanked. Fraser himself, for these two editions, One
thousand copies each, of the Lectures and Sartor, pays me down on the nail L150; consider that
miracle! Of the other Books which he is selling on a joint-stock basis, the poor man likewise
promises something, though as yet, ever since New-Year's-day, I cannot learn what, owing to a grievous
sickness of his,--for which otherwise I cannot but be sorry, poor Fraser within the Cockney
limits being really a worthy, accurate, and rather friendly creature. So you see me here provided
with bread and water for a season,--it is but for a season one needs either water or bread, --and
rejoice with me accordingly. It is the one useful, nay, I will say the one innoxious, result
of all this trumpeting, reviewing, and dinner-invitationing; from which I feel it indispensable
to withdraw myself more and more resolutely, and altogether count it as a thing not there.
Solitude is what I long and pray for.

In the babble of men my own soul goes all to babble: like soil you were forever screening,
tumbling over with shovels and riddles; in which soil no fruit can grow! My trust in Heaven
is, I shall yet get away "to some cottage by the sea-shore"; far enough from all the mad and mad
making things that dance round me here, which I shall then look on only as a theatrical phantasmagory,
with an eye only to the meaning that lies hidden in it. You, friend Emerson, are to be a Farmer, you
say, and dig Earth for your living? Well; I envy you that as much as any other of your blessednesses.
Meanwhile, I sit shrunk together here in a small dressing-closet, aloft in the back part of
the house, excluding all cackle and cockneys; and, looking out over the similitude of a May grove
(with little brick in it, and only the minarets of Westminster and gilt cross of St. Paul's visible
in the distance, and the enormous roar of London softened into an enormous hum), endeavor to await what
will betide. I am busy with Luther in one Marheinecke's very long- winded Book. I think of
innumerable things; steal out westward at sunset among the Kensington lanes; would this May weather
last, I might be as well here as in any attainable place.

But June comes; the rabid dogs get muzzles; all is brown-parched, dusty, suffocating, desperate,
and I shall have to run! Enough of all that.

On my paper there comes, or promises to come, as yet simply nothing
at all.

  Patience;--and yet who can be patient?
  
  Had you the happiness to see yourself not long ago, in Fraser's Magazine,
  classed nominatim by an emphatic earnest man, not without a kind of splay-footed
  strength and sincerity,--among the chief Heresiarchs of the--world?
  Perfectly right. Fraser was very anxious to know what I thought of the
  Paper,--"by an entirely unknown man in the country." I counseled "that
  there was something in him, which he ought to improve by holding
his peace for the next five years."

Adieu, dear Emerson; there is not a scrap more of Paper. All copies
of your Essays are out at use; with what result we shall perhaps see.
As for me I love the Book and man, and their noble rustic herohood
and manhood:--one voice as of a living man amid such jabberings of
galvanized corpses: Ach Gott!

Yours evermore, T. Carlyle

LXV. Emerson
to Carlyle

Concord, 80 May, 1841

My Dear Friend,--In my letter written
to you on the 1st of May (enclosing a bill of exchange of L100 sterling,
which, I hope, arrived safely) I believe I promised to send you by
the next steamer an account for April. But the false tardy Munroe
& Co. did not send it to me until one day too late. Here it is, as
they render it, compiled from Little and Brown's statement and their
own. I have never yet heard whether you have received their Analysis
or explanation of the last abstract they drew up of the mutual claims
between the great houses of T.C. and R.W.E., and I am impatient to
know whether you have caused it to be examined, and whether it was
satisfactory. This new one is based on that, and if that was incorrect,
this must be also. I am daily looking for some letter from you, which
is perhaps near at hand. If you have not written, write me exactly
and immediately on this subject, I entreat you. You will see that
in this sheet I am charged with a debt to you of $184.29.  My provisions being exhausted, I was aware that I must soon get out of the hold or
perish, yet I didn't anticipate much satisfaction from obtaining my liberty.  No time was,
however, to be lost, and I therefore nerved myself up for a fresh struggle.  Feeling that I
had my knife about me, and having put on my shoes, I prepared to make a desperate attempt to
effect my escape.  I crawled on through the crate, and once more attempted to climb up over
the packages into the main hold.

I tried to do this in several directions, but I found no opening so promising as the one which
I had before explored.  My weakness prevented me from making the exertions that were required
to force my way between the bales.  I was in momentary fear of falling down a crevice, and
being jammed to death.  My situation in some respects was infinitely worse than that of Toney
Lawson, who was bolted in, but then people knew where he was.  No one on deck was aware of
my deplorable condition.  Still I crawled on, resolved to succeed.  While feeling about, I
discovered a space between three or four bales.  I crept in very much as a rat does into his
hole, only he knows where he is going.  I could not tell whether I should get through or have
to force my way out again legs first.  Still the cravings of hunger induced me to venture.
On I crept, when on putting up my hand I found that there was nothing above me which I could
touch, so that I was able to stand upright, though there might be some depth in front down
which I might fall.

I moved with the greatest caution.  It turned out, however, that they were only bales piled
one upon another, and that I was standing in a sort of well.  Still there were stepping-places,
and with the ropes which bound the bales I was able to work my way upwards.  Higher and higher
I got.  I could now distinctly hear the footsteps of the men on the deck, which I guessed,
therefore, could be no great distance above me.  The ship must have been moving calmly along,
and I was thus preserved from being jerked off from the place to which I was clinging. I still
moved on till I reached a part of the hold filled chiefly, it appeared to me, with large packing-cases
and casks.  I was almost on a level floor.  It might have been the spar-deck.  Wearied with
the fatigue I had undergone, I sat down on a box to rest.  I could now distinctly hear not
only the tread of the men's feet, but their voices. They were the first human voices which
had reached my ears for days, or rather weeks.  I tried to shout to attract their attention,
but my voice had completely failed me.  Not a sound could I utter.  I felt that I had not strength
to move an inch further.

Twice I made the attempt, and had to sink back again on my seat.  I was gazing upward, the
only direction from which help could come, when a ray of light streamed right upon me.  Forgetting
my weakness, I started up. It must come, I knew, from the partly open hatchway, or from a fracture
in the hatch itself.  This I afterwards found to have been the case, the fracture being covered
up with a tarpaulin, which had at that instant been removed.  Again I endeavoured to shout
out, but my voice was not under the control of my will.  No sounds issued from my mouth.  I
stretched out my hands in an imploring attitude, fancying that I should be seen.  I attempted
to make my way directly under the opening, but ere I could reach it I sank down utterly exhausted.

I had never before been so completely prostrated.  I didn't lose my senses, but all physical
power had deserted me.  I could scarcely move my hands or feet; still I thought that the hatch
must be again opened before long, and that I could not fail to be discovered.  I earnestly
prayed that help might be sent me.  How it was to come I could not tell. Notwithstanding what
was before me, I still desired to be set free. Although I was not sleeping, strange fancies
filled my brain.  I saw people flit about in the darkness, suddenly coming into the light,
and then disappearing.  Some were people I knew, and others were strangers. Aunt Deb and Mr
Butterfield came by, tripping it lightly, holding each other's hands, he in a bob wig with
a sword by his side, she in high-heeled red shoes and a cap decked with flowers and ribbons.
She smiled and ogled, as if about to dance a minuet.  I almost laughed as I saw them, they
appeared so vivid and real.  Then Captain Longfleet came upon the scene as I fancied him, dressed
in a cocked-hat and feathers, a long sword buckled to his side, high boots, a red coat, and
a waistcoat braided with gold.

I fancy that I must have seen some picture of the sort of a pirate captain to cause him thus
to be presented to my imagination.  He walked about flourishing his sword till he met Aunt
Deb, to whom, instead of cutting her head off, as I thought he was about to do, he made a profound
bow, and then vanished.  Many other figures quite as bizarre and unnatural appeared before
me.  I mention these trivial circumstances to show the state of my mind.  I had been so long
by myself that I must be pardoned if I appear egotistical.  Again all was quiet.  I lay for
some time, if not unconscious, with very little power of thought.  I was afraid that another
night would come on, and that I should have to endure my sufferings for some hours longer,
if death did not put an end to them.  I could still hear the tread of the men's feet, and even
the voices of the officers, shouting their orders.  How I wished that I could shout also, for
then I knew I should be heard.  I tried once more to move, and managed to drag myself on till
I got directly under the hatchway.  Although I could not shout, to my surprise I heard myself
groaning.

There being light sufficient to enable me to observe objects, my eye fell upon a loose piece
of wood.  I grasped it with all my remaining strength, and began beating away on the top of
a cask, which proved to be empty from the sound which emanated from it.  I beat on and on,
but no notice appeared to be taken of the noise I was making.  I was too ill and weak to reason
on the subject, but I remembered hearing a loud voice shouting out some orders.  Presently
there came a tramp of feet overhead, backwards and forwards and from side to side they seemed
to run.  The crew were evidently engaged in shortening or making sail, which it was I was unable
to tell.  I had sense enough remaining to know that whilst this was going forward on deck it
was not likely that notice would be taken of my feeble knocking, for feeble it was, though
it sounded loud to me.

Presently I felt a greater movement than I had experienced for some time, and the ship heeled
over on one side.  My fear was that the cases on which I lay might be again shifted, and that
I might be thrown down to some lower depth of the hold, with bales and casks above me.  Of
course I am describing what I fancied might happen, not what was likely to occur.  I now guessed
that a number of the crew must have gone aloft to shorten sail, and that even if they had heard
the noise they would not have had time to ascertain what had caused it.  I now more than ever
feared that, before I could be liberated, I should become utterly exhausted, and should fall
into a swoon from which I might never recover.

I was too weak to pray, or any longer exert myself.  Still my senses did not altogether desert
me.  I lay on my back, looking up towards the hatchway.  The ship heeled over more and more.
To me, who had been accustomed to live so long down near the keel, it appeared at a frightful
angle, and I though, she would go over altogether.  Again I heard voices shouting out orders,
and the crew, I supposed, went aloft to take in more sail.  I was afraid that another storm
was coming on. Fearful would be the consequences to me if such should be the case. Presently
I heard something dragged over the hatchway.  The ray of light which had hitherto tended to
keep up my waning spirits was obscured.

A tarpaulin had been placed over the hatchway.  Perhaps the crew were about to batten down
the hatches.  In vain I tried, while this was going forward, to strike the cask.  I had not
sufficient strength to do it.  A fearful faintness was coming over me.  Perhaps the movement
of the ship contributed to this.  I think I must have fainted, for I cannot recollect what
happened.  I had no strength to hold on or to grasp the stick, and might have been thrown helplessly
about like a shuttlecock till life was extinct.

I fancy that some time must have passed.  When I recovered my senses, my first impulse was
to feel for the stick.  It was close to me.  I had power to grasp it.  The top of the chest
on which I lay was perfectly level, but I expected to find it heeling over as before.  Instead
of that, no movement took place.  The ship was apparently gliding forward on an even keel.
The storm had ceased, or probably the ship had only been struck by a sudden squall, which had
passed over.

My first impulse was again to try and strike the cask and to shout out, but I could only utter
a few low groans.  I managed, however, to give some blows on the cask, which resounded through
the hold.  The noise was loud enough, I fancy, to be heard on deck, or indeed in every part
of the ship.  I beat on and on.  Presently the tarpaulin was drawn off, and I heard some feet
moving directly above me.  A voice said distinctly, "Below!  What's that?"

Almost immediately the hatch was removed, and as I looked up a flood of light burst down upon
me.  For some seconds I could see nothing. Gradually I made out a number of human faces peering
down through the hatchway.

"Why, what can that be?" exclaimed one of the men.

"Ghost of a ghost," cried another.

"It can't be a live thing," said a third.

"Why, Jack, I do believe it's a boy," exclaimed a fourth; "we must get him up whatever he is,
but how could he have come there?"

Presently a ladder was let down.  None of the men seemed inclined to descend, evidently having
some doubts as to my character, till the last speaker, calling the others cowards, came down.
Instead of at first reviving me, the effect of the fresh air was to make me faint away. When
I recovered I found myself lying on the deck, surrounded by a number of strange faces.  A seaman--the
one who, I suppose, had brought me up--was supporting me and applying a wet cloth to my head
and shoulders, while another, kneeling down, was examining my countenance.

"Why, youngster, how did you come aboard here?  Where have you been ever since we sailed from
the Mersey?" he asked.

Too weak to answer, I could only stretch out my hand and then point to my lips, to show that
I wanted food and water.

"If you've been down in the hold all these weeks, no wonder that you want something to eat,"
he remarked.

Still he didn't move, or propose to obtain any refreshment for me.  As my lack-lustre eyes
looked up at him, I recognised Gregory Growles, the old seaman to whom I had at first spoken
with my cutter under my arm. No wonder that he didn't recollect me in my present forlorn and
dirt-begrimed condition.  At last the seaman against whom I leant told one of his messmates
to get me some water.  With indifference, if not unwillingness, the man did as requested, and
going to the water-butt on deck brought me a mugful, which I greedily drank.

"By the feel of his ribs he wants something more substantial than water," observed my friend.
"We must get the poor young chap into a berth, and feed him up, or he'll be slipping his cable.
There doesn't seem to be much life in him now."

"That will be seen."

"What business had he to stow himself away, and make us all fancy that a ghost was haunting
the ship?" cried Growles, in a surly way.  "We shall hear what the captain has to say to him.
To my notion, as he's made his bed, so he'll have to lie on it."

"Come, come, mate, it would be hard lines for the poor young chap if he were left to die, without
any of us trying to bring him through.  I, for one, can't stand by doing nothing, so just one
of you lend a hand here, and we'll put him into my berth, and get the cook to make some broth
for him," said the kind-hearted seaman.

While he was speaking, a person, who was evidently one of the officers, came forward and expressed
his surprise at seeing me, and inquired why he hadn't been informed of my having been discovered?

The men replied, that I had only just been found and brought on deck, and that they thought
I was dying.

"It would have saved trouble to have hove him overboard before he came to himself," said the
mate, with a careless laugh.  "The captain doesn't allow of stowaways, and we don't want any
aboard here."

He said this, I suppose, to frighten me, indifferent to the consequences.

"He's very bad, sir," said my friend, touching his hat, "and, maybe, it won't much matter what
is done with him; but if you'll give me leave, I'll take him below to my berth, after we've
washed off the dirt that sticks to him.  He wants food more than anything else to bring him
round, and when he's himself we can make some use of him at all events. We want a boy forward
very badly, and he'll be worth his salt, I've a notion."

"You may do what you like with him, Tom Trivett," answered the officer, "only don't let us
be bothered with him.  We've trouble enough with young Riddle, the mutinous young rascal. 
He'll have to look out for himself, if he don't mind."

The officer was the third mate of the ship, who happened just then to have charge of the deck.
He made further inquiries about how I had been found, and asked the men whether they had before
known of my being on board?

Trivett replied that they were entirely ignorant as to how I had come into the ship, but that
hearing peculiar noises, they lifted the hatch, and that he had gone down and discovered me.

"We shall hear by-and-by what he has to say for himself.  In the meantime, Trivett, take care
of him, and I'll let the captain know he's been found.  He's the ghost you fellows have been
frightened about," said the mate.

"We were no more frightened than he was," I heard some of the men utter, "but who could tell
where all those strange noises we heard came from when any of us went down into the hold. 
He's precious ready to call us cowards, but he was more frightened than we were.  Why, he would
never go down unless he had a couple of hands with him."  While this was going on, Tom Trivett
continued swabbing my head and neck.  When the mate walked aft he called to the cook to bring
him a bucket of warm water from the caboose, as well as a lump of soap, a scrubbing-brush,
and a piece of canvas.

The sun was shining brightly, and the air was warm, so that I did not feel the exposure so
much as it might have been felt.  Tom forthwith set about to scrape me clean, taking his own
pocket-comb to disentangle my matted hair after he had washed it.  The operation, though somewhat
hazardous, greatly refreshed me.  Before it was concluded, Julius Caesar, the black cook, who
had some tender spot in his heart, brought out a basin of soup, from which Trivett fed me as
tenderly as a nurse would a young child.  This still further revived me.

"You shall have some more, boy, when I have done a-cleaning you," said Tom.

The rest of the crew sat round making remarks, but not even offering to assist their shipmate,
evidently perfectly indifferent as to what happened to me, though perhaps curious to see whether
I should revive under the treatment to which I was being subjected.  Judging by the colour
of the water after I had been washed in it, I must have been as black as a coal.  I rather
think Julius Caesar must have fancied that I was one of his own race, and must have been greatly
astonished at seeing a blackamoor washed white.  When the operation was concluded, Growles
again came and had a look at me.

"Why, I do believe it's none other than the young chap who came aboard us at Liverpool," he
exclaimed.  "I thought as when I saw him so often that he was up to something, but never fancied
that he was going to stow himself away, or I should have been on the watch for him.  Well,
he'll have to pay pretty smartly for the trick he has played us."

My friend Tom took no notice of this and similar remarks made by others of the crew; but after
having again fed me, he called to a stout-looking lad who was coming forward from the companion-hatchway
to assist in carrying me to his berth under the topgallant forecastle.  The lad, without hesitation,
did as he was directed, and took up my legs, while Tom lifted me by the arms.  As I was being
carried along, my eyes turned towards the lad who was stepping backwards, when I at once recognised
him as Mark Riddle, though he looked very different to the smart young chap he was when I last
saw him, and he evidently did not know me.

"Can't you find a shirt and a pair of trousers for the poor fellow?" cried Tom; "his own want
washing terribly."

Mark ran aft, and in a short time returned with the garments, in which Tom clothed me.

Notwithstanding the food which had been given me, I was still too weak to speak.  He and Tom
lifted me into an upper bunk on the starboard side.  As he did so, I stretched out my hand
and seized his, which I pressed between my bony fingers.  I could just say, "Thank you, Mark."
He looked at me very hard, but still did not seem to have a suspicion who I was.  This was
not surprising, as he did not even know that I had gone to Liverpool.  I was so altered, that
even my mother would scarcely have recognised me.  He, however, asked Tom Trivett who I was.
Tom replied that I was a young stowaway, but that he knew no more about me than did the man
in the moon.

"Go and fetch the remainder of the broth," I heard Tom say.  "A little more will do him good,
and then if he gets a sound sleep he'll come round, I have a notion."

"If he does, it will only be to lead a dog's life," murmured Mark, as he left to get the broth.

Tom stood by me arranging the blankets, and trying to make me comfortable till Mark returned
with some soup, with some biscuits and rice floating in it.  Though I could drink the liquid,
it was with difficulty that I could masticate the latter, but I managed to get down a few pieces.

"He has eaten enough now," said Tom; "but, I say, Mark," he whispered, "you keep an eye on
him whenever you can, so that none of the fellows play him any tricks.  They'd do so, though
they knew he was dying, out of devilry."

"Aye, aye," answered Mark.  "They shan't hurt the poor young chap if I can help it, though
I've enough to do to keep clear of them myself."

"Well, we shall be three now, and shall be better able to stand up against them," said Tom.

I heard no more; for after taking the food a drowsiness crept over me, and I fell into a sound
sleep.  When I awoke I was in the dark, and felt very much more comfortable than I had for
a long time.  At first I fancied that I was down in the hold, but the loud snoring and groaning
of the men in the neighbouring bunks made me remember what had happened. I felt about, and
was soon convinced that I was in Tom Trivett's bunk, in a clean shirt and trousers, and a blanket
over me.  I heard the watch below turn out, the others shortly afterwards came in, but no one
took any notice of me.

When the latter were fast asleep I heard some one come into the berth and stop near my bunk.

"Who's that?"  I asked.

"Glad to see you can speak again, my lad," said the person whom by his voice I knew to be Tom
Trivett.  "Do you feel better?"

"Yes, thank you," I answered.  "You've saved my life, and I'm very grateful to you."

"Don't talk o' that, lad," he said, "it's not much good I can do in the world, but I couldn't
bear to see you allowed to die from neglect, though I'm afraid there are hard times coming
for you.  You're among as rough a lot as ever sailed on the salt ocean, and that's saying a
good deal.  I want to give you a piece of advice; I mayn't have another chance of giving it.
Don't be in a great hurry to get well, for though the fellows, bad as they are, won't have
the cruelty to ill-treat you while you're sick, as soon as you come round they'll be down upon
you, and you'll find that they'll give you more kicks than ha'pence. However, you must not
mind them.  Don't attempt to retaliate, for they're too many for you.  Above all things don't
grow sulky as poor Mark did, and has ever since well-nigh had his life knocked out of him.
Now I must go on deck as it's my watch, but remember what I have said."

I again thanked Tom, and just as he was going I asked him if he could get me any more food.

"I'll try and get you something as soon as the cook turns out; but he's asleep in his bunk,
and at this hour it would be a difficult job to find any.  I'll tell Mark, however, to ask
him when he wakes, though I'd advise you to go off to sleep again."

Saying this, Tom left the berth, and I once more closed my eyes.  I was awakened by the men
turning out.

The light streamed in at the door, showing me that it was morning.  In consequence of the advice
I received from Tom, I kept quiet and pretended to be asleep.  Soon afterwards I saw Mark Riddle
standing by my side.

"Tom told me you're hungry, boy," he said; "so I managed to get something for you from the
pantry.  I hope it won't be discovered, or the third mate will be giving me a rope's-ending."

He had brought me a captain's biscuit and a slice of ham, with a tin mug of water.

"I'll bring you a cup of hot coffee," he said, handing me the food.

Hungry as I was I could not help exclaiming, "What, don't you know me, Mark?"

He looked at me very hard, still not remembering me.

"No, I don't think I ever saw you before," he answered; "but how do you happen to know my name?"

"I didn't think I was so changed," I said.  "I'm Dick Cheveley."

"Dick Cheveley!" he cried out, looking at me still harder; "Dick Cheveley on board this ship!
And yet it must be; and are you really Dick Cheveley?"

"I don't believe I'm anybody else, though I have sometimes fancied I must be."

"Yes, yes, I see you're Master Cheveley," cried Mark, "though I can't say I feel much happier
to see you for your own sake, though I'm right glad for mine to have you with me," taking my
hand and grasping it. "Oh, Master Cheveley, what did bring you aboard?"

I briefly told him while I was discussing the food he brought me.

"It's a bad business for you, Master Dick," he said; "but the only thing now to be done is
to make the best of it.  They're a precious bad lot, and the captain and officers are no better.
I've made up my mind to run as soon as I can, and I'd advise you to do the same."

"That I certainly will when I have somewhere to run to, but at present it seems we should have
to run overboard," I answered.

"We must wait until we get into harbour.  We shall have to touch at a good many places, and
if we keep our wits about us we shall manage it one way or another."

"We'll talk about that by-and-by, but tell me how you happened to be here.  I heard that you
had been sent on board a man-of-war," I said.

"So I was, and I wish I had remained aboard her, too; but as I had been sent against my will,
I cut and run on the first chance I got.  She was the `Beagle' sloop of war.  We were ordered
to cruise on the Irish coast.  We were not far off the town of Belfast, when a boat's crew
to which I belonged pulled ashore under charge of a mid-shipmite.  While he went into a house
to deliver a message, I ran off as fast as my legs could carry me.  I at last reached a cottage
in which there was a whiteheaded old fellow, a girl, and two young men.  I told them that I
had been pressed and ill-treated, and was trying to make my escape from the cruelty of the
English.  The young men said at once that they would protect me, and would answer that I should
not be retaken.  The old man warned them that they were playing a dangerous game, and said
that he would have nothing to do with the business, advising them to take me back to the boat.
The girl, however, pleaded for me, and observed that now I had run, my punishment would be
ten times greater, and that it would be cruel and inhospitable to refuse me shelter.  She prevailed
on her old grandfather.  That evening the young men took me down aboard a little `hooker,'
which they said was just going to sail for Liverpool, and that if I liked I could go in her.
Her cargo, they said, was timber and fruit, but turned out to be faggots and potatoes.  I knew
that at Liverpool there was no chance of being discovered, and I at once agreed. We reached
the Mersey in a couple of days.  As ill-luck would have it, I landed close to where the `Emu'
was getting ready for sea.  Knowing that I could not venture to return home, I went on board
and asked if a boy was wanted.  The first mate at once said yes, as one of the apprentices
had cut and run and could not be found.  I thought I was in good luck, but we hadn't been to
sea many days before I found that I had fallen out of the frying-pan into the fire.  The other
apprentice, poor Jack Drage, told me that he had been kicked and cuffed from the first moment
that he had stepped on board, and that if he had had any friends on shore, he'd have taken
French leave as the other had done.  Things had grown worse instead of better, and he was already
weary of his life. I advised him not to give in; that in time things must mend; but he was
a poor-hearted fellow and only wrung his hands and cried, declaring that he was utterly miserable.
I did my best to keep up his spirits, but it was all of no use.  One night during a gale we
had soon after sailing, he disappeared.  Whether he had thrown himself overboard into the sea,
or been knocked overboard no one could tell.  Of course it was entered in the log that he had
been knocked overboard.  In my opinion he sacrificed his life rather than endure his miseries.
I told the first mate so, and he knocked me down.  The next time he called me a sulky rascal,
but I answered that I was not going to do away with myself like Jack Drage, and that I would
make a complaint of him to the British Consul whenever we touched at a port.  On this he knocked
me down again. I know that I was taken with the sulks, and for days afterwards didn't speak
to him or any one else; but as I had no wish to be killed, I did what I was ordered to do,
and got on somewhat better.  Ever since that not a day passes that I don't get a kick or have
a marline-spike hove at my head by either the officers or men forward.  They're all very much
alike for that matter, except Tom Trivett, and he's as good a fellow as ever lived.  He has
a hard life of it, for the men are always playing him tricks; and the officers spite him, and
are constantly making him do dirty jobs which no able seaman should be called on to perform.
But, I say, I mustn't stand talking here any longer, or I shall be suspected of being your
friend.  Don't let any one find out that we know each other, and we shall get on all the better.
I'll tell Tom Trivett, and he'll bring you the coffee if I can't manage it; meanwhile you stay
quiet in the bunk, even if you feel well enough to get up."

"There is no chance of my being able to do that for some days," I answered, "for I don't think
I could stand if I were to try."

Mark now left me, and I fell back nearly exhausted from having talked so long to him.

After some time Tom appeared with a basin of hot black coffee, with some biscuit floating in it.

"Can't I have a little milk?"  I asked.

"We've not any cows on board here," he answered with a laugh; "and there are no dairies in
the Atlantic, unless Daddy Neptune happens to keep sea-cows."

"You must have thought me very silly to ask for milk," I said, as I ate up the sopped biscuit,
and drank the hot coffee, which was well sweetened with sugar.

"It shows you are something of a greenhorn, lad," he answered, laughing, "but no wonder your
wits aren't of the brightest after having been shut up in the dark so long; you shall have
something else by-and-by. Remember what I told you; don't be getting well too soon, that's all."

CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

  My convalescence--Julius Caesar befriends me--We pass the Cape de
  Verde Islands--Our hopes of a change of diet disappear--My turn at
  last--A severe discipline--Captain Longfleet--"Please, sir, I couldn't
  help it"--"There goes the baby and his nurse"--Caesar's sympathy--How
  I owed my life to Tom Trivett--Bad food--"It makes me sick to cook
  it"--The deputation to the captain--The discontent increases among the
  crew--Crossing the line--"What ship is that?"--We receive a visit from
  Daddy Neptune and his court--Rough play, and what it might have come
  to.

I intended to take the advice of my friend and not get well too soon, but in reality there
was no malingering in the case, for I remained too low and weak to get out of my bed.

Tom Trivett all the time, having given up his berth to me, slept in a far more uncomfortable
bunk right forward, but never uttered a word of complaint, or tried to induce me to turn out.
His was true Samaritan charity, and I was grateful to him.  He even, I knew, tried to influence
the rest of the crew for good, but did not succeed.  They let him alone, which was all he could
expect of them.  The third mate, who knew I was there, never came near me to inquire how I
was getting on.

Mark paid me a visit whenever he could venture to do so, and brought me my food when Tom was
on duty.

The only other man who was kind to me was Julius Caesar, the black cook, and he frequently
sent me wholesome messes which he had concocted for my special benefit; but he had to charge
Mark and Tom not to let the other men see them, lest they should be gobbled up on their way.
Mark told me this, for Julius Caesar himself never came to have a look at me.

"If I come, den dey say I friend of his--it worse for him."

Both Mark and Caesar slept in the larboard berth, so that they had no business in the one I
occupied.

I should explain that the space under the topgallant forecastle was divided by a bulkhead running
fore and aft into parts forming separate cabins, one called the starboard, and the other the
larboard berths, with bunks built up on both sides, one above another, or rather, in two stories,
to explain myself better.

In moderate weather they were tolerably comfortable, but with the sun beating down on the deck
they were fearfully hot.  In a gale of wind, as the seas dashed against the bows or she pitched
into them, the noise and movement were tremendous.  However, to that I in time got accustomed.

Sometimes the decks and upper works leaked, and the water coming in wetted the clothes and
bedding.  However, in other respects they were better than the forepeak in a flush-decked ship,
which is generally close and hot, full of horrible odours, and totally destitute of ventilation,
and often wet into the bargain, from unseen leaks which are not of sufficient consequence to
trouble the officers, as they do not affect the safety of the ship.

At length, one day Tom told me that we were within sight of the Cape de Verde Islands, at which
he believed the captain intended to call.  He was very glad, he said, of this, as he hoped
to be able to get me a supply of oranges and limes, which he thought would do me more good
than anything else.

The very name of fruit made my mouth water, and I thought I would give a great deal just to
have one good suck at an orange.  Great was my disappointment, therefore, when shortly afterwards
Mark came in, and said that a strong north-easterly wind had sprung up, and that we were standing
away from the islands, but that the captain, he believed, intended to put into Rio de Janeiro.

"I must wait patiently till we get there," I said.  "I hope it won't take us long."

"We have to pass through the horse latitudes, and to cross the line first, and Rio is some
way to the south of that, so I'm afraid you must suck your fingers instead of oranges," he
answered.

I was now rapidly getting better, and I began to pine for fresh air and exercise.

"You'll be wiser to stay where you are, Master Dick," said Mark.  "No one believes that you're
a gentleman's son, and if they did I'm very sure it would make very little difference.  I should,
perhaps, benefit by your getting about, as you would have all the dirty work to do which now
falls to my lot.  It's only surprising that the captain has allowed you to remain so long in
the berth, for he knows that you're aboard, though he takes no notice of you.  Still I'd advise
you, as long as you can, to stay where you are."

I had not long the opportunity.  Two days afterwards the third mate came into the berth with
a short, knotted rope in his hand.

"Come, youngster, you have been long enough malingering here," he exclaimed; "I find the cook
has been serving out no end of good grub to you, and you've done nothing for it.  We don't
want idlers aboard the `Emu;' show a leg there pretty smartly."

I attempted to rise.  Tom had washed and dried my clothes.  I got hold of my trousers, and
slipt my legs into them.  When I attempted to stand upright, my knees gave way and down I sank.
At the same moment the mate's colt descended on my back.  I was taken so completely by surprise
that I shrieked out with pain.  I tried to lift myself up by the supports of the bunk, and
succeeded in getting on my feet.

"I thought I'd cure you.  Do you want another dose of this rope?"

"Oh!  No, sir!  No, sir!  Don't!  I'll dress as fast as I can," I called out.

The moment I let go I felt that I must slip down again.  Still the fear of another lash made
me exert myself in a way I could not otherwise have done, and I tried very hard to put on my
waistcoat and jacket, and to tie my handkerchief, by sitting down on a lower bunk.

"Now, come along!" said the mate; "the captain wants to speak to you."

I attempted to walk, but as I tottered on my knees again failed me, and I should have fallen
had not the mate caught me by the shoulders and dragged me along the deck.

It was a severe discipline, but it was effective, for the air and the necessity of moving quickly
brought back strength to my limbs, and by the time I reached the quarterdeck I was able to
keep my feet, though I should have fallen had not the mate still held me.

We there found the captain pacing to and fro.  On turning he stopped when he saw me.

"Is this the young stowaway, Mr Huggins?" he asked, eyeing me very sternly.  "What business
had you to come aboard, boy, without leave?"

"Please, sir, I couldn't help it," I said, and I told him that when merely intending to look
round the ship I had fallen into the hold.

"A likely story, youngster, which I don't intend to believe.  You came on board to please yourself,
and now you'll learn to please me, and do the work you're set to do."

"I'll do my best, sir," I answered, for I saw he was not a man to be trifled with; "but I am
not fit for much at present."

"You contrived to live down in the hold in an extraordinary manner--how did you manage it?"

I told him in a few words.

"Another likely story," he remarked.  "In other words, you stole the ship's provisions as long
as you could get at them, or you had an accomplice who kept you fed--he'll be made to smart
for it."

On hearing this, I began to tremble for the consequences to Mark. Though the captain didn't
mention his name, I guessed that he pointed at him.  I was much inclined to say who I was,
and to speak of Mr Butterfield, but shame prevented me, and the captain made no inquiries on
the subject.

"Now go forward," he said; "look out sharp, get back your strength, and make yourself useful."

He turned on his heel, not deigning to hold any further conversation with so insignificant
a person as he considered me.

The mate let me go.  I tried to walk, but staggered like a drunken man, and could only just
manage to reach the side, and catch hold of a belaying-pin.  I remained there until the captain
turned round, when, afraid of his looks, I once more set off to make my way along the deck,
the mate taking no trouble to help me, while the crew jeered and laughed at me; till Tom Trivett,
who had been at work on the other side, crossing over, took my arm and led me along to the
forehatch, where he bade me sit down.

"There goes the baby and his nurse," said one of the men.

"Tom will be getting him some pap presently," said another--at which they laughed in chorus.

The third mate, seeing Tom standing over me, ordered him back to his work.  Mark made an attempt
to join me, but was sent to perform some task or other, and I was left alone and forlorn to
endure the gibes of my hardhearted shipmates.

Caesar, however, came out of his caboose, and whispered as he passed--

"Neber you mind, Dick, as long dey only use der tongue."

He grinned and pointed with his finger, so that the rest fancied that he was only mocking me
as they were.

Notwithstanding this, the fresh air and the necessity of exerting myself did me good, and after
I had taken some food that Caesar brought me when the men went into their berth to dinner,
I felt quite another creature.

At nightfall I was allowed to slink into my bunk, of which Tom still refused to deprive me.

"I'm very well where I am.  I'm accustomed to it, and you are not, Dick," he said, when I begged
him to let me change places.

The next day I was still better, and after this I rapidly recovered my strength, notwithstanding
the cuffs and kicks and rope's-endings I frequently received, and the hard work I had to perform.

My clothes were soon again as dirty as they were when I came out of the hold, and torn and
tattered besides.

"Never mind, Dick," said Tom; "I'll rig you out in a suit of mine, which I'll cut down to suit
you when we get into colder latitudes.  It doesn't much matter about having old clothes now
the weather is so hot."

Mark regretted that he could not help me, as he had only the clothes he stood up in, which
would have been almost as bad as my own had they not been of stronger material, and thus held
out better.

Though the rest of the crew ill-treated Mark and me, and Tom also when they had the chance,
the captain and officers tyrannised over them in the most brutal fashion.  It was no unusual
occurrence for the first mate to heave a handspike at one of the men when he did not go about
his work in a way to please him, and both captain and mates swore at the men on all occasions
in the most fearful way.

At first I was horrified, but in time I got as much accustomed to it as they were, and was
only thankful that the oaths were not accompanied by a rope's-ending.

All this time the discipline was really very slack, and the men behaved to each other as they
pleased, and never failed to neglect their duty whenever the mates' eyes were off them.  Still
they resented, notwithstanding, the treatment they received, growling fiercely, if not loudly,
when the quality of their provisions had begun to fall off.  At first the food had been pretty
good, but it now became worse and worse, and the men swore that they would stand it no longer.
At last, when some rancid pork had been served out with musty peas and weevilly biscuits, the
men went aft in a body, headed by the boatswain, Sass Jowler, and Growles, who were deputed
to be spokesmen, to the quarterdeck, where the captain was walking.

"I axes you, Captain Longfleet, whether you think this ere stuff is fit food for British seamen?"
said the boatswain, holding up a piece of the pork at the end of a two-pronged fork.

"It makes um sick to cook it," said Caesar, who was standing behind the rest.

"And I wants to know, in the name of the crew, whether this 'ere biscuit as is all alive with
maggots, is the stuff we poor fellows forward should be made to put into our mouths?" cried
Growles.

"What's that you're talking about, you mutinous rascals?" cried the captain; "stop a bit, and
I'll answer you."

Saying this, he sprang back into the cabin, and while the men stood staring at the door without
advancing, he reappeared with a pistol in the one hand and a cutlass in the other.  I observed
that he had a second pistol in his belt.

"You know I never miss my aim, you scoundrels.  The first man that utters a word on the subject
I'll shoot through the head.  The food's good enough for better men than you, so be off forward,
and let this be the last time I hear any complaint.  If not, look out for squalls."

The men stood irresolute, and no one liked to run the chance of having a pistol-bullet sent
through his head.

"Are you going, you villains?" thundered the captain, pointing his pistol at the boatswain.

He used a good many other stronger expletives, which need not be repeated.

The boatswain was a bold fellow, but his courage gave way, and he stepped back.  The others,
overawed by the determined manner of the captain, imitated the example of their leader, knowing
that the pistol might be turned towards any one who stood his ground, and together they retreated
forward, tumbling over each other in their endeavour to put as wide a distance as possible
between themselves and their now furious commander.

For my part, I felt a greater amount of respect for him than I had ever done before.  His eye
did not for a moment quail, his arm appeared as firm as iron.  Had he shown the slightest hesitation,
the men, in the temper they were in, would have been upon him, and he would have lost his authority.

Mark and I remained at one side of the deck, where we happened to be at the time.  Tom Trivett
had not come aft, having refused to take any part in the affair, whereby he gained still greater
ill-will than before from his shipmates.

The discontent which had thus shown itself, though kept down for a time, was by no means quelled.
We had to eat the food, bad as it was, though perhaps not altogether as bad as the samples
exhibited to the captain.

The third mate came forward much oftener than before, and tried hard to win back the men into
something like good-humour, but his efforts were unavailing.

"You see, Mr Simmons, as how we poor fellows have got to work hard, and except we gets good
grub we can't do it," I heard the boatswain remark in an insinuating tone; "it's very hard
lines for us to have to eat rancid pork and weevilly bread, when we knows well enough that
the captain and mates has good grub in the cabin.  Share and share alike, and we sha'n't complain.
But we must abide by it till the ship gets into harbour, and then we suppose that the captain
will be getting good stores aboard and will serve out fresh meat and vegetables."

"Oh!  Of course he'll do that," said Mr Simmons, pleased, as he thought, at having brought
the men to reason.  "You know Captain Longfleet is a just man, though he's a determined one,
and won't stand nonsense.  Everything will go well, I hope, by-and-by."

I should have observed that our boatswain held a very different position among the crew to
that occupied by a warrant officer on board a man-of-war.  He was merely one of the men, and
was so called from certain duties he had to perform, and was a sort of link between the officers
and the crew.

We were now in the tropics.  When there was a breeze the heat was supportable enough, but when
it fell calm we could scarcely bear our clothes on, and went about in shirts and trousers,
with bare feet, and were glad to have the opportunity of getting into the shade.  The pitch
boiled up out of the seams, and old Growles declared that he could cook a beefsteak on the
capstan-head, if he only had a beefsteak to cook.

The heat did not improve the temper of the men, and the ship became to Mark and me a regular
hell afloat.  Matters were almost as bad with Tom Trivett, but he could hold his own better
than we could.

One day Mark came to me.

"I say, Dick," he exclaimed--a common fate had made us equal, and he had long ago dropped the
master--"I've been hearing that to-morrow we're to cross the line.  I wonder what sort of place
we shall get into on t'other side; as far as I can make out, it's a kind of bar, and those
who go over it for the first time have to pay toll to old Daddy Neptune, who is coming aboard
to collect his dues."

I was surprised that Mark had never heard of the line, and so I tried to explain to him what
it was.  As to Neptune coming on board, I knew that that was all nonsense, and so I told him.

During that evening and the next morning some of the men were busily engaged in their berth,
into which they allowed no one but themselves to enter.

Soon after noon the captain, having taken his observations, gave notice that we were about
to cross the line.  Mark and I had been sent aft, when we heard a voice hail as if from under
the bows.

"What ship is that?"

"The `Emu,'" answered the captain, who with the officers was standing on the poop.

"Where did you come from, and for what port are you bound?" asked the voice.

"From Liverpool, and we're bound to Rio and round Cape Horn," answered the captain.

"All right, Captain Longfleet; with your leave my wife and I will pay you a visit and bring
some of our children and attendants, and if you have any youngsters who have not crossed the
line before, we shall have a word to say to them."

"You're welcome, Father Neptune, for I suppose no one else would be desirous of giving me a
call out in these seas."

It was amusing to observe Mark's look of astonishment when immediately afterwards a party of
grotesque figures appeared clambering over the bows.  The first was an old fellow with a long
white beard, a gold paper crown on his head, and a sceptre in his hand, and dressed in a flowing
robe painted all over with curious devices.  With him came a huge woman, also wearing a crown
and garments of many colours, a necklace of huge beads and a couple of clasp-knives hanging
down from either side of her face to serve as ear-rings; another figure followed them equally
curiously dressed, with a basin under one arm, a pair of sailmaker's shears hanging round his
neck, and a piece of rusty hoop shaped like a razor in his hand.  A fourth person, tall and
gaunt, was seen in a cocked-hat, a thick cane in one hand, and a box of pills of large proportions
in the other.  Following them came a party of monsters in green dresses with long tails, and
heads covered by oakum wigs.

The captain, wishing to humour the men, shouted out--

"Glad to see your majesty on board my ship.  You're welcome to come aft and look out for any
of those whose acquaintance you have not before made."

On this the whole gang came tramping aft.  Mark and I saw that their eyes were fixed upon us.
We had no place to fly to but up the mizen rigging.  We made the attempt, but were quickly
caught by some of the monsters, who managed to climb up in spite of their tails.

The barber had in the meantime placed a huge tub on the deck, and a couple of small casks.
On these we were compelled to sit down, when he immediately with a paint-brush began to daub
our faces over with the contents of a bucket of grease.  He then drew out his razor, and scraped
us in the most cruel fashion, taking off the skin at every stroke.

The doctor in the meanwhile, with mock solemnity, felt our pulses, and then observing that
we were terribly sick, crammed one of the boluses out of his box into our mouths, and forced
it down with his tarry finger.

"A bath would do them good," he growled out.

We were seized, and soused head over heels in a tub till we were well-nigh drowned.  In vain
we struggled and shrieked.  Every time we opened our mouths the barber shoved his brush into
them, and the monsters then ducked our heads under water to wash them out, as they said.

More dead than alive we were at last allowed to go, but had scarcely strength left to crawl away.

Tom Trivett was next dragged aft, though he declared that he had often crossed the line.  Daddy
Neptune refused, however, to believe him, protesting that he had never seen his face in those
parts before. Though he fought bravely he was overpowered, and was even worse treated than
we had been, the monsters, aided by the doctor and barber and Mrs Neptune, holding his arms
and legs.

The captain and officers all the time in no way interfered, but seemed to enjoy the cruel sport.
They wished, indeed, to allow the sailors to take their full fling according to their barbarous
fancies.

Mark and I, seeing how our friend was treated, attempted to go to his rescue, but we had better
have remained quiet, both for his sake and our own, for we were cuffed and kicked even worse
than before, and with difficulty again made our escape.

A double allowance of grog was served out, which made the men even more savage than before;
and when they were tired of ill-treating us they took to rough play among themselves.  Daddy
Neptune's crown was torn off, his sceptre broken in two, his wife was despoiled of her finery;
the doctor's hat and spectacles shared the same fate; he was made to swallow his own pills,
and the barber had his brush nearly shoved down his throat.

They would have come to serious blows had not the captain ordered them to knock off and return
to their duty.  The mates, with boats' stretchers in their hands, had to rush in among them
before they could be induced to desist.  Not until a breeze sprang up, and they were ordered
aloft to make sail, were they brought into anything like order.

For days afterwards Mark and I limped about the deck, with aching heads and sore faces, and
Tom Trivett could with difficulty get through his duty.

This relaxation of discipline had no good effect on the men.  They still grumbled and growled
as much as ever at every meal over the food served out to them.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

  Land ho!--Cape Frio--The Sugar-loaf Mountain--The Castle of Santa
  Cruz--The harbour of Rio de Janeiro--A taste of fruit--We receive some
  passengers--A gale springs up--Man overboard--Poor Tom Trivett--
  Captain Longfleet's inhumanity--Mark and I are treated worse--I
  overhear a conversation--A proposed mutiny--The plot--Differences will
  arise--Who's to be captain?--I determine to reveal the plot--I consult
  with Mark--Our determination--Southern latitudes--The Southern Cross--
  The Falkland Islands--Mark escapes, but I am retaken--Highland blood--
  Mark's probable fate--A battle with an albatross.

"Land ho!" was shouted from the masthead.  In a short time we came off Cape Frio, a high, barren,
almost insular, promontory, which runs into the Atlantic to the eastward of Rio de Janeiro.
We stood on, the land appearing to be of a great height behind the beach, till we came in sight
of the Sugar-loaf Mountain; the light land wind preventing us from entering the harbour, we
had to stand off and on during the night.

"Well, I've made up my mind to get a precious good tuck out," I heard old Growles say to the
boatswain; "I suppose the skipper will order a good store of provisions aboard after the talk
we had with him the other day."

"Not so sure of that, old ship," said the boatswain; "but if he doesn't, he'd better look out
for squalls, as he said to us."

The other men were rejoicing in the expectation of a hearty meal and wholesome food, and so
indeed were Mark and I; for we were not better off than the rest, except that Mark occasionally
got some pickings at the captain's table, and now and then, when he could manage it, brought
me some.

Next morning a sea-breeze setting in, we stood towards the harbour, and as the fog lifted,
several small islands near its mouth came into sight, and the Sugar-loaf Mountain loomed up
high on the left, while on the right we saw the battlements of the Castle of Santa Cruz, which
stands at the foot of the mountain.  As we passed under the guns of the fortress, we were hailed
by a stentorian voice, which came out from among the stone-built walls, but the speaker was
not seen.

"What ship is that?  Where do you come from?  How many days out?"

The captain answered the questions through his speaking-trumpet as we glided by.  We at length
came to an anchor about a mile from the city of Rio de Janeiro, in one of the most beautiful
and picturesque harbours in the world. He prescribed the titlepage as well as other details, and
within four days Dodsley had the poem in print, and anticipated the piratical "Magazine" by
one day. But the "Magazine" named Gray as the author, and success
without anonymity was the fate of the "Elegy."  To
our disappointment no one was allowed to go on shore.  The captain and second mate almost immediately
took a country boat and pulled for the landing-place.

"I suppose they intend to send us off some grub," said old Growles, in a voice loud enough
for them to hear; but they took no notice, and pulled on.  We waited in anxious expectation
for the arrival of the provisions, but no boats appeared.  It looked very much as if the captain
had forgotten our necessities.  At last a small one came alongside with fruit and vegetables,
which those who had money eagerly purchased.  I had a few shillings remaining in my pocket,
but Mark had nothing, and I insisted on buying enough for him and myself.  Mark declined taking
them from me, saying he could do very well without them; but I pressed him, and we discussed
a couple of dozen oranges between us.  How delicious they tasted!  We both felt like different
creatures.  Those of the crew who had money were put into much better humour, but the rest
were more sulky than ever.

In the evening the boats brought off some fresh water, but no provisions.  When the captain
came on board at night we learnt that he had refused to purchase any, on account of their high
price.  Whether this was the case or not I don't know, but it made the men very angry. Next
day he went on shore again, returning in the afternoon with four gentlemen, whom we heard were
going as passengers round to Columbia River, in North America.

We soon found, from hearing them speak, that they were Scotch, and of this I had no doubt when
I learned their names, which were McTavish, McDonald, McKay, and Fraser.  Their vessel had
been wrecked off Cape Frio, and notwithstanding the character borne by Captain Longfleet, they
were glad to have an opportunity of continuing their voyage in the "Emu."  Just before daybreak
a small boat came alongside with fruit and vegetables; but they were all for the cabin, and
the crew were none the better for them.

Next morning we sailed at daybreak with a land wind, followed by three or four other vessels,
some bound round Cape Horn, others to cross the Atlantic.  They were still in sight when it
came on to blow very hard. In a short time a sea got up which made the ship tumble about in
a way I had not experienced since I had been down in the hold.  The captain stood on, wanting
to keep ahead of the other vessels.  The topmasts bent like willow wands, and every moment
looked as if they would go over the sides.  We carried on, however, until it was nearly dark,
when he ordered the hands aloft to reef sails.  I had not as yet been ordered to perform this
duty, but Mark was as active as any one.  He and Tom were on the lee fore-topsail yard-arm.
Two reefs had already been taken in when the sail had to be closely reefed.  It was now quite
dark.  The operation was being performed, when there was a cry from forward of "A man overboard!"
To round the ship to might have been hazardous; but the second mate, who was the best of the
officers, at once shouted out for volunteers to lower the boat.

"Hold hard," says the captain; "I'll not have the hands thrown away for a careless, useless
lubber who can't hold fast."

I had run aft when I heard some one say that the man who had gone was Tom Trivett.  Without
waiting for orders I hove overboard an oar and a hen-coop, with half-a-dozen cackling hens
in it, which not having been properly secured, had fetched away.  In my excitement I was proceeding
to throw some spars and other articles into the sea, when the captain, catching sight of me,
ordered me to desist.

"Let the fellow drown," he exclaimed; "it's his own fault, and it'll be a lesson to the rest
of you."

Though the men had no love for Tom Trivett, bad as they were these remarks greatly enraged them.

"He cares no more for our lives than he does for that of a dog.  It would have been just the
same if any of us had gone," exclaimed several of them.

The passengers were very indignant at the captain's barbarity.  Two of them had been ready
to go in the boat, and they all declared that the seaman might have been saved if proper efforts
had immediately been made.  I heard the captain in a peremptory tone tell them to hold their
tongues, as they knew nothing about the matter.  He was captain of the ship, and would act
as he thought fit, and not endanger her safety for the sake of a single man who was not worth
his salt.  I deeply grieved for Tom since I discovered that he had been my firm friend, and
I truly believed that I owed my life to him.  Had it been daylight we might have watched to
see whether he had got hold of any of the things thrown overboard, but almost immediately after
he fell he was lost to view. The gale lasted only a short time.  We made sail again as soon
as we could, and quickly lost sight of the other vessels.

Now that Tom Trivett had gone, my position became harder than ever, as I had no friend to stand
up for me.  I had often been protected by him when the others were inclined to bully me, and
thus escaped many a cuff and kick.  Julius Caesar was the only person who befriended me, and
he didn't dare to do so openly.  He often, indeed, appeared to be bullying me worse than the
rest.  I had been ordered to assist in cleaning his pots and pans, and sweeping out the caboose.
Whenever the rigging had to be blacked down I was sent to do it, and was called to perform
all the dirty jobs.  The men, knowing I was a gentleman's son, took pleasure in seeing me thus
employed.  Mark would willingly have helped me, but he was always sent aft to some other work
when seen near me.

I would gladly have changed places with him, but he told me that he was as badly off as I was
forward, for he got as much kicked about by the captain and officers as I was by the men.

I had no one to talk to, for I could seldom get the opportunity of saying much to him.  I felt
that I had not a friend aboard.  The men, when they had exhausted a few fresh provisions which
they themselves had purchased, again began to grumble at the bad quality of their food. They
took care, however, to say nothing when the third mate was forward, but they went about their
duty in a manner which it seemed surprising he did not observe.

One evening, being my watch below, still feeling the effect of the rough handling I had endured,
I had crept into my berth to be out of the way of my persecutors.  Mark, as usual, was attending
to his duties in the cabin.

I had fallen asleep, when I was awakened by hearing some men speaking close to me, though it
was too dark to see who they were, and even if they had looked into my berth they would not
have discovered me; but I recognised the voices of old Growles and the boatswain, and two other
men, who were the worst of the crew and the leading spirits for bad on board.  I was not much
alarmed, though I scarcely dared to breathe for fear of attracting their notice.  I cannot
repeat all they said, for they frequently made allusions which they knew that each other understood;
but I heard enough to convince me that they were hatching a plot to overpower the officers
and passengers, and to take the vessel into Buenos Aires, or some other place on the banks
of the River Plate. One of the men proposed killing them and throwing them overboard.  Old
Growles suggested that they should be put into a boat and allowed to shift for themselves,
just as their officers were treated by the mutineers of the "Bounty."  The boatswain said that
he thought the best way of treating them would be to put them on shore on some desert island
far-away to the southward, seldom visited by ships, so that they could not make their escape.

"But they'll die of hunger, if you do that," remarked another man.

"They'll die, at all events, so it matters little," answered the boatswain.  "Our business
is to get rid of them, and either to go cruising on our own account, or to sell the ship at
a Spanish port to the westward, and enjoy ourselves on what we get for her."

"Dead men tell no tales," muttered the first speaker.

"Heave them overboard at once, and we shall be done with them."

"I'm not for that sort of thing," said old Growles.  "I shouldn't like to see their white faces
as they dropped astern; they'd be haunting us, depend on that."

The boatswain and the others laughed.

"Who's to take the ship round Cape Horn, if we do away with the officers?" asked one of the men.

"I know enough navigation for that," said the boatswain, "it won't be a long job."

"Then I suppose you intend to turn captain.  Is that it?" said another man.

"We don't want no captain aboard."

"If the ship was caught in a squall, you'd soon be calling out for some one to command you.
Call me what you will, there's no man, except myself, knows how to navigate the ship when the
officers are gone."

"I sees what you are after, boatswain," said old Growles.  "We should be just getting rid of
one captain, and having another like him in his place.  We must all be free and equal aboard,
or it'll never do.  I propose that one is captain one day, and one another; and that you, if
you can, or any one else, shall navigate the ship.  Otherwise one man's as good as another,
to my mind, and knows as well as you how to make or shorten sail."

"Well, I don't see how that can tell one way or the other," said the boatswain, who evidently
didn't like the turn the conversation was taking.

To me it seemed that the villains were ready for any mischief, but had not wit enough to carry
it out.  I lay as quiet as a mouse, scarcely venturing to breathe, for I knew that they would
not scruple to put an end to me should they discover me, and fancy that I was awake and had
overheard them.  I determined, should I be found out, to pretend to be fast asleep.  They talked
on for some time longer, till all hands were summoned on deck to shorten sail.  I was considering,
as well as I could, what I had better do.  The captain and officers had ill-treated me, but
that was no reason I should allow them to be murdered, if I could in any way warn them of the
danger, while the guiltless passengers must be saved at all costs.  I thought that if I told
Captain Longfleet, he would treat my statement as a cock-and-bull story, and declare I had
been dreaming.  Probably I should be sent off with a kick and a cuff, and the crew would hear
that I had informed against them.  I thought, however, that I would tell the second mate, who
was better disposed, and far more sensible than the rest of the officers.  Then it occurred
to me that I had better consult Mark first, and hear what he thought.  Perhaps he would consider
it wiser to speak to one of the passengers, three of whom were determined-looking men.  The
fourth, Mr Alexander Fraser, was much younger, and I liked his appearance.  He had given me
a kind nod sometimes when I went aft.  Their presence prevented the captain and officers from
ill-treating Mark and me as much as usual.  We were therefore inclined to regard them with
a friendly spirit.  I finally came to the conclusion to tell Mr Fraser what I had heard, if
I could get the opportunity of speaking to him out of hearing of the rest of the crew, though
that might be difficult.  I knew that, after all, I must be guided by circumstances.  The would-be
mutineers talked on, and might have talked on for a whole watch, had not all hands been summoned
on deck to shorten sail.  I waited till they had gone up the rigging, and then crept out. 
The ship had been struck by a squall.  Sheets were flying, blocks rattling, officers shouting,
and a number of the men on deck pulling and hauling, made a hubbub so that I escaped aft unperceived,
and was able to join Mark at one of the ropes it was his duty to attend to.  As there was no
one near, I was able to tell him by snatches what I had heard.

"I'm not surprised," he answered.  "The villains would murder their own mothers or grandmothers
if they could gain anything by it; but I only doubt whether they will venture to attack the
captain."

"Still, we must let one of the officers know, or else their blood will be upon our heads. 
I propose warning Mr Fraser, or one of the other gentlemen," I observed.

"That will do," said Mark.  "Either you or I may find a chance to speak to one of them; but
there's no time to be lost, for we can't say at what moment these ruffians may take it into
their heads to carry out their villainous designs.  We must be careful, however, that they
don't suspect us of giving the information, or they might heave us overboard some dark night
without ceremony."

Some time was occupied in taking in the canvas, but in the course of an hour the squall passed
off, and we had again to make sail.

While this was being done, Mark and I had time to discuss the matter.

That night, while it was my watch, I managed to get aft, where I found a person walking the
deck, occasionally stopping and gazing at the bright stars overhead, the southern cross and
others so different from those of the northern hemisphere.  I waited till he had gone right
aft out of earshot of the man at the wheel.  I knew by his figure that it was Mr Fraser, so
I went boldly up to him.

"I have got something to say to you," I whispered.  "It's of great consequence.  I mustn't
speak loud."

I then briefly told him that I had heard the men propose to get rid of the officers and passengers
in some way or other.

"I've already heard something of this from your young messmate, but I'm very incredulous about
it," he answered.

"Pray don't be that, sir," I said.  "Your life, and the lives of many others besides, depends
on your believing the truth of what I say and taking measures to protect yourselves;" and I
then told him more circumstantially what I had heard.  He now seemed to listen attentively,
and evidently considered that there was something in what I had said.

"I'm very much obliged to you for the information you have given, and I'll consult my friends
on the subject," he answered.  "The captain seems to be a man who will know well how to deal
with the villains, if what you say is true.  We'll tell him what has come to our ears."

"Indeed what I say is true," I exclaimed with energy.  "They may be upon you at any moment,
while you are unprepared."

"Well, laddie, I'll lose no time," said Mr Fraser; and, afraid that if we remained much longer
we might be observed by some of the men, I crept forward under the shadow of the bulwarks.

I waited anxiously during the remainder of the watch to see what would occur; but as the men
turned in, I was thankful to find that they had no intention of carrying out their project
that night, and it was not likely that they would do anything in the daytime, when their movements
would be observed by the officers.  My only fear was that they might have seen Mark and me
talking to Mr Fraser, and might have their suspicions aroused.  If so, Mark and I would run,
I knew, great risk of being knocked on the head as soon as darkness again came on.  I therefore
kept a sharp look out whilst I was on deck during the night, though I had an uncomfortable
feeling that I might possibly be smothered in my sleep, or that Mark might be treated in the
same way.  Daylight, however, returned without anything having occurred.

On meeting Mark, I expressed my fears to him.

"Do you know, Dick, I was thinking of the same thing, and I have made up my mind to cut and
run on the first opportunity, and I advise you to do the same thing.  Indeed, I should not
be happy if I left you behind; in truth, I would not run unless you promise to desert also."

"That I will, with all my heart, though I don't think that Mr Fraser and the other gentlemen
are likely to allow themselves to be taken by surprise, or to neglect putting the officers
on their guard."

"They can't protect us; and the men, if they find themselves even suspected, will certainly
think that we informed on them."

Whenever we had the opportunity, Mark and I discussed our plans for escaping.  As far as we
could judge, the officers and passengers were at their ease, and didn't act as if they thought
any mutiny would occur. As the weather was now getting cold, the passengers had an excuse for
coming on deck in their cloaks; and one day, when Mr Fraser's blew aside, I observed that he
had a brace of pistols in his belt.  They also brought their rifles on deck, and amused themselves
by firing at passing birds, sometimes at porpoises, sharks, and other monsters of the deep
who showed their backs above water.  I guessed at last, by the looks of the men, that they
saw that the passengers were on their guard.  Even the third mate didn't come forward as he
had been accustomed to do; and at night, what was very unusual, there were two officers on
deck at a time.  We had now contrary winds and thick weather, which greatly delayed us for
several days.  No observations were taken.

One morning land was discovered on the weather bow, which, the captain said, was the coast
of South America, and he carefully kept along shore in order to pass between the Falkland Islands
and the main land; but at noon, when a meridian observation had been obtained, he found that
what he had at first supposed to be the main land was in reality the Falkland Islands.  We
had for many days been sailing entirely by dead reckoning, while the current had set us out
of our course.  As we had not taken a full supply of water on board at Rio, and, owing to the
bursting of the butt, which had frightened me so much, we had less on board than usual, the
captain steered for one of the islands, where he knew that it could be obtained.

We came to an anchor about half a mile from the shore just at sunset. As it would take the
crew the whole day to get water, which had to be rolled down in small casks to the beach and
brought on board, the passengers expressed their intention of making a shooting excursion on
shore to kill some wild cattle--of which there are numbers in the island--or any other animals
or birds they might fall in with.  As the captain had no objection to having a supply of beef
without cost to himself, he agreed to let them have a boat the next morning to take them on
shore.  They asked for one or two of the men to carry the meat.  The captain said that they
could not be spared, but finally told them that they could take Mark and me, as we were of
little use on board.

"Now," whispered Mark, "is our opportunity.  If there are cattle, we shall have some meat to
live on; and I propose that we hide ourselves away, so that when the gentlemen return on board
we shall be missing."

The captain, we were sure, would not take the trouble to look for us.  I agreed, provided that
from the appearance of the island we should have the chance of obtaining food and shelter;
if not, we might die of starvation, and it would be better to endure our miseries, and the
danger we ran of our lives, for a short time longer than to do that.

"Well, as to that we must see about it," answered Mark.

Soon after, our watch being over, we turned into our respective bunks. I didn't feel altogether
comfortable, not knowing what the men might do to us.  For some time I lay awake, for I wanted
to be on the watch, lest any trick should be attempted, but at length dropped off to sleep.
As we were in harbour, only an anchor watch was kept, and I was allowed to have my night's
rest out, from which I rose fresh and ready for anything some time before daybreak.  Mark,
who had gone aft to call the gentlemen, returned with an order for me to get ready to go in
the boat. Sufficient provisions for the party were put into the boat; and the gentlemen, taking
their rifles and pistols with them, and with their swords at their sides, we shoved off, the
boat being partly laden with empty water-casks.  As there was not room for Mark and me forward,
we sat aft with the gentlemen, when Mr Fraser talked in a friendly way to Mark and me.  I saw
the men eyeing us savagely at this; and I thought to myself at the moment, "Those villains
suspect that we have had something to do in putting the gentlemen on their guard."  I answered
Mr Fraser, however, and he went on talking to me.  We landed not far from where the casks were
to be filled with water.  The gentlemen then, taking their guns, divided the provisions between
themselves and us, and we set off towards the interior of the island, where we hoped to meet
with the wild cattle.  There was nothing attractive in its appearance.  Here and there were
low scrubby woods, and the country generally was covered with thick patches of tussack grass,
which, at a distance, gave it the appearance of being green and fertile.  Between the patches,
the soil was dry and sandy, so that it cost us much fatigue to make our way over it.

We had seen plenty of wild cattle, but the gentlemen had not yet succeeded in killing any.
They winded us on all occasions on our approach, and scampered off beyond the limit of rifle
range.  At last the gentlemen agreed to separate by going in small parties, and thus hoped
to get nearer to the creatures.  Mr Fraser invited Mark to go with him, and Mr McTavish took
me; the other two gentlemen went together.  Before starting they deposited their provisions
inside of a hollow in a high bank, which, from its position, was easily to be found, and they
agreed to return to dinner.  If any one of the party killed an animal, he was to summon the
rest to carry the meat.  The object of the gentlemen was to kill as many animals as they could;
for, as the weather was cool, it was hoped that the meat would last until we were well round
Cape Horn.  The island was of good size, but still there did not appear to be much risk of
our losing our way.  Mr Fraser, who was the most active of the party, said that he should go
to the further end of the island and work his way back; that he was determined to kill some
birds, if he couldn't knock over a cow.

"Remember," whispered Mark to me, "that I shall slip away; and you do the same, and come and
join me."

To this I agreed.  Mr McTavish and I went away to the right.  We had been looking out for cattle
for some time when we heard two shots, and from the top of a hill we saw the two other gentlemen,
standing by a couple of cattle they had shot.

"Come, Dick," said Mr McTavish; "though we cannot boast of killing a beast ourselves, we must
go and help them."

I thought that this would be a good opportunity to escape, and while he went down one side
of the hill I proposed running down the other.  I was just going when he caught sight of me.

"Hillo, youngster, where are you going to?" he cried out; and he came after me evidently with
no intention of letting me escape.  On getting up with me, he inquired, "What made you try
to run off?  Come, tell me as we go along."  He spoke very kindly.

At last I confessed that I had determined to run away from the ship in consequence of the ill-treatment
I had received.

"You would have been starved to death in the midst of plenty," he said in a kind tone.  "Had
the island been fertile, and you could have supported yourself, I, for one, would never have
hindered you, for I have observed the way the officers and men behave to you.  But for the
future I think we can prevent that.  I have a notion that we owe our lives to you and your
messmate, and we're grateful to you for it; so come along, and don't again attempt to run away."

He spoke so kindly that at last I promised to follow his advice, hoping that Mr Fraser would
also have prevented Mark from hiding himself, and would induce him to come back likewise. 
The gentlemen fired several shots to attract Mr Fraser's attention, but none were heard in
return. They, in the meantime, cut up the animals and loaded themselves with as much as they
could stagger under.  The rest they covered up closely with the hides so as to keep the flies
off, proposing to send some of the men for it.  With our loads we returned to the place where
we had left our dinner.  As we were all very hungry we didn't wait for Mr Fraser, but set to
at once, expecting that he and Mark would appear before we had finished.  We waited, however,
for some time, the gentlemen lighting their pipes to enjoy a smoke.

"I'm afraid that young companion of yours has bolted, and that Fraser is delayed by looking
for him," observed Mr McTavish. Might I but confess the name of my Mistress without incurring your
resentment!'

She interrupted me.

'Suppose, I were to spare you that confession? Suppose I were to acknowledge that the object of
your desires is not unknown to me? Suppose I were to say that She returns your affection, and
laments not less sincerely than yourself the unhappy vows which separate her from you?'

'Ah! Donna Rodolpha!' I exclaimed, throwing myself upon my knees before her, and pressing her
hand to my lips, 'You have discovered my secret! What is your decision? Must I despair, or may
I reckon upon your favour?'

She withdrew not the hand which I held;
But She turned from me, and covered her face with the other.

'How can I refuse it you?' She replied; 'Ah! Don Alphonso, I have long perceived to whom your attentions
were directed, but till now I perceived not the impression which they made upon my heart.

At length I can no longer hide my weakness either from myself or from you. I yield to the violence
of my passion, and own that I adore you! For three long months I stifled my desires; But grown
stronger by resistance, I submit to their impetuosity.

Pride, fear, and honour, respect for myself, and my engagements to the Baron, all are vanquished.
I sacrifice them to my love for you, and it still seems to me that I pay too mean a price for
your possession.'

She paused for an answer.--Judge, my Lorenzo, what must have been my confusion at this discovery.
I at once saw all the magnitude of this obstacle, which I had raised
myself to my happiness.

The Baroness had placed those attentions to her own account, which I had merely paid her for
the sake of Agnes: And the strength of her expressions, the looks
which accompanied them, and my knowledge of her revengeful disposition
made me tremble for myself and my Beloved.

I was silent for some minutes. I knew not how to reply to her declaration: I could only resolve
to clear up the mistake without delay, and for the present to conceal from her knowledge the name
of my Mistress.

No sooner had She avowed her passion than the transports which before were evident in my features
gave place to consternation and constraint. I dropped her hand, and rose from my knees. The
change in my countenance did not escape her observation.

'What means this silence?' said She in a trembling voice; 'Where is
that joy which you led me to expect?'

'Forgive me, Segnora,' I answered,
'if what necessity forces from me should seem harsh and ungrateful:
To encourage you in an error, which, however it may flatter myself,
must prove to you the source of disappointment, would make me appear
criminal in every eye.

Honour obliges me to inform you that you have mistaken for the solicitude of Love what was only
the attention of Friendship.

The latter sentiment is that which I wished to excite in your bosom:
To entertain a warmer, respect for you forbids me, and gratitude for
the Baron's generous treatment.

Perhaps these reasons would not be sufficient to shield me from your attractions, were it not that
my affections are already bestowed upon another.

You have charms, Segnora, which might captivate the most insensible; No heart unoccupied could
resist them.

Happy is it for me that mine is no longer in my possession; or I
should have to reproach myself for ever with having violated the Laws
of Hospitality.

Recollect yourself, noble Lady; Recollect what is owed by you to
honour, by me to the Baron, and replace by esteem and friendship those
sentiments which I never can return.'

The Baroness turned pale at
this unexpected and positive declaration: She doubted whether She
slept or woke.

At length recovering from her surprise, consternation gave place
to rage, and the blood rushed back into her cheeks with violence.

'Villain!' She cried; 'Monster of deceit!

Thus is the avowal of my love received? Is it thus that.... But no, no! It cannot, it shall
not be!

Alphonso, behold me at your feet! Be witness of my despair! Look with pity on a Woman who loves
you with sincere affection! She who possesses your heart, how has She merited such a treasure?
What sacrifice has She made to you?

What raises her above Rodolpha?'

I endeavoured to lift her from her Knees.

'For God's sake, Segnora, restrain these transports: They disgrace
yourself and me.

Your exclamations may be heard, and your secret divulged to your Attendants. I see that my
presence only irritates you: permit me to retire.'

I prepared to quit the apartment: The Baroness caught me suddenly
by the arm.

'And who is this happy Rival?' said She in a menacing tone; 'I will know her name, and WHEN I
know it.... ! She is someone in my power; You entreated my favour, my protection! Let me but find
her, let me but know who dares to rob me of your heart, and She shall suffer every torment which
jealousy and disappointment can inflict!

Who is She? Answer me this moment. Hope not to conceal her from my vengeance! Spies shall be
set over you; every step, every look shall be watched; Your eyes
will discover my Rival; I shall know her, and when She is found, tremble,
Alphonso for her and for yourself!'

As She uttered these last words
her fury mounted to such a pitch as to stop her powers of respiration.

She panted, groaned, and at length fainted away.

As She was falling I caught her in my arms, and placed her upon a Sopha. Then hastening to
the door, I summoned her Women to her assistance; I committed her
to their care, and seized the opportunity of escaping.

Agitated and confused beyond expression I bent my steps towards the Garden. The benignity with
which the Baroness had listened to me at first raised my hopes to the highest pitch: I imagined
her to have perceived my attachment for her Niece, and to approve of it. Extreme was my disappointment
at understanding the true purport of her discourse.

I knew not what course to take: The superstition of the Parents of Agnes, aided by her Aunt's
unfortunate passion, seemed to oppose such obstacles to our union as were almost insurmountable.

As
I past by a low parlour, whose windows looked into the Garden, through the door which stood half
open I observed Agnes seated at a Table. She was occupied in drawing, and several unfinished
sketches were scattered round her. I entered, still undetermined whether I should acquaint
her with the declaration of the Baroness.

'Oh! is it only you?' said She, raising her head; 'You are no Stranger, and I shall continue my
occupation without ceremony.

Take a Chair, and seat yourself by me.'

I obeyed, and placed myself
near the Table.

  Unconscious what I was doing, and totally occupied by the scene which
  had just passed, I took up some of the drawings, and cast my eye over
  them. One of the subjects struck me from its singularity. It represented
  the great Hall of the Castle of Lindenberg. A door conducting to a
  narrow staircase stood half open. In the foreground appeared a Groupe
  of figures, placed in the most grotesque attitudes; Terror was
  expressed upon every countenance.
  
  Here was One upon his knees with his eyes cast up to heaven, and praying
  most devoutly; There Another was creeping away upon all fours. Some
  hid their faces in their cloaks or the laps of their Companions; Some
  had concealed themselves beneath a Table, on which the remnants
  of a feast were visible; While Others with gaping mouths and eyes
wide-stretched pointed to a Figure, supposed to have created this
disturbance.

It represented a Female of more than human stature, clothed in the habit of some religious order.
Her face was veiled; On her arm hung a chaplet of beads; Her dress was in several places stained
with the blood which trickled from a wound upon her bosom. In one hand She held a Lamp, in
the other a large Knife, and She seemed advancing towards the iron gates of the Hall.

'What does this mean, Agnes?' said I; 'Is this some invention of your
own?'

She cast her eye upon the drawing.

'Oh! no,' She replied; ''Tis the invention of much wiser heads than mine. But can you possibly have
lived at Lindenberg for three whole Months without hearing of the
Bleeding Nun?'

'You are the first, who ever mentioned the name to me.

Pray, who may the Lady be?'

'That is more than I can pretend to tell you. All my knowledge of her History comes from an old
tradition in this family, which has been handed down from Father
to Son, and is firmly credited throughout the Baron's domains.

Nay, the Baron believes it himself; and as for my Aunt who has a natural turn for the marvellous,
She would sooner doubt the veracity of the Bible, than of the Bleeding
Nun.

Shall I tell you this History?'

I answered that She would oblige me much by relating it: She resumed her drawing, and then proceeded
as follows in a tone of burlesqued gravity.

'It is surprising that in all the Chronicles of past times, this remarkable Personage is never
once mentioned. Fain would I recount to you her life; But unluckily till after her death She
was never known to have existed. Then first did She think it necessary to make some noise in the
world, and with that intention She made bold to seize upon the Castle of Lindenberg. Having a
good taste, She took up her abode in the best room of the House:
and once established there, She began to amuse herself by knocking
about the tables and chairs in the middle of the night.

Perhaps She was a bad Sleeper, but this I have never been able to
ascertain.

According to the tradition, this entertainment commenced about a Century ago. It was accompanied
with shrieking, howling, groaning, swearing, and many other agreeable noises of the same kind.
But though one particular room was more especially honoured with her visits, She did not entirely
confine herself to it. She occasionally ventured into the old Galleries, paced up and down
the spacious Halls, or sometimes stopping at the doors of the Chambers, She wept and wailed
there to the universal terror of the Inhabitants.

In these nocturnal excursions She was seen by different People, who all describe her appearance
as you behold it here, traced by the hand of her unworthy Historian.'

The singularity of this account insensibly engaged my attention.

'Did She never speak to those who met her?' said I.

'Not She.

The specimens indeed, which She gave nightly of her talents for conversation,
were by no means inviting.

Sometimes the Castle rung with oaths and execrations: A Moment after She repeated her Paternoster:
Now She howled out the most horrible blasphemies, and then chaunted De Profundis, as orderly as
if still in the Choir. In short She seemed a mighty capricious Being: But whether She prayed
or cursed, whether She was impious or devout, She always contrived to terrify her Auditors out
of their senses. The Castle became scarcely habitable; and its Lord was so frightened by these
midnight Revels, that one fine morning He was found dead in his bed. This success seemed to please
the Nun mightily, for now She made more noise than ever.

But the next Baron proved too cunning for her. He made his appearance with a celebrated Exorciser
in his hand, who feared not to shut himself up for a night in the
haunted Chamber.

There it seems that He had an hard battle with the Ghost, before She would promise to be quiet.
She was obstinate, but He was more so, and at length She consented
to let the Inhabitants of the Castle take a good night's rest.

For some time after no news was heard of her. But at the end of five years the Exorciser died,
and then the Nun ventured to peep abroad again. However, She was now grown much more tractable
and well-behaved. She walked about in silence, and never made her appearance above once in
five years. This custom, if you will believe the Baron, She still continues. He is fully persuaded,
that on the fifth of May of every fifth year, as soon as the Clock
strikes One, the Door of the haunted Chamber opens.

(Observe, that this room has been shut up for near a Century.) Then out walks the Ghostly Nun
with her Lamp and dagger: She descends the staircase of the Eastern Tower; and crosses the great
Hall! On that night the Porter always leaves the Gates of the Castle open, out of respect to
the Apparition: Not that this is thought by any means necessary, since She could easily whip through
the Keyhole if She chose it; But merely out of politeness, and to prevent her from making
her exit in a way so derogatory to the dignity of her Ghost-ship.'

'And whither does She go on quitting the Castle?'

'To Heaven, I hope; But if She does, the place certainly is not to her taste, for She always
returns after an hour's absence.

The Lady then retires to her chamber, and is quiet for another five
years.'

'And you believe this, Agnes?'

'How can you ask such a question?

No, no, Alphonso! I have too much reason to lament superstition's influence to be its Victim myself.
However I must not avow my incredulity to the Baroness: She entertains
not a doubt of the truth of this History.

As to Dame Cunegonda, my Governess, She protests that fifteen years ago She saw the Spectre
with her own eyes.

She related to me one evening how She and several other Domestics had been terrified while
at Supper by the appearance of the Bleeding Nun, as the Ghost is called in the Castle: 'Tis
from her account that I drew this sketch, and you may be certain
that Cunegonda was not omitted.

There She is! I shall never forget what a passion She was in, and how ugly She looked while
She scolded me for having made her picture so like herself!'

Here
She pointed to a burlesque figure of an old Woman in an attitude of
terror.

In spite of the melancholy which oppressed me, I could not help smiling at the playful imagination
of Agnes: She had perfectly preserved Dame Cunegonda's resemblance,
but had so much exaggerated every fault, and rendered every feature
so irresistibly laughable, that I could easily conceive the Duenna's
anger.

'The figure is admirable, my dear Agnes! I knew not that you possessed such talents for the
ridiculous.'

'Stay a moment,' She replied; 'I will show you a figure still more ridiculous than Dame Cunegonda's.
If it pleases you, you may dispose of it as seems best to yourself.'

She rose, and went to a Cabinet at some little distance. Unlocking a drawer, She took out a small
case, which She opened, and presented to me.

'Do you know the resemblance?' said She smiling.

It was her own.

Transported at the gift, I pressed the portrait to my lips with passion: I threw myself at her
feet, and declared my gratitude in the warmest and most affectionate terms. She listened to me
with complaisance, and assured me that She shared my sentiments: When suddenly She uttered a
loud shriek, disengaged the hand which I held, and flew from the room by a door which opened to
the Garden. Amazed at this abrupt departure, I rose hastily from my knees. I beheld with confusion
the Baroness standing near me glowing with jealousy, and almost choaked with rage. On recovering
from her swoon, She had tortured her imagination to discover her concealed Rival. No one appeared
to deserve her suspicions more than Agnes. She immediately hastened to find her Niece, tax her
with encouraging my addresses, and assure herself whether her conjectures were well-grounded.
Unfortunately She had already seen enough to need no other confirmation. She arrived at the
door of the room at the precise moment, when Agnes gave me her Portrait. She heard me profess an everlasting
attachment to her Rival, and saw me kneeling at her feet. She advanced to separate us; We
were too much occupied by each other to perceive her approach, and were not aware of it, till
Agnes beheld her standing by my side.

Rage on the part of Donna Rodolpha, embarrassment on mine, for some
time kept us both silent.

The Lady recovered herself first.

'My suspicions then were just,' said She; 'The Coquetry of my Niece has triumphed, and 'tis
to her that I am sacrificed. In one respect however I am fortunate: I shall not be the only one
who laments a disappointed passion. You too shall know, what it is to love without hope! I daily
expect orders for restoring Agnes to her Parents. Immediately upon her arrival in Spain, She will
take the veil, and place an insuperable barrier to your union. You may spare your supplications.'
She continued, perceiving me on the point of speaking; 'My resolution is fixed and immoveable.
Your Mistress shall remain a close Prisoner in her chamber till She exchanges this Castle for the
Cloister. Solitude will perhaps recall her to a sense of her duty: But to prevent your opposing
that wished event, I must inform you, Don Alphonso, that your presence here is no longer agreeable
either to the Baron or Myself. It was not to talk nonsense to my Niece that your Relations sent
you to Germany: Your business was to travel, and I should be sorry to impede any longer so excellent
a design. Farewell, Segnor; Remember, that tomorrow morning we meet for the last time.'

Having said this, She darted upon me a look of pride, contempt, and malice, and quitted the
apartment. I also retired to mine, and consumed the night in planning the means of rescuing Agnes
from the power of her tyrannical Aunt.

After the positive declaration of its Mistress, it was impossible for me to make a longer stay
at the Castle of Lindenberg. Accordingly I the next day announced my immediate departure. The
Baron declared that it gave him sincere pain; and He expressed himself in my favour so warmly,
that I endeavoured to win him over to my interest. Scarcely had I mentioned the name of Agnes
when He stopped me short, and said, that it was totally out of his power to interfere in the
business. I saw that it was in vain to argue; The Baroness governed her Husband with despotic
sway, and I easily perceived that She had prejudiced him against the match. Agnes did not
appear: I entreated permission to take leave of her, but my prayer was rejected. I was obliged
to depart without seeing her.

At quitting him the Baron shook my hand affectionately, and assured me that as soon as his
Niece was gone, I might consider his House as my own.

'Farewell, Don Alphonso!' said the Baroness, and stretched out her
hand to me.

I took it, and offered to carry it to my lips. She prevented
me.

Her Husband was at the other end of the room, and out of hearing.

'Take
care of yourself,' She continued; 'My love is become hatred, and my
wounded pride shall not be unatoned. Go where you will, my vengeance
shall follow you!'

She accompanied these words with a look sufficient
to make me tremble. I answered not, but hastened to quit the Castle.

As
my Chaise drove out of the Court, I looked up to the windows of your
Sister's chamber. Nobody was to be seen there: I threw myself back
despondent in my Carriage. I was attended by no other servants than
a Frenchman whom I had hired at Strasbourg in Stephano's room, and
my little Page whom I before mentioned to you. The fidelity, intelligence,
and good temper of Theodore had already made him dear to me; But He
now prepared to lay an obligation on me, which made me look upon him
as a Guardian Genius. Scarcely had we proceeded half a mile from the
Castle, when He rode up to the Chaise-door.

'Take courage, Segnor!'
said He in Spanish, which He had already learnt to speak with fluency
and correctness. 'While you were with the Baron, I watched the moment
when Dame Cunegonda was below stairs, and mounted into the chamber
over that of Donna Agnes. I sang as loud as I could a little German
air well-known to her, hoping that She would recollect my voice. I
was not disappointed, for I soon heard her window open. I hastened
to let down a string with which I had provided myself: Upon hearing
the casement closed again, I drew up the string, and fastened to it
I found this scrap of paper.'

He then presented me with a small note
addressed to me. I opened it with impatience: It contained the following
words written in pencil:

Conceal yourself for the next fortnight
in some neighbouring Village. My Aunt will believe you to have quitted
Lindenberg, and I shall be restored to liberty. I will be in the West
Pavilion at twelve on the night of the thirtieth. Fail not to be there,
and we shall have an opportunity of concerting our future plans. Adieu.
Agnes.

At perusing these lines my transports exceeded all bounds;
Neither did I set any to the expressions of gratitude which I heaped
upon Theodore.  The appearance of the country was picturesque in the extreme, though it
didn't tempt me to make it my residence for the remainder of my life; and then again, I considered
that there must be other parts of a more gentle character where Robinson Crusoe must have resided.
I had been often looking about, considering how I might accomplish my object, when Mr McTavish
said, "I know what you are thinking about, Cheveley, but for your own sake I do not intend
you to succeed; and even if it were otherwise, I am bound to see you safe on board the boat.
So come along. You mustn't play me any trick."

"Well, I did think that I should like to stop here and live as Robinson Crusoe did.  Perhaps
I might give an account of my adventures when I got home," I answered.

"The chances are that you would be starved, or break your neck, or die of some disease, and
never get home; so I intend to keep an eye on you, my laddie," said my friend, in a good-natured
tone.  "Besides this, my friends and I propose to induce Captain Longfleet to set you at liberty
when we reach the Columbia River, and you can either wait at the fort till you can hear from
your father, making yourself useful there as a clerk, or you can turn fur-hunter, and lead
a life which I believe would be to your taste."

"I'm very much obliged to you, sir," I said, "and accept your offer, and will not attempt to
run away."

After a tiring excursion we got back to the boats just as they were about to shove off.  We
after this touched at Massafuero, an island mountain rising abruptly from the sea, surrounded
by a narrow slip of beach.  Here we obtained a vast quantity of fish and a few goats.  The
abundance of food contributed much to tranquillise the minds of the crew, and also, I suspect,
to prevent them from carrying their plans into execution.  One day when we were becalmed, several
of the crew who could swim jumped overboard to take a bathe, and as I was a good swimmer I
did the same, and got farther than the rest from the ship.  While I was sporting about, I heard
the dreadful cry of "Shark, shark!"  The rest of the men quickly making for the side, clambered
on board.  I was swimming towards the ship, when I saw a dark fin rising between her and me.
I knew what it indicated, for I had seen several sharks before.  To gain the ship without encountering
the monster seemed impossible.  I therefore, instead of swimming on, stopped and trod water,
beating the surface with my hands, and shouting out.  I saw some of the men leaning over the
sides with ropes.  Presently there was a shout.  One of the men had lowered a rope with a bowling
knot into the water, when the shark in its course round the ship ran its head and upper fin
between it.  At this moment it was secured to the cathead, and before the brute could get free
it was hoisted on deck.  I now darted forward, and seizing a rope which hung over the side
hauled myself up.  As I saw the monster floundering on deck, I was thankful that he had not
caught me in his jaws.

"You have had a narrow escape, my laddie," observed Mr McTavish.  "It will be a lesson to you
not to swim about in these latitudes."

Not many other incidents worth relating occurred for some time.

We touched at Valparaiso, where we discharged some of our cargo, and afterwards at Callao,
where we got rid of a still larger quantity.  We also put into Paita farther north.  As goods
brought in English vessels were subject to a very high duty, or were altogether prohibited,
they were smuggled on shore.  Had I been so disposed I might on two or three occasions have
made good my escape, but I was relying on the promise of Mr McTavish.  From the coast of Peru
we steered to the Sandwich Islands, of which I should like to give a description.  We there
took on board three of the natives, to supply the place of the men who had been lost.  The
king and a brace of queens, besides several chiefs and a number of white men, visited the ship.
The king and his brown consorts came in a large double canoe, formed by lashing two canoes
together separated by bars.  Each canoe was paddled by twenty or thirty men.  On the bars was
raised a kind of seat, on which the ladies reposed.

Raised considerably higher than his consorts was a sort of throne placed on the top of a large
arm-chest full of muskets, and on this his Sandwich Island Majesty was seated in regal state.
In front of him stood a dark-skinned native, carrying a handsome silver hanger in imitation
of the sword-bearers of European monarchs; behind the king sat a boy holding a basin of dark-brown
wood, in which his Majesty ever and anon spat abundantly.  Instead of a crown the king's head
was covered by an old beaver hat.  His coat was of coarse woven cloth of ancient cut, with
large metal buttons.  His waistcoat was of brown velvet, which had once been black, while a
pair of short, tight, and well-worn velveteen pantaloons, worsted stockings, and thick-soled
shoes covered his lower extremities.  His shirt and cravat had been once probably white, but
had attained the hue of his own swarthy skin.

On coming on deck he shook hands with every one he met between the gangway and cabin, assuring
them of his affection.  I had to attend at the dinner, to which the royal party were invited.
The ladies, however, had to sit aside, the king taking his place at the table at the right
hand of the captain, while the minister, who carried his saliva bowl, squatted behind him.
He ate voraciously, and washed down the solids with numerous glasses of Madeira.  He drank
the health of each person present, finishing well-nigh three decanters of his favourite wine.
As soon as the king, the captain, passengers, and first mate had risen, the ladies were allowed
to approach their dinner, which had been cooked on shore, and was now placed on the table.
It consisted of a couple of roast dogs, several dishes of small fish, and a white mixture called
pooah, of the consistency of flummery.

The steward and I could scarcely keep our countenances as we saw them dipping the two forefingers
of the right hand into the pooah, and after turning them round in the mixture until they were
covered with three or four coats, by a dexterous twist rapidly transfer the food to their open
mouths, when, with one smack of their lips, their fingers were cleared.

Their dress consisted of a cloth worn over the shoulders--a long piece of cloth wrapped in
several folds--round the waist and reaching to their knees.

The king spent a part of the afternoon in going over the ship, and measuring her from stem
to stern, while the ladies played draughts and beat their antagonists hollow.  There were a
number of English and other white men settled on the island.  Two acted as the king's chief
counsellors, and took an active part in all the affairs of the country, many of them having
become very rich.

I may here remark, that the daughter and granddaughter of one of these gentlemen afterwards
became Queen of the Sandwich Islands.  The country, as far as I could see, appeared to be highly
cultivated.  The people in their habits and customs presented a curious mixture of savagery
and civilisation.

As I gazed on the shore on which I was not permitted to set foot, I considered whether I could
not manage to get away and offer my services to the king, as I was better educated than most
of those about him.  I thought that I should probably rise to the highest dignities of the
State; perhaps become his prime minister, his commander-in-chief, or admiral of his fleet,
but I found that I was too strictly watched by old Growles and the boatswain to accomplish
my object.  Had Mark been with me, I had little doubt but that we should have managed to escape.
I at last asked Mr McTavish if he would take me on shore.

"No, no, my laddie, I know what is running in your mind," he said.  "The natives would be too
ready to assist, and I might find it difficult to prevent your being carried off and stowed
away till the ship sails.  You may fancy that your life would be a very pleasant one, but I
know what it is to live among savages.  You would, in course of time, have a brown wife given
to you, and, unwilling to leave her, you would become a banished man from home and country.
Follow the plan I at first proposed.  If you will remain with us you will in the course of
a few years make your fortune, and be able to return home and enjoy it."

I felt that the advice given was sound, and I promised Mr McTavish not to try and run away
while we remained at the Sandwich Islands.  He said that the next day he would take me on shore
if the captain would give me leave.  Shortly after, however, we went out of harbour.  We had
a quick passage to the entrance of the Columbia River.  A dangerous bar runs across the mouth
of it, so that the captain was unwilling to enter until we had a fair wind and a favourable
tide.  Boats were sent ahead to sound.  While thus engaged a canoe, followed by a barge, were
seen coming off.  The canoe, which was paddled by six naked savages, and steered by an old
Indian chief, was soon alongside, but as they could not understand a word we said we could
gain no information till the barge arrived, when our passengers greeted a number of their friends
who had come off in her.  The ship now entered the river, and came to an anchor off a fort
which had been erected by the fur-traders.  I never felt more happy in my life, believing that
my sufferings were over, and that I should regain my liberty.  I hoped that Mr McTavish and
his friends would at once go on shore and take me with them; but as it was late in the day,
and they heard that the accommodation in the fort was limited, they accepted the captain's
pressing invitation to remain with their friends on board till next morning.  A more sumptuous
repast than I had yet seen was prepared.  The captain produced his best wine in abundance.
The steward and I had to wait at table.  The captain, when giving me my orders, spoke in a
far more conciliatory tone than he had ever done before.  "I suppose he wishes to make amends
to me for his past conduct, and to show my friends that he has no ill-will towards me," I thought.
The wine flowed freely, and hilarity and good-humour prevailed for some time, till a remark
was made by one of the officers of the ship which offended a gentleman from the shore.  His
Highland blood being up he hove a glass of wine in the face of the mate, telling him that the
bottle should follow if he didn't apologise.  This the mate did, in a somewhat humble fashion,
at the request of the captain, and order was restored.  The wine continued to flow freely;
songs were sung and speeches made, and every one appeared to be talking at once at the top
of their voices.  The captain at last ordered me to go on deck with a message to the second
mate, who was the officer of the watch, and to come back and let him know how the ship was
riding.  He said this in a loud voice so that every one might hear.

I could not find the mate aft, so, supposing that he had gone forward to examine the cable,
I was making my way in that direction when suddenly I found myself seized.  A cloth was shoved
into my mouth, and another bound over my eyes, so that I was unable to see or cry out, and
I was carried down the main hatchway in the strong arms of a man whose voice I had been unable
to recognise, though I fancied that he was either Growles or the boatswain.  In vain I struggled
to get free.  On reaching, as I supposed, the spar-deck, another man bound my arms and my legs,
and I was then carried still farther down into the hold, when I was shoved into some place
or other, a door was shut and locked on me, and I found myself alone.  I was very nearly suffocated
with the cloth in my mouth, but I managed after much exertion to work it out.  Having done
this, I was inclined to shout; but I feared that if I did so old Growles would return and put
it back, and perhaps ill-treat me into the bargain.  I therefore thought it wiser to remain
silent, and to try and get the handkerchief off my eyes.  I lay quiet for some time to recover
my breath.  Though I could not move to feel about, I was convinced, by the closeness of the
atmosphere, that I was in a small place--probably in a compartment of the boatswain's store-room.
My next object was to get the handkerchief off my eyes, to ascertain if any light penetrated
my place of confinement.  It was a difficult matter to do this without hurting myself, but
I tried, by turning over and rubbing the knot at the back of my head against the boards on
which I lay, to work it upwards, though at the expense of making a sore place, so tightly was
it secured. At last I succeeded in getting it off.  All was dark, as I had expected.  The next
task I undertook was to free my arms.  This was a far more difficult undertaking.  I made up
my mind to bite through the ropes if I could get my teeth into them; but that, after many attempts,
I found to be impossible.  I avoided, as much as I could, drawing them tighter round my wrists.
I endeavoured, by making one of my hands as small as I could, to draw it out of the knot, but
again and again I was obliged to desist.  Still I recollected how I had before escaped from
the hold, as well as from the mill, and I repeated to myself, "Fortune favours the persevering."

I had been on foot for a number of hours; and, wearied by the exertions I had lately made,
I at last began to feel very sleepy, and shortly dropped off into an uncomfortable slumber.
I was awakened by a gruff voice, which I recognised as that of the boatswain.

"Gregory, I do believe the young rascal is dead," he said.

"It may save a world of trouble if he is," answered old Growles; "for those passengers are
making a precious fuss about him.  If he was to get ashore, he'd be telling tales.  We can
say he died in his sleep, and let them have his body, which will show how it happened."

"Not if he's black in the face.  Here, hand the lantern, and let's have a look."

All this time I was afraid to open my eyes, or even to breathe; and I thought that, if I could
sham being dead, they would carry me on deck, and I would then soon show them the contrary.
I guessed that I must have rolled over with my face away from the door, so that they couldn't
see it.  Presently I felt a hand placed on my shoulder to draw me round. I let them move me
as they liked, and I knew, from the light which I saw through my eyelids, that the rays of
a lantern were cast on me.  I flattered myself that I was succeeding very well, till I heard
the boatswain remark--

"People don't die with their eyes shut."

Then a hand was placed on my face, and old Growles observed--

"The young chap's as alive as I am; he's quite warm.  Rouse up, Dick, you rascal!  But take
care you don't sing out, or it'll be the worse for you."

Still I endeavoured to make them believe I was really dead.  It was a satisfaction to find
that they were casting off the lashings from my arms and legs; but when one of them lifted
up my arm I let it fall down again, like that of a dead person.  This seemed to puzzle them,
and old Growles gave me a cruel pinch on the arm.  Though I didn't cry out, I had the greatest
difficulty not to flinch.  He then bent back one of my fingers.  It was a wonder he didn't
break it.  Not able to endure the pain, I cried out.

"I thought so," he said, with a low laugh.  "You can't play your tricks off on us, youngster,"
said the boatswain, "and you'll gain nothing by it."

I said nothing, but looked up at him as if I had just awakened out of a sleep or a trance.

"Now mind you," he continued, "if you shout out or make any noise, we'll gag you and leave
you to starve; but if you keep quiet you shall have some food, and you won't be worse off than
when you were shut up before in the hold."

"What are you going to do with me?"  I asked.

"That's not for you to know," answered the boatswain.  "We're not going to kill you, for fear
you should haunt the ship, not for any love to you.  We could have made away with you long
ago, if we had thought fit. We're not going to let you go ashore, and let you give a bad name
to the ship and us.  We know who 'peached to the captain, and you may think yourself fortunate
that you were not dropped overboard next night.  Will you promise to keep quiet?"

I knew that I was in the hands of unscrupulous ruffians, whose fears alone prevented them from
doing away with me; so there was no use holding out.  I therefore said that I would make no
noise if they would unlash my arms and legs and bring me some food.  I found that I was in
the place I had supposed--a big locker which had been cleaned out to make room for me.  It
smelt horribly of tar and rancid grease, and coils of small rope and balls of twine, mats,
cans, pots, and brushes, up in the corners, showed me what was usually stowed in it.

"Shall we trust the young rascal?" asked the boatswain of his companion.

"He daren't break his word," answered Growles; "he knows what he'll get if he does."

Thereupon they unlashed my arms and legs.  I considered for a moment whether I could spring
past them and gain the deck.  Perhaps they thought I might make the attempt; and before I had
time to do more than think of it, they had shut the door and locked me in.  I knew, from the
quietness of the ship, that she was still at anchor, and I hoped that my friends might make
inquiries about me that might lead to my discovery; and this idea kept me up.  As I lay perfectly
still I could hear the crew hoisting the remainder of the cargo out of the hold.  The noise
they made would have drowned my voice, even had I ventured to cry out. I guessed, also, that
most of them knew of my imprisonment, and would not assist me.  My only solace was the thought
that Mr McTavish, who had been so friendly to me, would insist on searching the ship, and then
I thought it probable a story would be told of my having fallen overboard.  They would very
likely say that I had got drunk with their wine, and been seen rolling along the deck, or something
of that sort.

I did not, indeed, altogether despair of making my escape.  As I lay in the ill-odorous locker
I thought and thought of all sorts of plans.  In spite of the smells I was getting hungry,
and I wished that the boatswain or Growles would return with the food they had promised.  If
only one came I made up my mind to seize him by the throat, put my fingers into his eyes, spring
up past him, and try to gain the deck.  It would be hazardous in the extreme; for, if he caught
me, he would not let me go, and in the struggle I should certainly be overcome, when he would
not fail to punish me severely--perhaps to deprive me of life. Still, anything was better than
to have again to endure the sufferings I had gone through in the hold.  I nerved myself up
for the undertaking I proposed.  All was again silent in the hold.  The crew had, I concluded,
knocked off work; whether to go to dinner or for the day I could not calculate.  After some
time I heard the sound as of some one moving near me, the door opened, and the light of a lantern
fell on my face.  There were two heads instead of one.  It would be madness to attempt to spring
past them, so I lay quiet.

"Here's the food I promised you," said the voice of old Growles.  "Eat it and be thankful;
it's more than you deserve."

It consisted of biscuit and meat, and a cooked root of some sort.  He placed also a can of
water by my side.

"Don't capsize it; for you'll get no more," he said, drawing my attention to it.

Wishing to soothe him and throw him off his guard, I answered and thanked him.  Before I could
finish the sentence he had shut to the door and left me to discuss my meal in the dark.  I
heard him and his companion go away.  The air which had come in had revived my appetite, and
I eagerly ate up the provisions and drank the water, supposing that I should have more in due
time.  As soon as I had finished my meal I tried to see if I could force open the door, but
I could discover no tool of any description.  I made up my mind therefore to wait patiently
till the opportunity offered of getting out.  Perhaps the next time old Growles or the boatswain
would come alone, or they might send some one else; or, should my friends be searching the
ship, I might make them hear me.  While these thoughts were passing through my mind I again
fell asleep.

It might be found wearisome were I to describe my thoughts and sensations, my hopes and fears,
while I was awake, or to say how often I slept.  Day after day passed.  Old Growles and the
boatswain invariably came together; they seemed to divine that should only one come I might
in my desperation attempt to pass him.

As far as I could judge the crew were now taking cargo on board, as I could hear the bales
descending into the hold.  They consisted, I afterwards found, of skins and peltries.  How
much longer the ship would remain in harbour I could not tell, nor could I conjecture when
I was to be set free.  They would scarcely keep me a prisoner during the remainder of the voyage,
as, shut up, I could do nothing, but if I were at liberty I could make myself useful.  Drearily
the time passed away. Fear still prevented me from shouting out; for, from the position I was
in, I could certainly have made myself heard by the crew, although my voice would not have
reached to the cabin.  From the remarks that I had heard from the passengers, when we were
approaching the Columbia River, I guessed that, having loaded with furs, we should cross the
Pacific to China, where they would fetch a high price, and thence, as I knew beforehand, with
the produce of that country, we should proceed to Australia, where we should load with wood
for home.  If I were kept a prisoner for the whole period I should lose my health, if not my
life. How many days or nights I had been kept in confinement I could not calculate, when I
heard the sounds of heaving up the anchor; a trampling of feet, as if sail was being made.
Some time afterwards I was sensible of a movement in the ship, and presently she plunged into
a heavy sea, and I could hear much rushing of water against her sides.  Again she made a more
furious plunge, and I guessed that we were crossing the bar. I knew that I was right, as shortly
afterwards the ship glided on with a comparatively slight movement.  All hope of being rescued
by my friends was gone.  I knew that we must have crossed the bar while it was light, but I
was allowed to remain in prison for another night.  At last the door was opened, and old Growles
and the boatswain appeared.

"You may go on deck now, youngster," said old Growles; "but remember, as you value your life,
that you don't tell the captain or any one else who put you down here.  You played the stowaway
once, and you must say you did so again, 'cos you didn't want to go ashore and live among the
injins.  If he believes you or not, it doesn't much matter; only you stick to it, and, mind
yer, you'll come to a bad end if you don't."

I made no answer, for although I wished to get out of the locker and enjoy the fresh air once
more, I could not make up my mind to tell a falsehood, notwithstanding the threats of the old
ruffian.  Neither he nor the boatswain seemed to expect an answer.  Perhaps they thought it
mattered very little whether or not I promised to do as they ordered me, not believing that
I would keep my word if it suited my convenience to break it; for, without saying another word,
they bound my eyes, and one of them dragged me along among bales and other articles of cargo,
which I could feel as I passed by.

"Stay here," said the boatswain, "till it strikes four bells.  You may then find your way on
deck as you best can, and spin any yarn you like to account for yourself being there, only
mind you don't 'peach on us, or, as I said afore it'll be the worse for you."

As he spoke he took the bandage off my eyes, and I heard the men retiring.  I was still in
total darkness, but I had been so often accustomed to find my way about under such circumstances
that I was not very anxious on that account.  I thought it prudent, however, to remain seated
until I heard four bells strike, when on feeling about I was almost convinced that I was on
the spar-deck.  I could distinguish the tramp of feet overhead as if sail was being made, and
shortly afterwards, the hatchway being lifted up, daylight streamed down upon me.  Pining for
fresh air, and desperately hungry, I lost no time in making my way on deck.

There stood the captain and two mates.  The ship was under all sail, gliding rapidly before
a strong breeze over the ocean, while the blue outline of the land could dimly be seen astern.
I stood irresolute whether to go at once up to the captain and get the worst over, or to run
forward and ask the cook to give me something to eat.  I was about to follow the latter course,
when I heard the captain's voice shouting, "Halloa, youngster, where on earth do you come from?"

"That's more than I can exactly say, sir," I answered.

"Why, we thought you had gone overboard and been drowned, or had slipped ashore and been carried
off by the Indians," he continued; "Mr McTavish and the other gentlemen were making a great
ado about you.  You have been playing your old trick again.  For my part, I should have supposed
you would have been glad enough to get out of the ship, as I understood they wished to take
you with them."

"Please sir, I hope you'll pardon me for what has happened," I said, an idea at that moment
striking me.  "I want to become a sailor, and I'll promise to try and do my duty, and learn
to be one if you'll allow me."

The captain, from what I said, at once took it for granted that I had again acted the stowaway,
and I flattered myself that I had not spoken an untruth, while I had avoided saying anything
which would offend him. I observed that old Growles had come aft, and was then within earshot.
The captain seemed rather pleased than otherwise that I had not wished to leave the ship.

"Go forward," he said, "and let me see that you do your duty."

He was evidently in better humour than usual, having got a rich freight which he had not expected.
Touching my cap, I hurried to the caboose. Caesar rolled his eyes and opened his mouth with
astonishment when he saw me.

"Where you been all dis time, Dick?" he asked.

"That's more than I can tell you, Caesar.  Do in mercy give me some grub, for I'm well-nigh
starved," I answered.

He gave me part of a mess he had been cooking for himself.

"Dis curious ship," he said, as he remarked the ravenous way in which I devoured the food.
"I no ask questions, you no tell lies, dat is it. Oh you wise boy."

I suspected from this that Caesar had observed the visits of old Growles and the boatswain
to the hold, and shrewdly guessed that I had been a prisoner.  I could not understand, however,
how the captain didn't make some fuss about it, unless he also was cognisant of the fact; but
of that I was left in uncertainty.  I had expected from the way he had first treated me that
some change for the better would take place in my condition, but in this I was mistaken.  I
was at the beck and call of every one, having to do all the dirty work in the cabin, and being
knocked about and bullied by the men just as much as before.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

  My position does not improve--Another attempt at escape frustrated--
  Becalmed off Japan--Macao--A fresh cargo--Extension of the voyage--Not
  dead yet--I gain some important information as to the future fate
  awaiting me, and I determine to quit the ship--A carouse--My escape,
  and how I accomplished it--Alone on the ocean--I sight land--The rock
  and my landing-place--My search for food--I meet with an accident--I
  lose my boat.

I must pass rapidly over the voyage across the Pacific.  Whatever better feelings the captain
had at one time displayed towards me completely disappeared.  I was treated by him and the
officers and men as badly as ever.  My spirit was not broken, and perhaps I may at times have
shown too refractory a disposition to please them.  I was compelled, however, to submit to
and obey their orders, annoying and vexatious as they often were.  I did not show my feelings
so much by what I said as by my looks, and I often stopped to consider whether or no I would
do as I was told.

We fell in with a few ships--most of them whalers--the captains of which sometimes came on
board, and I had hoped that I might be able to get off in one of them.  I fancied that it would
be impossible to change for the worse, but I in vain watched for an opportunity.

One evening we were becalmed to the southward of Japan, not far off a South Sea whaler.  The
commander, who was an old acquaintance of Captain Longfleet, came aboard, and spent the evening
with him in the cabin.  I waited eagerly till it had become dark.  The lights of the other
ship could be seen in the distance, and I expected every instant that the captain would come
on deck ready to take his departure.  The boat's crew had come aboard, and were being entertained
by our men.  I thought if I could manage to slip down I might stow myself away under the foremost
thwart, and should not be discovered till I had reached the other ship. I would then tell my
story to the commander, who if he would not have compassion on me would probably not think
it worth while to send me back that night, and before the morning a breeze might spring up
and the ships be separated.

I waited concealed under the long-boat stowed amidships till I fancied that there was no one
near the side where the whale-boat lay.  I then crept out and got into the main chains.  I
was just about to lower myself down when a huge hand was placed on my shoulder, and I heard
a voice which I knew to be that of old Growles.

"Come inboard, you young rascal!" he said; "you're not going to get off as easily as you fancy.
It's lucky for you that you didn't get into the boat, for you would have been found to a certainty,
and handed over to our skipper, who would have knocked the life out of you."

"What's all this about?  How did you know I wanted to get into the boat?"  I asked, in a tone
of assumed astonishment.

"'Cos I've seen you watching ever since she came alongside," answered Growles; "so take that--and
that,"--and hauling me inboard, he bestowed several blows with the end of a rope on my back.

I ran forward to escape from him, and stowed myself away in my bunk, as it was my watch below.

We at last reached Macao, where our cargo of furs was discharged, and for which I believe a
very high price was obtained.  I had no wish, from what I had heard of the Chinese, to go and
live among them, and I therefore did not attempt to get on shore, although I had reason to
believe that I was all the time narrowly watched by old Growles and the boatswain.

Instead of the furs and skins we shipped a cargo of tea in chests, and other Chinese produce.
Part of this was to be landed at Sydney, New South Wales, and the rest, if no market could
be found there for it, was to be carried on to America.  This would greatly prolong the voyage,
and consequently my miseries.  I had hitherto been supported by the expectation of soon reaching
home and being emancipated from my bondage.

I had no dislike to the sea; and had I been well treated even in my subordinate position I
should have been contented to remain where I was, and to try and learn as much as I could;
but to be kicked and beaten and knocked down every day of my life--to have the dirtiest of
work and the worst of food--to be sworn at and abused at all hours--made me well-nigh weary
of my life.

I was one night standing just before the windlass, when I said something which offended Sam
Dixon, one of the men.  In return he struck me a blow on the head.  I must have fallen immediately,
and rolled down directly under the windlass.  Perhaps fancying that he had killed me, Dixon
walked away, without uttering anything to anybody as to what he had done.

I probably lay there for some time in a state of unconsciousness--how long I could not tell.
When I came to myself I heard some of my shipmates talking near me.  I was about to crawl out
when my own name caught my ears.

"We have had enough of that youngster at present," said one; "he has 'peached once, and will
ferret out what we're about, and 'peach again if he has the chance.  I only wish we had dropped
him overboard with a shot round his feet long ago."

It was the boatswain who spoke.

"I didn't think of the shot, as I suppose that would stop him from coming up again, and haunting
the ship," remarked old Growles; "that's what I was afeered of."

"Why, Gregory, you're always thinking of ghosts and spirits--they wouldn't do harm to you or
any of us," remarked another fellow who was looked upon as the chief sceptic of the crew, though
it is difficult to say what they did or did not believe, for considering their lives it might
be supposed that they were all infidels together.

They continued talking in low voices.  Though I could not make out all they said, I gathered
enough to be convinced that they had some plot or other which they intended soon to put into
execution, and fearing lest I should get an inkling of it and inform the captain, they intended
to do away with me.  It was some satisfaction to discover that they had no immediate intention
of executing their plans.  I might have time to warn the officers or to make my escape.

I for some time had had an idea in my head.  We carried a small boat astern, generally called
a dinghy.  She could hold two or three people, and was useful for sending away to the shore,
or for lowering at sea in calm weather when anything had to be picked up.  If I could lower
her into the water during the night when off the coast of some island, I might manage to escape
to the shore before I was discovered.

What I had heard made me resolve not to delay a moment longer than could be helped.  That night
nothing could be done, even should I find that the blow had not incapacitated me from exertion.
I dare not move from my present uncomfortable position, for should I be discovered the men
would not scruple to do away with me.  I was thankful that the men at last got up and began
to walk about the deck.  I was fearful, however, that they might come by the windlass, when
I must have been discovered.

At last I heard the second mate, who was the officer of the watch, give the order to shorten
sail, and they had to run to their stations; and as they did so, I crawled out and succeeded
in reaching my bunk, into which I tumbled unperceived.  I was far from comfortable, however,
fearing that that very night they might smother me--the mode I fancied they would take to put
me out of existence.

I was not missed, I suppose, as no one called me, and when my watch on deck came round I turned
out with the rest.  My head ached, and I had a big lump on my forehead.  In the morning, when
the third mate saw me, he asked how I got that.  I replied that it was the way I had got many
another, that it was only what I expected, and had made up my mind to bear it.

"You're a rum chap, and a bold one--more than I'd do," answered the mate, not troubling himself
more about the matter.

When I went aft to the cabin at breakfast, I heard one of the mates observe that we should
make the coast of Australia that day.  Then I thought to myself, "If I can get off I will."
I had no intention of going without provisions.  I knew that a good store was kept in the pantry,
to which I had access.  My intention was to tumble everything I could find into a cloth, to
tie it up, and to carry it off, if I could, unperceived to the dinghy.

How to lower that without being heard or seen by the watch on deck was the difficulty.  The
falls were so fitted that a single person might lower her, but then she would make a splash
in the water.

We made the land about four o'clock in the afternoon, but after standing on for some time till
it was nearly dark, the captain ordered the ship's head to be put about, as he was not well
acquainted with the coast, and there were dangerous reefs which ran off for a considerable
distance.

Night came on, and a very dark night it was, but the darkness would favour my design.  Instead
of being allowed to turn in when it was my watch below, I was sent aft by the cook with a dish
of devilled biscuits to the cabin, where the captain and the first and second mates were taking
supper, while the third mate had the watch on deck.  I intended it to be the last time I would
turn into my bunk.  I had not been long in the cabin before I observed that the captain and
mates had been drinking, and seemed disposed to continue their debauch.  The devilled biscuits
which I had placed before them still farther incited their thirst, and the captain ordered
another bottle of rum.  I noticed that the steward, when I told him, got out two bottles, one
of which he kept in the pantry while he took the other into the cabin.

"You'll do to attend on the officers, Dick," he said to me; "I'm going to enjoy myself."

I stood ready to obey any orders I should receive.  The conversation I heard was far from edifying,
but I was too much engaged in thinking of my own project to attend to it.

As I was standing at the far end of the cabin I heard a crash.  One of the mates had knocked
over a couple of tumblers, and I was sent into the pantry to obtain others.  I found the steward
fast verging into a state of unconsciousness.  He had been pulling away at the rum-bottle at
a great rate, for fear he should not have time to finish it.

As I got the tumblers I cast my eyes round the pantry to see what articles of food I could
most readily carry off.  I saw the best part of a cold ham, an ample supply of biscuits and
some pots of Chinese preserves, with several other things of less consequence.

Returning to the cabin I placed the tumblers on the table, and retired beyond the reach of
the officers, having been taught by experience that they might at any moment think fit to give
me a box on the ear or to knock me down.  I watched them with intense interest, lest they should
knock off before they were completely drunk.  The third mate came into the cabin apparently
to report something to the captain, but, seeing the state his commander was in, uttering a
loud whew!  He turned on his heel, and went out again, seeing the importance of keeping sober
himself.  I confess that I wished he had sat down with the others, and left the ship to take
care of herself.

Soon afterwards, as I knew I should not be missed, I stole out of the cabin, and went into
the pantry, where I quickly did up the provisions I intended to take with me.  There was a
jar of water, evidently quite full, which the steward kept ready for use.

I now went on deck to ascertain what chance I had of carrying out my design.  I could discover
no one excepting the man at the helm, and the third mate had, I concluded, to take a look-out.
I hurried back to get the jar and provisions, and unperceived placed them in the dinghy.  I
felt about in her, and found two oars and a boat-hook.

The falls were, as I have said, so fitted that one person could lower the boat, but to do so
without capsizing her when the ship was moving through the water was almost an impossible undertaking.

The wind had previously been very light, and the vessel had scarcely any steerage way on her.
To my intense satisfaction I noticed that it was now almost a stark calm.

Now or never I must carry out my project.  I thought not of the dangers to be encountered;
the chances of being chased and overtaken; the savages on shore; the risk of starvation; the
want of water; the current that might sweep me along; or the chances of a storm arising before
I could gain the land.  I had not a moment to lose.  The mate remained forward; the man at
the helm stood motionless, and, I hoped, was asleep. I slipped into the boat, and passing the
slack of the falls under two thwarts, gently lowered myself down.  I had, the day before, unobserved,
thoroughly greased the blocks.

My chief fear now was, that the splash the boat would make on reaching the water would be heard.
I therefore eased away with the greatest care, and stood ready in a moment to cast off the
aft-most fall.  I cleared it in the nick of time, and the boat was towed slowly ahead.  I quickly
cleared the foremost fall, and was now adrift.  I was conscious that a light splash had been
made, but I hoped that if the mate heard it he would fancy that it was caused by some monster
of the deep rising above the surface.  Without waiting to ascertain whether this was the case
or not, I seized the oars and pulled rapidly away from the stern of the vessel, the light from
the cabin window assisting me to keep the course I desired to make towards the land.  I congratulated
myself at having accomplished my object before it was too late, for I felt a breeze fanning
my ears as I pulled on.

As I looked up at the tall masts, it seemed to me that the sails bulged out, and that the ship
was rapidly increasing her distance from me.  I was already a considerable way astern when
I heard a loud hail.  I recognised the voice of the mate, who had probably just discovered
that the boat was gone.  My fear was, that another would be lowered and sent in chase of me.
This made me pull all the harder.  My only idea was, to reach shore and escape from my persecutors.
I dared not lose time by stopping even for a moment to listen for the sounds of a boat being
lowered.  I heard several other voices hail, but the ship stood on and gradually faded away
in the gloom of night.  I knew that being low in the water I could not be seen.

Presently I saw the flash of a musket; then another and another; but no shots came near me,
and from this I was convinced that the third mate, or some one else, was firing at random.
Had the captain or the other mates been in their right senses the ship would probably have
been hove-to and two boats, at least, have been sent in chase of me.  The third mate was, I
suspect, afraid of heaving to on account of the reefs. He kept the ship, therefore, before
the wind.  Whatever the cause, I was thankful I was not pursued, and I trusted that the breeze
would blow stronger and carry the ship farther and farther away from me.

Although, through there being no moon, the night was dark, and there was a mist which hung
over the waters, yet I could observe overhead several stars, and as the lights from the cabin
receded, I marked their position, and was thus able, with tolerable confidence, to continue
my way towards the land.  I fancied that I should be able to reach it early in the morning
or during the next day.  I at length began to grow weary, but as long as I could move my arms
I determined to row on.  The wind being off the land, the sea was perfectly calm.  Scarcely
a ripple disturbed the surface.  I was too anxious to feel hunger or thirst.  At the same time,
the joy at having escaped kept up my spirits.

Under other circumstances I do not think I could have accomplished what I did.  I fancied that
I was pulling at the rate of four miles an hour, and that I was nearing the shore.  At length,
however, my fatigue overcame me, and I felt that I could row no more.  The moment I stopped
I felt very sleepy, but had sense sufficient to take in my oars and place them by my side.
I then lay down in the bottom of the boat, intending to rest for a few minutes, after which,
I expected again to be able to pull on.

As may be supposed, I was soon again fast asleep.  My slumbers were peaceful and pleasant,
rendered so, I presume, by the consciousness that I had escaped from the fate intended for
me.  I was awakened by a bright light flashing in my eyes.  Opening them, I sprang up and found
that the sun had just risen above the horizon.  I looked eagerly around, dreading lest I should
see the ship near me, but to my infinite relief she was not visible, nor was the land I had
expected to see and so soon to reach.  My little boat was the only object on the waste of waters.

The coast, I knew, was to the westward, and as the rising sun would guide me, I took out my
oars and began to row away in that direction.  I had not rowed long before I began to feel
very hungry.  I therefore again laid in my oars and took a hearty meal off the provisions I
had brought, washing it down with an ample draught of water.  Then I once more turned to, but
the heat soon became excessive, and I was streaming at every pore.  Still, as long as my strength
lasted I determined not to give in.  I occasionally stopped to take a pull at my water-bottle.
With very little rest beside, I continued to paddle on till it was again dark.  This showed
me what had not occurred to me before, that I might have been rowing part of the time along
the coast, instead of towards it, and I supposed that the ship had been much farther off than
I had previously imagined.  I had been in a dreamy state all day, and unable to think much.
This was produced by the heat which beat down on my head.  I felt somewhat revived as the sun
set, but after a time excessive drowsiness came over me, and once more taking in my oars, I
lay down to sleep.

I must have slept the whole night, for when I again woke, it was already dawn.  I stood up
and looked about me, when to my surprise I observed some rocks between myself in the boat and
the bright light which heralded the rising sun.  I must have been carried by a current inside
them.  I was about to row away to the westward, when as the light increased I saw what I at
first thought was the mast of a small vessel or boat near them.  Seizing my oars, I eagerly
pulled towards the object.  Again looking round I soon discovered it; it was not a mast, but
a pole stuck in the rock with a cask or basket fixed on the top of it.

This was a sign that some civilised inhabitants must be on the neighbouring shore, and that
they had placed that beacon to warn mariners of the dangers of the rock.

A number of sea-fowl circled over the rock, occasionally dipping their wings in the clear water.

As the sun rose, I made out the land running in a long line to a far distance, as I concluded
north and south.  It was now time for breakfast.

I had no intention of landing on the rock, for this would only cause delay.  I took my ham
out from the stern sheets, but as I did so, the horrible odour which saluted my nostrils made
me certain that it would be impossible to eat it, and, except the dry biscuits, I had no other
food.  I managed with the aid of some water to masticate a fair quantity, but it might be a
long time even now before I could gain the shore, and even then I might be disappointed in
obtaining food.  It then occurred to me that perhaps the sea-fowl made their nests on the rock,
and that I might get some of their eggs, which would give me an ample supply of provisions
for some time to come.

As I had once upon a time lived upon raw rats, I was not very particular; and even should I
not obtain any eggs, I might find some young birds, which, though perhaps fishy in taste, would
enable me to support existence.  I therefore rowed towards the rock which I saw was of considerable
extent, although one part only on which the beacon was placed rose a few feet above the surface.

The clearness of the atmosphere had deceived me as to the distance.  I rowed on for some time
before I reached it.  Possibly also, there was a current against me, although that such was
the case did not occur to me at the time.

The sea-fowl shrieked loudly and wildly as I approached, as if to warn me off from their domain.
Some sat on the rock, others darted off and circled round and round the boat, but I was not
to be deterred from landing by their threatening cries and movements.  At last I got close
to the rock, and found an indentation or little bay, into which I ran my boat.

Though several birds appeared, I found that they were merely resting on the rock, and that
the water was too shallow to allow me to get close enough to step on shore.

In many places the seaweed grew so thickly, and was so slimy, that I was afraid to venture
on it, lest it offering a treacherous foothold I should slip back into the water.  At last
I saw a point some distance from the beacon where I thought I could land, and secure the boat's
painter round a rough part of the coral rock.  I succeeded in stepping on to it and making
the rope fast; and confident that she would be secure, made my way along the rock with the
assistance of the boat-hook. I found neither eggs nor young birds; indeed, on examining the
rock, I knew that it must be covered occasionally, if not at every tide, by the water.  Still
I thought that I should find them at the higher part, near the beacon.

I accordingly scrambled on as well as I could, but here and there I came to a lower part of
the rock over which the water washed, and I saw that to reach the beacon I must wade through
it.  I had to proceed very cautiously, for it was full of hollows and slippery in the extreme,
and a fall might involve serious consequences.

The shriek of the birds, though it sounded rather pleasant at a distance, became almost deafening
as I got nearer to them.

After going some way, I had to stop and rest, supporting myself on the boat-hook.  I now saw,
on looking round, that the sky which at sunrise had been bright and clear, was becoming fast
covered with clouds.  The wind, too, blew with much greater force than before.  Still, as it
came off the land, I hoped that it might not cause such a sea as would prevent me from continuing
my voyage.  I was too eager, also, to obtain some eggs or young birds to allow the subject
to trouble me.  I therefore continued scrambling along over the rocks, hoping to find what
I was in search of nearer the beacon.  I was by this time nearly wet through up to the middle,
but that did not matter, as the hot sun soon dried my clothes.  Having got on some distance
without an accident, I perhaps became more careless; for when leaping from one rock to another,
my foot slipped and I came down with a force which I thought must have broken my arm.  I lay
clutching the rock with the other hand, unable to move from the pain, while my boat-hook slipped
from my grasp, and gliding into the water was borne away from the rock.  I now saw that a rapid
current was passing the rock, the influence of which I must have felt when approaching it in
the boat.  Without the boat-hook I should find it still more difficult to get along; but I
knew that I must not stay where I was for ever, and as soon therefore as the pain allowed me,
I rose to my feet and endeavoured to continue my scramble over the rocks.

I forgot that my return journey would be quite as difficult if not more so, as I should have
no boat-hook, and at the same time should be loaded, I hoped, with eggs and birds.  I went
on and on, of course making very slow progress.  At length I got close to the beacon, and great
was my disappointment to find neither eggs nor young birds.

I searched round and round the rock in all directions, and I at last came to the conclusion
that if the birds lay their eggs there at all the hatching season must have passed, and the
young birds grown strong on the wing, and have flown away.

It was a great disappointment.  As it was, I had had my difficult and tiring scramble for nothing,
and had bruised my arm, though happily I had not broken it.  I had also lost my boat-hook.
I climbed to the higher part of the rock, and had a look at the land, which I judged was ten
or twelve miles off at least.  Still I hoped to accomplish that distance long before dark,
and to find a harbour, as I supposed there was one, or it was not likely that the beacon could
have been placed on the rock.  I therefore, without further delay, began my return journey.
As I went along, I found that some places where I had crossed had become much deeper.  At length
it occurred to me that the tide was rising.  I had regained sight of my boat, which at a distance
could not be distinguished from the black rocks, when it suddenly appeared to me that she was
moving.  I rushed on at the risk of breaking my legs.  What was my dismay at seeing that she
was already at a considerable distance from the rock where I had left her, and there seemed
every probability that I should lose her altogether.  In my terror I shouted and shrieked to
her to stop.  I was on the point of rushing into the water to try and overtake her when I saw
a black fin glide by, followed by another, and the wicked eye of a shark glanced up at me,
daring me to venture on the undertaking.  My despair overcoming me, I sank down on the rock.

CHAPTER NINETEEN.

  My adventures on the rock--My search for food, and what I found--The
  storm--Despite my perilous position, I marvel at the grandeur of the
  scene--The storm subsides--My search for clams, and further
  explorations on the rock--The darkest night must come to an end--A
  welcome wetting--My only refuge--Return of stormy weather--Perilous
  moments--I climb the beacon-post.

I had gone through a few misadventures, but this was the most trying of all.  After lying on
the rock for a few minutes or more, I recovered sufficiently to recollect that the tide was
rising, and that unless I could select a higher spot I should be swept off, and become a prey
to the monsters I dreaded.  I therefore got up, and trying to pull myself together again, endeavoured
to reach the beacon, which would at all events afford me temporary shelter.  When taking out
the biscuits in the morning I had shoved several into my pocket, which would enable me to sustain
existence until I could make signals to some passing boat or vessel.  Having lost my boat-hook
I made slower progress than before, and often with the greatest difficulty avoided falling.
Two or three times I had to wade up to my middle, and I dreaded lest one of the sharks should
have shoved his nose through the opening, and might snap me up.  Still I went on.  My anxiety
made me forget the pain in my arm. This being without reproach! This Mortal who placed his puny
virtues on a level with those of Angels.

He is mine! Irrevocably, eternally mine! Companions of my sufferings! Denizens of hell! How
grateful will be my present!'

He paused; then addressed himself to the Monk----

'Carry you to Matilda?' He continued, repeating Ambrosio's words:

'Wretch! you shall soon be with her! You well deserve a place near her, for hell boasts no miscreant
more guilty than yourself.

Hark, Ambrosio, while I unveil your crimes! You have shed the blood of two innocents; Antonia
and Elvira perished by your hand. That Antonia whom you violated, was your Sister! That Elvira
whom you murdered, gave you birth! Tremble, abandoned Hypocrite! Inhuman Parricide! Incestuous
Ravisher! Tremble at the extent of your offences! And you it was who thought yourself proof
against temptation, absolved from human frailties, and free from error and vice! Is pride
then a virtue? Is inhumanity no fault? Know, vain Man! Your pride was gratified by her flattery;
Your lust only needed an opportunity to break forth; You ran into the snare blindly, and scrupled
not to commit a crime which you blamed in another with unfeeling
severity.

It was I who threw Matilda in your way; It was I who gave you entrance to Antonia's chamber;
It was I who caused the dagger to be given you which pierced your Sister's bosom; and it was
I who warned Elvira in dreams of your designs upon her Daughter, and thus, by preventing your profiting
by her sleep, compelled you to add rape as well as incest to the catalogue of your crimes. Hear,
hear, Ambrosio! Had you resisted me one minute longer, you had saved your body and soul. The
guards whom you heard at your prison door came to signify your pardon. But I had already triumphed:
My plots had already succeeded. Scarcely could I propose crimes so quick as you performed them.
You are mine, and Heaven itself cannot rescue you from my power. Hope not that your penitence
will make void our contract.

Here is your bond signed with your blood; You have given up your claim to mercy, and nothing
can restore to you the rights which you have foolishly resigned. Believe you that your secret thoughts
escaped me? No, no, I read them all! You trusted that you should still have time for repentance.
I saw your artifice, knew its falsity, and rejoiced in deceiving the deceiver! You are mine beyond
reprieve: I burn to possess my right, and alive you quit not these mountains.'

During the Daemon's speech, Ambrosio had been stupefied by terror and surprize. This last declaration
rouzed him.
'Not quit these mountains alive?' He exclaimed: 'Perfidious, what
mean you? Have you forgotten our contract?'

The Fiend answered by
a malicious laugh:

'Our contract? Have I not performed my part? What
more did I promise than to save you from your prison? Have I not done
so? Are you not safe from the Inquisition--safe from all but from
me? Fool that you were to confide yourself to a Devil! Why did you
not stipulate for life, and power, and pleasure? Then all would have
been granted: Now, your reflections come too late. Miscreant, prepare
for death; You have not many hours to live!'

On hearing this sentence,
dreadful were the feelings of the devoted Wretch!  After searching about for some time, I caught sight of a few clams,
but they were not to be obtained without risk, as the sea surged up and recovered them.  I
fixed my eye on one, then rushing down, I cut it off and threw it up out of the reach of the
water.  I obtained two more in the same way; and in attempting to secure a fourth, the waves
swept round the rock, almost covering me, and I had to cling on for my life, losing my clam
and very nearly my life.  This taught me to be more cautious than ever; but I managed notwithstanding
to obtain three or four more, and as I could see none others above water, I had to content
myself with those I had collected.  Gathering those I had obtained together, I returned to
the higher part of the rock, close under the beacon, where I was sheltered from the wind. 
I had no means of lighting a fire.  There was no fuel on the rock to make one, and so I was
compelled to eat the clams raw, with a little biscuit to make them more palatable.  The whole
day had passed away, and another night was coming on.  I dreaded it, for I knew not what might
happen during the hours of darkness.

The storm had in no way abated, and I feared that when the tide again rose the sea might get
still more over the rock.  I had little idea, however, how fiercely it was about to do so.
I have often spoken of my sleeping and waking, but thus our lives are spent.  In spite of the
storm raging around me, the seas thundering on the rock, and the wind whistling through the
beacon, a drowsiness overpowered me, and I found myself dropping off to sleep.  I was still
conscious in some degree how I was situated.  I felt all the time an overpowering sense of
danger. Sometimes I was in my little boat, gliding calmly over the ocean; now I was suddenly
chased by big waves, which threatened every instant to engulf me.  Then I found myself cast
upon the rock, my boat floating away, and tumbling and tossing till she disappeared.  Now I
was seated all alone, gazing out over the ocean, which rose and fell, and tossed before my
eyes just as I had seen it in the daytime, only rising to a far greater height, and descending
in a more furious fashion.  This sort of confused dream continued while I was asleep.  Now
and then I awoke, only to hear the noises I have before described.  The rock itself seemed
quaking, as the seas with a thundering roar dashed against it.  I could hear, too, the screams
of the sea-birds as they swept round and round, disturbed from their usual resting-place, though
many of them flew off, I suppose, to the far-away shores, or to other rocks perhaps higher
out of the water.

The night I had escaped from the "Emu" was very dark; but this was unfortunately darker, except
when a flash of lightning darted from the sky and illumined the white foam which, lashed by
the wind into spray, flew in sheets over the rock.  I was soon wet to the skin.  I felt chilly
in the extreme.  Even the most terrible night must come to an end.

Morning broke, but cheerless as could well be.  The sky was of one leaden hue, broken here
and there by the clouds which hung lower down in the strata.  The waves, when not covered by
foam, were of the same tint. To sit where I was I found was impossible.  I got up and walked
about and stretched my legs.  To my dismay I found that the rocks, which at the same hour the
previous day were high out of the water, were now almost covered by the furious seas which
rolled over them.  I trembled to think what would be the case at high water.  I should have
liked to have got some more clams for breakfast, but I could see none, even after searching
for them, and there was a great risk of being swept away, so I contented myself with taking
one of those I had saved from the previous day, with a biscuit, for breakfast.  I was already
very thirsty, having had nothing to drink since I had left the boat, and would have welcomed
a heavy shower from the dark clouds overhead.  I continued to walk, or rather to climb about
the rock, as there was but a very small level place on which I could walk.

Then I sat down again, and with melancholy gaze watched the foaming seas, which I began to
dread, as I saw them more and more frequently covering the rock, would prove my grave.  At
length I had to seek a higher and more exposed level, and as water occasionally surged up to
the place where I had spent the night, and might at any moment sweep me off, I tried to nerve
myself up to my fate.

With difficulty I could restrain myself from drinking the sea-water.  I was well aware of the
danger of doing so, and resisted the temptation. At last, as I was looking up, I felt a drop
fall on my face.  It was not the spray of the sea.  Another and another followed, and down
came a copious shower.  I opened my mouth, at the same time holding out my cap to the rain,
hoping to get a little in it.  I got but little, so I placed it on the rock and spread it open.
I then took off my jacket, and held it out that it might be well wetted.

I hoped also to find some hollow in the rock that might be rilled with fresh water.  The rain
came down, as it does in the tropics, in a perfect deluge.  My jacket was wet through in a
minute, and I was able to wring out of it a sufficient amount of fresh water to quench my burning
thirst.  After this I was able to eat some biscuits.  It should be remembered that the tide
reaches its height nearly three-quarters of an hour later every day.  I watched with intense
anxiety its rising this afternoon.  Now it entirely covered the rocks where I had landed, then
those over which I had made my way were concealed from view, and now it reached the base of
the beacon-rock itself, against which the seas began to break with a fury surpassing that of
the previous day.

The spot on which I had been standing one minute was the next covered by the seething waters,
when I retired to a higher level.  Again and again a wave broke over the rock, and striking
one of the almost perpendicular sides flew high into the air above my head.  Every moment my
hope of escape was becoming less and less.  I cried to heaven for mercy.  As I saw death drawing
near, the desire to live increased.  It seemed so terrible to have to die all alone away from
friends and country.

At last I was driven to the very foot of the beacon, and I clutched it as if it alone could
afford me protection.  I knew that I could not for a single moment stand upon the rock with
the sea breaking over it, but the beacon itself withstood the furious waves.  I had not as
yet thought of climbing to it to see how it was fixed, but I now did so with intense anxiety.
I found that the staff was of hard oak, and that it had been imbedded in a deep hole formed
by art in the rock, and further secured by iron bars driven into it, and fastened round by
iron hoops.  This gave me some hopes that it would stand the fury of the seas should they rise
high enough to strike it.  That they would do this seemed every moment more probable.

On every side around me they tossed and foamed and roared, as if eager to seize me.  I frantically
clutched the pole, which, from its size, I could with difficulty embrace.  Even now, though
my chance of escape seemed small indeed, I did not abandon all hope.  A small line hung down
through the bottom of the cask.  I tried its strength.  It would enable me, I found, to mount
upwards, but I was unwilling to make the attempt, as I could not tell whether the cask was
fixed securely enough to bear my weight.  There I stood, my arms round the pole, clutching
the rope with my hands, and awaiting my fate. My private reading was not less happy for this robbery whereby the
eager public were supplied.

Odin was all new to me; and Mahomet, for the most part; and it was all good to read, abounding
in truth and nobleness. Yet, as I read these pages, I dream that your audience in London are less
prepared to hear, than is our New England one. I judge only from the tone. I think I know many
persons here who accept thoughts of this vein so readily now, that, if you were speaking on
this shore, you would not feel that emphasis you use to be necessary. I have been feeble and
almost sick during all the spring, and have been in Boston but once or twice, and know nothing of the
reception the book meets from the Catholic Carlylian Church. We work together day by day in
my garden, and I grow well and strong. My mother, my wife, my boy and girl, are all in usual
health, and according to their several ability salute you and yours. Do not cease to tell me
of the health of your wife and of the learned and friendly physician.

Yours, R.W. Emerson

LXVI. Carlyle to Emerson

Chelsea, London, 25 June, 1841

Dear Emerson,--Now that there begins again to be some program possible of my future motions
for some time, I hastily despatch you some needful outline of the same.

After infinite confused uncertainty, I learn yesternight that there has been a kind of country-house
got for us, at a place called Annan, on the north shore of the Solway Frith, in my native County
of Dumfries. You passed through the little Burgh, I suppose, in your way homeward from Craigenputtock:
it stands about midway, on the great road, between Dumfries and Carlisle. It is the place
where I got my schooling;--consider what a preternatural significance such a scene has now
got for me!

It is within eight miles of my aged Mother's dwelling-place; within riding distance, in fact,
of almost all the Kindred I have in the world.--The house, which is built since my time, and
was never yet seen by me, is said to be a reasonable kind of house. We get it for a small
sum in proportion to its value (thanks to kind accident); the three hundred miles of travel,
very hateful to me, will at least entirely obliterate all traces of this Dust- Babel; the
place too being naturally almost ugly, as far as a green leafy place in sight of sea and mountains
can be so nicknamed, the whole gang of picturesque Tourists, Cockney friends of Nature, &c., &c.,
who penetrate now by steam, in shoals every autumn, into the very centre of the Scotch Highlands,
will be safe over the horizon! In short, we are all bound thitherward in few days; must cobble up
some kind of gypsy establishment; and bless Heaven for solitude,
for the sight of green fields, heathy moors; for a silent sky over
one's head, and air to breathe which does not consist of coal-smoke,
finely powdered flint, and other beautiful etceteras of that kind
among others!

God knows I have need enough to be left altogether alone for some considerable while (forever,
as it at present seems to me), to get my inner world, and my poor bodily nerves, both all
torn to pieces, set in order a little again! After much vain reluctance therefore; disregarding
many considerations,-- disregarding finance in the front of these,--I am off; and calculate on
staying till I am heartily sated with country, till at least the last gleam of summer weather
has departed. My way of life has all along hitherto been a resolute staying at home: I find now,
however, that I must alter my habits, cost what it may; that I cannot live all the year round
in London, under pain of dying or going rabid;--that I must, in fact, learn to travel, as others
do, and be hanged to me! Wherefore, in brief, my Friend, our address for the next two or three
months is "Newington Lodge, Annan, Scotland,"--where a letter from
Emerson will be a right pleasant visitor!

Faustum sit.

My second piece of news, not less interesting I hope, is that Emerson's
Essays, the Book so called, is to be reprinted here; nay, I think,
is even now at press,--in the hands of that invaluable Printer, Robson,
who did the Miscellanies. Fraser undertakes it, "on half-profits";--T.
Carlyle writing a Preface,*--which accordingly he did (in rather sullen
humor,--not with you!) last night and the foregoing days. Robson will
stand by the text to the very utmost; and I also am to read the Proof
sheets. The edition is of Seven Hundred and Fifty; which Fraser thinks
he will sell.
After remaining quiet for some time, I felt as if I possessed sufficient strength, and resolved
to make the attempt.  With legs and arms and hands I worked my way up.  I would have clung
with my teeth to the rope could I have seized it.  I was within a foot of the bottom of the
cask, when I felt so exhausted that I thought I could get no higher.  I looked down on the
raging sea and then up at the only place which could afford me shelter.  In the darkness I
could not see whether or not there was a trap, and if there were one perhaps I might not be
able to force it open, and, exhausted by the effort, might drop into the water.  I dreaded
the risk, but it must be run.

Nerving myself up to the undertaking, I slowly and carefully began to work my way higher up.
My head struck the cask.  I put up my hand, the bottom yielded, and now exerting all my remaining
strength I seized the edges and drew myself up, holding well on with my hands and feet until
I had got my head and shoulders into the interior.  Throwing myself on my chest, I felt round
and discovered some beckets, evidently intended for the purpose of enabling a person situated
as I was to draw himself up. I then, grasping the rope which hung from the top of the pole
which passed through the cask, dragged myself up and placed my feet at the bottom.  I pressed
down the trap.  I felt more secure than I had been for many hours.  Had I not still had a post
to cling to after the strain my muscles had so long endured, I could not have stood upright.

Several cross-pieces secured the top of the cask to the post.  I shoved my head through them,
and could now look down on the wild and raging waters with which I was surrounded.  Still I
dare not quit my hold of the post, fancying that if I pressed on one side of the cask or the
other, it might give way.  Not that there was the slightest chance of that in reality.  I did
not long contemplate the fearful scene, but overcome by what I had gone through, I sank down
to the bottom of the cask, and, wet and cold as I was, fell into a troubled slumber.

CHAPTER TWENTY.

  In the beacon--The storm continues--The tide turns--I again seek for
  food--I meet with another accident--Brighter weather--A sail in
  sight--My hopes and fears--My signal--My rescue--A voice from the
  deep--Three old friends meet again--On board the "Falcon"--The good
  captain--Sydney harbour, and why I did not go ashore there--The
  homeward voyage--Mark and I learn navigation--My reception at
  Liverpool--Sad, sad news--My journey to Sandgate--I enter Mr
  Butterfield's office, and have had no cause to regret doing so.

I awoke to find the storm still raging around me; but as I opened my eyes I was sensible that
a faint light came in from the top of the cask. I was cramped with the uncomfortable position
in which I had been sleeping.  When I looked out over the edge of the cask, though the seas
were tossing as wildly as before, I perceived that the rock below me was once more uncovered,
owing, as I knew, to the tide having ebbed.  At first I thought of descending; then I recollected
that the waters might again rise to their former level, and I feared that I might not have
strength to regain my sheltering-place.  I therefore remained where I was.  I shortly began
to feel the pangs of hunger and thirst.  I eagerly felt in my pocket for some biscuit, forgetting
that I had consumed the last the night before.  I found a few crumbs, and with difficulty got
them down, having no water to moisten my dry mouth.  Still, the wet state of my clothes prevented
me from suffering so much from thirst as I should otherwise have done.

The storm, I knew, would not last for ever.  Should it continue much longer, however, I might
succumb before I could possibly be relieved; but having been hitherto so mercifully preserved,
I did not despair. Feeling weary of standing, I again crouched down at the bottom of the cask.
I had reason to bless the persons who had placed it there.  As I thus sat, half asleep and
half awake, it seemed to me that the wind blew with less violence than it had done before.
I got up to ascertain if this was the case.  On looking round I felt confident that it was
so. It appeared to me, also, that the seas were tumbling about with less violence than they
had done on the previous day.  If so, they might not again cover the rock.  I was well accustomed
to notice the tides on our own shore, and I remembered that, after the highest of the spring
tides, they were said by the fishermen to "take off"--that is, to rise to a less elevation
every subsequent day.  Thus, even should the storm continue, the rock might not again be covered.
This idea brought considerable relief to me.

My hunger made me resolve to descend to search for clams.  Perhaps I should find a fish thrown
on the rock.  The thought of obtaining some food made me get down at once.  I opened the trap,
and, grasping the rope, slid down with perfect ease.  Already the rocks over which I had clambered
from the boat were bare, for the tide had fallen rapidly.  I knew that it would fall in proportion
as it had risen.  I went as close to the edge as I could venture without running the risk of
being carried off.  The rocks, which were washed by the fierce seas, were slippery in the extreme,
and I feared that any clams clinging to them must have been washed away.  Still, hunger urged
me on.  I made my way along the top of the coral reef.  I observed several small pools ahead.
There must be creatures of some sort within, which would enable me to satisfy the cravings
of hunger.  I had gone some little distance, when I slipped, and came down on the rock.  In
my weak state I felt unable again to rise for some minutes, though I was not seriously hurt.

The clouds, some time before this, began to break, and suddenly the sun shone forth, his warm
rays cheering me up.  As I cast my eyes round, something glittered brightly just for a moment
in one of the pools. Rising with renewed strength, I scrambled, faster than I had moved before,
towards it, and great was my delight to see a good-sized fish floundering in the pool.  It
attempted to escape me, but I pounced down upon it as a sea-bird would have done, and, giving
it a blow on the head, quickly despatched it.  I was too hungry to wait even to partially prepare
it by hanging it up in the sun, and, taking out my knife, quickly cut some slices from the
thickest part of the body.  I did not stop to consider whether it was wholesome, but ate it
raw as it was.  I looked about in the hope of finding another, and was successful; it was of
the same species as the first.  I could exist now without the clams; and, therefore, thinking
it prudent not to run any risk in trying to obtain them, I returned to the beacon.

By this time the wind had fallen to a moderate breeze, though the seas still continued rolling
on with foaming crests, but far less wildly than before, and were evidently decreasing in height.
The atmosphere having cleared, I was able to distinguish the distant shore, which had the appearance
of a blue irregular line to the westward.  Again and again I turned my eyes seaward, in hopes
of seeing a passing ship, which might stand near enough to observe me.  I was disappointed;
not a sail came in sight, and another night approached.  The waters covered some of the rocks,
but only for a short time, when the tide again ran out.  Still I was unwilling to sleep upon
the cold rock, and, taking my second fish, having consumed the first to the bones, I climbed
up again into the tub. Having coiled myself away round the bottom, I was soon fast asleep.
My slumbers were peaceful and quiet.  The gentle wind produced no sound round the cask; the
roar of the surf on the rocks had ceased.  I slept the whole night through, and not till the
sun had risen out of the ocean did I wake.  I at once stood up and looked round me.  A light
breeze from the northward sent the wavelets rippling against the rock.  The sea was otherwise
perfectly calm, and glowed in the rays of the bright orb of day.

I looked landwards, in the expectation of seeing some vessels come out of the harbour, which,
I thought, could not be far off, but none appeared.  Then I gazed anxiously to the northward,
and round the horizon in all directions.  Presently I saw a spot appear of snowy whiteness,
glittering in the rays of the sun.  It rapidly increased in size.  "A sail!  A sail!"  I shouted,
though there was no one to hear me.  I soon perceived that she was a large ship.  First her
topgallant sails, then her topsails, rose out of the water.  I was so intently watching her
that I forgot for a time to take my meal.  As may be supposed, I turned many a look towards
the ship.  She was standing towards me, running before the wind along the coast.  At last her
courses, and then her hull, appeared, and I fancied that I could almost see the people moving
on her deck.  I was congratulating myself that I should have a speedy deliverance, when the
thought came to me that she might be the "Emu."

If I were discovered I should be worse treated than before.  I had not so often seen the ship
on which I had spent so many dreary months, to be certain about her appearance at a distance.
I trembled lest I should be right, though she had been steering in a different direction. 
As the stranger approached, I became more and more convinced that she was not the "Emu."  Still
I felt a feeling of uncertainty on the subject. Should I make a signal, and try to attract
the attention of those on board?  The beacon would certainly be observed; perhaps they were
looking out for it.  Had I possessed a supply of water, I might have hesitated longer; but
my perilous position determined me at all risks to make a signal.  I watched till the ship
came nearly abreast of the beacon, when, stripping off my shirt, I climbed as high as I could,
until I reached the cask.  I waved the shirt frantically.  In my eagerness I shouted also,
though I might have known that my puny voice could not be heard.  For some time it appeared
to me that I was waving in vain; and then, what was my dismay to see the ship's head turned
away from the shore.  I was deserted.

Presently the sheets were let fly, the main-topsail was backed against the mast.  She hove-to.
I almost fell from my post with joy as I saw a boat lowered, which came rapidly pulling towards
the rock.  Putting on my shirt--it was now perfectly dry--I descended from my perch to the
rock, and there stood eagerly watching the boat.  Again a thought occurred to me, that she
might, after all, be the "Emu," and in another few minutes I might be in the clutches of old
Growles and the boatswain, and my other persecutors.  But as I strained my eyes to discern
their countenances.  I became aware that none of the "Emu's" crew were there. As far as I could
make out, they were all perfect strangers.  The boat steered for the lee-side of the rock.
I hurried down to meet them.

"Why, my lad, who are you, and how came you here?" exclaimed one of the strangers.  "Has your
ship gone to the bottom?"

"That's more than I can say," I answered; "I came in a boat.  The boat floated away, and I
have been left here."

"What ship do you belong to?" asked the stranger.

"The `Emu,'" I answered, thinking it was as well to acknowledge this much.

"The `Emu!'" he exclaimed.  "Why, who are you?  Let me let me look at you.  Don't you know
me, Dick?" and he grasped my hand.  I looked at him hard.

"Why, if I didn't think you were at the bottom of the sea, I should have declared that you
were Tom Trivett."

"And so I am," he said, "though I'm not at the bottom of the sea, and right glad I am to find
you, Dick, out of that dreadful ship.  Come along, we mustn't stand talking here; we were sent
to bring you off, and, judging by your looks, the sooner you're on board the better."

"Yes, indeed," I answered, "for I find it a hard matter to speak from the dryness in my throat;
I haven't tasted water for a couple of days, and if you had not come I don't suppose I should
have held out much longer, with the hot sun shining down on my head."

"Well, I am glad," cried Tom, as he, with the aid of another hand, who was the third mate of
the ship, helped me into the boat.  She immediately shoved off, and pulled towards the ship.

"Who would have thought of finding you, Dick, all alone by yourself out on yonder rock?" said
Tom, who was pulling stroke oar.  "However, wonders never end.  There's another old shipmate
of yours on board, whom you'll be glad to see, I have a notion; and not a little surprised
either, if you thought that he was left to perish on the Falkland Islands."

"What!  Do you mean Mark Riddle?"  I asked.

"Yes, Mark himself," he said.  "He didn't die, or he wouldn't be on board the `Falcon.'  We
found him about ten days after.  He had been pretty well worn out, but still with life enough
in him to crawl down to the beach when we put in for water."

"I am glad, I am glad!"  I said, though I could say little more, and was unable to ask Tom
how he had escaped.

The mate put questions to me which I was unable to answer; indeed I was almost fainting before
I was lifted up the side of the "Falcon."  One of the first persons I set eyes on was Mark
Riddle.  He was much grown and bronzed.  Had I not been aware that he was on board, I should
not at first have known him; nor did he guess who I was till Tom told him, when he sprang to
my side, and warmly grasped my hand.  He forbore asking questions, as he saw that I was not
in a state to reply.  The first thing Tom did was to bring me a mug of water, which I eagerly
drank. After that the captain ordered that I should be carried to a spare berth in the cabin.

"We must have him there, that he may be properly looked after.  He'll be better off than in
the forepeak," he said.

From this I guessed that he was a kind-hearted man, very different to Captain Longfleet.  In
a short time some broth and a fresh roll baked on board were brought to me, and I was not so
far gone that I was prevented from thankfully swallowing the food.  It revived me greatly,
and when Captain Mason looked in on me shortly afterwards, I was able to answer all the questions
he put to me.  I confessed who I was, and how I had come to sea.  When he heard that I was
the son of a clergyman, and related to Mr Butterfield, he was even kinder than before; though
he did not, I suspect, quite believe my account.

"Truth should be adhered to, my lad, under all circumstances," he observed.  "Are you quite
sure that you did not run away?"

"I thought of doing so, sir; but I was carried off exactly as I have told you, and I was very
sorry for it afterwards."

"You have been severely punished for it, and I am afraid have caused great anxiety and grief
to your friends.  You might have lost your life, though you have been preserved in God's good
providence, and when you get home I hope you will make amends for your fault.  It is all you
can do," he observed.

The state of the ship contrasted greatly with that of the "Emu."  After a sound sleep, I was
able the next day to get about, though I still remained somewhat sick and weak.  Tom told me
that the "Falcon" was the happiest ship he had ever been aboard.  The crew were generally orderly
and well behaved.  Mark corroborated what Tom said.

As soon as I was strong enough, I begged that I might be allowed to do duty on board, so that
I might not pass my time idly.  To this Captain Mason willingly agreed.  I was separated more
than I liked from Mark, but he told me that he was not jealous.

"But I say, Dick," he said, "if you could teach me, when it's my watch below, some of the navigation
and other things you're learning, I should be very much obliged."

I willingly promised to do this; and, as he came down to the spar-deck, we at once set to work,
and every day I imparted to him the knowledge I had obtained.  One day the first mate, who
was a very kind man, found us thus engaged.  He said nothing at the time, but afterwards asked
me if Riddle was very anxious to learn navigation.  I told him that he was. It contains a greenish
liquor: Fill a small phial with it when you are unobserved, and Antonia is your own.'

The Monk hesitated not to adopt this infamous plan. His desires, but too violent before, had acquired fresh
vigour from the sight of Antonia. As He sat by her bedside, accident had discovered to him
some of those charms which till then had been concealed from him:
He found them even more perfect, than his ardent imagination had pictured
them.

Sometimes her white and polished arm was displayed in arranging the pillow: Sometimes a sudden
movement discovered part of her swelling bosom: But whereever the new-found charm presented
itself, there rested the Friar's gloting eyes. Scarcely could He master himself sufficiently
to conceal his desires from Antonia and her vigilant Duenna. Inflamed by the remembrance of these
beauties, He entered into Matilda's scheme without hesitation.

No sooner were Matins over than He bent his course towards the Convent of St. Clare: His arrival threw
the whole Sisterhood into the utmost amazement. The Prioress was sensible of the honour done
her Convent by his paying it his first visit, and strove to express her gratitude by every
possible attention. He was paraded through the Garden, shown all the reliques of Saints and
Martyrs, and treated with as much respect and distinction as had
He been the Pope himself.

On his part, Ambrosio received the Domina's civilities very graciously, and strove to remove
her surprize at his having broken through his resolution.

I confess I found it very difficult to be sorry that I had run away with the boat, since I
had saved my life by so doing.  Then I might afterwards have lost it on the rock; and the matter
has been a very puzzling one to me ever since.

We sailed with a fair wind, which carried us down the coast of Australia.  The wind then shifted
to the eastward, and we passed through Bass's Straits, between the mighty continent and Van
Diemen's Land, as it was at that time called, the captain intending to go home by the Cape
of Good Hope instead of across the Pacific and round Cape Horn, as ships of the present day
generally do.

I have few incidents to describe during our homeward voyage.  I was far happier than I had
been on board the "Emu."  Somehow or other I had no longer that affection for a sea life which
I fancied I possessed.  I dreaded, however, the reception I should meet with, on my return
home, from Aunt Deb and Mr Butterfield, and from my father and brothers and sisters.  The only
person who I knew would receive me affectionately was my mother.  I was very certain of it.
I was half inclined, from fear of the upbraiding that I should get from the rest of my family,
to beg Captain Mason to let me remain on board, and to make another voyage with him, expecting
that I should regain my love for the ocean.  I at last mentioned the subject.

"I would willingly do so, my lad, if your father and friends think it best you should become
a sailor, but I cannot consent to act contrary to their wishes. Alarmed at this intelligence, they
hastened to the Convent, resolved to defend it if possible, or at least to rescue the Inhabitants
from the fury of the Rioters. Most of the Nuns had fled, but a few still remained in their habitation.


I thanked the captain very much for his offer, as I felt that I should have much more confidence
in his presence than if I had gone alone. Still, as we ran up the Irish Channel and sighted
the Welsh coast, I felt very nervous, and could scarcely attend to my duties.  At length we
entered the Mersey and dropped anchor off Liverpool.  As soon as the ship had been taken into
dock, and the captain was at liberty, he sent for me, and we walked together to Mr Butterfield's
office, where we were at once shown into his private room.  The old gentleman did not recognise
me, I was so grown and altered.  When Captain Mason said who I was, he started, and, eyeing
me keenly, at last took my hand.

"I'm thankful to see you again, my boy," he said; "but you have caused your aunt and me much
anxiety, and trouble and sorrow to others of your family; but I won't say just now what has
happened. How can I wish to lengthen a life so wretched! Yet such a death! O! God! To perish
by such a death! To linger out such ages in torture!

Till now, I knew not what it was to hunger! Hark! No. No one comes! They will come no more!'

She
was silent.  Captain Mason having much business
to get through, rose to take his leave, when Mr Butterfield expressed his desire to repay him
for the trouble and expense he had been put to on my account.

"Pray don't speak of it, my kind sir," answered the worthy captain; "I am amply repaid by the
satisfaction I feel at restoring the lad to his friends;" and shaking me warmly by the hand,
he left the office.

As it was late in the day, Mr Butterfield having signed a few letters, said he was ready to
go home, and desired me to accompany him.  As we walked along together, he questioned me about
my adventures, seeming rather incredulous when I assured him that I had not intentionally run
away to sea.

"Well, well, Dick, we'll let by-gones be by-gones.  I shall be glad to see you act rightly
in future."

I inquired if Aunt Deb was still with him.

"She returned to your father soon after you disappeared, and has only lately come back to pay
me another visit," he answered.

I confess I wished she had stayed at home. In due time, perhaps, we can send you Munroe, and
Nichols also, and so all your factors shall render direct account
of themselves to you.

I believe I shall also make Brown the bearer of a little book written some time since by a young
friend of mine in a very peculiar frame of mind,--thought by most
persons to be mad,--and of the publication of which I took the charge.*
Mr. Very requested me to send you a copy.--I had a letter from Sterling,
lately, which rejoiced me in all but the dark picture it gave of his
health.

  "I have
no affection for the sea, or generally for those whose profession it is to sail upon it," she
said, looking hard at me. "There are exceptions to every rule, and I hope that this young gentleman
will show that he doesn't possess the objectionable manners and customs of sailors."

"I trust you will not be mistaken in the favourable opinion you form of me, Madam," I said,
as stiffly as I could.  "But I venture to think that you are prejudiced against seafaring men.
Let me assure you, however, that there are many estimable persons among them, though there
are some as bad as any to be found on shore.  You once had a nephew who went away to sea. 
I hope that you don't class him among the bad ones."

"I class him among the very worst," she exclaimed.  "He ran off without leave, without wishing
me, his kind aunt, farewell, or letting us know where he had gone, or what had become of him.
He made us all very miserable, and broke his poor mother's heart."

"My mother dead!"  I exclaimed.  "Oh, don't say that, don't say that! And I killed her."

"Who are you?" cried Aunt Deb, starting up and looking me in the face.

"Yes; I do believe that you are that graceless young monkey, Dick!"

"I am indeed your nephew, Dick.  I am indeed heartily sorry for all I have done, and shall
never forgive myself if my conduct was the cause of my mother's death.  Did I not mistake what
you said?  Oh, Aunt Deb, do tell me is she really dead?" and I grasped her hands and burst
into tears.

She was moved as I spoke more than I could have expected; and instead of further upbraiding
me, tried to soothe the anguish I felt.  I was indeed severely punished for my thoughtless
conduct, to say the best of it.

Mr Butterfield spoke to me more kindly than I expected or deserved, and when he again offered
me a seat in his counting-house, and assured me that he would endeavour to further my interests
and raise me according to my deserts, I thankfully accepted his proposal.

Before, however, commencing my career as a merchant, he allowed me to go home and see my father,
who, I need not say, received me according to the dictates of his affectionate heart, without
uttering a word of blame. Tomorrow after Matins you may expect me at your House: I will then examine
into what I can do for you, and if it is in my power, will free you from this unwelcome Visitor.
Now then go home, and peace be with you!'

'Home?' exclaimed Jacintha; 'I go home? Not I by my troth! except under your protection, I set
no foot of mine within the threshold. God help me, the Ghost may meet me upon the Stairs, and whisk
me away with her to the devil! Oh! That I had accepted young Melchior
Basco's offer!  Tom Trivett entered the navy, and having lost a leg, became an out-pensioner
of Greenwich Hospital.  He used frequently to come and see me in after years, and nothing pleased
him so much as to talk over the adventures of our early days, and to spin long yarns to my
children about those he subsequently went through.  After a week's stay at Sandgate, I returned
to Liverpool, where I at once set to work in Mr Butterfield's office, and have every reason
to be thankful that I was enabled to take my place on one of the high stools which I had formerly
looked upon with such intense disgust.  By diligence and perseverance, and strict attention
to my duties, I gained my principal's good opinion, and ultimately, on his death, I became
the head of the firm.

THE END.

