Essays and Lectures

Contents

The Rise of Historical Criticism The English Renaissance of Art House Decoration Art and the
Handicraftman Lecture to Art Students London Models Poems in Prose

THE RISE OF HISTORICAL CRITICISM

CHAPTER I

HISTORICAL criticism nowhere occurs as an isolated fact in the civilisation or literature of
any people.  It is part of that complex working towards freedom which may be described as the
revolt against authority.  It is merely one facet of that speculative spirit of an innovation,
which in the sphere of action produces democracy and revolution, and in that of thought is
the parent of philosophy and physical science; and its importance as a factor of progress is
based not so much on the results it attains, as on the tone of thought which it represents,
and the method by which it works.

Being thus the resultant of forces essentially revolutionary, it is not to be found in the
ancient world among the material despotisms of Asia or the stationary civilisation of Egypt.
The clay cylinders of Assyria and Babylon, the hieroglyphics of the pyramids, form not history
but the material for history.

The Chinese annals, ascending as they do to the barbarous forest life of the nation, are marked
with a soberness of judgment, a freedom from invention, which is almost unparalleled in the
writings of any people; but the protective spirit which is the characteristic of that people
proved as fatal to their literature as to their commerce. In doing thus he often turned over
the edge, when he sprang back as though he had seen a ghost. Recovering from the shock, he circled
around the dish with little hops, occasionally giving a gentle peck at the edge of the dish, or
a snip at the water with his beak. Thus he waltzed around the bath perhaps forty times, now and
then going so far as to jump up on the edge, make a dash at the water, and back off as if it
were hot, or to give a hop into the middle of the water and out again so quickly that one
could hardly believe he touched it.

It is among the Hellenic branch of the Indo-Germanic race that history proper is to be found,
as well as the spirit of historical criticism; among that wonderful offshoot of the primitive
Aryans, whom we call by the name of Greeks and to whom, as has been well said, we owe all that
moves in the world except the blind forces of nature.

For, from the day when they left the chill table-lands of Tibet and journeyed, a nomad people,
to AEgean shores, the characteristic of their nature has been the search for light, and the
spirit of historical criticism is part of that wonderful Aufklarung or illumination of the
intellect which seems to have burst on the Greek race like a great flood of light about the
sixth century B.C.

L'ESPRIT D'UN SIECLE NE NAIT PAS ET NE MEURT PAS E JOUR FIXE, and the first critic is perhaps
as difficult to discover as the first man.  It is from democracy that the spirit of criticism
borrows its intolerance of dogmatic authority, from physical science the alluring analogies
of law and order, from philosophy the conception of an essential unity underlying the complex
manifestations of phenomena.  It appears first rather as a changed attitude of mind than as
a principle of research, and its earliest influences are to be found in the sacred writings.

For men begin to doubt in questions of religion first, and then in matters of more secular
interest; and as regards the nature of the spirit of historical criticism itself in its ultimate
development, it is not confined merely to the empirical method of ascertaining whether an event
happened or not, but is concerned also with the investigation into the causes of events, the
general relations which phenomena of life hold to one another, and in its ultimate development
passes into the wider question of the philosophy of history.

Now, while the workings of historical criticism in these two spheres of sacred and uninspired
history are essentially manifestations of the same spirit, yet their methods are so different,
the canons of evidence so entirely separate, and the motives in each case so unconnected, that
it will be necessary for a clear estimation of the progress of Greek thought, that we should
consider these two questions entirely apart from one another.  I shall then in both cases take
the succession of writers in their chronological order as representing the rational order -
not that the succession of time is always the succession of ideas, or that dialectics moves
ever in the straight line in which Hegel conceives its advance.  In Greek thought, as elsewhere,
there are periods of stagnation and apparent retrogression, yet their intellectual development,
not merely in the question of historical criticism, but in their art, their poetry and their
philosophy, seems so essentially normal, so free from all disturbing external influences, so
peculiarly rational, that in following in the footsteps of time we shall really be progressing
in the order sanctioned by reason.

CHAPTER II

AT an early period in their intellectual development the Greeks reached that critical point
in the history of every civilised nation, when speculative invades the domain of revealed truth,
when the spiritual ideas of the people can no longer be satisfied by the lower, material conceptions
of their inspired writers, and when men find it impossible to pour the new wine of free thought
into the old bottles of a narrow and a trammelling creed.

From their Aryan ancestors they had received the fatal legacy of a mythology stained with immoral
and monstrous stories which strove to hide the rational order of nature in a chaos of miracles,
and to mar by imputed wickedness the perfection of God's nature - a very shirt of Nessos in
which the Heracles of rationalism barely escaped annihilation.  Now while undoubtedly the speculations
of Thales, and the alluring analogies of law and order afforded by physical science, were most
important forces in encouraging the rise of the spirit of scepticism, yet it was on its ethical
side that the Greek mythology was chiefly open to attack.

It is difficult to shake the popular belief in miracles, but no man will admit sin and immorality
as attributes of the Ideal he worships; so the first symptoms of a new order of thought are
shown in the passionate outcries of Xenophanes and Heraclitos against the evil things said
by Homer of the sons of God; and in the story told of Pythagoras, how that he saw tortured
in Hell the 'two founders of Greek theology,' we can recognise the rise of the Aufklarung as
clearly as we see the Reformation foreshadowed in the INFERNO of Dante.

Any honest belief, then, in the plain truth of these stories soon succumbed before the destructive
effects of the A PRIORI ethical criticism of this school; but the orthodox party, as is its
custom, found immediately a convenient shelter under the aegis of the doctrine of metaphors
and concealed meanings.

To this allegorical school the tale of the fight around the walls of Troy was a mystery, behind
which, as behind a veil, were hidden certain moral and physical truths.  The contest between
Athena and Ares was that eternal contest between rational thought and the brute force of ignorance;
the arrows which rattled in the quiver of the 'Far Darter' were no longer the instruments of
vengeance shot from the golden bow of the child of God, but the common rays of the sun, which
was itself nothing but a mere inert mass of burning metal.

Modern investigation, with the ruthlessness of Philistine analysis, has ultimately brought
Helen of Troy down to a symbol of the dawn. There were Philistines among the Greeks also who
saw in the [Greek text which cannot be reproduced] a mere metaphor for atmospheric power.

Now while this tendency to look for metaphors and hidden meanings must be ranked as one of
the germs of historical criticism, yet it was essentially unscientific.  Its inherent weakness
is clearly pointed out by Plato, who showed that while this theory will no doubt explain many
of the current legends, yet, if it is to be appealed to at all, it must be as a universal principle;
a position he is by no means prepared to admit.

Like many other great principles it suffered from its disciples, and furnished its own refutation
when the web of Penelope was analysed into a metaphor of the rules of formal logic, the warp
representing the premises, and the woof the conclusion.

Rejecting, then, the allegorical interpretation of the sacred writings as an essentially dangerous
method, proving either too much or too little, Plato himself returns to the earlier mode of
attack, and re-writes history with a didactic purpose, laying down certain ethical canons of
historical criticism.  God is good; God is just; God is true; God is without the common passions
of men. These are the tests to which we are to bring the stories of the Greek religion.

'God predestines no men to ruin, nor sends destruction on innocent cities; He never walks the
earth in strange disguise, nor has to mourn for the death of any well-beloved son.  Away with
the tears for Sarpedon, the lying dream sent to Agamemnon, and the story of the broken covenant!'
(Plato, REPUBLIC, Book ii. 380; iii. 388, 391.)

Similar ethical canons are applied to the accounts of the heroes of the days of old, and by
the same A PRIORI principles Achilles is rescued from the charges of avarice and insolence
in a passage which may be recited as the earliest instance of that 'whitewashing of great men,'
as it has been called, which is so popular in our own day, when Catiline and Clodius are represented
as honest and far-seeing politicians, when EINE EDLE UND GUTE NATUR is claimed for Tiberius,
and Nero is rescued from his heritage of infamy as an accomplished DILETTANTE whose moral aberrations
are more than excused by his exquisite artistic sense and charming tenor voice.

But besides the allegorising principle of interpretation, and the ethical reconstruction of
history, there was a third theory, which may be called the semi-historical, and which goes
by the name of Euhemeros, though he was by no means the first to propound it.

Appealing to a fictitious monument which he declared that he had discovered in the island of
Panchaia, and which purported to be a column erected by Zeus, and detailing the incidents of
his reign on earth, this shallow thinker attempted to show that the gods and heroes of ancient
Greece were 'mere ordinary mortals, whose achievements had been a good deal exaggerated and
misrepresented,' and that the proper canon of historical criticism as regards the treatment
of myths was to rationalise the incredible, and to present the plausible residuum as actual truth.

To him and his school, the centaurs, for instance, those mythical sons of the storm, strange
links between the lives of men and animals, were merely some youths from the village of Nephele
in Thessaly, distinguished for their sporting tastes; the 'living harvest of panoplied knights,'
which sprang so mystically from the dragon's teeth, a body of mercenary troops supported by
the profits on a successful speculation in ivory; and Actaeon, an ordinary master of hounds,
who, living before the days of subscription, was eaten out of house and home by the expenses
of his kennel.

Now, that under the glamour of myth and legend some substratum of historical fact may lie,
is a proposition rendered extremely probable by the modern investigations into the workings
of the mythopoeic spirit in post-Christian times.  Charlemagne and Roland, St. Francis and
William Tell, are none the less real personages because their histories are filled with much
that is fictitious and incredible, but in all cases what is essentially necessary is some external
corroboration, such as is afforded by the mention of Roland and Roncesvalles in the chronicles
of England, or (in the sphere of Greek legend) by the excavations of Hissarlik.  But to rob
a mythical narrative of its kernel of supernatural elements, and to present the dry husk thus
obtained as historical fact, is, as has been well said, to mistake entirely the true method
of investigation and to identify plausibility with truth.

And as regards the critical point urged by Palaiphatos, Strabo, and Polybius, that pure invention
on Homer's part is inconceivable, we may without scruple allow it, for myths, like constitutions,
grow gradually, and are not formed in a day.  But between a poet's deliberate creation and
historical accuracy there is a wide field of the mythopoeic faculty.

This Euhemeristic theory was welcomed as an essentially philosophical and critical method by
the unscientific Romans, to whom it was introduced by the poet Ennius, that pioneer of cosmopolitan
Hellenicism, and it continued to characterise the tone of ancient thought on the question of
the treatment of mythology till the rise of Christianity, when it was turned by such writers
as Augustine and Minucius Felix into a formidable weapon of attack on Paganism.  It was then
abandoned by all those who still bent the knee to Athena or to Zeus, and a general return,
aided by the philosophic mystics of Alexandria, to the allegorising principle of interpretation
took place, as the only means of saving the deities of Olympus from the Titan assaults of the
new Galilean God.  In what vain defence, the statue of Mary set in the heart of the Pantheon
can best tell us.

Religions, however, may be absorbed, but they never are disproved, and the stories of the Greek
mythology, spiritualised by the purifying influence of Christianity, reappear in many of the
southern parts of Europe in our own day.  The old fable that the Greek gods took service with
the new religion under assumed names has more truth in it than the many care to discover.

Having now traced the progress of historical criticism in the special treatment of myth and
legend, I shall proceed to investigate the form in which the same spirit manifested itself
as regards what one may term secular history and secular historians. The field traversed will
be found to be in some respects the same, but the mental attitude, the spirit, the motive of
investigation are all changed.

There were heroes before the son of Atreus and historians before Herodotus, yet the latter
is rightly hailed as the father of history, for in him we discover not merely the empirical
connection of cause and effect, but that constant reference to Laws, which is the characteristic
of the historian proper.

For all history must be essentially universal; not in the sense of comprising all the synchronous
events of the past time, but through the universality of the principles employed.  And the
great conceptions which unify the work of Herodotus are such as even modern thought has not
yet rejected.  The immediate government of the world by God, the nemesis and punishment which
sin and pride invariably bring with them, the revealing of God's purpose to His people by signs
and omens, by miracles and by prophecy; these are to Herodotus the laws which govern the phenomena
of history.  He is essentially the type of supernatural historian; his eyes are ever strained
to discern the Spirit of God moving over the face of the waters of life; he is more concerned
with final than with efficient causes.

Yet we can discern in him the rise of that HISTORIC SENSE which is the rational antecedent
of the science of historical criticism, the [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], to use
the words of a Greek writer, as opposed to that which comes either [Greek text which cannot
be reproduced].

He has passed through the valley of faith and has caught a glimpse of the sunlit heights of
Reason; but like all those who, while accepting the supernatural, yet attempt to apply the
canons of rationalism, he is essentially inconsistent.  For the better apprehension of the
character of this historic sense in Herodotus it will be necessary to examine at some length
the various forms of criticism in which it manifests itself.

Such fabulous stories as that of the Phoenix, of the goat-footed men, of the headless beings
with eyes in their breasts, of the men who slept six months in the year ([Greek text which
cannot be reproduced]), of the wer-wolf of the Neuri, and the like, are entirely rejected by
him as being opposed to the ordinary experience of life, and to those natural laws whose universal
influence the early Greek physical philosophers had already made known to the world of thought.
Other legends, such as the suckling of Cyrus by a bitch, or the feather-rain of northern Europe,
are rationalised and explained into a woman's name and a fall of snow. The supernatural origin
of the Scythian nation, from the union of Hercules and the monstrous Echidna, is set aside
by him for the more probable account that they were a nomad tribe driven by the Massagetae
from Asia; and he appeals to the local names of their country as proof of the fact that the
Kimmerians were the original possessors.

But in the case of Herodotus it will be more instructive to pass on from points like these
to those questions of general probability, the true apprehension of which depends rather on
a certain quality of mind than on any possibility of formulated rules, questions which form
no unimportant part of scientific history; for it must be remembered always that the canons
of historical criticism are essentially different from those of judicial evidence, for they
cannot, like the latter, be made plain to every ordinary mind, but appeal to a certain historical
faculty founded on the experience of life.  Besides, the rules for the reception of evidence
in courts of law are purely stationary, while the science of historical probability is essentially
progressive, and changes with the advancing spirit of each age.

Now, of all the speculative canons of historical criticism, none is more important than that
which rests on psychological probability.

Arguing from his knowledge of human nature, Herodotus rejects the presence of Helen within
the walls of Troy.  Had she been there, he says, Priam and his kinsmen would never have been
so mad ([Greek text which cannot be reproduced]) as not to give her up, when they and their
children and their city were in such peril (ii. 118); and as regards the authority of Homer,
some incidental passages in his poem show that he knew of Helen's sojourn in Egypt during the
siege, but selected the other story as being a more suitable motive for an epic.  Similarly
he does not believe that the Alcmaeonidae family, a family who had always been the haters of
tyranny ([Greek text which cannot be reproduced]), and to whom, even more than to Harmodios
and Aristogeiton, Athens owed its liberty, would ever have been so treacherous as to hold up
a shield after the battle of Marathon as a signal for the Persian host to fall on the city.
A shield, he acknowledges, was held up, but it could not possibly have been done by such friends
of liberty as the house of Alcmaeon; nor will he believe that a great king like Rhampsinitus
would have sent his daughter [Greek text which cannot be reproduced].

Elsewhere he argues from more general considerations of probability; a Greek courtesan like
Rhodopis would hardly have been rich enough to build a pyramid, and, besides, on chronological
grounds the story is impossible (ii. 134).

In another passage (ii. 63), after giving an account of the forcible entry of the priests of
Ares into the chapel of the god's mother, which seems to have been a sort of religious faction
fight where sticks were freely used ([Greek text which cannot be reproduced]), 'I feel sure,'
he says, 'that many of them died from getting their heads broken, notwithstanding the assertions
of the Egyptian priests to the contrary.'  There is also something charmingly naive in the
account he gives of the celebrated Greek swimmer who dived a distance of eighty stadia to give
his countrymen warning of the Persian advance.  'If, however,' he says, 'I may offer an opinion
on the subject, I would say that he came in a boat.'

There is, of course, something a little trivial in some of the instances I have quoted; but
in a writer like Herodotus, who stands on the borderland between faith and rationalism, one
likes to note even the most minute instances of the rise of the critical and sceptical spirit
of inquiry.

How really strange, at base, it was with him may, I think, be shown by a reference to those
passages where he applies rationalistic tests to matters connected with religion.  He nowhere,
indeed, grapples with the moral and scientific difficulties of the Greek Bible; and where he
rejects as incredible the marvellous achievements of Hercules in Egypt, he does so on the express
grounds that he had not yet been received among the gods, and so was still subject to the ordinary
conditions of mortal life ([Greek text which cannot be reproduced]).

Even within these limits, however, his religious conscience seems to have been troubled at
such daring rationalism, and the passage (ii. 45) concludes with a pious hope that God will
pardon him for having gone so far, the great rationalistic passage being, of course, that in
which he rejects the mythical account of the foundation of Dodona.  'How can a dove speak with
a human voice?' he asks, and rationalises the bird into a foreign princess.

Similarly he seems more inclined to believe that the great storm at the beginning of the Persian
War ceased from ordinary atmospheric causes, and not in consequence of the incantations of
the MAGIANS. He calls Melampos, whom the majority of the Greeks looked on as an inspired prophet,
'a clever man who had acquired for himself the art of prophecy'; and as regards the miracle
told of the AEginetan statues of the primeval deities of Damia and Auxesia, that they fell
on their knees when the sacrilegious Athenians strove to carry them off, 'any one may believe
it,' he says, 'who likes, but as for myself, I place no credence in the tale.'

So much then for the rationalistic spirit of historical criticism, as far as it appears explicitly
in the works of this great and philosophic writer; but for an adequate appreciation of his
position we must also note how conscious he was of the value of documentary evidence, of the
use of inscriptions, of the importance of the poets as throwing light on manners and customs
as well as on historical incidents.  No writer of any age has more vividly recognised the fact
that history is a matter of evidence, and that it is as necessary for the historian to state
his authority as it is to produce one's witnesses in a court of law.

While, however, we can discern in Herodotus the rise of an historic sense, we must not blind
ourselves to the large amount of instances where he receives supernatural influences as part
of the ordinary forces of life.  Compared to Thucydides, who succeeded him in the development
of history, he appears almost like a mediaeval writer matched with a modern rationalist.  For,
contemporary though they were, between these two authors there is an infinite chasm of thought.

The essential difference of their methods may be best illustrated from those passages where
they treat of the same subject.  The execution of the Spartan heralds, Nicolaos and Aneristos,
during the Peloponnesian War is regarded by Herodotus as one of the most supernatural instances
of the workings of nemesis and the wrath of an outraged hero; while the lengthened siege and
ultimate fall of Troy was brought about by the avenging hand of God desiring to manifest unto
men the mighty penalties which always follow upon mighty sins.  But Thucydides either sees
not, or desires not to see, in either of these events the finger of Providence, or the punishment
of wicked doers.  The death of the heralds is merely an Athenian retaliation for similar outrages
committed by the opposite side; the long agony of the ten years' siege is due merely to the
want of a good commissariat in the Greek army; while the fall of the city is the result of
a united military attack consequent on a good supply of provisions.

Now, it is to be observed that in this latter passage, as well as elsewhere, Thucydides is
in no sense of the word a sceptic as regards his attitude towards the truth of these ancient
legends.

Agamemnon and Atreus, Theseus and Eurystheus, even Minos, about whom Herodotus has some doubts,
are to him as real personages as Alcibiades or Gylippus.  The points in his historical criticism
of the past are, first, his rejection of all extra-natural interference, and, secondly, the
attributing to these ancient heroes the motives and modes of thought of his own day.  The present
was to him the key to the explanation of the past, as it was to the prediction of the future.

Now, as regards his attitude towards the supernatural he is at one with modern science.  We
too know that, just as the primeval coal- beds reveal to us the traces of rain-drops and other
atmospheric phenomena similar to those of our own day, so, in estimating the history of the
past, the introduction of no force must be allowed whose workings we cannot observe among the
phenomena around us.  To lay down canons of ultra-historical credibility for the explanation
of events which happen to have preceded us by a few thousand years, is as thoroughly unscientific
as it is to intermingle preternatural in geological theories.

Whatever the canons of art may be, no difficulty in history is so great as to warrant the introduction
of a spirit of spirit [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], in the sense of a violation
of the laws of nature.

Upon the other point, however, Thucydides falls into an anachronism.  To refuse to allow the
workings of chivalrous and self-denying motives among the knights of the Trojan crusade, because
he saw none in the faction-loving Athenian of his own day, is to show an entire ignorance of
the various characteristics of human nature developing under different circumstances, and to
deny to a primitive chieftain like Agamemnon that authority founded on opinion, to which we
give the name of divine right, is to fall into an historical error quite as gross as attributing
to Atreus the courting of the populace ([Greek text which cannot be reproduced]) with a view
to the Mycenean throne.

The general method of historical criticism pursued by Thucydides having been thus indicated,
it remains to proceed more into detail as regards those particular points where he claims for
himself a more rational method of estimating evidence than either the public or his predecessors
possessed.

'So little pains,' he remarks, 'do the vulgar take in the investigation of truth, satisfied
with their preconceived opinions,' that the majority of the Greeks believe in a Pitanate cohort
of the Spartan army and in a double vote being the prerogative of the Spartan kings, neither
of which opinions has any foundation in fact.  But the chief point on which he lays stress
as evincing the 'uncritical way with which men receive legends, even the legends of their own
country,' is the entire baselessness of the common Athenian tradition in which Harmodios and
Aristogeiton were represented as the patriotic liberators of Athens from the Peisistratid tyranny.
So far, he points out, from the love of freedom being their motive, both of them were influenced
by merely personal considerations, Aristogeiton being jealous of Hipparchos' attention to Harmodios,
then a beautiful boy in the flower of Greek loveliness, while the latter's indignation was
aroused by an insult offered to his sister by the prince.

Their motives, then, were personal revenge, while the result of their conspiracy served only
to rivet more tightly the chains of servitude which bound Athens to the Peisistratid house,
for Hipparchos, whom they killed, was only the tyrant's younger brother, and not the tyrant
himself.

To prove his theory that Hippias was the elder, he appeals to the evidence afforded by a public
inscription in which his name occurs immediately after that of his father, a point which he
thinks shows that he was the eldest, and so the heir.  This view he further corroborates by
another inscription, on the altar of Apollo, which mentions the children of Hippias and not
those of his brothers; 'for it was natural for the eldest to be married first'; and besides
this, on the score of general probability he points out that, had Hippias been the younger,
he would not have so easily obtained the tyranny on the death of Hipparchos.

Now, what is important in Thucydides, as evinced in the treatment of legend generally, is not
the results he arrived at, but the method by which he works.  The first great rationalistic
historian, he may be said to have paved the way for all those who followed after him, though
it must always be remembered that, while the total absence in his pages of all the mystical
paraphernalia of the supernatural theory of life is an advance in the progress of rationalism,
and an era in scientific history, whose importance could never be over-estimated, yet we find
along with it a total absence of any mention of those various social and economical forces
which form such important factors in the evolution of the world, and to which Herodotus rightly
gave great prominence in his immortal work.  The history of Thucydides is essentially one-sided
and incomplete.  The intricate details of sieges and battles, subjects with which the historian
proper has really nothing to do except so far as they may throw light on the spirit of the
age, we would readily exchange for some notice of the condition of private society in Athens,
or the influence and position of women.

There is an advance in the method of historical criticism; there is an advance in the conception
and motive of history itself; for in Thucydides we may discern that natural reaction against
the intrusion of didactic and theological considerations into the sphere of the pure intellect,
the spirit of which may be found in the Euripidean treatment of tragedy and the later schools
of art, as well as in the Platonic conception of science.

History, no doubt, has splendid lessons for our instruction, just as all good art comes to
us as the herald of the noblest truth. But, to set before either the painter or the historian
the inculcation of moral lessons as an aim to be consciously pursued, is to miss entirely the
true motive and characteristic both of art and history, which is in the one case the creation
of beauty, in the other the discovery of the laws of the evolution of progress: IL NE FAUT
DEMANDER DE L'ART QUE L'ART, DU PASSE QUE LE PASSE.

Herodotus wrote to illustrate the wonderful ways of Providence and the nemesis that falls on
sin, and his work is a good example of the truth that nothing can dispense with criticism so
much as a moral aim.  Thucydides has no creed to preach, no doctrine to prove.  He analyses
the results which follow inevitably from certain antecedents, in order that on a recurrence
of the same crisis men may know how to act.

His object was to discover the laws of the past so as to serve as a light to illumine the future.
We must not confuse the recognition of the utility of history with any ideas of a didactic
aim.  Two points more in Thucydides remain for our consideration:  his treatment of the rise
of Greek civilisation, and of the primitive condition of Hellas, as well as the question how
far can he be said really to have recognised the existence of laws regulating the complex phenomena
of life.

CHAPTER III

THE investigation into the two great problems of the origin of society and the philosophy of
history occupies such an important position in the evolution of Greek thought that, to obtain
any clear view of the workings of the critical spirit, it will be necessary to trace at some
length their rise and scientific development as evinced not merely in the works of historians
proper, but also in the philosophical treatises of Plato and Aristotle.  The important position
which these two great thinkers occupy in the progress of historical criticism can hardly be
over- estimated.  I do not mean merely as regards their treatment of the Greek Bible, and Plato's
endeavours to purge sacred history of its immorality by the application of ethical canons at
the time when Aristotle was beginning to undermine the basis of miracles by his scientific
conception of law, but with reference to these two wider questions of the rise of civil institutions
and the philosophy of history.

And first, as regards the current theories of the primitive condition of society, there was
a wide divergence of opinion in Hellenic society, just as there is now.  For while the majority
of the orthodox public, of whom Hesiod may be taken as the representative, looked back, as
a great many of our own day still do, to a fabulous age of innocent happiness, a BELL' ETE
DELL' AURO, where sin and death were unknown and men and women were like Gods, the foremost
men of intellect such as Aristotle and Plato, AEschylus and many of the other poets (1) saw
in primitive man 'a few small sparks of humanity preserved on the tops of mountains after some
deluge,' 'without an idea of cities, governments or legislation,' 'living the lives of wild
beasts in sunless caves,' 'their only law being the survival of the fittest.'

And this, too, was the opinion of Thucydides, whose ARCHAEOLOGIA as it is contains a most valuable
disquisition on the early condition of Hellas, which it will be necessary to examine at some
length.

Now, as regards the means employed generally by Thucydides for the elucidation of ancient history,
I have already pointed out how that, while acknowledging that 'it is the tendency of every
poet to exaggerate, as it is of every chronicler to seek to be attractive at the expense of
truth; he yet assumes in the thoroughly euhemeristic way, that under the veil of myth and legend
there does yet exist a rational basis of fact discoverable by the method of rejecting all supernatural
interference as well as any extraordinary motives influencing the actors.  It is in complete
accordance with this spirit that he appeals, for instance, to the Homeric epithet of [Greek
text which cannot be reproduced], as applied to Corinth, as a proof of the early commercial
prosperity of that city; to the fact of the generic name HELLENES not occurring in the ILIAD
as a corroboration of his theory of the essentially disunited character of the primitive Greek
tribes; and he argues from the line 'O'er many islands and all Argos ruled,' as applied to
Agamemnon, that his forces must have been partially naval, 'for Agamemnon's was a continental
power, and he could not have been master of any but the adjacent islands, and these would not
be many but through the possession of a fleet.'

Anticipating in some measure the comparative method of research, he argues from the fact of
the more barbarous Greek tribes, such as the AEtolians and Acarnanians, still carrying arms
in his own day, that this custom was the case originally over the whole country. 'The fact,'
he says, 'that the people in these parts of Hellas are still living in the old way points to
a time when the same mode of life was equally common to all.'  Similarly, in another passage,
he shows how a corroboration of his theory of the respectable character of piracy in ancient
days is afforded by 'the honour with which some of the inhabitants of the continent still regard
a successful marauder,' as well as by the fact that the question, 'Are you a pirate?' is a
common feature of primitive society as shown in the poets; and finally, after observing how
the old Greek custom of wearing belts in gymnastic contests still survived among the more uncivilised
Asiatic tribes, he observes that there are many other points in which a likeness may be shown
between the life of the primitive Hellenes and that of the barbarians to-day.'

As regards the evidence afforded by ancient remains, while adducing as a proof of the insecure
character of early Greek society the fact of their cities (2) being always built at some distance
from the sea, yet he is careful to warn us, and the caution ought to be borne in mind by all
archaeologists, that we have no right to conclude from the scanty remains of any city that
its legendary greatness in primitive times was a mere exaggeration.  'We are not justified,'
he says, 'in rejecting the tradition of the magnitude of the Trojan armament, because Mycenae
and the other towns of that age seem to us small and insignificant.  For, if Lacedaemon was
to become desolate, any antiquarian judging merely from its ruins would be inclined to regard
the tale of the Spartan hegemony as an idle myth; for the city is a mere collection of villages
after the old fashion of Hellas, and has none of those splendid public buildings and temples
which characterise Athens, and whose remains, in the case of the latter city, would be so marvellous
as to lead the superficial observer into an exaggerated estimate of the Athenian power.'  Nothing
can be more scientific than the archaeological canons laid down, whose truth is strikingly
illustrated to any one who has compared the waste fields of the Eurotas plain with the lordly
monuments of the Athenian acropolis. (3)

On the other hand, Thucydides is quite conscious of the value of the positive evidence afforded
by archaeological remains.  He appeals, for instance, to the character of the armour found
in the Delian tombs and the peculiar mode of sepulture, as corroboration of his theory of the
predominance of the Carian element among the primitive islanders, and to the concentration
of all the temples either in the Acropolis, or in its immediate vicinity, to the name of [Greek
text which cannot be reproduced] by which it was still known, and to the extraordinary sanctity
of the spring of water there, as proof that the primitive city was originally confined to the
citadel, and the district immediately beneath it (ii. 16).  And lastly, in the very opening
of his history, anticipating one of the most scientific of modern methods, he points out how
in early states of civilisation immense fertility of the soil tends to favour the personal
aggrandisement of individuals, and so to stop the normal progress of the country through 'the
rise of factions, that endless source of ruin'; and also by the allurements it offers to a
foreign invader, to necessitate a continual change of population, one immigration following
on another.  He exemplifies his theory by pointing to the endless political revolutions that
characterised Arcadia, Thessaly and Boeotia, the three richest spots in Greece, as well as
by the negative instance of the undisturbed state in primitive time of Attica, which was always
remarkable for the dryness and poverty of its soil.

Now, while undoubtedly in these passages we may recognise the first anticipation of many of
the most modern principles of research, we must remember how essentially limited is the range
of the ARCHAEOLOGIA, and how no theory at all is offered on the wider questions of the general
conditions of the rise and progress of humanity, a problem which is first scientifically discussed
in the REPUBLIC of Plato.

And at the outset it must be premised that, while the study of primitive man is an essentially
inductive science, resting rather on the accumulation of evidence than on speculation, among
the Greeks it was prosecuted rather on deductive principles. Thucydides did, indeed, avail
himself of the opportunities afforded by the unequal development of civilisation in his own
day in Greece, and in the places I have pointed out seems to have anticipated the comparative
method.  But we do not find later writers availing themselves of the wonderfully accurate and
picturesque accounts given by Herodotus of the customs of savage tribes.  To take one instance,
which bears a good deal on modern questions, we find in the works of this great traveller the
gradual and progressive steps in the development of the family life clearly manifested in the
mere gregarious herding together of the Agathyrsi, their primitive kinsmanship through women
in common, and the rise of a feeling of paternity from a state of polyandry.  This tribe stood
at that time on that borderland between umbilical relationship and the family which has been
such a difficult point for modern anthropologists to find.

The ancient authors, however, are unanimous in insisting that the family is the ultimate unit
of society, though, as I have said, an inductive study of primitive races, or even the accounts
given of them by Herodotus, would have shown them that the [Greek text which cannot be reproduced]
of a personal household, to use Plato's expression, is really a most complex notion appearing
always in a late stage of civilisation, along with recognition of private property and the
rights of individualism.

Philology also, which in the hands of modern investigators has proved such a splendid instrument
of research, was in ancient days studied on principles too unscientific to be of much use.
Herodotus points out that the word ERIDANOS is essentially Greek in character, that consequently
the river supposed to run round the world is probably a mere Greek invention.  His remarks,
however, on language generally, as in the case of PIROMIS and the ending of the Persian names,
show on what unsound basis his knowledge of language rested.

In the BACCHAE of Euripides there is an extremely interesting passage in which the immoral
stories of the Greek mythology are accounted for on the principle of that misunderstanding
of words and metaphors to which modern science has given the name of a disease of language.
In answer to the impious rationalism of Pentheus - a sort of modern Philistine - Teiresias,
who may be termed the Max Muller of the Theban cycle, points out that the story of Dionysus
being inclosed in Zeus' thigh really arose from the linguistic confusion between [Greek text
which cannot be reproduced] and [Greek text which cannot be reproduced].

On the whole, however - for I have quoted these two instances only to show the unscientific
character of early philology - we may say that this important instrument in recreating the
history of the past was not really used by the ancients as a means of historical criticism.
Nor did the ancients employ that other method, used to such advantage in our own day, by which
in the symbolism and formulas of an advanced civilisation we can detect the unconscious survival
of ancient customs:  for, whereas in the sham capture of the bride at a marriage feast, which
was common in Wales till a recent time, we can discern the lingering reminiscence of the barbarous
habit of exogamy, the ancient writers saw only the deliberate commemoration of an historical event.

Aristotle does not tell us by what method he discovered that the Greeks used to buy their wives
in primitive times, but, judging by his general principles, it was probably through some legend
or myth on the subject which lasted to his own day, and not, as we would do, by arguing back
from the marriage presents given to the bride and her relatives. (4)

The origin of the common proverb 'worth so many beeves,' in which we discern the unconscious
survival of a purely pastoral state of society before the use of metals was known, is ascribed
by Plutarch to the fact of Theseus having coined money bearing a bull's head. Similarly, the
Amathusian festival, in which a young man imitated the labours of a woman in travail, is regarded
by him as a rite instituted in Ariadne's honour, and the Carian adoration of asparagus as a
simple commemoration of the adventure of the nymph Perigune.  In the first of these WE discern
the beginning of agnation and kinsmanship through the father, which still lingers in the 'couvee'
of New Zealand tribes:  while the second is a relic of the totem and fetish worship of plants.

Now, in entire opposition to this modern inductive principle of research stands the philosophic
Plato, whose account of primitive man is entirely speculative and deductive.

The origin of society he ascribes to necessity, the mother of all inventions, and imagines
that individual man began deliberately to herd together on account of the advantages of the
principle of division of labour and the rendering of mutual need.

It must, however, be borne in mind that Plato's object in this whole passage in the REPUBLIC
was, perhaps, not so much to analyse the conditions of early society as to illustrate the importance
of the division of labour, the shibboleth of his political economy, by showing what a powerful
factor it must have been in the most primitive as well as in the most complex states of society;
just as in the LAWS he almost rewrites entirely the history of the Peloponnesus in order to
prove the necessity of a balance of power. He surely, I mean, must have recognised himself
how essentially incomplete his theory was in taking no account of the origin of family life,
the position and influence of women, and other social questions, as well as in disregarding
those deeper motives of religion, which are such important factors in early civilisation, and
whose influence Aristotle seems to have clearly apprehended, when he says that the aim of primitive
society was not merely life but the higher life, and that in the origin of society utility
is not the sole motive, but that there is something spiritual in it if, at least, 'spiritual'
will bring out the meaning of that complex expression [Greek text which cannot be reproduced].
Otherwise, the whole account in the REPUBLIC of primitive man will always remain as a warning
against the intrusion of A PRIORI speculations in the domain appropriate to induction.

Now, Aristotle's theory of the origin of society, like his philosophy of ethics, rests ultimately
on the principle of final causes, not in the theological meaning of an aim or tendency imposed
from without, but in the scientific sense of function corresponding to organ.  'Nature maketh
no thing in vain' is the text of Aristotle in this as in other inquiries.  Man being the only
animal possessed of the power of rational speech is, he asserts, by nature intended to be social,
more so than the bee or any other gregarious animal.

He is [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], and the national tendency towards higher forms
of perfection brings the 'armed savage who used to sell his wife' to the free independence
of a free state, and to the [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], which was the test of
true citizenship.  The stages passed through by humanity start with the family first as the
ultimate unit.

The conglomeration of families forms a village ruled by that patriarchal sway which is the
oldest form of government in the world, as is shown by the fact that all men count it to be
the constitution of heaven, and the villages are merged into the state, and here the progression
stops.

For Aristotle, like all Greek thinkers, found his ideal within the walls of the [Greek text
which cannot be reproduced], yet perhaps in his remark that a united Greece would rule the
world we may discern some anticipation of that 'federal union of free states into one consolidated
empire' which, more than the [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], is to our eyes the ultimately
perfect polity.

How far Aristotle was justified in regarding the family as the ultimate unit, with the materials
afforded to him by Greek literature, I have already noticed.  Besides, Aristotle, I may remark,
had he reflected on the meaning of that Athenian law which, while prohibiting marriage with
a uterine sister, permitted it with a sister-german, or on the common tradition in Athens that
before the time of Cecrops children bore their mothers' names, or on some of the Spartan regulations,
could hardly have failed to see the universality of kinsmanship through women in early days,
and the late appearance of monandry.  Yet, while he missed this point, in common, it must be
acknowledged, with many modern writers, such as Sir Henry Maine, it is essentially as an explorer
of inductive instances that we recognise his improvement on Plato.  The treatise [Greek text
which cannot be reproduced], did it remain to us in its entirety, would have been one of the
most valuable landmarks in the progress of historical criticism, and the first scientific treatise
on the science of comparative politics.

A few fragments still remain to us, in one of which we find Aristotle appealing to the authority
of an ancient inscription on the 'Disk of Iphitus,' one of the most celebrated Greek antiquities,
to corroborate his theory of the Lycurgean revival of the Olympian festival; while his enormous
research is evinced in the elaborate explanation he gives of the historical origin of proverbs
such as [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], of religious songs like the [Greek text which
cannot be reproduced] of the Botticean virgins, or the praises of love and war.

And, finally, it is to be observed how much wider than Plato's his theory of the origin of
society is.  They both rest on a psychological basis, but Aristotle's recognition of the capacity
for progress and the tendency towards a higher life shows how much deeper his knowledge of
human nature was.

In imitation of these two philosophers, Polybius gives an account of the origin of society
in the opening to his philosophy of history.  Somewhat in the spirit of Plato, he imagines
that after one of the cyclic deluges which sweep off mankind at stated periods and annihilate
all pre-existing civilisation, the few surviving members of humanity coalesce for mutual protection,
and, as in the case with ordinary animals, the one most remarkable for physical strength is
elected king.  In a short time, owing to the workings of sympathy and the desire of approbation,
the moral qualities begin to make their appearance, and intellectual instead of bodily excellence
becomes the qualification for sovereignty.

Other points, as the rise of law and the like, are dwelt on in a somewhat modern spirit, and
although Polybius seems not to have employed the inductive method of research in this question,
or rather, I should say, of the hierarchical order of the rational progress of ideas in life,
he is not far removed from what the laborious investigations of modern travellers have given us.

And, indeed, as regards the working of the speculative faculty in the creation of history,
it is in all respects marvellous how that the most truthful accounts of the passage from barbarism
to civilisation in ancient literature come from the works of poets. The elaborate researches
of Mr. Tylor and Sir John Lubbock have done little more than verify the theories put forward
in the PROMETHEUS BOUND and the DE NATURA RERUM; yet neither AEschylus nor Lucretias followed
in the modern path, but rather attained to truth by a certain almost mystic power of creative
imagination, such as we now seek to banish from science as a dangerous power, though to it
science seems to owe many of its most splendid generalities. (5)

Leaving then the question of the origin of society as treated by the ancients, I shall now
turn to the other and the more important question of how far they may he said to have attained
to what we call the philosophy of history.

Now at the outset we must note that, while the conceptions of law and order have been universally
received as the governing principles of the phenomena of nature in the sphere of physical science,
yet their intrusion into the domain of history and the life of man has always been met with
a strong opposition, on the ground of the incalculable nature of two great forces acting on
human action, a certain causeless spontaneity which men call free will, and the extra-natural
interference which they attribute as a constant attribute to God.

Now, that there is a science of the apparently variable phenomena of history is a conception
which WE have perhaps only recently begun to appreciate; yet, like all other great thoughts,
it seems to have come to the Greek mind spontaneously, through a certain splendour of imagination,
in the morning tide of their civilisation, before inductive research had armed them with the
instruments of verification.  For I think it is possible to discern in some of the mystic speculations
of the early Greek thinkers that desire to discover what is that 'invariable existence of which
there are variable states,' and to incorporate it in some one formula of law which may serve
to explain the different manifestations of all organic bodies, MAN INCLUDED, which is the germ
of the philosophy of history; the germ indeed of an idea of which it is not too much to say
that on it any kind of historical criticism, worthy of the name, must ultimately rest.

For the very first requisite for any scientific conception of history is the doctrine of uniform
sequence:  in other words, that certain events having happened, certain other events corresponding
to them will happen also; that the past is the key of the future.

Now at the birth of this great conception science, it is true, presided, yet religion it was
which at the outset clothed it in its own garb, and familiarised men with it by appealing to
their hearts first and then to their intellects; knowing that at the beginning of things it
is through the moral nature, and not through the intellectual, that great truths are spread.

So in Herodotus, who may be taken as a representative of the orthodox tone of thought, the
idea of the uniform sequence of cause and effect appears under the theological aspect of Nemesis
and Providence, which is really the scientific conception of law, only it is viewed from an
ETHICAL standpoint.

Now in Thucydides the philosophy of history rests on the probability, which the uniformity
of human nature affords us, that the future will in the course of human things resemble the
past, if not reproduce it.  He appears to contemplate a recurrence of the phenomena of history
as equally certain with a return of the epidemic of the Great Plague.

Notwithstanding what German critics have written on the subject, we must beware of regarding
this conception as a mere reproduction of that cyclic theory of events which sees in the world
nothing but the regular rotation of Strophe and Antistrophe, in the eternal choir of life and
death.

For, in his remarks on the excesses of the Corcyrean Revolution, Thucydides distinctly rests
his idea of the recurrence of history on the psychological grounds of the general sameness
of mankind.

'The sufferings,' he says, 'which revolution entailed upon the cities were many and terrible,
such as have occurred and always will occurs as long as human nature remains the same, though
in a severer or milder form, and varying in their symptoms according to the variety of the
particular cases.

'In peace and prosperity states and individuals have better sentiments, because they are not
confronted with imperious necessities; but war takes away the easy supply of men's wants, and
so proves a hard taskmaster, which brings most men's characters to a level with their fortunes.'

CHAPTER IV

IT is evident that here Thucydides is ready to admit the variety of manifestations which external
causes bring about in their workings on the uniform character of the nature of man.  Yet, after
all is said, these are perhaps but very general statements:  the ordinary effects of peace
and war are dwelt on, but there is no real analysis of the immediate causes and general laws
of the phenomena of life, nor does Thucydides seem to recognise the truth that if humanity
proceeds in circles, the circles are always widening.

Perhaps we may say that with him the philosophy of history is partly in the metaphysical stage,
and see, in the progress of this idea from Herodotus to Polybius, the exemplification of the
Comtian Law of the three stages of thought, the theological, the metaphysical, and the scientific:
for truly out of the vagueness of theological mysticism this conception which we call the Philosophy
of History was raised to a scientific principle, according to which the past was explained
and the future predicted by reference to general laws.

Now, just as the earliest account of the nature of the progress of humanity is to be found
in Plato, so in him we find the first explicit attempt to found a universal philosophy of history
upon wide rational grounds.  Having created an ideally perfect state, the philosopher proceeds
to give an elaborate theory of the complex causes which produce revolutions, of the moral effects
of various forms of government and education, of the rise of the criminal classes and their
connection with pauperism, and, in a word, to create history by the deductive method and to
proceed from A PRIORI psychological principles to discover the governing laws of the apparent
chaos of political life.

There have been many attempts since Plato to deduce from a single philosophical principle all
the phenomena which experience subsequently verifies for us.  Fichte thought he could predict
the world-plan from the idea of universal time.  Hegel dreamed he had found the key to the
mysteries of life in the development of freedom, and Krause in the categories of being.  But
the one scientific basis on which the true philosophy of history must rest is the complete
knowledge of the laws of human nature in all its wants, its aspirations, its powers and its
tendencies:  and this great truth, which Thucydides may be said in some measure to have apprehended,
was given to us first by Plato.

Now, it cannot be accurately said of this philosopher that either his philosophy or his history
is entirely and simply A PRIORI.  ON EST DE SON SIECLE MEME QUAND ON Y PROTESTE, and so we
find in him continual references to the Spartan mode of life, the Pythagorean system, the general
characteristics of Greek tyrannies and Greek democracies.  For while, in his account of the
method of forming an ideal state, he says that the political artist is indeed to fix his gaze
on the sun of abstract truth in the heavens of the pure reason, but is sometimes to turn to
the realisation of the ideals on earth:  yet, after all, the general character of the Platonic
method, which is what we are specially concerned with, is essentially deductive and A PRIORI.
And he himself, in the building up of his Nephelococcygia, certainly starts with a [Greek text
which cannot be reproduced], making a clean sweep of all history and all experience; and it
was essentially as an A PRIORI theorist that he is criticised by Aristotle, as we shall see later.

To proceed to closer details regarding the actual scheme of the laws of political revolutions
as drawn out by Plato, we must first note that the primary cause of the decay of the ideal
state is the general principle, common to the vegetable and animal worlds as well as to the
world of history, that all created things are fated to decay - a principle which, though expressed
in the terms of a mere metaphysical abstraction, is yet perhaps in its essence scientific.
For we too must hold that a continuous redistribution of matter and motion is the inevitable
result of the nominal persistence of Force, and that perfect equilibrium is as impossible in
politics as it certainly is in physics.

The secondary causes which mar the perfection of the Platonic 'city of the sun' are to be found
in the intellectual decay of the race consequent on injudicious marriages and in the Philistine
elevation of physical achievements over mental culture; while the hierarchical succession of
Timocracy and Oligarchy, Democracy and Tyranny, is dwelt on at great length and its causes
analysed in a very dramatic and psychological manner, if not in that sanctioned by the actual
order of history.

And indeed it is apparent at first sight that the Platonic succession of states represents
rather the succession of ideas in the philosophic mind than any historical succession of time.

Aristotle meets the whole simply by an appeal to facts.  If the theory of the periodic decay
of all created things, he urges, be scientific, it must be universal, and so true of all the
other states as well as of the ideal.  Besides, a state usually changes into its contrary and
not to the form next to it; so the ideal state would not change into Timocracy; while Oligarchy,
more often than Tyranny, succeeds Democracy.  Plato, besides, says nothing of what a Tyranny
would change to.  According to the cycle theory it ought to pass into the ideal state again,
but as a fact one Tyranny is changed into another as at Sicyon, or into a Democracy as at Syracuse,
or into an Aristocracy as at Carthage.  The example of Sicily, too, shows that an Oligarchy
is often followed by a Tyranny, as at Leontini and Gela.  Besides, it is absurd to represent
greed as the chief motive of decay, or to talk of avarice as the root of Oligarchy, when in
nearly all true oligarchies money-making is forbidden by law.  And finally the Platonic theory
neglects the different kinds of democracies and of tyrannies.

Now nothing can be more important than this passage in Aristotle's POLITICS (v. 12.), which
may he said to mark an era in the evolution of historical criticism.  For there is nothing
on which Aristotle insists so strongly as that the generalisations from facts ought to be added
to the data of the A PRIORI method - a principle which we know to be true not merely of deductive
speculative politics but of physics also:  for are not the residual phenomena of chemists a
valuable source of improvement in theory?

His own method is essentially historical though by no means empirical.  On the contrary, this
far-seeing thinker, rightly styled IL MAESTRO DI COLOR CHE SANNO, may be said to have apprehended
clearly that the true method is neither exclusively empirical nor exclusively speculative,
but rather a union of both in the process called Analysis or the Interpretation of Facts, which
has been defined as the application to facts of such general conceptions as may fix the important
characteristics of the phenomena, and present them permanently in their true relations. He
too was the first to point out, what even in our own day is incompletely appreciated, that
nature, including the development of man, is not full of incoherent episodes like a bad tragedy,
that inconsistency and anomaly are as impossible in the moral as they are in the physical world,
and that where the superficial observer thinks he sees a revolution the philosophical critic
discerns merely the gradual and rational evolution of the inevitable results of certain antecedents.

And while admitting the necessity of a psychological basis for the philosophy of history, he
added to it the important truth that man, to be apprehended in his proper position in the universe
as well as in his natural powers, must be studied from below in the hierarchical progression
of higher function from the lower forms of life.  The important maxim, that to obtain a clear
conception of anything we must 'study it in its growth from the very beginning,' is formally
set down in the opening of the POLITICS, where, indeed, we shall find the other characteristic
features of the modern Evolutionary theory, such as the 'Differentiation of Function' and the
'Survival of the Fittest' explicitly set forth.

What a valuable step this was in the improvement of the method of historical criticism it is
needless to point out.  By it, one may say, the true thread was given to guide one's steps
through the bewildering labyrinth of facts.  For history (to use terms with which Aristotle
has made us familiar) may be looked at from two essentially different standpoints; either as
a work of art whose [Greek text which cannot be reproduced] or final cause is external to it
and imposed on it from without; or as an organism containing the law of its own development
in itself, and working out its perfection merely by the fact of being what it is.  Now, if
we adopt the former, which we may style the theological view, we shall be in continual danger
of tripping into the pitfall of some A PRIORI conclusion - that bourne from which, it has been
truly said, no traveller ever returns.

The latter is the only scientific theory and was apprehended in its fulness by Aristotle, whose
application of the inductive method to history, and whose employment of the evolutionary theory
of humanity, show that he was conscious that the philosophy of history is nothing separate
from the facts of history but is contained in them, and that the rational law of the complex
phenomena of life, like the ideal in the world of thought, is to be reached through the facts,
not superimposed on them - [Greek text which cannot be reproduced].

And finally, in estimating the enormous debt which the science of historical criticism owes
to Aristotle, we must not pass over his attitude towards those two great difficulties in the
formation of a philosophy of history on which I have touched above.  I mean the assertion of
extra-natural interference with the normal development of the world and of the incalculable
influence exercised by the power of free will.

Now, as regards the former, he may be said to have neglected it entirely.  The special acts
of providence proceeding from God's immediate government of the world, which Herodotus saw
as mighty landmarks in history, would have been to him essentially disturbing elements in that
universal reign of law, the extent of whose limitless empire he of all the great thinkers of
antiquity was the first explicitly to recognise.

Standing aloof from the popular religion as well as from the deeper conceptions of Herodotus
and the Tragic School, he no longer thought of God as of one with fair limbs and treacherous
face haunting wood and glade, nor would he see in him a jealous judge continually interfering
in the world's history to bring the wicked to punishment and the proud to a fall.  God to him
was the incarnation of the pure Intellect, a being whose activity was the contemplation of
his own perfection, one whom Philosophy might imitate but whom prayers could never move, to
the sublime indifference of whose passionless wisdom what were the sons of men, their desires
or their sins?  While, as regards the other difficulty and the formation of a philosophy of
history, the conflict of free will with general laws appears first in Greek thought in the
usual theological form in which all great ideas seem to be cradled at their birth.

It was such legends as those of OEdipus and Adrastus, exemplifying the struggles of individual
humanity against the overpowering force of circumstances and necessity, which gave to the early
Greeks those same lessons which we of modern days draw, in somewhat less artistic fashion,
from the study of statistics and the laws of physiology.

In Aristotle, of course, there is no trace of supernatural influence.  The Furies, which drive
their victim into sin first and then punishment, are no longer 'viper-tressed goddesses with
eyes and mouth aflame,' but those evil thoughts which harbour within the impure soul.  In this,
as in all other points, to arrive at Aristotle is to reach the pure atmosphere of scientific
and modern thought.

But while he rejected pure necessitarianism in its crude form as essentially a REDUCTIO AD
ABSURDUM of life, he was fully conscious of the fact that the will is not a mysterious and
ultimate unit of force beyond which we cannot go and whose special characteristic is inconsistency,
but a certain creative attitude of the mind which is, from the first, continually influenced
by habits, education and circumstance; so absolutely modifiable, in a word, that the good and
the bad man alike seem to lose the power of free will; for the one is morally unable to sin,
the other physically incapacitated for reformation.

And of the influence of climate and temperature in forming the nature of man (a conception
perhaps pressed too far in modern days when the 'race theory' is supposed to be a sufficient
explanation of the Hindoo, and the latitude and longitude of a country the best guide to its
morals(6)) Aristotle is completely unaware.  I do not allude to such smaller points as the
oligarchical tendencies of a horse-breeding country and the democratic influence of the proximity
of the sea (important though they are for the consideration of Greek history), but rather to
those wider views in the seventh book of his POLITICS, where he attributes the happy union
in the Greek character of intellectual attainments with the spirit of progress to the temperate
climate they enjoyed, and points out how the extreme cold of the north dulls the mental faculties
of its inhabitants and renders them incapable of social organisation or extended empire; while
to the enervating heat of eastern countries was due that want of spirit and bravery which then,
as now, was the characteristic of the population in that quarter of the globe.

Thucydides has shown the causal connection between political revolutions and the fertility
of the soil, but goes a step farther and points out the psychological influences on a people's
character exercised by the various extremes of climate - in both cases the first appearance
of a most valuable form of historical criticism.

To the development of Dialectic, as to God, intervals of time are of no account.  From Plato
and Aristotle we pass direct to Polybius.

The progress of thought from the philosopher of the Academe to the Arcadian historian may be
best illustrated by a comparison of the method by which each of the three writers, whom I have
selected as the highest expression of the rationalism of his respective age, attained to his
ideal state:  for the latter conception may be in a measure regarded as representing the most
spiritual principle which they could discern in history.

Now, Plato created his on A PRIORI principles; Aristotle formed his by an analysis of existing
constitutions; Polybius found his realised for him in the actual world of fact.  Aristotle
criticised the deductive speculations of Plato by means of inductive negative instances, but
Polybius will not take the 'Cloud City' of the REPUBLIC into account at all.  He compares it
to an athlete who has never run on 'Constitution Hill,' to a statue so beautiful that it is
entirely removed from the ordinary conditions of humanity, and consequently from the canons
of criticism.

The Roman state had attained in his eyes, by means of the mutual counteraction of three opposing
forces, (7) that stable equilibrium in politics which was the ideal of all the theoretical
writers of antiquity.  And in connection with this point it will be convenient to notice here
how much truth there is contained in the accusation often brought against the ancients that
they knew nothing of the idea of Progress, for the meaning of many of their speculations will
be hidden from us if we do not try and comprehend first what their aim was, and secondly why
it was so.

Now, like all wide generalities, this statement is at least inaccurate.  The prayer of Plato's
ideal City - [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], might be written as a text over the door
of the last Temple to Humanity raised by the disciples of Fourier and Saint-Simon, but it is
certainly true that their ideal principle was order and permanence, not indefinite progress.
For, setting aside the artistic prejudices which would have led the Greeks to reject this idea
of unlimited improvement, we may note that the modern conception of progress rests partly on
the new enthusiasm and worship of humanity, partly on the splendid hopes of material improvements
in civilisation which applied science has held out to us, two influences from which ancient
Greek thought seems to have been strangely free.  For the Greeks marred the perfect humanism
of the great men whom they worshipped, by imputing to them divinity and its supernatural powers;
while their science was eminently speculative and often almost mystic in its character, aiming
at culture and not utility, at higher spirituality and more intense reverence for law, rather
than at the increased facilities of locomotion and the cheap production of common things about
which our modern scientific school ceases not to boast.  And lastly, and perhaps chiefly, we
must remember that the 'plague spot of all Greek states,' as one of their own writers has called
it, was the terrible insecurity to life and property which resulted from the factions and revolutions
which ceased not to trouble Greece at all times, raising a spirit of fanaticism such as religion
raised in the middle ages of Europe.

These considerations, then, will enable us to understand first how it was that, radical and
unscrupulous reformers as the Greek political theorists were, yet, their end once attained,
no modern conservatives raised such outcry against the slightest innovation. Even acknowledged
improvements in such things as the games of children or the modes of music were regarded by
them with feelings of extreme apprehension as the herald of the DRAPEAU ROUGE of reform.  And
secondly, it will show us how it was that Polybius found his ideal in the commonwealth of Rome,
and Aristotle, like Mr. Bright, in the middle classes.  Polybius, however, is not content merely
with pointing out his ideal state, but enters at considerable length into the question of those
general laws whose consideration forms the chief essential of the philosophy of history.

He starts by accepting the general principle that all things are fated to decay (which I noticed
in the case of Plato), and that 'as iron produces rust and as wood breeds the animals that
destroy it, so every state has in it the seeds of its own corruption.'  He is not, however,
content to rest there, but proceeds to deal with the more immediate causes of revolutions,
which he says are twofold in nature, either external or internal.  Now, the former, depending
as they do on the synchronous conjunction of other events outside the sphere of scientific
estimation, are from their very character incalculable; but the latter, though assuming many
forms, always result from the over-great preponderance of any single element to the detriment
of the others, the rational law lying at the base of all varieties of political changes being
that stability can result only from the statical equilibrium produced by the counteraction
of opposing parts, since the more simple a constitution is the more it is insecure.  Plato
had pointed out before how the extreme liberty of a democracy always resulted in despotism,
but Polybius analyses the law and shows the scientific principles on which it rests.

The doctrine of the instability of pure constitutions forms an important era in the philosophy
of history.  Its special applicability to the politics of our own day has been illustrated
in the rise of the great Napoleon, when the French state had lost those divisions of caste
and prejudice, of landed aristocracy and moneyed interest, institutions in which the vulgar
see only barriers to Liberty but which are indeed the only possible defences against the coming
of that periodic Sirius of politics, the [Greek text which cannot be reproduced].

There is a principle which Tocqueville never wearies of explaining, and which has been subsumed
by Mr. Herbert Spencer under that general law common to all organic bodies which we call the
Instability of the Homogeneous.  The various manifestations of this law, as shown in the normal,
regular revolutions and evolutions of the different forms of government, (8) are expounded
with great clearness by Polybius, who claimed for his theory, in the Thucydidean spirit, that
it is a [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], not a mere [Greek text which cannot be reproduced],
and that a knowledge of it will enable the impartial observer (9) to discover at any time what
period of its constitutional evolution any particular state has already reached and into what
form it will be next differentiated, though possibly the exact time of the changes may be more
or less uncertain. (10)

Now in this necessarily incomplete account of the laws of political revolutions as expounded
by Polybius enough perhaps has been said to show what is his true position in the rational
development of the 'Idea' which I have called the Philosophy of History, because it is the
unifying of history.  Seen darkly as it is through the glass of religion in the pages of Herodotus,
more metaphysical than scientific with Thucydides, Plato strove to seize it by the eagle- flight
of speculation, to reach it with the eager grasp of a soul impatient of those slower and surer
inductive methods which Aristotle, in his trenchant criticism of his greater master, showed
were more brilliant than any vague theory, if the test of brilliancy is truth.

What then is the position of Polybius?  Does any new method remain for him?  Polybius was one
of those many men who are born too late to be original.  To Thucydides belongs the honour of
being the first in the history of Greek thought to discern the supreme calm of law and order
underlying the fitful storms of life, and Plato and Aristotle each represents a great new principle.
To Polybius belongs the office - how noble an office he made it his writings show - of making
more explicit the ideas which were implicit in his predecessors, of showing that they were
of wider applicability and perhaps of deeper meaning than they had seemed before, of examining
with more minuteness the laws which they had discovered, and finally of pointing out more clearly
than any one had done the range of science and the means it offered for analysing the present
and predicting what was to come.  His office thus was to gather up what they had left, to give
their principles new life by a wider application.

Polybius ends this great diapason of Greek thought.  When the Philosophy of history appears
next, as in Plutarch's tract on 'Why God's anger is delayed,' the pendulum of thought had swung
back to where it began.  His theory was introduced to the Romans under the cultured style of
Cicero, and was welcomed by them as the philosophical panegyric of their state.  The last notice
of it in Latin literature is in the pages of Tacitus, who alludes to the stable polity formed
out of these elements as a constitution easier to commend than to produce and in no case lasting.
Yet Polybius had seen the future with no uncertain eye, and had prophesied the rise of the
Empire from the unbalanced power of the ochlocracy fifty years and more before there was joy
in the Julian household over the birth of that boy who, born to power as the champion of the
people, died wearing the purple of a king.

No attitude of historical criticism is more important than the means by which the ancients
attained to the philosophy of history. The principle of heredity can be exemplified in literature
as well as in organic life:  Aristotle, Plato and Polybius are the lineal ancestors of Fichte
and Hegel, of Vico and Cousin, of Montesquieu and Tocqueville.

As my aim is not to give an account of historians but to point out those great thinkers whose
methods have furthered the advance of this spirit of historical criticism, I shall pass over
those annalists and chroniclers who intervened between Thucydides and Polybius.  Yet perhaps
it may serve to throw new light on the real nature of this spirit and its intimate connection
with all other forms of advanced thought if I give some estimate of the character and rise
of those many influences prejudicial to the scientific study of history which cause such a
wide gap between these two historians.

Foremost among these is the growing influence of rhetoric and the Isocratean school, which
seems to have regarded history as an arena for the display either of pathos or paradoxes, not
a scientific investigation into laws.

The new age is the age of style.  The same spirit of exclusive attention to form which made
Euripides often, like Swinburne, prefer music to meaning and melody to morality, which gave
to the later Greek statues that refined effeminacy, that overstrained gracefulness of attitude,
was felt in the sphere of history.  The rules laid down for historical composition are those
relating to the aesthetic value of digressions, the legality of employing more than one metaphor
in the same sentence, and the like; and historians are ranked not by their power of estimating
evidence but by the goodness of the Greek they write.

I must note also the important influence on literature exercised by Alexander the Great; for
while his travels encouraged the more accurate research of geography, the very splendour of
his achievements seems to have brought history again into the sphere of romance.  The appearance
of all great men in the world is followed invariably by the rise of that mythopoeic spirit
and that tendency to look for the marvellous, which is so fatal to true historical criticism.
An Alexander, a Napoleon, a Francis of Assisi and a Mahomet are thought to be outside the limiting
conditions of rational law, just as comets were supposed to be not very long ago. While the
founding of that city of Alexandria, in which Western and Eastern thought met with such strange
result to both, diverted the critical tendencies of the Greek spirit into questions of grammar,
philology and the like, the narrow, artificial atmosphere of that University town (as we may
call it) was fatal to the development of that independent and speculative spirit of research
which strikes out new methods of inquiry, of which historical criticism is one.

The Alexandrines combined a great love of learning with an ignorance of the true principles
of research, an enthusiastic spirit for accumulating materials with a wonderful incapacity
to use them.  Not among the hot sands of Egypt, or the Sophists of Athens, but from the very
heart of Greece rises the man of genius on whose influence in the evolution of the philosophy
of history I have a short time ago dwelt.  Born in the serene and pure air of the clear uplands
of Arcadia, Polybius may be said to reproduce in his work the character of the place which
gave him birth.  For, of all the historians - I do not say of antiquity but of all time - none
is more rationalistic than he, none more free from any belief in the 'visions and omens, the
monstrous legends, the grovelling superstitions and unmanly craving for the supernatural' ([Greek
text that cannot be reproduced](11)) which he himself is compelled to notice as the characteristics
of some of the historians who preceded him.  Fortunate in the land which bore him, he was no
less blessed in the wondrous time of his birth.  For, representing in himself the spiritual
supremacy of the Greek intellect and allied in bonds of chivalrous friendship to the world-conqueror
of his day, he seems led as it were by the hand of Fate 'to comprehend,' as has been said,
'more clearly than the Romans themselves the historical position of Rome,' and to discern with
greater insight than all other men could those two great resultants of ancient civilisation,
the material empire of the city of the seven hills, and the intellectual sovereignty of Hellas.

Before his own day, he says, (12) the events of the world were unconnected and separate and
the histories confined to particular countries.  Now, for the first time the universal empire
of the Romans rendered a universal history possible. (13)  This, then, is the august motive
of his work:  to trace the gradual rise of this Italian city from the day when the first legion
crossed the narrow strait of Messina and landed on the fertile fields of Sicily to the time
when Corinth in the East and Carthage in the West fell before the resistless wave of empire
and the eagles of Rome passed on the wings of universal victory from Calpe and the Pillars
of Hercules to Syria and the Nile.  At the same time he recognised that the scheme of Rome's
empire was worked out under the aegis of God's will. (14)  For, as one of the Middle Age scribes
most truly says, the [Greek text which cannot be reproduced] of Polybius is that power which
we Christians call God; the second aim, as one may call it, of his history is to point out
the rational and human and natural causes which brought this result, distinguishing, as we
should say, between God's mediate and immediate government of the world.

With any direct intervention of God in the normal development of Man, he will have nothing
to do:  still less with any idea of chance as a factor in the phenomena of life.  Chance and
miracles, he says, are mere expressions for our ignorance of rational causes. The spirit of
rationalism which we recognised in Herodotus as a vague uncertain attitude and which appears
in Thucydides as a consistent attitude of mind never argued about or even explained, is by
Polybius analysed and formulated as the great instrument of historical research.

Herodotus, while believing on principle in the supernatural, yet was sceptical at times.  Thucydides
simply ignored the supernatural.  He did not discuss it, but he annihilated it by explaining
history without it.  Polybius enters at length into the whole question and explains its origin
and the method of treating it.  Herodotus would have believed in Scipio's dream.  Thucydides
would have ignored it entirely.  Polybius explains it.  He is the culmination of the rational
progression of Dialectic.  'Nothing,' he says, 'shows a foolish mind more than the attempt
to account for any phenomena on the principle of chance or supernatural intervention.  History
is a search for rational causes, and there is nothing in the world - even those phenomena which
seem to us the most remote from law and improbable - which is not the logical and inevitable
result of certain rational antecedents.'

Some things, of course, are to be rejected A PRIORI without entering into the subject:  'As
regards such miracles,' he says, (15) 'as that on a certain statue of Artemis rain or snow
never falls though the statue stands in the open air, or that those who enter God's shrine
in Arcadia lose their natural shadows, I cannot really be expected to argue upon the subject.
For these things are not only utterly improbable but absolutely impossible.'

'For us to argue reasonably on an acknowledged absurdity is as vain a task as trying to catch
water in a sieve; it is really to admit the possibility of the supernatural, which is the very
point at issue.'

What Polybius felt was that to admit the possibility of a miracle is to annihilate the possibility
of history:  for just as scientific and chemical experiments would be either impossible or
useless if exposed to the chance of continued interference on the part of some foreign body,
so the laws and principles which govern history, the causes of phenomena, the evolution of
progress, the whole science, in a word, of man's dealings with his own race and with nature,
will remain a sealed book to him who admits the possibility of extra-natural interference.

The stories of miracles, then, are to be rejected on A PRIORI rational grounds, but in the
case of events which we know to have happened the scientific historian will not rest till he
has discovered their natural causes which, for instance, in the case of the wonderful rise
of the Roman Empire - the most marvellous thing, Polybius says, which God ever brought about
(16) - are to be found in the excellence of their constitution ([Greek text which cannot be
reproduced]), the wisdom of their advisers, their splendid military arrangements, and their
superstition ([Greek text which cannot be reproduced]).  For while Polybius regarded the revealed
religion as, of course, objective reality of truth, (17) he laid great stress on its moral
subjective influence, going, in one passage on the subject, even so far as almost to excuse
the introduction of the supernatural in very small quantities into history on account of the
extremely good effect it would have on pious people.

But perhaps there is no passage in the whole of ancient and modern history which breathes such
a manly and splendid spirit of rationalism as one preserved to us in the Vatican - strange
resting-place for it! - in which he treats of the terrible decay of population which had fallen
on his native land in his own day, and which by the general orthodox public was regarded as
a special judgment of God sending childlessness on women as a punishment for the sins of the
people.  For it was a disaster quite without parallel in the history of the land, and entirely
unforeseen by any of its political-economy writers who, on the contrary, were always anticipating
that danger would arise from an excess of population overrunning its means of subsistence,
and becoming unmanageable through its size.  Polybius, however, will have nothing to do with
either priest or worker of miracles in this matter.  He will not even seek that 'sacred Heart
of Greece,' Delphi, Apollo's shrine, whose inspiration even Thucydides admitted and before
whose wisdom Socrates bowed.  How foolish, he says, were the man who on this matter would pray
to God.  We must search for the rational causes, and the causes are seen to be clear, and the
method of prevention also.  He then proceeds to notice how all this arose from the general
reluctance to marriage and to bearing the expense of educating a large family which resulted
from the carelessness and avarice of the men of his day, and he explains on entirely rational
principles the whole of this apparently supernatural judgment.

Now, it is to be borne in mind that while his rejection of miracles as violation of inviolable
laws is entirely A PRIORI - for discussion of such a matter is, of course, impossible for a
rational thinker - yet his rejection of supernatural intervention rests entirely on the scientific
grounds of the necessity of looking for natural causes.  And he is quite logical in maintaining
his position on these principles.  For, where it is either difficult or impossible to assign
any rational cause for phenomena, or to discover their laws, he acquiesces reluctantly in the
alternative of admitting some extra-natural interference which his essentially scientific method
of treating the matter has logically forced on him, approving, for instance, of prayers for
rain, on the express ground that the laws of meteorology had not yet been ascertained.  He
would, of course, have been the first to welcome our modern discoveries in the matter.  The
passage in question is in every way one of the most interesting in his whole work, not, of
course, as signifying any inclination on his part to acquiesce in the supernatural, but because
it shows how essentially logical and rational his method of argument was, and how candid and
fair his mind.

Having now examined Polybius's attitude towards the supernatural and the general ideas which
guided his research, I will proceed to examine the method he pursued in his scientific investigation
of the complex phenomena of life.  For, as I have said before in the course of this essay,
what is important in all great writers is not so much the results they arrive at as the methods
they pursue.  The increased knowledge of facts may alter any conclusion in history as in physical
science, and the canons of speculative historical credibility must be acknowledged to appeal
rather to that subjective attitude of mind which we call the historic sense than to any formulated
objective rules.  But a scientific method is a gain for all time, and the true if not the only
progress of historical criticism consists in the improvement of the instruments of research.

Now first, as regards his conception of history, I have already pointed out that it was to
him essentially a search for causes, a problem to be solved, not a picture to be painted, a
scientific investigation into laws and tendencies, not a mere romantic account of startling
incident and wondrous adventure.  Thucydides, in the opening of his great work, had sounded
the first note of the scientific conception of history.  'The absence of romance in my pages,'
he says, 'will, I fear, detract somewhat from its value, but I have written my work not to
be the exploit of a passing hour but as the possession of all time.' (18)  Polybius follows
with words almost entirely similar.  If, he says, we banish from history the consideration
of causes, methods and motives ([Greek text which cannot be reproduced]), and refuse to consider
how far the result of anything is its rational consequent, what is left is a mere [Greek text
which cannot be reproduced], not a [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], an oratorical essay
which may give pleasure for the moment, but which is entirely without any scientific value
for the explanation of the future.  Elsewhere he says that 'history robbed of the exposition
of its causes and laws is a profitless thing, though it may allure a fool.'  And all through
his history the same point is put forward and exemplified in every fashion.

So far for the conception of history.  Now for the groundwork.  As regards the character of
the phenomena to be selected by the scientific investigator, Aristotle had laid down the general
formula that nature should be studied in her normal manifestations. Polybius, true to his character
of applying explicitly the principles implicit in the work of others, follows out the doctrine
of Aristotle, and lays particular stress on the rational and undisturbed character of the development
of the Roman constitution as affording special facilities for the discovery of the laws of
its progress.  Political revolutions result from causes either external or internal.  The former
are mere disturbing forces which lie outside the sphere of scientific calculation.  It is the
latter which are important for the establishing of principles and the elucidation of the sequences
of rational evolution.

He thus may be said to have anticipated one of the most important truths of the modern methods
of investigation:  I mean that principle which lays down that just as the study of physiology
should precede the study of pathology, just as the laws of disease are best discovered by the
phenomena presented in health, so the method of arriving at all great social and political
truths is by the investigation of those cases where development has been normal, rational and
undisturbed.

The critical canon that the more a people has been interfered with, the more difficult it becomes
to generalise the laws of its progress and to analyse the separate forces of its civilisation,
is one the validity of which is now generally recognised by those who pretend to a scientific
treatment of all history:  and while we have seen that Aristotle anticipated it in a general
formula, to Polybius belongs the honour of being the first to apply it explicitly in the sphere
of history.

I have shown how to this great scientific historian the motive of his work was essentially
the search for causes; and true to his analytical spirit he is careful to examine what a cause
really is and in what part of the antecedents of any consequent it is to be looked for.  To
give an illustration:  As regards the origin of the war with Perseus, some assigned as causes
the expulsion of Abrupolis by Perseus, the expedition of the latter to Delphi, the plot against
Eumenes and the seizure of the ambassadors in Boeotia; of these incidents the two former, Polybius
points out, were merely the pretexts, the two latter merely the occasions of the war.  The
war was really a legacy left to Perseus by his father, who was determined to fight it out with
Rome. (19)

Here as elsewhere he is not originating any new idea.  Thucydides had pointed out the difference
between the real and the alleged cause, and the Aristotelian dictum about revolutions, [Greek
text which cannot be reproduced], draws the distinction between cause and occasion with the
brilliancy of an epigram.  But the explicit and rational investigation of the difference between
[Greek text which cannot be reproduced], and [Greek text which cannot be reproduced] was reserved
for Polybius.  No canon of historical criticism can be said to be of more real value than that
involved in this distinction, and the overlooking of it has filled our histories with the contemptible
accounts of the intrigues of courtiers and of kings and the petty plottings of backstairs influence
- particulars interesting, no doubt, to those who would ascribe the Reformation to Anne Boleyn's
pretty face, the Persian war to the influence of a doctor or a curtain-lecture from Atossa,
or the French Revolution to Madame de Maintenon, but without any value for those who aim at
any scientific treatment of history.

But the question of method, to which I am compelled always to return, is not yet exhausted.
There is another aspect in which it may be regarded, and I shall now proceed to treat of it.

One of the greatest difficulties with which the modern historian has to contend is the enormous
complexity of the facts which come under his notice:  D'Alembert's suggestion that at the end
of every century a selection of facts should be made and the rest burned (if it was really
intended seriously) could not, of course, be entertained for a moment.  A problem loses all
its value when it becomes simplified, and the world would be all the poorer if the Sibyl of
History burned her volumes.  Besides, as Gibbon pointed out, 'a Montesquieu will detect in
the most insignificant fact relations which the vulgar overlook.'

Nor can the scientific investigator of history isolate the particular elements, which he desires
to examine, from disturbing and extraneous causes, as the experimental chemist can do (though
sometimes, as in the case of lunatic asylums and prisons, he is enabled to observe phenomena
in a certain degree of isolation).  So he is compelled either to use the deductive mode of
arguing from general laws or to employ the method of abstraction, which gives a fictitious
isolation to phenomena never so isolated in actual existence.  And this is exactly what Polybius
has done as well as Thucydides.  For, as has been well remarked, there is in the works of these
two writers a certain plastic unity of type and motive; whatever they write is penetrated through
and through with a specific quality, a singleness and concentration of purpose, which we may
contrast with the more comprehensive width as manifested not merely in the modern mind, but
also in Herodotus.  Thucydides, regarding society as influenced entirely by political motives,
took no account of forces of a different nature, and consequently his results, like those of
most modern political economists, have to be modified largely (20) before they come to correspond
with what we know was the actual state of fact.  Similarly, Polybius will deal only with those
forces which tended to bring the civilised world under the dominion of Rome (ix. 1), and in
the Thucydidean spirit points out the want of picturesqueness and romance in his pages which
is the result of the abstract method ([Greek text which cannot be reproduced]) being careful
also to tell us that his rejection of all other forces is essentially deliberate and the result
of a preconceived theory and by no means due to carelessness of any kind.

Now, of the general value of the abstract method and the legality of its employment in the
sphere of history, this is perhaps not the suitable occasion for any discussion.  It is, however,
in all ways worthy of note that Polybius is not merely conscious of, but dwells with particular
weight on, the fact which is usually urged as the strongest objection to the employment of
the abstract method - I mean the conception of a society as a sort of human organism whose
parts are indissolubly connected with one another and all affected when one member is in any
way agitated.  This conception of the organic nature of society appears first in Plato and
Aristotle, who apply it to cities.  Polybius, as his wont is, expands it to be a general characteristic
of all history.  It is an idea of the very highest importance, especially to a man like Polybius
whose thoughts are continually turned towards the essential unity of history and the impossibility
of isolation.

Farther, as regards the particular method of investigating that group of phenomena obtained
for him by the abstract method, he will adopt, he tells us, neither the purely deductive nor
the purely inductive mode but the union of both.  In other words, he formally adopts that method
of analysis upon the importance of which I have dwelt before.

And lastly, while, without doubt, enormous simplicity in the elements under consideration is
the result of the employment of the abstract method, even within the limit thus obtained a
certain selection must be made, and a selection involves a theory.  For the facts of life cannot
be tabulated with as great an ease as the colours of birds and insects can be tabulated.  Now,
Polybius points out that those phenomena particularly are to be dwelt on which may serve as
a [Greek text which cannot be reproduced] or sample, and show the character of the tendencies
of the age as clearly as 'a single drop from a full cask will be enough to disclose the nature
of the whole contents.'  This recognition of the importance of single facts, not in themselves
but because of the spirit they represent, is extremely scientific; for we know that from the
single bone, or tooth even, the anatomist can recreate entirely the skeleton of the primeval
horse, and the botanist tell the character of the flora and fauna of a district from a single
specimen.

Regarding truth as 'the most divine thing in Nature,' the very 'eye and light of history without
which it moves a blind thing,' Polybius spared no pains in the acquisition of historical materials
or in the study of the sciences of politics and war, which he considered were so essential
to the training of the scientific historian, and the labour he took is mirrored in the many
ways in which he criticises other authorities.

There is something, as a rule, slightly contemptible about ancient criticism.  The modern idea
of the critic as the interpreter, the expounder of the beauty and excellence of the work he
selects, seems quite unknown.  Nothing can be more captious or unfair, for instance, than the
method by which Aristotle criticised the ideal state of Plato in his ethical works, and the
passages quoted by Polybius from Timaeus show that the latter historian fully deserved the
punning name given to him.  But in Polybius there is, I think, little of that bitterness and
pettiness of spirit which characterises most other writers, and an incidental story he tells
of his relations with one of the historians whom he criticised shows that he was a man of great
courtesy and refinement of taste - as, indeed, befitted one who had lived always in the society
of those who were of great and noble birth.

Now, as regards the character of the canons by which he criticises the works of other authors,
in the majority of cases he employs simply his own geographical and military knowledge, showing,
for instance, the impossibility in the accounts given of Nabis's march from Sparta simply by
his acquaintance with the spots in question; or the inconsistency of those of the battle of
Issus; or of the accounts given by Ephorus of the battles of Leuctra and Mantinea. In the latter
case he says, if any one will take the trouble to measure out the ground of the site of the
battle and then test the manoeuvres given, he will find how inaccurate the accounts are.

In other cases he appeals to public documents, the importance of which he was always foremost
in recognising; showing, for instance, by a document in the public archives of Rhodes how inaccurate
were the accounts given of the battle of Lade by Zeno and Antisthenes. Or he appeals to psychological
probability, rejecting, for instance, the scandalous stories told of Philip of Macedon, simply
from the king's general greatness of character, and arguing that a boy so well educated and
so respectably connected as Demochares (xii. 14) could never have been guilty of that of which
evil rumour accused him.

But the chief object of his literary censure is Timaeus, who had been unsparing of his strictures
on others.  The general point which he makes against him, impugning his accuracy as a historian,
is that he derived his knowledge of history not from the dangerous perils of a life of action
but in the secure indolence of a narrow scholastic life.  There is, indeed, no point on which
he is so vehement as this.  'A history,' he says, 'written in a library gives as lifeless and
as inaccurate a picture of history as a painting which is copied not from a living animal but
from a stuffed one.'

There is more difference, he says in another place, between the history of an eye-witness and
that of one whose knowledge comes from books, than there is between the scenes of real life
and the fictitious landscapes of theatrical scenery.  Besides this, he enters into somewhat
elaborate detailed criticism of passages where he thought Timaeus was following a wrong method
and perverting truth, passages which it will be worth while to examine in detail.

Timaeus, from the fact of there being a Roman custom to shoot a war-horse on a stated day,
argued back to the Trojan origin of that people.  Polybius, on the other hand, points out that
the inference is quite unwarrantable, because horse-sacrifices are ordinary institutions common
to all barbarous tribes.  Timaeus here, as was common with Greek writers, is arguing back from
some custom of the present to an historical event in the past.  Polybius really is employing
the comparative method, showing how the custom was an ordinary step in the civilisation of
every early people.

In another place, (21) he shows how illogical is the scepticism of Timaeus as regards the existence
of the Bull of Phalaris simply by appealing to the statue of the Bull, which was still to be
seen in Carthage; pointing out how impossible it was, on any other theory except that it belonged
to Phalaris, to account for the presence in Carthage of a bull of this peculiar character with
a door between his shoulders.  But one of the great points which he uses against this Sicilian
historian is in reference to the question of the origin of the Locrian colony.  In accordance
with the received tradition on the subject, Aristotle had represented the Locrian colony as
founded by some Parthenidae or slaves' children, as they were called, a statement which seems
to have roused the indignation of Timaeus, who went to a good deal of trouble to confute this
theory.  He does so on the following grounds:-

First of all, he points out that in the ancient days the Greeks had no slaves at all, so the
mention of them in the matter is an anachronism; and next he declares that he was shown in
the Greek city of Locris certain ancient inscriptions in which their relation to the Italian
city was expressed in terms of the position between parent and child, which showed also that
mutual rights of citizenship were accorded to each city.  Besides this, he appeals to various
questions of improbability as regards their international relationship, on which Polybius takes
diametrically opposite grounds which hardly call for discussion.  And in favour of his own
view he urges two points more:  first, that the Lacedaemonians being allowed furlough for the
purpose of seeing their wives at home, it was unlikely that the Locrians should not have had
the same privilege; and next, that the Italian Locrians knew nothing of the Aristotelian version
and had, on the contrary, very severe laws against adulterers, runaway slaves and the like.
Now, most of these questions rest on mere probability, which is always such a subjective canon
that an appeal to it is rarely conclusive.  I would note, however, as regards the inscriptions
which, if genuine, would of course have settled the matter, that Polybius looks on them as
a mere invention on the part of Timaeus, who, he remarks, gives no details about them, though,
as a rule, he is over-anxious to give chapter and verse for everything.  A somewhat more interesting
point is that where he attacks Timaeus for the introduction of fictitious speeches into his
narrative; for on this point Polybius seems to be far in advance of the opinions held by literary
men on the subject not merely in his own day, but for centuries after.

Herodotus had introduced speeches avowedly dramatic and fictitious. Thucydides states clearly
that, where he was unable to find out what people really said, he put down what they ought
to have said. Sallust alludes, it is true, to the fact of the speech he puts into the mouth
of the tribune Memmius being essentially genuine, but the speeches given in the senate on the
occasion of the Catilinarian conspiracy are very different from the same orations as they appear
in Cicero.  Livy makes his ancient Romans wrangle and chop logic with all the subtlety of a
Hortensius or a Scaevola.  And even in later days, when shorthand reporters attended the debates
of the senate and a DAILY NEWS was published in Rome, we find that one of the most celebrated
speeches in Tacitus (that in which the Emperor Claudius gives the Gauls their freedom) is shown,
by an inscription discovered recently at Lugdunum, to be entirely fabulous.

Upon the other hand, it must be borne in mind that these speeches were not intended to deceive;
they were regarded merely as a certain dramatic element which it was allowable to introduce
into history for the purpose of giving more life and reality to the narration, and were to
be criticised, not as we should, by arguing how in an age before shorthand was known such a
report was possible or how, in the failure of written documents, tradition could bring down
such an accurate verbal account, but by the higher test of their psychological probability
as regards the persons in whose mouths they are placed.  An ancient historian in answer to
modern criticism would say, probably, that these fictitious speeches were in reality more truthful
than the actual ones, just as Aristotle claimed for poetry a higher degree of truth in comparison
to history.  The whole point is interesting as showing how far in advance of his age Polybius
may be said to have been.

The last scientific historian, it is possible to gather from his writings what he considered
were the characteristics of the ideal writer of history; and no small light will be thrown
on the progress of historical criticism if we strive to collect and analyse what in Polybius
are more or less scattered expressions. The ideal historian must be contemporary with the events
he describes, or removed from them by one generation only.  Where it is possible, he is to
be an eye-witness of what he writes of; where that is out of his power he is to test all traditions
and stories carefully and not to be ready to accept what is plausible in place of what is true.
He is to be no bookworm living aloof from the experiences of the world in the artificial isolation
of a university town, but a politician, a soldier, and a traveller, a man not merely of thought
but of action, one who can do great things as well as write of them, who in the sphere of history
could be what Byron and AEschylus were in the sphere of poetry, at once LE CHANTRE ET LE HEROS.

He is to keep before his eyes the fact that chance is merely a synonym for our ignorance; that
the reign of law pervades the domain of history as much as it does that of political science.
He is to accustom himself to look on all occasions for rational and natural causes.  And while
he is to recognise the practical utility of the supernatural, in an educational point of view,
he is not himself to indulge in such intellectual beating of the air as to admit the possibility
of the violation of inviolable laws, or to argue in a sphere wherein argument is A PRIORI annihilated.
He is to be free from all bias towards friend and country; he is to be courteous and gentle
in criticism; he is not to regard history as a mere opportunity for splendid and tragic writing;
nor is he to falsify truth for the sake of a paradox or an epigram.

While acknowledging the importance of particular facts as samples of higher truths, he is to
take a broad and general view of humanity.  He is to deal with the whole race and with the
world, not with particular tribes or separate countries.  He is to bear in mind that the world
is really an organism wherein no one part can be moved without the others being affected also.
He is to distinguish between cause and occasion, between the influence of general laws and
particular fancies, and he is to remember that the greatest lessons of the world are contained
in history and that it is the historian's duty to manifest them so as to save nations from
following those unwise policies which always lead to dishonour and ruin, and to teach individuals
to apprehend by the intellectual culture of history those truths which else they would have
to learn in the bitter school of experience,

Now, as regards his theory of the necessity of the historian's being contemporary with the
events he describes, so far as the historian is a mere narrator the remark is undoubtedly true.
But to appreciate the harmony and rational position of the facts of a great epoch, to discover
its laws, the causes which produced it and the effects which it generates, the scene must be
viewed from a certain height and distance to be completely apprehended.  A thoroughly contemporary
historian such as Lord Clarendon or Thucydides is in reality part of the history he criticises;
and, in the case of such contemporary historians as Fabius and Philistus, Polybius in compelled
to acknowledge that they are misled by patriotic and other considerations.  Against Polybius
himself no such accusation can be made.  He indeed of all men is able, as from some lofty tower,
to discern the whole tendency of the ancient world, the triumph of Roman institutions and of
Greek thought which is the last message of the old world and, in a more spiritual sense, has
become the Gospel of the new.

One thing indeed he did not see, or if he saw it, he thought but little of it - how from the
East there was spreading over the world, as a wave spreads, a spiritual inroad of new religions
from the time when the Pessinuntine mother of the gods, a shapeless mass of stone, was brought
to the eternal city by her holiest citizen, to the day when the ship CASTOR AND POLLUX stood
in at Puteoli, and St. Paul turned his face towards martyrdom and victory at Rome. Polybius
was able to predict, from his knowledge of the causes of revolutions and the tendencies of
the various forms of governments, the uprising of that democratic tone of thought which, as
soon as a seed is sown in the murder of the Gracchi and the exile of Marius, culminated as
all democratic movements do culminate, in the supreme authority of one man, the lordship of
the world under the world's rightful lord, Caius Julius Caesar.  This, indeed, he saw in no
uncertain way.  But the turning of all men's hearts to the East, the first glimmering of that
splendid dawn which broke over the hills of Galilee and flooded the earth like wine, was hidden
from his eyes.

There are many points in the description of the ideal historian which one may compare to the
picture which Plato has given us of the ideal philosopher.  They are both 'spectators of all
time and all existence.'  Nothing is contemptible in their eyes, for all things have a meaning,
and they both walk in august reasonableness before all men, conscious of the workings of God
yet free from all terror of mendicant priest or vagrant miracle-worker.  But the parallel ends
here.  For the one stands aloof from the world-storm of sleet and hail, his eyes fixed on distant
and sunlit heights, loving knowledge for the sake of knowledge and wisdom for the joy of wisdom,
while the other is an eager actor in the world ever seeking to apply his knowledge to useful
things.  Both equally desire truth, but the one because of its utility, the other for its beauty.
The historian regards it as the rational principle of all true history, and no more.  To the
other it comes as an all- pervading and mystic enthusiasm, 'like the desire of strong wine,
the craving of ambition, the passionate love of what is beautiful.'

Still, though we miss in the historian those higher and more spiritual qualities which the
philosopher of the Academe alone of all men possessed, we must not blind ourselves to the merits
of that great rationalist who seems to have anticipated the very latest words of modern science.
Nor yet is he to be regarded merely in the narrow light in which he is estimated by most modern
critics, as the explicit champion of rationalism and nothing more. For he is connected with
another idea, the course of which is as the course of that great river of his native Arcadia
which, springing from some arid and sun-bleached rock, gathers strength and beauty as it flows
till it reaches the asphodel meadows of Olympia and the light and laughter of Ionian waters.

For in him we can discern the first notes of that great cult of the seven-hilled city which
made Virgil write his epic and Livy his history, which found in Dante its highest exponent,
which dreamed of an Empire where the Emperor would care for the bodies and the Pope for the
souls of men, and so has passed into the conception of God's spiritual empire and the universal
brotherhood of man and widened into the huge ocean of universal thought as the Peneus loses
itself in the sea.

Polybius is the last scientific historian of Greece.  The writer who seems fittingly to complete
the progress of thought is a writer of biographies only.  I will not here touch on Plutarch's
employment of the inductive method as shown in his constant use of inscription and statue,
of public document and building and the like, because it involves no new method.  It is his
attitude towards miracles of which I desire to treat.

Plutarch is philosophic enough to see that in the sense of a violation of the laws of nature
a miracle is impossible.  It is absurd, he says, to imagine that the statue of a saint can
speak, and that an inanimate object not possessing the vocal organs should be able to utter
an articulate sound.  Upon the other hand, he protests against science imagining that, by explaining
the natural causes of things, it has explained away their transcendental meaning.  'When the
tears on the cheek of some holy statue have been analysed into the moisture which certain temperatures
produce on wood and marble, it yet by no means follows that they were not a sign of grief and
mourning set there by God Himself.'  When Lampon saw in the prodigy of the one-horned ram the
omen of the supreme rule of Pericles, and when Anaxagoras showed that the abnormal development
was the rational resultant of the peculiar formation of the skull, the dreamer and the man
of science were both right; it was the business of the latter to consider how the prodigy came
about, of the former to show why it was so formed and what it so portended.  The progression
of thought is exemplified in all particulars.  Herodotus had a glimmering sense of the impossibility
of a violation of nature.  Thucydides ignored the supernatural. Polybius rationalised it. 
Plutarch raises it to its mystical heights again, though he bases it on law.  In a word, Plutarch
felt that while science brings the supernatural down to the natural, yet ultimately all that
is natural is really supernatural.  To him, as to many of our own day, religion was that transcendental
attitude of the mind which, contemplating a world resting on inviolable law, is yet comforted
and seeks to worship God not in the violation but in the fulfilment of nature.

It may seem paradoxical to quote in connection with the priest of Chaeronea such a pure rationalist
as Mr. Herbert Spencer; yet when we read as the last message of modern science that 'when the
equation of life has been reduced to its lowest terms the symbols are symbols still,' mere
signs, that is, of that unknown reality which underlies all matter and all spirit, we may feel
how over the wide strait of centuries thought calls to thought and how Plutarch has a higher
position than is usually claimed for him in the progress of the Greek intellect.

And, indeed, it seems that not merely the importance of Plutarch himself but also that of the
land of his birth in the evolution of Greek civilisation has been passed over by modern critics.
To us, indeed, the bare rock to which the Parthenon serves as a crown, and which lies between
Colonus and Attica's violet hills, will always be the holiest spot in the land of Greece: 
and Delphi will come next, and then the meadows of Eurotas where that noble people lived who
represented in Hellenic thought the reaction of the law of duty against the law of beauty,
the opposition of conduct to culture. Yet, as one stands on the [Greek text which cannot be
reproduced] of Cithaeron and looks out on the great double plain of Boeotia, the enormous importance
of the division of Hellas comes to one's mind with great force.  To the north are Orchomenus
and the Minyan treasure-house, seat of those merchant princes of Phoenicia who brought to Greece
the knowledge of letters and the art of working in gold.  Thebes is at our feet with the gloom
of the terrible legends of Greek tragedy still lingering about it, the birthplace of Pindar,
the nurse of Epaminondas and the Sacred Band.

And from out of the plain where 'Mars loved to dance,' rises the Muses' haunt, Helicon, by
whose silver streams Corinna and Hesiod sang; while far away under the white aegis of those
snow-capped mountains lies Chaeronea and the Lion plain where with vain chivalry the Greeks
strove to check Macedon first and afterwards Rome; Chaeronea, where in the Martinmas summer
of Greek civilisation Plutarch rose from the drear waste of a dying religion as the aftermath
rises when the mowers think they have left the field bare.

Greek philosophy began and ended in scepticism:  the first and the last word of Greek history
was Faith.

Splendid thus in its death, like winter sunsets, the Greek religion passed away into the horror
of night.  For the Cimmerian darkness was at hand, and when the schools of Athens were closed
and the statue of Athena broken, the Greek spirit passed from the gods and the history of its
own land to the subtleties of defining the doctrine of the Trinity and the mystical attempts
to bring Plato into harmony with Christ and to reconcile Gethsemane and the Sermon on the Mount
with the Athenian prison and the discussion in the woods of Colonus.  The Greek spirit slept
for wellnigh a thousand years.  When it woke again, like Antaeus it had gathered strength from
the earth where it lay; like Apollo it had lost none of its divinity through its long servitude.

In the history of Roman thought we nowhere find any of those characteristics of the Greek Illumination
which I have pointed out are the necessary concomitants of the rise of historical criticism.
The conservative respect for tradition which made the Roman people delight in the ritual and
formulas of law, and is as apparent in their politics as in their religion, was fatal to any
rise of that spirit of revolt against authority the importance of which, as a factor in intellectual
progress, we have already seen.

The whitened tables of the Pontifices preserved carefully the records of the eclipses and other
atmospherical phenomena, and what we call the art of verifying dates was known to them at an
early time; but there was no spontaneous rise of physical science to suggest by its analogies
of law and order a new method of research, nor any natural springing up of the questioning
spirit of philosophy with its unification of all phenomena and all knowledge. At the very time
when the whole tide of Eastern superstition was sweeping into the heart of the Capital the
Senate banished the Greek philosophers from Rome.  And of the three systems which did at length
take some root in the city, those of Zeno and Epicurus were used merely as the rule for the
ordering of life, while the dogmatic scepticism of Carneades, by its very principles, annihilated
the possibility of argument and encouraged a perfect indifference to research.

Nor were the Romans ever fortunate enough like the Greeks to have to face the incubus of any
dogmatic system of legends and myths, the immoralities and absurdities of which might excite
a revolutionary outbreak of sceptical criticism.  For the Roman religion became as it were
crystallised and isolated from progress at an early period of its evolution.  Their gods remained
mere abstractions of commonplace virtues or uninteresting personifications of the useful things
of life.  The old primitive creed was indeed always upheld as a state institution on account
of the enormous facilities it offered for cheating in politics, but as a spiritual system of
belief it was unanimously rejected at a very early period both by the common people and the
educated classes, for the sensible reason that it was so extremely dull.  The former took refuge
in the mystic sensualities of the worship of Isis, the latter in the Stoical rules of life.
The Romans classified their gods carefully in their order of precedence, analysed their genealogies
in the laborious spirit of modern heraldry, fenced them round with a ritual as intricate as
their law, but never quite cared enough about them to believe in them.  So it was of no account
with them when the philosophers announced that Minerva was merely memory.  She had never been
much else.  Nor did they protest when Lucretius dared to say of Ceres and of Liber that they
were only the corn of the field and the fruit of the vine.  For they had never mourned for
the daughter of Demeter in the asphodel meadows of Sicily, nor traversed the glades of Cithaeron
with fawn-skin and with spear.

This brief sketch of the condition of Roman thought will serve to prepare us for the almost
total want of scientific historical criticism which we shall discern in their literature, and
has, besides, afforded fresh corroboration of the conditions essential to the rise of this
spirit, and of the modes of thought which it reflects and in which it is always to be found.
Roman historical composition had its origin in the pontifical college of ecclesiastical lawyers,
and preserved to its close the uncritical spirit which characterised its fountain-head.  It
possessed from the outset a most voluminous collection of the materials of history, which,
however, produced merely antiquarians, not historians.  It is so hard to use facts, so easy
to accumulate them.

Wearied of the dull monotony of the pontifical annals, which dwelt on little else but the rise
and fall in provisions and the eclipses of the sun, Cato wrote out a history with his own hand
for the instruction of his child, to which he gave the name of Origines, and before his time
some aristocratic families had written histories in Greek much in the same spirit in which
the Germans of the eighteenth century used French as the literary language.  But the first
regular Roman historian is Sallust.  Between the extravagant eulogies passed on this author
by the French (such as De Closset), and Dr. Mommsen's view of him as merely a political pamphleteer,
it is perhaps difficult to reach the VIA MEDIA of unbiassed appreciation.  He has, at any rate,
the credit of being a purely rationalistic historian, perhaps the only one in Roman literature.
Cicero had a good many qualifications for a scientific historian, and (as he usually did) thought
very highly of his own powers.  On passages of ancient legend, however, he is rather unsatisfactory,
for while he is too sensible to believe them he is too patriotic to reject them.  And this
is really the attitude of Livy, who claims for early Roman legend a certain uncritical homage
from the rest of the subject world.  His view in his history is that it is not worth while
to examine the truth of these stories.

In his hands the history of Rome unrolls before our eyes like some gorgeous tapestry, where
victory succeeds victory, where triumph treads on the heels of triumph, and the line of heroes
seems never to end. This checked the Purging, but did not stop it entirely. The Fever went on, without
any remarkable Change, till the 27th; at which time the Petechiæ appeared all over her Body,
attended with a Redness of the Eyes, and a violent Oppression and Pain of her Head, and a quick
Pulse. I ordered six Ounces of Blood to be taken away immediately, and a large Blister to be applied
to her Back, and, at the same time, ordered her a cordial Mixture, with half an Ounce of the Extract
of the Bark in it, to be taken every twenty-four Hours. The 28th, her Pulse was not so hard,
her Head was much easier, the Redness of her Eyes was much less, and the Petechiæ had begun to die
away. The Blood which was taken away the Day before, had a thin Buff at the Top, but the Crassamentum
underneath was of a dark Colour, and of a loose Texture: p. On the 29th, she told me that she
had had two or three loose Stools, and she was lower than the Day before; and therefore a Drachm of
Mithridate, and two Drachms of the Tincture of Cinnamon, were added to her cordial Mixture,
with the Cortex; and she was allowed half a Pint of Red Wine, mulled with Cinnamon, per Day. 30th,
Her Tongue rather moister than the Day before; and she not so low, but she was still inclined to
be loose; and therefore was ordered the anodyne Draught at Nights, and to continue the other
Medicines.

31st, She was still inclined to be loose; but her Pulse kept up, her Tongue was moister, and
she found herself pretty easy: p. Feb. 1st, Her Pulse pretty strong, and she found herself
much cooler, and freer from the Fever, and complained of a Dullness
of Hearing.

On the 2d, in the Morning, she felt a warm Moisture all over her Skin, which, about Noon, broke
out into a profuse Sweat, and continued till the 4th; when it went off, and her Urine let
fall a copious whitish Sediment.

She had then little or no Fever.

The Dullness of Hearing still continued, though it was much less than before. After this the
Deafness went gradually away. She continued the Use of the cordial Mixture, with the Cortex,
till the 12th, and recovered Strength daily. After this, she had no other Medicine, except two
Doses of the Tincture of Rhubarb, and was soon in good Health, and able to discharge her Duty
as a Nurse.

However, it ought to be observed, that we must not bleed so freely, in this or any other Stage
of the Malignant Fever, as in acute inflammatory Disorders, otherwise we shall sink the Patient,
and hurry him to his Grave; and that Bleeding can only take place with Safety and Advantage,
under the Circumstances above-mentioned, immediately before giving
the Bark freely; or where some accidental sharp Pain in the Breast,
or Bowels, or some other violent Symptom, may require it.

They err equally, who recommend Bleeding freely in this Fever, with those who entirely forbid
its Use.

Although we found the Bark to be in general the best Remedy in this malignant Petechial Fever, yet
it did not answer in every Case; for in some we found other Remedies had a better Effect: And
therefore, when we observed that, notwithstanding the Use of the
Bark, the Patient sunk, and the Symptoms grew worse, we did not persist
obstinately in its Use, but tried the Effect of other Medicines.

Towards the End of May 1761, two Soldiers in the Hospital, at Osnabruck, were taken ill of this
Fever; who, after using the Bark freely, and being allowed a Pint of Red Wine per Day, for some
Days together, began to sink, and had a Delirium and other bad Symptoms hastening on: upon
which I laid aside the Use of the Bark, and ordered each of them a Blister to the Back, and
to take a cordial Draught, with fifteen Grains of Musk in it, every
four Hours; and to have their Wine mulled with Cinnamon; and although
at that Time they were both so low that I scarce imagined they would
live twenty-four Hours, yet next Day I found them greatly mended;
and they had a kindly warm Moisture all over their Skin, and the Pulse
had rose considerably in both.

By the Continuance of the same Medicine the feverish Symptoms gradually abated, and they both got well.

About
the same time, having given the Bark freely for some Days, and applied a Blister, to another
Patient, after the Petechiæ had appeared, I found him one Morning so low that his Pulse could scarce
be felt.

He could not speak; he had a Delirium, and rather a Tremor than a subsultus tendinum, and he
had all the Appearance of a dying Man. However, as he still swallowed whatever was put in his Mouth,
I changed the Bark Mixture for Draughts, which contained a Scruple of the confectio cardiaca, and
seven Grains of the sal vol. corn. cerv.[13] each, and ordered one to be given immediately,
and afterwards to be repeated every four Hours; and, in the Intervals, to give him frequently
a Tea-cup full of Red Wine, mulled with Cinnamon; and to apply two large Blisters to his Legs. Next
Day, his Pulse had rose; and by the Continuance of the same Remedies it became gradually fuller
and stronger, and the third Day after he recovered his Voice; and a warm kindly Moisture which
ended in a profuse Sweat coming on, the feverish Symptoms went off
soon after, and he recovered his Health.

[13] Dr. Huxham, in his Treatise on the ulcerous sore Throat, p. 54, &c. condemns the Use of the volatile
alcaline Salts, in Fevers of the putrid, pestilential, or petechial kind, as being apt to heat
too much, and to hasten the Dissolution and consequent Putrefaction of the Blood. However, I cannot
help thinking that they are the best Remedies we can use on some particular Occasions, even
in this Fever; for we have no Remedy which gives such a sudden and brisk Stimulus to the Fibres as
they do. And I have known many Cases of Patients who were extremely low, and whose Pulse was
scarce to be felt, and others who were apt to fail into fainting Fits, who have been preserved
by large and repeated Doses of these Salts, and the free Use of Wine, and acescent Liquors, to correct
their alcaline Acrimony in the Blood.

Though as soon as such Patients had recovered from this low State, I laid these Medicines aside;
because I cannot help agreeing with the Doctor in the Belief, that their continued Use will produce
the Effects he mentions. For although it be true, that these Salts, when mixed with putrescent
Liquors, or with dead animal Substances, resist Putrefaction, and, like ardent Spirits and Vinegar
(the other Products of Fermentation) check and put a Stop to that very Process which produced them:
Yet it is also true, that, when mixed with the Blood of living Animals, they stimulate the Vessels,
and increase the Heat and Momentum of the Blood, and dissolve it;
and therefore I cannot but disapprove the continuing their Use longer
than is immediately necessary.

At Bremen there were two Men, one in January, and the other in February 1762, on whom the Cortex
had but little Effect, who recovered by the free Use of Mixtures, with the confectio cardiaca
and rad. serpentariæ, and of Wine, with the Application of large Blisters. Several Cases of
this kind occurred in the Hospitals, where the Bark did not answer.

There is one thing to be observed with respect to Malignant Fevers, which is, that if ever they appear
in large crowded Hospitals, unless we can thin the Wards, and procure a free Circulation of Air,
and keep the Hospital and Sick extremely clean, the Fevers will continue to spread, and great Numbers
will die; and even the most efficacious Remedies will have little or no Effect. And that when
once the Infection is grown strong, it requires the greatest Care,
and some Time, before it can be entirely got the better of.

And that if a great number of Men, ill of this Fever, be kept in the same Ward, they will help to keep
up the Infection; and therefore it is always proper, when it can possibly be done, to lay but
a few of them in one Ward; not above one-third of the Number generally admitted.

Many of the Patients, towards the Height of this Fever, sooner or later, had a Purging, which
seldom proved critical; and some were seized with the Flux. A gentle diarrhœa, such as did not sink
the Patient, was commonly of Service; but when violent, or a Dysentery came on, the Case was
always dangerous; for whatever stopped the Flux increased the Fever;
and, if the Purging or Flux continued, it sunk the Patient.

Such Fluxes we treated in the Manner to be mentioned afterwards, when we come to the History
of the Dysentery.

In this Fever, it was common for Patients to vomit Worms[14], or to pass them by Stool, or,
what was more frequent, to have them come up into their Throat and Mouth, or sometimes into their Nostrils,
while they were asleep in Bed, and to pull them out with their Fingers.

The same Thing happened to most of the British Soldiers, brought to the Hospitals for other feverish
Disorders as well as this. Dr. Pringle[15] when he mentions Worms being observed in this Fever,
seems to embrace Lancisius’s Opinion; and believes that these Worms are not the Cause of the
Fever; but being lodged in the Intestines, before the Fever comes on, they are annoyed by
the Increase of the Heat, and the Corruption of the Humours, in the Cavity of the Intestines of
Persons labouring under Fevers, especially of the putrid Kind; and so they begin to move and struggle
to get out. This seemed evidently to be the Case with many of the Patients we had; though in some the Worms
seemed to have given Rise to the Fever, which the bad State of the Patient’s Humours, or the
infected Air of Hospitals, determined to be of this Kind. In many, the Fever lessened, or
went off entirely, soon after; and they were no more affected with Symptoms of Worms. But some
notwithstanding were subject to frequent Sickness, Pain of the Stomach, and Uneasiness in the Bowels,
and discharged some Worms from Time to Time. Others had frequent Relapses into Fevers, which
seemed to be owing to the Irritation of these Insects.

[14] Some Men passed only one Worm; others, two or three; some, six or seven; and one Man, of
the Guards, in January 1763, after passing three by Stools in the Course of a Fever of this Kind,
discharged fourteen more upon taking a Dose of Rhubarb and Calomel
after the Fever was over.

[15] Observations on the Diseases of the Army, part iii. chap. iv. Note to p. 213. third Edition.

It
is no Wonder that Worms of the round Kind should be productive of troublesome Symptoms, and
occasion these Relapses; since we know that they have sometimes perforated the Intestines,
and been found in the Cavity of the Abdomen[16].

[16] See Hoffman’s Works, vol. III. chap. x. River. Observ. commun. Obs. 13. of Observations
found in a Library. Bonetus’s Sepulchret. anatom. tom. II. Gualther van Doeveren’s Inaugural Dissertation
de Vermibus intestinalibus, published at Leyden, 1753; and Lancisi’s
Works; for Cases where the internal Coats of the Stomach, and Intestines,
have been eroded, and all the Coats perforated by Worms of the round
Kind.

As soon as we observed a Patient to be troubled with Worms, if his present Situation did not
prevent it, we gave twenty-five or thirty Grains of Rhubarb, with five or six Grains of Calomel;
and if there was much Sickness, we likewise gave an Emetic; which, in more than one Case, brought up
two or three Worms of the round Kind, and gave great Relief.

But where the Fever was violent, we were obliged to neglect this Symptom of Worms for the present;
and when the Fever was over, if there still remained any Symptoms of Worms, we gave the purgative
Medicine once or oftener, and in the Intervals gave the pulvis stanni, or an Infusion of Camomile
Flowers; and in some Cases, oily Medicines.

By these Means most of the Patients got well and recovered their Health, and seemed to be freed,
at least for the present, from these troublesome Insects; though a few continued to complain
of Sickness, and other Symptoms of Worms, for some Time afterwards.

What was the Cause of the Army’s being so much troubled with Worms
of the round Kind, is not easy to ascertain; unless it was owing to
the great Quantity of crude Vegetables, and Fruits, which the Soldiers
eat in the Course of the Summer and Autumn, and to the bad Water they
were often obliged to drink.

In the Malignant Fever at Paderborn, many complained of a Dysuria, and some of a Suppression of
Urine, especially towards the Decline of the Fever; and others, of a Scalding and Pain in making
Water, though they had no venereal Complaint. These Symptoms appeared in other Places, but
not near so frequently as at Paderborn.

Decoctions of Gum Arabic, with some of the spiritus nitri dulcis, and oily Mixtures, and Opiates,
commonly gave immediate Relief, and soon removed this Complaint.

One of the first salutary Symptoms which most generally appeared in those who recovered, was
a Dullness of Hearing, or Deafness[17]; which came on about the Height of the Fever, and continued
a longer or shorter Time, generally till the Fever was entirely gone;
and sometimes for a considerable Time afterwards.

For the most Part we did nothing for this Complaint, and it went off as the Patient recovered
his Strength. When it continued long, Blisters applied behind the Ears, or on the Neck, and washing
the meatus auditorius with the emollient Decoction, in which a small Quantity of Soap was
dissolved, proved of Service.

[17] Riverius tells us, that, according to Hippocrates’s Doctrine, Deafness is a very dangerous
Symptom in the Beginning of acute Disorders, though it be a good Omen, and portends Health, when
it does not appear till the Height of Fevers, especially those of a malignant Kind; and adds,
that he himself has a thousand Times observed, that those labouring under this Fever have recovered,
when this Symptom of Deafness came on at the Height (in statu) though the other Symptoms threatened
much Danger. Prax. Medic. lib.

XVII. sect. iii. cap. i. p. 451.

This Symptom of Deafness occurs in other Fevers as well as in this,
and often proves a good Symptom in them likewise, as I have frequently
observed.

Two remarkable Examples of which I had under my Care in St. George’s Hospital, in the Year
1759. On the 17th of January 1759, James Donaldson, a young Man of nineteen Years of Age, was
admitted into the Hospital for a Fever, attended with a Stupor and a Delirium, a parched dry
Tongue, and other Symptoms of a Fever of the inflammatory Kind, for
which he had been blooded, and used other Evacuations. On the 19th,
after the Application of a Blister, he was seized with almost an entire
Deafness; after which, all his other Symptoms became milder, and he
mended daily, and was entirely free from the Fever by the 30th.

For it is not enough that a work of art should conform to the aesthetic demands of its age:
there must be also about it, if it is to affect us with any permanent delight, the impress
of a distinct individuality, an individuality remote from that of ordinary men, and coming
near to us only by virtue of a certain newness and wonder in the work, and through channels
whose very strangeness makes us more ready to give them welcome.

LA PERSONNALITE, said one of the greatest of modem French critics, VOILE CE QUI NOUS SAUVERA.

But above all things was it a return to Nature - that formula which seems to suit so many and
such diverse movements:  they would draw and paint nothing but what they saw, they would try
and imagine things as they really happened.  Later there came to the old house by Blackfriars
Bridge, where this young brotherhood used to meet and work, two young men from Oxford, Edward
Burne-Jones and William Morris - the latter substituting for the simpler realism of the early
days a more exquisite spirit of choice, a more faultless devotion to beauty, a more intense
seeking for perfection:  a master of all exquisite design and of all spiritual vision.  It
is of the school of Florence rather than of that of Venice that he is kinsman, feeling that
the close imitation of Nature is a disturbing element in imaginative art.  The visible aspect
of modern life disturbs him not; rather is it for him to render eternal all that is beautiful
in Greek, Italian, and Celtic legend.  To Morris we owe poetry whose perfect precision and
clearness of word and vision has not been excelled in the literature of our country, and by
the revival of the decorative arts he has given to our individualised romantic movement the
social idea and the social factor also.

But the revolution accomplished by this clique of young men, with Ruskin's faultless and fervent
eloquence to help them, was not one of ideas merely but of execution, not one of conceptions
but of creations.

For the great eras in the history of the development of all the arts have been eras not of
increased feeling or enthusiasm in feeling for art, but of new technical improvements primarily
and specially.  The discovery of marble quarries in the purple ravines of Pentelicus and on
the little low-lying hills of the island of Paros gave to the Greeks the opportunity for that
intensified vitality of action, that more sensuous and simple humanism, to which the Egyptian
sculptor working laboriously in the hard porphyry and rose-coloured granite of the desert could
not attain. The splendour of the Venetian school began with the introduction of the new oil
medium for painting.  The progress in modern music has been due to the invention of new instruments
entirely, and in no way to an increased consciousness on the part of the musician of any wider
social aim.  The critic may try and trace the deferred resolutions of Beethoven to some sense
of the incompleteness of the modern intellectual spirit, but the artist would have answered,
as one of them did afterwards, 'Let them pick out the fifths and leave us at peace.'

And so it is in poetry also:  all this love of curious French metres like the Ballade, the
Villanelle, the Rondel; all this increased value laid on elaborate alliterations, and on curious
words and refrains, such as you will find in Dante Rossetti and Swinburne, is merely the attempt
to perfect flute and viol and trumpet through which the spirit of the age and the lips of the
poet may blow the music of their many messages.

And so it has been with this romantic movement of ours:  it is a reaction against the empty
conventional workmanship, the lax execution of previous poetry and painting, showing itself
in the work of such men as Rossetti and Burne-Jones by a far greater splendour of colour, a
far more intricate wonder of design than English imaginative art has shown before.  In Rossetti's
poetry and the poetry of Morris, Swinburne and Tennyson a perfect precision and choice of language,
a style flawless and fearless, a seeking for all sweet and precious melodies and a sustaining
consciousness of the musical value of each word are opposed to that value which is merely intellectual.
In this respect they are one with the romantic movement of France of which not the least characteristic
note was struck by Theophile Gautier's advice to the young poet to read his dictionary every
day, as being the only book worth a poet's reading.

While, then, the material of workmanship is being thus elaborated and discovered to have in
itself incommunicable and eternal qualities of its own, qualities entirely satisfying to the
poetic sense and not needing for their aesthetic effect any lofty intellectual vision, any
deep criticism of life or even any passionate human emotion at all, the spirit and the method
of the poet's working - what people call his inspiration - have not escaped the controlling
influence of the artistic spirit.  Not that the imagination has lost its wings, but we have
accustomed ourselves to count their innumerable pulsations, to estimate their limitless strength,
to govern their ungovernable freedom.

To the Greeks this problem of the conditions of poetic production, and the places occupied
by either spontaneity or self-consciousness in any artistic work, had a peculiar fascination.
We find it in the mysticism of Plato and in the rationalism of Aristotle.  We find it later
in the Italian Renaissance agitating the minds of such men as Leonardo da Vinci.  Schiller
tried to adjust the balance between form and feeling, and Goethe to estimate the position of
self-consciousness in art.  Wordsworth's definition of poetry as 'emotion remembered in tranquillity'
may be taken as an analysis of one of the stages through which all imaginative work has to
pass; and in Keats's longing to be 'able to compose without this fever' (I quote from one of
his letters), his desire to substitute for poetic ardour 'a more thoughtful and quiet power,'
we may discern the most important moment in the evolution of that artistic life.  The question
made an early and strange appearance in your literature too; and I need not remind you how
deeply the young poets of the French romantic movement were excited and stirred by Edgar Allan
Poe's analysis of the workings of his own imagination in the creating of that supreme imaginative
work which we know by the name of THE RAVEN.

In the last century, when the intellectual and didactic element had intruded to such an extent
into the kingdom which belongs to poetry, it was against the claims of the understanding that
an artist like Goethe had to protest.  'The more incomprehensible to the understanding a poem
is the better for it,' he said once, asserting the complete supremacy of the imagination in
poetry as of reason in prose.  But in this century it is rather against the claims of the emotional
faculties, the claims of mere sentiment and feeling, that the artist must react.  The simple
utterance of joy is not poetry any more than a mere personal cry of pain, and the real experiences
of the artist are always those which do not find their direct expression but are gathered up
and absorbed into some artistic form which seems, from such real experiences, to be the farthest
removed and the most alien.

'The heart contains passion but the imagination alone contains poetry,' says Charles Baudelaire.
This too was the lesson that Theophile Gautier, most subtle of all modern critics, most fascinating
of all modern poets, was never tired of teaching - 'Everybody is affected by a sunrise or a
sunset.'  The absolute distinction of the artist is not his capacity to feel nature so much
as his power of rendering it.  The entire subordination of all intellectual and emotional faculties
to the vital and informing poetic principle is the surest sign of the strength of our Renaissance.

We have seen the artistic spirit working, first in the delightful and technical sphere of language,
the sphere of expression as opposed to subject, then controlling the imagination of the poet
in dealing with his subject.  And now I would point out to you its operation in the choice
of subject.  The recognition of a separate realm for the artist, a consciousness of the absolute
difference between the world of art and the world of real fact, between classic grace and absolute
reality, forms not merely the essential element of any aesthetic charm but is the characteristic
of all great imaginative work and of all great eras of artistic creation - of the age of Phidias
as of the age of Michael Angelo, of the age of Sophocles as of the age of Goethe.

Art never harms itself by keeping aloof from the social problems of the day:  rather, by so
doing, it more completely realises for us that which we desire.  For to most of us the real
life is the life we do not lead, and thus, remaining more true to the essence of its own perfection,
more jealous of its own unattainable beauty, is less likely to forget form in feeling or to
accept the passion of creation as any substitute for the beauty of the created thing.

The artist is indeed the child of his own age, but the present will not be to him a whit more
real than the past; for, like the philosopher of the Platonic vision, the poet is the spectator
of all time and of all existence.  For him no form is obsolete, no subject out of date; rather,
whatever of life and passion the world has known, in desert of Judaea or in Arcadian valley,
by the rivers of Troy or the rivers of Damascus, in the crowded and hideous streets of a modern
city or by the pleasant ways of Camelot - all lies before him like an open scroll, all is still
instinct with beautiful life.  He will take of it what is salutary for his own spirit, no more;
choosing some facts and rejecting others with the calm artistic control of one who is in possession
of the secret of beauty.

There is indeed a poetical attitude to be adopted towards all things, but all things are not
fit subjects for poetry.  Into the secure and sacred house of Beauty the true artist will admit
nothing that is harsh or disturbing, nothing that gives pain, nothing that is debatable, nothing
about which men argue.  He can steep himself, if he wishes, in the discussion of all the social
problems of his day, poor-laws and local taxation, free trade and bimetallic currency, and
the like; but when he writes on these subjects it will be, as Milton nobly expressed it, with
his left hand, in prose and not in verse, in a pamphlet and not in a lyric. This exquisite
spirit of artistic choice was not in Byron: Wordsworth had it not.  In the work of both these
men there is much that we have to reject, much that does not give us that sense of calm and
perfect repose which should be the effect of all fine, imaginative work.  But in Keats it seemed
to have been incarnate, and in his lovely ODE ON A GRECIAN URN it found its most secure and
faultless expression; in the pageant of the EARTHLY PARADISE and the knights and ladies of
Burne-Jones it is the one dominant note.

It is to no avail that the Muse of Poetry be called, even by such a clarion note as Whitman's,
to migrate from Greece and Ionia and to placard REMOVED and TO LET on the rocks of the snowy
Parnassus. Calliope's call is not yet closed, nor are the epics of Asia ended; the Sphinx is
not yet silent, nor the fountain of Castaly dry.  For art is very life itself and knows nothing
of death; she is absolute truth and takes no care of fact; she sees (as I remember Mr. Swinburne
insisting on at dinner) that Achilles is even now more actual and real than Wellington, not
merely more noble and interesting as a type and figure but more positive and real.

Literature must rest always on a principle, and temporal considerations are no principle at
all.  For to the poet all times and places are one; the stuff he deals with is eternal and
eternally the same:  no theme is inept, no past or present preferable.  The steam whistle will
not affright him nor the flutes of Arcadia weary him:  for him there is but one time, the artistic
moment; but one law, the law of form; but one land, the land of Beauty - a land removed indeed
from the real world and yet more sensuous because more enduring; calm, yet with that calm which
dwells in the faces of the Greek statues, the calm which comes not from the rejection but from
the absorption of passion, the calm which despair and sorrow cannot disturb but intensify only.
And so it comes that he who seems to stand most remote from his age is he who mirrors it best,
because he has stripped life of what is accidental and transitory, stripped it of that 'mist
of familiarity which makes life obscure to us.'

Those strange, wild-eyed sibyls fixed eternally in the whirlwind of ecstasy, those mighty-limbed
and Titan prophets, labouring with the secret of the earth and the burden of mystery, that
guard and glorify the chapel of Pope Sixtus at Rome - do they not tell us more of the real
spirit of the Italian Renaissance, of the dream of Savonarola and of the sin of Borgia, than
all the brawling boors and cooking women of Dutch art can teach us of the real spirit of the
history of Holland?

And so in our own day, also, the two most vital tendencies of the nineteenth century - the
democratic and pantheistic tendency and the tendency to value life for the sake of art - found
their most complete and perfect utterance in the poetry of Shelley and Keats who, to the blind
eyes of their own time, seemed to be as wanderers in the wilderness, preachers of vague or
unreal things.  And I remember once, in talking to Mr. Burne-Jones about modern science, his
saying to me, 'the more materialistic science becomes, the more angels shall I paint:  their
wings are my protest in favour of the immortality of the soul.'

But these are the intellectual speculations that underlie art. Where in the arts themselves
are we to find that breadth of human sympathy which is the condition of all noble work; where
in the arts are we to look for what Mazzini would call the social ideas as opposed to the merely
personal ideas?  By virtue of what claim do I demand for the artist the love and loyalty of
the men and women of the world?  I think I can answer that.

Whatever spiritual message an artist brings to his aid is a matter for his own soul.  He may
bring judgment like Michael Angelo or peace like Angelico; he may come with mourning like the
great Athenian or with mirth like the singer of Sicily; nor is it for us to do aught but accept
his teaching, knowing that we cannot smite the bitter lips of Leopardi into laughter or burden
with our discontent Goethe's serene calm.  But for warrant of its truth such message must have
the flame of eloquence in the lips that speak it, splendour and glory in the vision that is
its witness, being justified by one thing only - the flawless beauty and perfect form of its
expression:  this indeed being the social idea, being the meaning of joy in art.

Not laughter where none should laugh, nor the calling of peace where there is no peace; not
in painting the subject ever, but the pictorial charm only, the wonder of its colour, the satisfying
beauty of its design.

You have most of you seen, probably, that great masterpiece of Rubens which hangs in the gallery
of Brussels, that swift and wonderful pageant of horse and rider arrested in its most exquisite
and fiery moment when the winds are caught in crimson banner and the air lit by the gleam of
armour and the flash of plume.  Well, that is joy in art, though that golden hillside be trodden
by the wounded feet of Christ and it is for the death of the Son of Man that that gorgeous
cavalcade is passing.

But this restless modern intellectual spirit of ours is not receptive enough of the sensuous
element of art; and so the real influence of the arts is hidden from many of us:  only a few,
escaping from the tyranny of the soul, have learned the secret of those high hours when thought
is not.

And this indeed is the reason of the influence which Eastern art is having on us in Europe,
and of the fascination of all Japanese work.  While the Western world has been laying on art
the intolerable burden of its own intellectual doubts and the spiritual tragedy of its own
sorrows, the East has always kept true to art's primary and pictorial conditions.

In judging of a beautiful statue the aesthetic faculty is absolutely and completely gratified
by the splendid curves of those marble lips that are dumb to our complaint, the noble modelling
of those limbs that are powerless to help us.  In its primary aspect a painting has no more
spiritual message or meaning than an exquisite fragment of Venetian glass or a blue tile from
the wall of Damascus:  it is a beautifully coloured surface, nothing more.  The channels by
which all noble imaginative work in painting should touch, and do touch the soul, are not those
of the truths of life, nor metaphysical truths.  But that pictorial charm which does not depend
on any literary reminiscence for its effect on the one hand, nor is yet a mere result of communicable
technical skill on the other, comes of a certain inventive and creative handling of colour.
Nearly always in Dutch painting and often in the works of Giorgione or Titian, it is entirely
independent of anything definitely poetical in the subject, a kind of form and choice in workmanship
which is itself entirely satisfying, and is (as the Greeks would say) an end in itself.

And so in poetry too, the real poetical quality, the joy of poetry, comes never from the subject
but from an inventive handling of rhythmical language, from what Keats called the 'sensuous
life of verse.'  The element of song in the singing accompanied by the profound joy of motion,
is so sweet that, while the incomplete lives of ordinary men bring no healing power with them,
the thorn- crown of the poet will blossom into roses for our pleasure; for our delight his
despair will gild its own thorns, and his pain, like Adonis, be beautiful in its agony; and
when the poet's heart breaks it will break in music.

And health in art - what is that?  It has nothing to do with a sane criticism of life.  There
is more health in Baudelaire than there is in [Kingsley].  Health is the artist's recognition
of the limitations of the form in which he works.  It is the honour and the homage which he
gives to the material he uses - whether it be language with its glories, or marble or pigment
with their glories - knowing that the true brotherhood of the arts consists not in their borrowing
one another's method, but in their producing, each of them by its own individual means, each
of them by keeping its objective limits, the same unique artistic delight.  The delight is
like that given to us by music - for music is the art in which form and matter are always one,
the art whose subject cannot be separated from the method of its expression, the art which
most completely realises the artistic ideal, and is the condition to which all the other arts
are constantly aspiring.

And criticism - what place is that to have in our culture?  Well, I think that the first duty
of an art critic is to hold his tongue at all times, and upon all subjects:  C'EST UN GRAND
AVANTAGE DE N'AVOIR RIEN FAIT, MAIS IL NE FAUT PAS EN ABUSER.

It is only through the mystery of creation that one can gain any knowledge of the quality of
created things.  You have listened to PATIENCE for a hundred nights and you have heard me for
one only. It will make, no doubt, that satire more piquant by knowing something about the subject
of it, but you must not judge of aestheticism by the satire of Mr. Gilbert.  As little should
you judge of the strength and splendour of sun or sea by the dust that dances in the beam,
or the bubble that breaks on the wave, as take your critic for any sane test of art.  For the
artists, like the Greek gods, are revealed only to one another, as Emerson says somewhere;
their real value and place time only can show.  In this respect also omnipotence is with the
ages.  The true critic addresses not the artist ever but the public only.  His work lies with
them.  Art can never have any other claim but her own perfection:  it is for the critic to
create for art the social aim, too, by teaching the people the spirit in which they are to
approach all artistic work, the love they are to give it, the lesson they are to draw from it.

All these appeals to art to set herself more in harmony with modern progress and civilisation,
and to make herself the mouthpiece for the voice of humanity, these appeals to art 'to have
a mission,' are appeals which should be made to the public.  The art which has fulfilled the
conditions of beauty has fulfilled all conditions: it is for the critic to teach the people
how to find in the calm of such art the highest expression of their own most stormy passions.
'I have no reverence,' said Keats, 'for the public, nor for anything in existence but the Eternal
Being, the memory of great men and the principle of Beauty.'

Such then is the principle which I believe to be guiding and underlying our English Renaissance,
a Renaissance many-sided and wonderful, productive of strong ambitions and lofty personalities,
yet for all its splendid achievements in poetry and in the decorative arts and in painting,
for all the increased comeliness and grace of dress, and the furniture of houses and the like,
not complete.  For there can be no great sculpture without a beautiful national life, and the
commercial spirit of England has killed that; no great drama without a noble national life,
and the commercial spirit of England has killed that too.

It is not that the flawless serenity of marble cannot bear the burden of the modern intellectual
spirit, or become instinct with the fire of romantic passion - the tomb of Duke Lorenzo and
the chapel of the Medici show us that - but it is that, as Theophile Gautier used to say, the
visible world is dead, LE MONDE VISIBLE A DISPARU.

Nor is it again that the novel has killed the play, as some critics would persuade us - the
romantic movement of France shows us that. The work of Balzac and of Hugo grew up side by side
together; nay, more, were complementary to each other, though neither of them saw it.  While
all other forms of poetry may flourish in an ignoble age, the splendid individualism of the
lyrist, fed by its own passion, and lit by its own power, may pass as a pillar of fire as well
across the desert as across places that are pleasant.  It is none the less glorious though
no man follow it - nay, by the greater sublimity of its loneliness it may be quickened into
loftier utterance and intensified into clearer song.  From the mean squalor of the sordid life
that limits him, the dreamer or the idyllist may soar on poesy's viewless wings, may traverse
with fawn-skin and spear the moonlit heights of Cithaeron though Faun and Bassarid dance there
no more.  Like Keats he may wander through the old-world forests of Latmos, or stand like Morris
on the galley's deck with the Viking when king and galley have long since passed away.  But
the drama is the meeting-place of art and life; it deals, as Mazzini said, not merely with
man, but with social man, with man in his relation to God and to Humanity.  It is the product
of a period of great national united energy; it is impossible without a noble public, and belongs
to such ages as the age of Elizabeth in London and of Pericles at Athens; it is part of such
lofty moral and spiritual ardour as came to Greek after the defeat of the Persian fleet, and
to Englishman after the wreck of the Armada of Spain.

Shelley felt how incomplete our movement was in this respect, and has shown in one great tragedy
by what terror and pity he would have purified our age; but in spite of THE CENCI the drama
is one of the artistic forms through which the genius of the England of this century seeks
in vain to find outlet and expression.  He has had no worthy imitators.

It is rather, perhaps, to you that we should turn to complete and perfect this great movement
of ours, for there is something Hellenic in your air and world, something that has a quicker
breath of the joy and power of Elizabeth's England about it than our ancient civilisation can
give us.  For you, at least, are young; 'no hungry generations tread you down,' and the past
does not weary you with the intolerable burden of its memories nor mock you with the ruins
of a beauty, the secret of whose creation you have lost. That very absence of tradition, which
Mr. Ruskin thought would rob your rivers of their laughter and your flowers of their light,
may be rather the source of your freedom and your strength.  It is a triumph which you above
all nations may be destined to achieve. For the voices that have their dwelling in sea and
mountain are not the chosen music of Liberty only; other messages are there in the wonder of
wind-swept height and the majesty of silent deep - messages that, if you will but listen to
them, may yield you the splendour of some new imagination, the marvel of some new beauty.

'I foresee,' said Goethe, 'the dawn of a new literature which all people may claim as their
own, for all have contributed to its foundation.'  If, then, this is so, and if the materials
for a civilisation as great as that of Europe lie all around you, what profit, you will ask
me, will all this study of our poets and painters be to you?  I might answer that the intellect
can be engaged without direct didactic object on an artistic and historical problem; that the
demand of the intellect is merely to feel itself alive; that nothing which has ever interested
men or women can cease to be a fit subject for culture.

I might remind you of what all Europe owes to the sorrow of a single Florentine in exile at
Verona, or to the love of Petrarch by that little well in Southern France; nay, more, how even
in this dull, materialistic age the simple expression of an old man's simple life, passed away
from the clamour of great cities amid the lakes and misty hills of Cumberland, has opened out
for England treasures of new joy compared with which the treasures of her luxury are as barren
as the sea which she has made her highway, and as bitter as the fire which she would make her
slave.

But I think it will bring you something besides this, something that is the knowledge of real
strength in art:  not that you should imitate the works of these men; but their artistic spirit,
their artistic attitude, I think you should absorb that.

For in nations, as in individuals, if the passion for creation be not accompanied by the critical,
the aesthetic faculty also, it will be sure to waste its strength aimlessly, failing perhaps
in the artistic spirit of choice, or in the mistaking of feeling for form, or in the following
of false ideals.

For the various spiritual forms of the imagination have a natural affinity with certain sensuous
forms of art - and to discern the qualities of each art, to intensify as well its limitations
as its powers of expression, is one of the aims that culture sets before us.  It is not an
increased moral sense, an increased moral supervision that your literature needs.  Indeed,
one should never talk of a moral or an immoral poem - poems are either well written or badly
written, that is all.  And, indeed, any element of morals or implied reference to a standard
of good or evil in art is often a sign of a certain incompleteness of vision, often a note
of discord in the harmony of an imaginative creation; for all good work aims at a purely artistic
effect.  'We must be careful,' said Goethe, 'not to be always looking for culture merely in
what is obviously moral.  Everything that is great promotes civilisation as soon as we are
aware of it.'

But, as in your cities so in your literature, it is a permanent canon and standard of taste,
an increased sensibility to beauty (if I may say so) that is lacking.  All noble work is not
national merely, but universal.  The political independence of a nation must not be confused
with any intellectual isolation.  The spiritual freedom, indeed, your own generous lives and
liberal air will give you.  From us you will learn the classical restraint of form.

For all great art is delicate art, roughness having very little to do with strength, and harshness
very little to do with power.  'The artist,' as Mr. Swinburne says, 'must be perfectly articulate.'

This limitation is for the artist perfect freedom:  it is at once the origin and the sign of
his strength.  So that all the supreme masters of style - Dante, Sophocles, Shakespeare - are
the supreme masters of spiritual and intellectual vision also.

Love art for its own sake, and then all things that you need will be added to you.

This devotion to beauty and to the creation of beautiful things is the test of all great civilised
nations.  Philosophy may teach us to bear with equanimity the misfortunes of our neighbours,
and science resolve the moral sense into a secretion of sugar, but art is what makes the life
of each citizen a sacrament and not a speculation, art is what makes the life of the whole
race immortal.

For beauty is the only thing that time cannot harm.  Philosophies fall away like sand, and
creeds follow one another like the withered leaves of autumn; but what is beautiful is a joy
for all seasons and a possession for all eternity.

Wars and the clash of armies and the meeting of men in battle by trampled field or leaguered
city, and the rising of nations there must always be.  But I think that art, by creating a
common intellectual atmosphere between all countries, might - if it could not overshadow the
world with the silver wings of peace - at least make men such brothers that they would not
go out to slay one another for the whim or folly of some king or minister, as they do in Europe.
Fraternity would come no more with the hands of Cain, nor Liberty betray freedom with the kiss
of Anarchy; for national hatreds are always strongest where culture is lowest.

'How could I?' said Goethe, when reproached for not writing like Korner against the French.
'How could I, to whom barbarism and culture alone are of importance, hate a nation which is
among the most cultivated of the earth, a nation to which I owe a great part of my own cultivation?'

Mighty empires, too, there must always be as long as personal ambition and the spirit of the
age are one, but art at least is the only empire which a nation's enemies cannot take from
her by conquest, but which is taken by submission only.  The sovereignty of Greece and Rome
is not yet passed away, though the gods of the one be dead and the eagles of the other tired.

And we in our Renaissance are seeking to create a sovereignty that will still be England's
when her yellow leopards have grown weary of wars and the rose of her shield is crimsoned no
more with the blood of battle; and you, too, absorbing into the generous heart of a great people
this pervading artistic spirit, will create for yourselves such riches as you have never yet
created, though your land be a network of railways and your cities the harbours for the galleys
of the world.

I know, indeed, that the divine natural prescience of beauty which is the inalienable inheritance
of Greek and Italian is not our inheritance.  For such an informing and presiding spirit of
art to shield us from all harsh and alien influences, we of the Northern races must turn rather
to that strained self-consciousness of our age which, as it is the key-note of all our romantic
art, must be the source of all or nearly all our culture.  I mean that intellectual curiosity
of the nineteenth century which is always looking for the secret of the life that still lingers
round old and bygone forms of culture.  It takes from each what is serviceable for the modern
spirit - from Athens its wonder without its worship, from Venice its splendour without its
sin.  The same spirit is always analysing its own strength and its own weakness, counting what
it owes to East and to West, to the olive-trees of Colonus and to the palm-trees of Lebanon,
to Gethsemane and to the garden of Proserpine.

And yet the truths of art cannot be taught:  they are revealed only, revealed to natures which
have made themselves receptive of all beautiful impressions by the study and worship of all
beautiful things.  And hence the enormous importance given to the decorative arts in our English
Renaissance; hence all that marvel of design that comes from the hand of Edward Burne-Jones,
all that weaving of tapestry and staining of glass, that beautiful working in clay and metal
and wood which we owe to William Morris, the greatest handicraftsman we have had in England
since the fourteenth century.

So, in years to come there will be nothing in any man's house which has not given delight to
its maker and does not give delight to its user.  The children, like the children of Plato's
perfect city, will grow up 'in a simple atmosphere of all fair things' - I quote from the passage
in the REPUBLIC - 'a simple atmosphere of all fair things, where beauty, which is the spirit
of art, will come on eye and ear like a fresh breath of wind that brings health from a clear
upland, and insensibly and gradually draw the child's soul into harmony with all knowledge
and all wisdom, so that he will love what is beautiful and good, and hate what is evil and
ugly (for they always go together) long before he knows the reason why; and then when reason
comes will kiss her on the cheek as a friend.'

That is what Plato thought decorative art could do for a nation, feeling that the secret not
of philosophy merely but of all gracious existence might be externally hidden from any one
whose youth had been passed in uncomely and vulgar surroundings, and that the beauty of form
and colour even, as he says, in the meanest vessels of the house, will find its way into the
inmost places of the soul and lead the boy naturally to look for that divine harmony of spiritual
life of which art was to him the material symbol and warrant.

Prelude indeed to all knowledge and all wisdom will this love of beautiful things be for us;
yet there are times when wisdom becomes a burden and knowledge is one with sorrow:  for as
every body has its shadow so every soul has its scepticism.  In such dread moments of discord
and despair where should we, of this torn and troubled age, turn our steps if not to that secure
house of beauty where there is always a little forgetfulness, always a great joy; to that CITTE
DIVINA, as the old Italian heresy called it, the divine city where one can stand, though only
for a brief moment, apart from the division and terror of the world and the choice of the world
too?

This is that CONSOLATION DES ARTS which is the key-note of Gautier's poetry, the secret of
modern life foreshadowed - as indeed what in our century is not? - by Goethe.  You remember
what he said to the German people:  'Only have the courage,' he said, 'to give yourselves up
to your impressions, allow yourselves to be delighted, moved, elevated, nay instructed, inspired
for something great.'  The courage to give yourselves up to your impressions: yes, that is
the secret of the artistic life - for while art has been defined as an escape from the tyranny
of the senses, it is an escape rather from the tyranny of the soul. In one, who had lain sick
in Quarters for ten Days or upwards, before he was sent to the Hospital, the right Cavity of the Thorax
was found full of a watery Serum; and the Lobes of the Lungs on the same Side almost entirely
wasted; and what remained seemed as it were composed of thickened
Membranes, resembling those formed by the coagulable Lymph, or what
is called by some (though improperly) the fibrous Part of the Blood.

The Lobes in the left Side seemed to be in a sound State, or at most but slightly inflamed.
From the right Lobes of the Lungs being so much wasted, I suspected that the Patient had probably
laboured long under some Disorder of the Breast; but I could not from Enquiry obtain any Information
in this Particular; nor did he ever mention such a Thing during the few Days he lived after being
brought into the Hospital; he said, he had only been ill for eight or ten Days before; but Soldiers
afflicted with chronic Distempers, when they are seized with violent Symptoms, or acute Diseases,
are apt to reckon the Beginning of their Disorder, only from the
Time they are taken ill in a violent Manner; and never to take any
Notice of their former Complaints.

Another Soldier, about the Middle of February, 1762, remained in Quarters five Days after being
taken ill with a Pain of the Breast, and a Difficulty of Breathing; the sixth Day he was brought
to the Hospital in the Morning, and I saw him about eleven o’Clock; he then had all the Symptoms
of the true Peripneumony, attended with a strong hard Pulse. He was immediately blooded as freely
as his Pulse would bear, had Blisters applied, and other Remedies used; notwithstanding which,
on the eighth Day from that Time, he began to throw up a purulent Matter in great Quantity,
attended with a constant hectic Heat, and Fever; which sunk him so fast, that he died the tenth
Day, after he first began to expectorate.

On the 2d of March, a Soldier, of the Fifty-first Regiment of Foot, was brought to the Hospital,
with a violent Pain in the left Side, and a great Difficulty of Breathing. Upon examining him,
he told me, that about two Years before he had had a violent Stitch in his left Side, towards
the lower Part of the Thorax; that ever since he had been subject
to a Difficulty of Breathing; and at Times to a Pain in the Side;
but that he had only been seized with the violent Pain and Difficulty
of Breathing he then complained of, about five Days before, occasioned
by catching Cold, on being billeted in a low, cold, and damp House.--His
Pulse was quick, the Pain of his Side and Difficulty of Breathing
so great, that he could not sleep, nor lie down, but was obliged to
sit constantly in an erect Posture; his Tongue was white and furred,
and he had had no Stools for three Days: He was ordered to be blooded
immediately; and to take a Dose of Salts; and his Side to be rubbed
with the linimentum volatile.

3d. His Breathing and Pain of the Side were easier; he had slept a little in the Night, and could
lie on his right side, but not on his left.
  Nor can I but just note, in passing,
the immense influence the decorative work of Greece and Italy had on its artists, the one teaching
the sculptor that restraining influence of design which is the glory of the Parthenon, the
other keeping painting always true to its primary, pictorial condition of noble colour which
is the secret of the school of Venice; for I wish rather, in this lecture at least, to dwell
on the effect that decorative art has on human life - on its social not its purely artistic effect.

And so you must seek out your workman and give him, as far as possible, the right surroundings,
for remember that the real test and virtue of a workman is not his earnestness nor his industry
even, but his power of design merely; and that 'design is not the offspring of idle fancy:
it is the studied result of accumulative observation and delightful habit.'  All the teaching
in the world is of no avail if you do not surround your workman with happy influences and with
beautiful things.  It is impossible for him to have right ideas about colour unless he sees
the lovely colours of Nature unspoiled; impossible for him to supply beautiful incident and
action unless he sees beautiful incident and action in the world about him.

For to cultivate sympathy you must be among living things and thinking about them, and to cultivate
admiration you must be among beautiful things and looking at them.  'The steel of Toledo and
the silk of Genoa did but give strength to oppression and lustre to pride,' as Mr. Ruskin says;
let it be for you to create an art that is made by the hands of the people for the joy of the
people, to please the hearts of the people, too; an art that will be your expression of your
delight in life.  There is nothing 'in common life too mean, in common things too trivial to
be ennobled by your touch'; nothing in life that art cannot sanctify.

You have heard, I think, a few of you, of two flowers connected with the aesthetic movement
in England, and said (I assure you, erroneously) to be the food of some aesthetic young men.
Well, let me tell you that the reason we love the lily and the sunflower, in spite of what
Mr. Gilbert may tell you, is not for any vegetable fashion at all.  It is because these two
lovely flowers are in England the two most perfect models of design, the most naturally adapted
for decorative art - the gaudy leonine beauty of the one and the precious loveliness of the
other giving to the artist the most entire and perfect joy.  And so with you:  let there be
no flower in your meadows that does not wreathe its tendrils around your pillows, no little
leaf in your Titan forests that does not lend its form to design, no curving spray of wild
rose or brier that does not live for ever in carven arch or window or marble, no bird in your
air that is not giving the iridescent wonder of its colour, the exquisite curves of its wings
in flight, to make more precious the preciousness of simple adornment.

We spend our days, each one of us, in looking for the secret of life.  Well, the secret of
life is in art.

HOUSE DECORATION

IN my last lecture I gave you something of the history of Art in England.  I sought to trace
the influence of the French Revolution upon its development.  I said something of the song
of Keats and the school of the pre-Raphaelites.  But I do not want to shelter the movement,
which I have called the English Renaissance, under any palladium however noble, or any name
however revered.  The roots of it have, indeed, to be sought for in things that have long passed
away, and not, as some suppose, in the fancy of a few young men - although I am not altogether
sure that there is anything much better than the fancy of a few young men.

When I appeared before you on a previous occasion, I had seen nothing of American art save
the Doric columns and Corinthian chimney-pots visible on your Broadway and Fifth Avenue.  Since
then, I have been through your country to some fifty or sixty different cities, I think.  I
find that what your people need is not so much high imaginative art but that which hallows
the vessels of everyday use.  I suppose that the poet will sing and the artist will paint regardless
whether the world praises or blames.  He has his own world and is independent of his fellow-men.
But the handicraftsman is dependent on your pleasure and opinion.  He needs your encouragement
and he must have beautiful surroundings.  Your people love art but do not sufficiently honour
the handicraftsman. Of course, those millionaires who can pillage Europe for their pleasure
need have no care to encourage such; but I speak for those whose desire for beautiful things
is larger than their means.  I find that one great trouble all over is that your workmen are
not given to noble designs.  You cannot be indifferent to this, because Art is not something
which you can take or leave.  It is a necessity of human life.

And what is the meaning of this beautiful decoration which we call art?  In the first place,
it means value to the workman and it means the pleasure which he must necessarily take in making
a beautiful thing.  The mark of all good art is not that the thing done is done exactly or
finely, for machinery may do as much, but that it is worked out with the head and the workman's
heart.  I cannot impress the point too frequently that beautiful and rational designs are necessary
in all work.  I did not imagine, until I went into some of your simpler cities, that there
was so much bad work done.  I found, where I went, bad wall-papers horribly designed, and coloured
carpets, and that old offender the horse-hair sofa, whose stolid look of indifference is always
so depressing.  I found meaningless chandeliers and machine-made furniture, generally of rosewood,
which creaked dismally under the weight of the ubiquitous interviewer.  I came across the small
iron stove which they always persist in decorating with machine-made ornaments, and which is
as great a bore as a wet day or any other particularly dreadful institution.  When unusual
extravagance was indulged in, it was garnished with two funeral urns.

It must always be remembered that what is well and carefully made by an honest workman, after
a rational design, increases in beauty and value as the years go on.  The old furniture brought
over by the Pilgrims, two hundred years ago, which I saw in New England, is just as good and
as beautiful to-day as it was when it first came here.  Now, what you must do is to bring artists
and handicraftsmen together.  Handicraftsmen cannot live, certainly cannot thrive, without
such companionship.  Separate these two and you rob art of all spiritual motive.

Having done this, you must place your workman in the midst of beautiful surroundings.  The
artist is not dependent on the visible and the tangible.  He has his visions and his dreams
to feed on. But the workman must see lovely forms as he goes to his work in the morning and
returns at eventide.  And, in connection with this, I want to assure you that noble and beautiful
designs are never the result of idle fancy or purposeless day-dreaming.  They come only as
the accumulation of habits of long and delightful observation. And yet such things may not
be taught.  Right ideas concerning them can certainly be obtained only by those who have been
accustomed to rooms that are beautiful and colours that are satisfying.

Perhaps one of the most difficult things for us to do is to choose a notable and joyous dress
for men.  There would be more joy in life if we were to accustom ourselves to use all the beautiful
colours we can in fashioning our own clothes.  The dress of the future, I think, will use drapery
to a great extent and will abound with joyous colour.  At present we have lost all nobility
of dress and, in doing so, have almost annihilated the modern sculptor. And, in looking around
at the figures which adorn our parks, one could almost wish that we had completely killed the
noble art.  To see the frock-coat of the drawing-room done in bronze, or the double waistcoat
perpetuated in marble, adds a new horror to death. But indeed, in looking through the history
of costume, seeking an answer to the questions we have propounded, there is little that is
either beautiful or appropriate.  One of the earliest forms is the Greek drapery which is exquisite
for young girls.  And then, I think we may be pardoned a little enthusiasm over the dress of
the time of Charles I., so beautiful indeed, that in spite of its invention being with the
Cavaliers it was copied by the Puritans. And the dress for the children of that time must not
be passed over.  It was a very golden age of the little ones.  I do not think that they have
ever looked so lovely as they do in the pictures of that time.  The dress of the last century
in England is also peculiarly gracious and graceful.  There is nothing bizarre or strange about
it, but it is full of harmony and beauty.  In these days, when we have suffered dreadfully
from the incursions of the modern milliner, we hear ladies boast that they do not wear a dress
more than once.  In the old days, when the dresses were decorated with beautiful designs and
worked with exquisite embroidery, ladies rather took a pride in bringing out the garment and
wearing it many times and handing it down to their daughters - a process that would, I think,
be quite appreciated by a modern husband when called upon to settle his wife's bills.

And how shall men dress?  Men say that they do not particularly care how they dress, and that
it is little matter.  I am bound to reply that I do not think that you do.  In all my journeys
through the country, the only well-dressed men that I saw - and in saying this I earnestly
deprecate the polished indignation of your Fifth Avenue dandies - were the Western miners.
Their wide-brimmed hats, which shaded their faces from the sun and protected them from the
rain, and the cloak, which is by far the most beautiful piece of drapery ever invented, may
well be dwelt on with admiration.  Their high boots, too, were sensible and practical.  They
wore only what was comfortable, and therefore beautiful.  As I looked at them I could not help
thinking with regret of the time when these picturesque miners would have made their fortunes
and would go East to assume again all the abominations of modern fashionable attire. Indeed,
so concerned was I that I made some of them promise that when they again appeared in the more
crowded scenes of Eastern civilisation they would still continue to wear their lovely costume.
But I do not believe they will.

Now, what America wants to-day is a school of rational art.  Bad art is a great deal worse
than no art at all.  You must show your workmen specimens of good work so that they come to
know what is simple and true and beautiful.  To that end I would have you have a museum attached
to these schools - not one of those dreadful modern institutions where there is a stuffed and
very dusty giraffe, and a case or two of fossils, but a place where there are gathered examples
of art decoration from various periods and countries. Such a place is the South Kensington
Museum in London, whereon we build greater hopes for the future than on any other one thing.
There I go every Saturday night, when the museum is open later than usual, to see the handicraftsman,
the wood-worker, the glass-blower and the worker in metals.  And it is here that the man of
refinement and culture comes face to face with the workman who ministers to his joy.  He comes
to know more of the nobility of the workman, and the workman, feeling the appreciation, comes
to know more of the nobility of his work.

You have too many white walls.  More colour is wanted.  You should have such men as Whistler
among you to teach you the beauty and joy of colour.  Take Mr. Whistler's 'Symphony in White,'
which you no doubt have imagined to be something quite bizarre.  It is nothing of the sort.
Think of a cool grey sky flecked here and there with white clouds, a grey ocean and three wonderfully
beautiful figures robed in white, leaning over the water and dropping white flowers from their
fingers.  Here is no extensive intellectual scheme to trouble you, and no metaphysics of which
we have had quite enough in art.  But if the simple and unaided colour strike the right keynote,
the whole conception is made clear.  I regard Mr. Whistler's famous Peacock Room as the finest
thing in colour and art decoration which the world has known since Correggio painted that wonderful
room in Italy where the little children are dancing on the walls.  Mr. Whistler finished another
room just before I came away - a breakfast room in blue and yellow.  The ceiling was a light
blue, the cabinet-work and the furniture were of a yellow wood, the curtains at the windows
were white and worked in yellow, and when the table was set for breakfast with dainty blue
china nothing can be conceived at once so simple and so joyous.

The fault which I have observed in most of your rooms is that there is apparent no definite
scheme of colour.  Everything is not attuned to a key-note as it should be.  The apartments
are crowded with pretty things which have no relation to one another.  Again, your artists
must decorate what is more simply useful.  In your art schools I found no attempt to decorate
such things as the vessels for water.  I know of nothing uglier than the ordinary jug or pitcher.
A museum could be filled with the different kinds of water vessels which are used in hot countries.
Yet we continue to submit to the depressing jug with the handle all on one side.  I do not
see the wisdom of decorating dinner-plates with sunsets and soup-plates with moonlight scenes.
I do not think it adds anything to the pleasure of the canvas-back duck to take it out of such
glories.  Besides, we do not want a soup-plate whose bottom seems to vanish in the distance.
One feels neither safe nor comfortable under such conditions.  In fact, I did not find in the
art schools of the country that the difference was explained between decorative and imaginative
art.

The conditions of art should be simple.  A great deal more depends upon the heart than upon
the head.  Appreciation of art is not secured by any elaborate scheme of learning.  Art requires
a good healthy atmosphere.  The motives for art are still around about us as they were round
about the ancients.  And the subjects are also easily found by the earnest sculptor and the
painter.  Nothing is more picturesque and graceful than a man at work.  The artist who goes
to the children's playground, watches them at their sport and sees the boy stoop to tie his
shoe, will find the same themes that engaged the attention of the ancient Greeks, and such
observation and the illustrations which follow will do much to correct that foolish impression
that mental and physical beauty are always divorced.

To you, more than perhaps to any other country, has Nature been generous in furnishing material
for art workers to work in.  You have marble quarries where the stone is more beautiful in
colour than any the Greeks ever had for their beautiful work, and yet day after day I am confronted
with the great building of some stupid man who has used the beautiful material as if it were
not precious almost beyond speech.  Marble should not be used save by noble workmen.  There
is nothing which gave me a greater sense of barrenness in travelling through the country than
the entire absence of wood carving on your houses.  Wood carving is the simplest of the decorative
arts.  In Switzerland the little barefooted boy beautifies the porch of his father's house
with examples of skill in this direction.  Why should not American boys do a great deal more
and better than Swiss boys?

There is nothing to my mind more coarse in conception and more vulgar in execution than modern
jewellery.  This is something that can easily be corrected.  Something better should be made
out of the beautiful gold which is stored up in your mountain hollows and strewn along your
river beds.  When I was at Leadville and reflected that all the shining silver that I saw coming
from the mines would be made into ugly dollars, it made me sad.  It should be made into something
more permanent.  The golden gates at Florence are as beautiful to-day as when Michael Angelo
saw them.

We should see more of the workman than we do.  We should not be content to have the salesman
stand between us - the salesman who knows nothing of what he is selling save that he is charging
a great deal too much for it.  And watching the workman will teach that most important lesson
- the nobility of all rational workmanship.

I said in my last lecture that art would create a new brotherhood among men by furnishing a
universal language.  I said that under its beneficent influences war might pass away.  Thinking
this, what place can I ascribe to art in our education?  If children grow up among all fair
and lovely things, they will grow to love beauty and detest ugliness before they know the reason
why.  If you go into a house where everything is coarse, you find things chipped and broken
and unsightly.  Nobody exercises any care.  If everything is dainty and delicate, gentleness
and refinement of manner are unconsciously acquired.  When I was in San Francisco I used to
visit the Chinese Quarter frequently.  There I used to watch a great hulking Chinese workman
at his task of digging, and used to see him every day drink his tea from a little cup as delicate
in texture as the petal of a flower, whereas in all the grand hotels of the land, where thousands
of dollars have been lavished on great gilt mirrors and gaudy columns, I have been given my
coffee or my chocolate in cups an inch and a quarter thick.  I think I have deserved something
nicer.

The art systems of the past have been devised by philosophers who looked upon human beings
as obstructions.  They have tried to educate boys' minds before they had any.  How much better
it would be in these early years to teach children to use their hands in the rational service
of mankind.  I would have a workshop attached to every school, and one hour a day given up
to the teaching of simple decorative arts.  It would be a golden hour to the children.  And
you would soon raise up a race of handicraftsmen who would transform the face of your country.
I have seen only one such school in the United States, and this was in Philadelphia and was
founded by my friend Mr. Leyland.  I stopped there yesterday and have brought some of the work
here this afternoon to show you. Here are two disks of beaten brass:  the designs on them are
beautiful, the workmanship is simple, and the entire result is satisfactory.  The work was
done by a little boy twelve years old. This is a wooden bowl decorated by a little girl of
thirteen.  The design is lovely and the colouring delicate and pretty.  Here you see a piece
of beautiful wood carving accomplished by a little boy of nine.  In such work as this, children
learn sincerity in art. They learn to abhor the liar in art - the man who paints wood to look
like iron, or iron to look like stone.  It is a practical school of morals.  No better way
is there to learn to love Nature than to understand Art.  It dignifies every flower of the
field. And, the boy who sees the thing of beauty which a bird on the wing becomes when transferred
to wood or canvas will probably not throw the customary stone.  What we want is something spiritual
added to life.  Nothing is so ignoble that Art cannot sanctify it.

ART AND THE HANDICRAFTSMAN

PEOPLE often talk as if there was an opposition between what is beautiful and what is useful.
There is no opposition to beauty except ugliness:  all things are either beautiful or ugly,
and utility will be always on the side of the beautiful thing, because beautiful decoration
is always on the side of the beautiful thing, because beautiful decoration is always an expression
of the use you put a thing to and the value placed on it. In Expeditions into warm Countries, where
fresh Water is difficult to be had, a few Stills, with a proper Apparatus, ought to be carried
out; and after a Landing is made, the Stills ought to be set to work for distilling fresh
Water from Sea Water in the Manner mentioned by Dr. Lind[145]; and although a sufficient Quantity
cannot be distilled for serving the whole Army, yet enough may be got in this Way for the Use
of the Sick.

[145] Dr. Lind relates a Number of Experiments of his having distilled Sea Water in different Manners,
as recommended by others; and concludes, that the best Way of getting fresh Water from Salt,
is to distil the Sea Water by itself, without any Mixture; and he proposes having a Still Head
to the Coppers or Iron Pots in which the Meat is dressed aboard a Ship. Ibid. note to p. 84,
&c.

When Men are very warm, after long Marches, and other hard Duties, in Summer; Officers should
endeavour to prevent their swallowing immediately great Quantities of cold Water, and persuade
them to wait a little till they cool; and at such Times, if Spirits can be got easily, to order
a small Quantity to be mixed with the Water in each Man’s Canteen.

Though the Abuse of vinous and spirituous Liquors is very destructive to the Constitution, yet
these same Liquors, given in Moderation to Soldiers on Service, during the Times of great Fatigues,
are some of the best Preservatives of Health. Spirits, for common Use, ought to be mixed with Water; and
in the hot Climates made into Punch; though in very cold and wet
Weather, and in damp Nights, a Glass of pure Spirits, given to the
Men going on Duty, is of great Service; for it is always observed,
that Men are much less apt to catch Diseases from being wet when they
are upon a March, or at hard Work, than when they stand Centinels,
or are upon Out-Posts where they move but little, or when they lie
down in their wet Cloaths; and that they are less liable to be affected
by the Weather after a hearty Meal, or drinking a Glass of Spirits,
or some generous Liquor, than when their Stomachs are empty.

An Infusion of Bark or other Bitters, and of Garlick, in Spirits, has been found to encrease
their Efficacy as Preservatives both against the Effects of Cold and malignant Distempers.
Dr. Lind has recommended an Infusion of Garlick in Spirits as one of the best Stomachics and
Diaphoretics he knows in cold wet Weather. And many have recommended a Tincture of the Bark[146]:
Towards the End of the Year 1743, Mr. Tough, one of the Apothecaries
to the British military Hospital in the late War, then a Mate to a
marching Regiment, was ordered to go down the Rhine with a Party of
Sick, who had the Seeds of the Hospital Fever among them, and were
to go in Bilanders, from Germany to Flanders.

  If
one merely shrieks slander through a tube and the other whispers folly into a wire, do not
think that anybody is very much benefited by the invention.

The train that whirls an ordinary Englishman through Italy at the rate of forty miles an hour
and finally sends him home without any memory of that lovely country but that he was cheated
by a courier at Rome, or that he got a bad dinner at Verona, does not do him or civilisation
much good.  But that swift legion of fiery-footed engines that bore to the burning ruins of
Chicago the loving help and generous treasure of the world was as noble and as beautiful as
any golden troop of angels that ever fed the hungry and clothed the naked in the antique times.
As beautiful, yes; all machinery may be beautiful when it is undecorated even.  Do not seek
to decorate it.  We cannot but think all good machinery is graceful, also, the line of strength
and the line of beauty being one.

Give then, as I said, to your workmen of to-day the bright and noble surroundings that you
can yourself create.  Stately and simple architecture for your cities, bright and simple dress
for your men and women; those are the conditions of a real artistic movement.  For the artist
is not concerned primarily with any theory of life but with life itself, with the joy and loveliness
that should come daily on eye and ear for a beautiful external world.

But the simplicity must not be barrenness nor the bright colour gaudy.  For all beautiful colours
are graduated colours, the colours that seem about to pass into one another's realm - colour
without tone being like music without harmony, mere discord. Barren architecture, the vulgar
and glaring advertisements that desecrate not merely your cities but every rock and river that
I have seen yet in America - all this is not enough.  A school of design we must have too in
each city.  It should be a stately and noble building, full of the best examples of the best
art of the world.  Furthermore, do not put your designers in a barren whitewashed room and
bid them work in that depressing and colourless atmosphere as I have seen many of the American
schools of design, but give them beautiful surroundings.  Because you want to produce a permanent
canon and standard of taste in your workman, he must have always by him and before him specimens
of the best decorative art of the world, so that you can say to him:  'This is good work. 
Greek or Italian or Japanese wrought it so many years ago, but it is eternally young because
eternally beautiful.'  Work in this spirit and you will be sure to be right.  Do not copy it,
but work with the same love, the same reverence, the same freedom of imagination.  You must
teach him colour and design, how all beautiful colours are graduated colours and glaring colours
the essence of vulgarity.  Show him the quality of any beautiful work of nature like the rose,
or any beautiful work of art like an Eastern carpet - being merely the exquisite gradation
of colour, one tone answering another like the answering chords of a symphony. Teach him how
the true designer is not he who makes the design and then colours it, but he who designs in
colour, creates in colour, thinks in colour too.  Show him how the most gorgeous stained-glass
windows of Europe are filled with white glass, and the most gorgeous Eastern tapestry with
toned colours - the primary colours in both places being set in the white glass, and the tone
colours like brilliant jewels set in dusky gold.  And then as regards design, show him how
the real designer will take first any given limited space, little disk of silver, it may be,
like a Greek coin, or wide expanse of fretted ceiling or lordly wall as Tintoret chose at Venice
(it does not matter which), and to this limited space - the first condition of decoration being
the limitation of the size of the material used - he will give the effect of its being filled
with beautiful decoration, filled with it as a golden cup will be filled with wine, so complete
that you should not be able to take away anything from it or add anything to it.  For from
a good piece of design you can take away nothing, nor can you add anything to it, each little
bit of design being as absolutely necessary and as vitally important to the whole effect as
a note or chord of music is for a sonata of Beethoven.

But I said the effect of its being so filled, because this, again, is of the essence of good
design.  With a simple spray of leaves and a bird in flight a Japanese artist will give you
the impression that he has completely covered with lovely design the reed fan or lacquer cabinet
at which he is working, merely because he knows the exact spot in which to place them.  All
good design depends on the texture of the utensil used and the use you wish to put it to. 
One of the first things I saw in an American school of design was a young lady painting a romantic
moonlight landscape on a large round dish, and another young lady covering a set of dinner
plates with a series of sunsets of the most remarkable colours.  Let your ladies paint moonlight
landscapes and sunsets, but do not let them paint them on dinner plates or dishes.  Let them
take canvas or paper for such work, but not clay or china.  They are merely painting the wrong
subjects on the wrong material, that is all.  They have not been taught that every material
and texture has certain qualities of its own.  The design suitable for one is quite wrong for
the other, just as the design which you should work on a flat table- cover ought to be quite
different from the design you would work on a curtain, for the one will always be straight,
the other broken into folds; and the use too one puts the object to should guide one in the
choice of design.  One does not want to eat one's terrapins off a romantic moonlight nor one's
clams off a harrowing sunset. Glory of sun and moon, let them be wrought for us by our landscape
artist and be on the walls of the rooms we sit in to remind us of the undying beauty of the
sunsets that fade and die, but do not let us eat our soup off them and send them down to the
kitchen twice a day to be washed and scrubbed by the handmaid.

All these things are simple enough, yet nearly always forgotten. Your school of design here
will teach your girls and your boys, your handicraftsmen of the future (for all your schools
of art should be local schools, the schools of particular cities).  We talk of the Italian
school of painting, but there is no Italian school; there were the schools of each city.  Every
town in Italy, from Venice itself, queen of the sea, to the little hill fortress of Perugia,
each had its own school of art, each different and all beautiful.

So do not mind what art Philadelphia or New York is having, but make by the hands of your own
citizens beautiful art for the joy of your own citizens, for you have here the primary elements
of a great artistic movement.

For, believe me, the conditions of art are much simpler than people imagine.  For the noblest
art one requires a clear healthy atmosphere, not polluted as the air of our English cities
is by the smoke and grime and horridness which comes from open furnace and from factory chimney.
You must have strong, sane, healthy physique among your men and women.  Sickly or idle or melancholy
people do not do much in art.  And lastly, you require a sense of individualism about each
man and woman, for this is the essence of art - a desire on the part of man to express himself
in the noblest way possible.  And this is the reason that the grandest art of the world always
came from a republic:  Athens, Venice, and Florence - there were no kings there and so their
art was as noble and simple as sincere.  But if you want to know what kind of art the folly
of kings will impose on a country look at the decorative art of France under the GRAND MONARQUE,
under Louis the Fourteenth; the gaudy gilt furniture writhing under a sense of its own horror
and ugliness, with a nymph smirking at every angle and a dragon mouthing on every claw.  Unreal
and monstrous art this, and fit only for such periwigged pomposities as the nobility of France
at that time, but not at all fit for you or me.  We do not want the rich to possess more beautiful
things but the poor to create more beautiful things; for ever man is poor who cannot create.
Art shall be again the most glorious of all the chords through which the spirit of a great
nation finds its noblest utterance.

All around you, I said, lie the conditions for a great artistic movement for every great art.
Let us think of one of them; a sculptor, for instance.

If a modern sculptor were to come and say, 'Very well, but where can one find subjects for
sculpture out of men who wear frock-coats and chimney-pot hats?' I would tell him to go to
the docks of a great city and watch the men loading or unloading the stately ships, working
at wheel or windlass, hauling at rope or gangway.  I have never watched a man do anything useful
who has not been graceful at some moment of his labour:  it is only the loafer and the idle
saunterer who is as useless and uninteresting to the artist as he is to himself.  I would ask
the sculptor to go with me to any of your schools or universities, to the running ground and
gymnasium, to watch the young men start for a race, hurling quoit or club, kneeling to tie
their shoes before leaping, stepping from the boat or bending to the oar, and to carve them;
and when he was weary of cities I would ask him to come to your fields and meadows to watch
the reaper with his sickle and the cattle-driver with lifted lasso.  For if a man cannot find
the noblest motives for his art in such simple daily things as a woman drawing water from the
well or a man leaning with his scythe, he will not find them anywhere at all.  Gods and goddesses
the Greek carved because he loved them; saint and king the Goth because he believed in them.
But you, you do not care much for Greek gods and goddesses, and you are perfectly and entirely
right; and you do not think much of kings either, and you are quite right.  But what you do
love are your own men and women, your own flowers and fields, your own hills and mountains,
and these are what your art should represent to you.

Ours has been the first movement which has brought the handicraftsman and the artist together,
for remember that by separating the one from the other you do ruin to both; you rob the one
of all spiritual motive and all imaginative joy, you isolate the other from all real technical
perfection.  The two greatest schools of art in the world, the sculptor at Athens and the school
of painting at Venice, had their origin entirely in a long succession of simple and earnest
handicraftsmen.  It was the Greek potter who taught the sculptor that restraining influence
of design which was the glory of the Parthenon; it was the Italian decorator of chests and
household goods who kept Venetian painting always true to its primary pictorial condition of
noble colour.  For we should remember that all the arts are fine arts and all the arts decorative
arts.  The greatest triumph of Italian painting was the decoration of a pope's chapel in Rome
and the wall of a room in Venice.  Michael Angelo wrought the one, and Tintoret, the dyer's
son, the other.  And the little 'Dutch landscape, which you put over your sideboard to-day,
and between the windows to-morrow, is' no less a glorious 'piece of work than the extents of
field and forest with which Benozzo has made green and beautiful the once melancholy arcade
of the Campo Santo at Pisa,' as Ruskin says.

Do not imitate the works of a nation, Greek or Japanese, Italian or English; but their artistic
spirit of design and their artistic attitude to-day, their own world, you should absorb but
imitate never, copy never.  Unless you can make as beautiful a design in painted china or embroidered
screen or beaten brass out of your American turkey as the Japanese does out of his grey silver-winged
stork, you will never do anything.  Let the Greek carve his lions and the Goth his dragons:
buffalo and wild deer are the animals for you.

Golden rod and aster and rose and all the flowers that cover your valleys in the spring and
your hills in the autumn:  let them be the flowers for your art.  Not merely has Nature given
you the noblest motives for a new school of decoration, but to you above all other countries
has she given the utensils to work in.

You have quarries of marble richer than Pentelicus, more varied than Paros, but do not build
a great white square house of marble and think that it is beautiful, or that you are using
marble nobly. If you build in marble you must either carve it into joyous decoration, like
the lives of dancing children that adorn the marble castles of the Loire, or fill it with beautiful
sculpture, frieze and pediment, as the Greeks did, or inlay it with other coloured marbles
as they did in Venice.  Otherwise you had better build in simple red brick as your Puritan
fathers, with no pretence and with some beauty.  Do not treat your marble as if it was ordinary
stone and build a house of mere blocks of it.  For it is indeed a precious stone, this marble
of yours, and only workmen of nobility of invention and delicacy of hand should be allowed
to touch it at all, carving it into noble statues or into beautiful decoration, or inlaying
it with other coloured marbles:  for 'the true colours of architecture are those of natural
stone, and I would fain see them taken advantage of to the full.  Every variety is here, from
pale yellow to purple passing through orange, red, and brown, entirely at your command; nearly
every kind of green and grey also is attainable, and with these and with pure white what harmony
might you not achieve.  Of stained and variegated stone the quantity is unlimited, the kinds
innumerable.  Were brighter colours required, let glass, and gold protected by glass, be used
in mosaic, a kind of work as durable as the solid stone and incapable of losing its lustre
by time.  And let the painter's work be reserved for the shadowed loggia and inner chamber.

'This is the true and faithful way of building.  Where this cannot be, the device of external
colouring may indeed be employed without dishonour - but it must be with the warning reflection
that a time will come when such aids will pass away and when the building will be judged in
its lifelessness, dying the death of the dolphin. Better the less bright, more enduring fabric.
The transparent alabasters of San Miniato and the mosaics of Saint Mark's are more warmly filled
and more brightly touched by every return of morning and evening, while the hues of the Gothic
cathedrals have died like the iris out of the cloud, and the temples, whose azure and purple
once flamed above the Grecian promontory, stand in their faded whiteness like snows which the
sunset has left cold.' - Ruskin, SEVEN LAMPS OF ARCHITECTURE, II.

I do not know anything so perfectly commonplace in design as most modern jewellery.  How easy
for you to change that and to produce goldsmiths' work that would be a joy to all of us.  The
gold is ready for you in unexhausted treasure, stored up in the mountain hollow or strewn on
the river sand, and was not given to you merely for barren speculation.  There should be some
better record of it left in your history than the merchant's panic and the ruined home. We
do not remember often enough how constantly the history of a great nation will live in and
by its art.  Only a few thin wreaths of beaten gold remain to tell us of the stately empire
of Etruria; and, while from the streets of Florence the noble knight and haughty duke have
long since passed away, the gates which the simple goldsmith Ghiberti made for their pleasure
still guard their lovely house of baptism, worthy still of the praise of Michael Angelo who
called them worthy to be the Gates of Paradise.

Have then your school of design, search out your workmen and, when you find one who has delicacy
of hand and that wonder of invention necessary for goldsmiths' work, do not leave him to toil
in obscurity and dishonour and have a great glaring shop and two great glaring shop-boys in
it (not to take your orders:  they never do that; but to force you to buy something you do
not want at all). When you want a thing wrought in gold, goblet or shield for the feast, necklace
or wreath for the women, tell him what you like most in decoration, flower or wreath, bird
in flight or hound in the chase, image of the woman you love or the friend you honour. Watch
him as he beats out the gold into those thin plates delicate as the petals of a yellow rose,
or draws it into the long wires like tangled sunbeams at dawn.  Whoever that workman be, help
him, cherish him, and you will have such lovely work from his hand as will be a joy to you
for all time.

This is the spirit of our movement in England, and this is the spirit in which we would wish
you to work, making eternal by your art all that is noble in your men and women, stately in
your lakes and mountains, beautiful in your own flowers and natural life.  We want to see that
you have nothing in your houses that has not been a joy to the man who made it, and is not
a joy to those that use it.  We want to see you create an art made by the hands of the people
to please the hearts of the people too.  Do you like this spirit or not?  Do you think it simple
and strong, noble in its aim, and beautiful in its result?  I know you do.

Folly and slander have their own way for a little time, but for a little time only.  You now
know what we mean:  you will be able to estimate what is said of us - its value and its motive.

There should be a law that no ordinary newspaper should be allowed to write about art.  The
harm they do by their foolish and random writing it would be impossible to overestimate - not
to the artist but to the public, blinding them to all, but harming the artist not at all. 
Without them we would judge a man simply by his work; but at present the newspapers are trying
hard to induce the public to judge a sculptor, for instance, never by his statues but by the
way he treats his wife; a painter by the amount of his income and a poet by the colour of his
neck-tie.  I said there should be a law, but there is really no necessity for a new law:  nothing
could be easier than to bring the ordinary critic under the head of the criminal classes. 
But let us leave such an inartistic subject and return to beautiful and comely things, remembering
that the art which would represent the spirit of modern newspapers would be exactly the art
which you and I want to avoid - grotesque art, malice mocking you from every gateway, slander
sneering at you from every corner.

Perhaps you may be surprised at my talking of labour and the workman.  You have heard of me,
I fear, through the medium of your somewhat imaginative newspapers as, if not a 'Japanese young
man,' at least a young man to whom the rush and clamour and reality of the modern world were
distasteful, and whose greatest difficulty in life was the difficulty of living up to the level
of his blue china - a paradox from which England has not yet recovered.

Well, let me tell you how it first came to me at all to create an artistic movement in England,
a movement to show the rich what beautiful things they might enjoy and the poor what beautiful
things they might create.

One summer afternoon in Oxford - 'that sweet city with her dreaming spires,' lovely as Venice
in its splendour, noble in its learning as Rome, down the long High Street that winds from
tower to tower, past silent cloister and stately gateway, till it reaches that long, grey seven-arched
bridge which Saint Mary used to guard (used to, I say, because they are now pulling it down
to build a tramway and a light cast-iron bridge in its place, desecrating the loveliest city
in England) - well, we were coming down the street - a troop of young men, some of them like
myself only nineteen, going to river or tennis-court or cricket-field - when Ruskin going up
to lecture in cap and gown met us.  He seemed troubled and prayed us to go back with him to
his lecture, which a few of us did, and there he spoke to us not on art this time but on life,
saying that it seemed to him to be wrong that all the best physique and strength of the young
men in England should be spent aimlessly on cricket ground or river, without any result at
all except that if one rowed well one got a pewter-pot, and if one made a good score, a cane-handled
bat.  He thought, he said, that we should be working at something that would do good to other
people, at something by which we might show that in all labour there was something noble. Well,
we were a good deal moved, and said we would do anything he wished.  So he went out round Oxford
and found two villages, Upper and Lower Hinksey, and between them there lay a great swamp,
so that the villagers could not pass from one to the other without many miles of a round. 
And when we came back in winter he asked us to help him to make a road across this morass for
these village people to use.  So out we went, day after day, and learned how to lay levels
and to break stones, and to wheel barrows along a plank - a very difficult thing to do.  And
Ruskin worked with us in the mist and rain and mud of an Oxford winter, and our friends and
our enemies came out and mocked us from the bank.  We did not mind it much then, and we did
not mind it afterwards at all, but worked away for two months at our road.  And what became
of the road? Well, like a bad lecture it ended abruptly - in the middle of the swamp.  Ruskin
going away to Venice, when we came back for the next term there was no leader, and the 'diggers,'
as they called us, fell asunder.  And I felt that if there was enough spirit amongst the young
men to go out to such work as road-making for the sake of a noble ideal of life, I could from
them create an artistic movement that might change, as it has changed, the face of England.
So I sought them out - leader they would call me - but there was no leader:  we were all searchers
only and we were bound to each other by noble friendship and by noble art.  There was none
of us idle: poets most of us, so ambitious were we:  painters some of us, or workers in metal
or modellers, determined that we would try and create for ourselves beautiful work:  for the
handicraftsman beautiful work, for those who love us poems and pictures, for those who love
us not epigrams and paradoxes and scorn.

Well, we have done something in England and we will do something more.  Now, I do not want
you, believe me, to ask your brilliant young men, your beautiful young girls, to go out and
make a road on a swamp for any village in America, but I think you might each of you have some
art to practise.

We must have, as Emerson said, a mechanical craft for our culture, a basis for our higher accomplishments
in the work of our hands - the uselessness of most people's hands seems to me one of the most
unpractical things.  'No separation from labour can be without some loss of power or truth
to the seer,' says Emerson again.  The heroism which would make on us the impression of Epaminondas
must be that of a domestic conqueror.  The hero of the future is he who shall bravely and gracefully
subdue this Gorgon of fashion and of convention.  Congratulate yourself if you have done something
strange and extravagant and broken the monotony of a decorous age.

And lastly, let us remember that art is the one thing which Death cannot harm.  The little
house at Concord may be desolate, but the wisdom of New England's Plato is not silenced nor
the brilliancy of that Attic genius dimmed:  the lips of Longfellow are still musical for us
though his dust be turning into the flowers which he loved: and as it is with the greater artists,
poet and philosopher and song-bird, so let it be with you.

LECTURE TO ART STUDENTS

IN the lecture which it is my privilege to deliver before you to- night I do not desire to
give you any abstract definition of beauty at all.  For we who are working in art cannot accept
any theory of beauty in exchange for beauty itself, and, so far from desiring to isolate it
in a formula appealing to the intellect, we, on the contrary, seek to materialise it in a form
that gives joy to the soul through the senses.  We want to create it, not to define it. The
definition should follow the work:  the work should not adapt itself to the definition.

Nothing, indeed, is more dangerous to the young artist than any conception of ideal beauty:
he is constantly led by it either into weak prettiness or lifeless abstraction:  whereas to
touch the ideal at all you must not strip it of vitality.  You must find it in life and re-create
it in art.

While, then, on the one hand I do not desire to give you any philosophy of beauty - for, what
I want to-night is to investigate how we can create art, not how we can talk of it - on the
other hand, I do not wish to deal with anything like a history of English art.

To begin with, such an expression as English art is a meaningless expression.  One might just
as well talk of English mathematics. Art is the science of beauty, and Mathematics the science
of truth: there is no national school of either.  Indeed, a national school is a provincial
school, merely.  Nor is there any such thing as a school of art even.  There are merely artists,
that is all.

And as regards histories of art, they are quite valueless to you unless you are seeking the
ostentatious oblivion of an art professorship.  It is of no use to you to know the date of
Perugino or the birthplace of Salvator Rosa:  all that you should learn about art is to know
a good picture when you see it, and a bad picture when you see it.  As regards the date of
the artist, all good work looks perfectly modern:  a piece of Greek sculpture, a portrait of
Velasquez  - they are always modern, always of our time.  And as regards the nationality of
the artist, art is not national but universal.  As regards archaeology, then, avoid it altogether:
archaeology is merely the science of making excuses for bad art; it is the rock on which many
a young artist founders and shipwrecks; it is the abyss from which no artist, old or young,
ever returns.  Or, if he does return, he is so covered with the dust of ages and the mildew
of time, that he is quite unrecognisable as an artist, and has to conceal himself for the rest
of his days under the cap of a professor, or as a mere illustrator of ancient history.  How
worthless archaeology is in art you can estimate by the fact of its being so popular. Popularity
is the crown of laurel which the world puts on bad art. Whatever is popular is wrong.

As I am not going to talk to you, then, about the philosophy of the beautiful, or the history
of art, you will ask me what I am going to talk about.  The subject of my lecture to-night
is what makes an artist and what does the artist make; what are the relations of the artist
to his surroundings, what is the education the artist should get, and what is the quality of
a good work of art.

Now, as regards the relations of the artist to his surroundings, by which I mean the age and
country in which he is born.  All good art, as I said before, has nothing to do with any particular
century; but this universality is the quality of the work of art; the conditions that produce
that quality are different.  And what, I think, you should do is to realise completely your
age in order completely to abstract yourself from it; remembering that if you are an artist
at all, you will be not the mouthpiece of a century, but the master of eternity, that all art
rests on a principle, and that mere temporal considerations are no principle at all; and that
those who advise you to make your art representative of the nineteenth century are advising
you to produce an art which your children, when you have them, will think old-fashioned.  But
you will tell me this is an inartistic age, and we are an inartistic people, and the artist
suffers much in this nineteenth century of ours.

Of course he does.  I, of all men, am not going to deny that.  But remember that there never
has been an artistic age, or an artistic people, since the beginning of the world.  The artist
has always been, and will always be, an exquisite exception.  There is no golden age of art;
only artists who have produced what is more golden than gold.

WHAT, you will say to me, the Greeks? were not they an artistic people?

Well, the Greeks certainly not, but, perhaps, you mean the Athenians, the citizens of one out
of a thousand cities.

Do you think that they were an artistic people?  Take them even at the time of their highest
artistic development, the latter part of the fifth century before Christ, when they had the
greatest poets and the greatest artists of the antique world, when the Parthenon rose in loveliness
at the bidding of a Phidias, and the philosopher spake of wisdom in the shadow of the painted
portico, and tragedy swept in the perfection of pageant and pathos across the marble of the
stage.  Were they an artistic people then?  Not a bit of it. What is an artistic people but
a people who love their artists and understand their art?  The Athenians could do neither.

How did they treat Phidias?  To Phidias we owe the great era, not merely in Greek, but in all
art - I mean of the introduction of the use of the living model.

And what would you say if all the English bishops, backed by the English people, came down
from Exeter Hall to the Royal Academy one day and took off Sir Frederick Leighton in a prison
van to Newgate on the charge of having allowed you to make use of the living model in your
designs for sacred pictures?

Would you not cry out against the barbarism and the Puritanism of such an idea?  Would you
not explain to them that the worst way to honour God is to dishonour man who is made in His
image, and is the work of His hands; and, that if one wants to paint Christ one must take the
most Christlike person one can find, and if one wants to paint the Madonna, the purest girl
one knows?

Would you not rush off and burn down Newgate, if necessary, and say that such a thing was without
parallel in history?

Without parallel?  Well, that is exactly what the Athenians did.

In the room of the Parthenon marbles, in the British Museum, you will see a marble shield on
the wall.  On it there are two figures; one of a man whose face is half hidden, the other of
a man with the godlike lineaments of Pericles.  For having done this, for having introduced
into a bas relief, taken from Greek sacred history, the image of the great statesman who was
ruling Athens at the time, Phidias was flung into prison and there, in the common gaol of Athens,
died, the supreme artist of the old world.

And do you think that this was an exceptional case?  The sign of a Philistine age is the cry
of immorality against art, and this cry was raised by the Athenian people against every great
poet and thinker of their day - AEschylus, Euripides, Socrates.  It was the same with Florence
in the thirteenth century.  Good handicrafts are due to guilds, not to the people.  The moment
the guilds lost their power and the people rushed in, beauty and honesty of work died.

And so, never talk of an artistic people; there never has been such a thing.

But, perhaps, you will tell me that the external beauty of the world has almost entirely passed
away from us, that the artist dwells no longer in the midst of the lovely surroundings which,
in ages past, were the natural inheritance of every one, and that art is very difficult in
this unlovely town of ours, where, as you go to your work in the morning, or return from it
at eventide, you have to pass through street after street of the most foolish and stupid architecture
that the world has ever seen; architecture, where every lovely Greek form is desecrated and
defiled, and every lovely Gothic form defiled and desecrated, reducing three-fourths of the
London houses to being, merely, like square boxes of the vilest proportions, as gaunt as they
are grimy, and as poor as they are pretentious - the hall door always of the wrong colour,
and the windows of the wrong size, and where, even when wearied of the houses you turn to contemplate
the street itself, you have nothing to look at but chimney-pot hats, men with sandwich boards,
vermilion letter-boxes, and do that even at the risk of being run over by an emerald-green omnibus.

Is not art difficult, you will say to me, in such surroundings as these?  Of course it is difficult,
but then art was never easy; you yourselves would not wish it to be easy; and, besides, nothing
is worth doing except what the world says is impossible.

Still, you do not care to be answered merely by a paradox.  What are the relations of the artist
to the external world, and what is the result of the loss of beautiful surroundings to you,
is one of the most important questions of modern art; and there is no point on which Mr. Ruskin
so insists as that the decadence of art has come from the decadence of beautiful things; and
that when the artist cannot feed his eye on beauty, beauty goes from his work.

I remember in one of his lectures, after describing the sordid aspect of a great English city,
he draws for us a picture of what were the artistic surroundings long ago.

Think, he says, in words of perfect and picturesque imagery, whose beauty I can but feebly
echo, think of what was the scene which presented itself, in his afternoon walk, to a designer
of the Gothic school of Pisa - Nino Pisano or any of his men (22):

On each side of a bright river he saw rise a line of brighter palaces, arched and pillared,
and inlaid with deep red porphyry, and with serpentine; along the quays before their gates
were riding troops of knights, noble in face and form, dazzling in crest and shield; horse
and man one labyrinth of quaint colour and gleaming light - the purple, and silver, and scarlet
fringes flowing over the strong limbs and clashing mall, like sea-waves over rocks at sunset.
Opening on each side from the river were gardens, courts, and cloisters; long successions of
white pillars among wreaths of vine; leaping of fountains through buds of pomegranate and orange:
and still along the garden-paths, and under and through the crimson of the pomegranate shadows,
moving slowly, groups of the fairest women that Italy ever saw - fairest, because purest and
thoughtfullest; trained in all high knowledge, as in all courteous art - in dance, in song,
in sweet wit, in lofty learning, in loftier courage, in loftiest love - able alike to cheer,
to enchant, or save, the souls of men.  Above all this scenery of perfect human life, rose
dome and bell-tower, burning with white alabaster and gold:  beyond dome and bell-tower the
slopes of mighty hills hoary with olive; far in the north, above a purple sea of peaks of solemn
Apennine, the clear, sharp-cloven Carrara mountains sent up their steadfast flames of marble
summit into amber sky; the great sea itself, scorching with expanse of light, stretching from
their feet to the Gorgonian isles; and over all these, ever present, near or far - seen through
the leaves of vine, or imaged with all its march of clouds in the Arno's stream, or set with
its depth of blue close against the golden hair and burning cheek of lady and knight, - that
untroubled and sacred sky, which was to all men, in those days of innocent faith, indeed the
unquestioned abode of spirits, as the earth was of men; and which opened straight through its
gates of cloud and veils of dew into the awfulness of the eternal world; - a heaven in which
every cloud that passed was literally the chariot of an angel, and every ray of its Evening
and Morning streamed from the throne of God.

What think you of that for a school of design?

And then look at the depressing, monotonous appearance of any modern city, the sombre dress
of men and women, the meaningless and barren architecture, the colourless and dreadful surroundings. The
naval force includes 10,000 officers and men, together with 2,000
marines.

The number of vessels of the United States Navy when all the ships now authorized are completed,
excluding those which by the process of decay and the operation of law will by that date have
been condemned, will comprise 11 armored and 31 unarmored vessels. The five stations maintained
are the Asiatic, European, North Atlantic, South Atlantic, and Pacific.

The chief matter of present public interest concerning this department is the creation of a new
navy by the construction of modern steel vessels. This new policy was begun in 1882.

#The Interior Department.#--The Interior Department was created in 1849, to take charge of various
duties not properly belonging to any of the existing departments. There are two assistant secretaries.
The chiefs of the bureaus into which this department is divided, and their respective duties
are as follows: The Commissioner of the General Land Office has charge
of all the public land of the government, its care, supervision, and
sale or distribution.

In another chapter we give further details concerning the operations of this important bureau.

The
Commissioner of Pensions has charge of the granting of pensions to old soldiers and sailors.
He has a large force at Washington. There are eighteen pension agencies in different parts of the
country.

In 1808 the United States assumed all the state pension obligations. The act of 1818 gave pensions
to all who had served nine months in the Revolutionary War; other wars were afterwards included.
The acts of the period beginning 1862 have enormously increased the amount paid. The report of
the Commissioner for 1890 shows that at the close of the fiscal year
of 1889 the number of pensioners was 537,944, and the annual expenditures
for pensions $105,528,180.38.

The disability pension law passed June 27,1890, will greatly lengthen the pension list and increase
the annual expenditures.

The present Commissioner says in his last report that "it is believed that there are probably
over one hundred thousand claims in this office which can be properly allowed under the provisions
of these regulations.

The act of June 27, 1890, is the first disability pension law in the history of the world
which grants to soldiers and sailors pensions for disabilities which are not proven to have
been incurred in the service and in line of duty." Speaker Reed of the House characterized
it as "the most generous piece of pension legislation ever passed
by any nation on earth."

The Commissioner of Patents has charge of the granting of patents. In 1793 the granting of
patents was given exclusively to the Secretary of State. In 1821 the clerk of the State Department
who examined applications for patents received the title of Superintendent
of the Patent Office, and on July 4, 1836, the Patent Office was created
as a separate bureau and a Commissioner of Patents created.

About 24,000 patents are issued annually.

There is an Assistant Commissioner-in-chief, an Examiner of Interferences,
three Examiners-in-chief, thirty-eight Principal Examiners, and a
large force of assistant examiners for different branches.

Patents run for seventeen years. The annual receipts of the bureau from fees more than equal
the expenditures, and the office now has a surplus of several millions
to its credit in the Treasury.

The Commissioner of Indian Affairs has charge of all matters concerning
the Indians, their education, government and support.  It is, primarily, a purely decorative thing, a delight to look at.

All archaeological pictures that make you say 'How curious!' all sentimental pictures that
make you say, 'How sad!' all historical pictures that make you say 'How interesting!' all pictures
that do not immediately give you such artistic joy as to make you say 'How beautiful!' are
bad pictures.

* * * * * * * *

We never know what an artist is going to do.  Of course not.  The artist is not a specialist.
All such divisions as animal painters, landscape painters, painters of Scotch cattle in an
English mist, painters of English cattle in a Scotch mist, racehorse painters, bull-terrier
painters, all are shallow.  If a man is an artist he can paint everything.

The object of art is to stir the most divine and remote of the chords which make music in our
soul; and colour is indeed, of itself a mystical presence on things, and tone a kind of sentinel.

Am I pleading, then, for mere technique?  No.  As long as there are any signs of technique
at all, the picture is unfinished.  What is finish?  A picture is finished when all traces
of work, and of the means employed to bring about the result, have disappeared.

In the case of handicraftsmen - the weaver, the potter, the smith - on their work are the traces
of their hand.  But it is not so with the painter; it is not so with the artist.

Art should have no sentiment about it but its beauty, no technique except what you cannot observe.
One should be able to say of a picture not that it is 'well painted,' but that it is 'not painted.'

What is the difference between absolutely decorative art and a painting?  Decorative art emphasises
its material:  imaginative art annihilates it.  Tapestry shows its threads as part of its beauty:
a picture annihilates its canvas:  it shows nothing of it. Porcelain emphasises its glaze:
water-colours reject the paper.

A picture has no meaning but its beauty, no message but its joy. That is the first truth about
art that you must never lose sight of.  A picture is a purely decorative thing.

LONDON MODELS

PROFESSIONAL models are a purely modern invention.  To the Greeks, for instance, they were
quite unknown.  Mr. Mahaffy, it is true, tells us that Pericles used to present peacocks to
the great ladies of Athenian society in order to induce them to sit to his friend Phidias,
and we know that Polygnotus introduced into his picture of the Trojan women the face of Elpinice,
the celebrated sister of the great Conservative leader of the day, but these GRANDES DAMES
clearly do not come under our category.  As for the old masters, they undoubtedly made constant
studies from their pupils and apprentices, and even their religious pictures are full of the
portraits of their friends and relations, but they do not seem to have had the inestimable
advantage of the existence of a class of people whose sole profession is to pose.  In fact
the model, in our sense of the word, is the direct creation of Academic Schools.

Every country now has its own models, except America.  In New York, and even in Boston, a good
model is so great a rarity that most of the artists are reduced to painting Niagara and millionaires.
In Europe, however, it is different.  Here we have plenty of models, and of every nationality.
The Italian models are the best.  The natural grace of their attitudes, as well as the wonderful
picturesqueness of their colouring, makes them facile - often too facile - subjects for the
painter's brush.  The French models, though not so beautiful as the Italian, possess a quickness
of intellectual sympathy, a capacity, in fact, of understanding the artist, which is quite
remarkable.  They have also a great command over the varieties of facial expression, are peculiarly
dramatic, and can chatter the ARGOT of the ATELIER as cleverly as the critic of the GIL BLAS.
The English models form a class entirely by themselves.  They are not so picturesque as the
Italian, nor so clever as the French, and they have absolutely no tradition, so to speak, of
their order.  Now and then some old veteran knocks at the studio door, and proposes to sit
as Ajax defying the lightning, or as King Lear upon the blasted heath.  One of them some time
ago called on a popular painter who, happening at the moment to require his services, engaged
him, and told him to begin by kneeling down in the attitude of prayer.  'Shall I be Biblical
or Shakespearean, sir?' asked the veteran.  'Well - Shakespearean,' answered the artist, wondering
by what subtle nuance of expression the model would convey the difference.  'All right, sir,'
said the professor of posing, and he solemnly knelt down and began to wink with his left eye!
This class, however, is dying out.  As a rule the model, nowadays, is a pretty girl, from about
twelve to twenty-five years of age, who knows nothing about art, cares less, and is merely
anxious to earn seven or eight shillings a day without much trouble.  English models rarely
look at a picture, and never venture on any aesthetic theories.  In fact, they realise very
completely Mr. Whistler's idea of the function of an art critic, for they pass no criticisms
at all.  They accept all schools of art with the grand catholicity of the auctioneer, and sit
to a fantastic young impressionist as readily as to a learned and laborious academician.  They
are neither for the Whistlerites nor against them; the quarrel between the school of facts
and the school of effects touches them not; idealistic and naturalistic are words that convey
no meaning to their ears; they merely desire that the studio shall be warm, and the lunch hot,
for all charming artists give their models lunch.

As to what they are asked to do they are equally indifferent.  On Monday they will don the
rags of a beggar-girl for Mr. Pumper, whose pathetic pictures of modern life draw such tears
from the public, and on Tuesday they will pose in a peplum for Mr. Phoebus, who thinks that
all really artistic subjects are necessarily B.C. They career gaily through all centuries and
through all costumes, and, like actors, are interesting only when they are not themselves.
They are extremely good-natured, and very accommodating.  'What do you sit for?' said a young
artist to a model who had sent him in her card (all models, by the way, have cards and a small
black bag).  'Oh, for anything you like, sir,' said the girl, 'landscape if necessary!'

Intellectually, it must be acknowledged, they are Philistines, but physically they are perfect
- at least some are.  Though none of them can talk Greek, many can look Greek, which to a nineteenth-
century painter is naturally of great importance.  If they are allowed, they chatter a great
deal, but they never say anything. Their observations are the only BANALITES heard in Bohemia.
However, though they cannot appreciate the artist as artist, they are quite ready to appreciate
the artist as a man.  They are very sensitive to kindness, respect and generosity.  A beautiful
model who had sat for two years to one of our most distinguished English painters, got engaged
to a street vendor of penny ices.

On her marriage the painter sent her a pretty wedding present, and received in return a nice
letter of thanks with the following remarkable postscript:  'Never eat the green ices!'

When they are tired a wise artist gives them a rest.  Then they sit in a chair and read penny
dreadfuls, till they are roused from the tragedy of literature to take their place again in
the tragedy of art.  A few of them smoke cigarettes.  This, however, is regarded by the other
models as showing a want of seriousness, and is not generally approved of.  They are engaged
by the day and by the half-day.  The tariff is a shilling an hour, to which great artists usually
add an omnibus fare.  The two best things about them are their extraordinary prettiness, and
their extreme respectability. As a class they are very well behaved, particularly those who
sit for the figure, a fact which is curious or natural according to the view one takes of human
nature.  They usually marry well, and sometimes they marry the artist.  For an artist to marry
his model is as fatal as for a GOURMET to marry his cook:  the one gets no sittings, and the
other gets no dinners.

On the whole the English female models are very naive, very natural, and very good-humoured.
The virtues which the artist values most in them are prettiness and punctuality.  Every sensible
model consequently keeps a diary of her engagements, and dresses neatly. "True," said she; "but
the servants, when the post that supported it was blown down t'other day, very judiciously unlinked
the rods, and now, since I remember me, they are, to use your phrase, 'stowed away' below the
house;" and so they were, sure enough.
  In France the models migrate EN MASSE to
the little seaport villages or forest hamlets where the painters congregate.  The English models,
however, wait patiently in London, as a rule, till the artists come back.  Nearly all of them
live with their parents, and help to support the house.  They have every qualification for
being immortalised in art except that of beautiful hands.  The hands of the English model are
nearly always coarse and red.

As for the male models, there is the veteran whom we have mentioned above.  He has all the
traditions of the grand style, and is rapidly disappearing with the school he represents. 
An old man who talks about Fuseli is, of course, unendurable, and, besides, patriarchs have
ceased to be fashionable subjects.  Then there is the true Academy model.  He is usually a
man of thirty, rarely good-looking, but a perfect miracle of muscles.  In fact he is the apotheosis
of anatomy, and is so conscious of his own splendour that he tells you of his tibia and his
thorax, as if no one else had anything of the kind.  Then come the Oriental models.  The supply
of these is limited, but there are always about a dozen in London.  They are very much sought
after as they can remain immobile for hours, and generally possess lovely costumes. However,
they have a very poor opinion of English art, which they regard as something between a vulgar
personality and a commonplace photograph.  Next we have the Italian youth who has come over
specially to be a model, or takes to it when his organ is out of repair.  He is often quite
charming with his large melancholy eyes, his crisp hair, and his slim brown figure.  It is
true he eats garlic, but then he can stand like a faun and couch like a leopard, so he is forgiven.
He is always full of pretty compliments, and has been known to have kind words of encouragement
for even our greatest artists.  As for the English lad of the same age, he never sits at all.
Apparently he does not regard the career of a model as a serious profession.  In any case he
is rarely, if ever, to be got hold of.  English boys, too, are difficult to find.  Sometimes
an ex-model who has a son will curl his hair, and wash his face, and bring him the round of
the studios, all soap and shininess. The young school don't like him, but the older school
do, and when he appears on the walls of the Royal Academy he is called THE INFANT SAMUEL. 
Occasionally also an artist catches a couple of GAMINS in the gutter and asks them to come
to his studio.  The first time they always appear, but after that they don't keep their appointments.
They dislike sitting still, and have a strong and perhaps natural objection to looking pathetic.
Besides, they are always under the impression that the artist is laughing at them. It is a
sad fact, but there is no doubt that the poor are completely unconscious of their own picturesqueness.
Those of them who can be induced to sit do so with the idea that the artist is merely a benevolent
philanthropist who has chosen an eccentric method of distributing alms to the undeserving.
Perhaps the School Board will teach the London GAMIN his own artistic value, and then they
will be better models than they are now.  One remarkable privilege belongs to the Academy model,
that of extorting a sovereign from any newly elected Associate or R.A.  They wait at Burlington
House till the announcement is made, and then race to the hapless artist's house. "Thank you--certainly."

It
was by this time grey dawn. My window had been left open the evening before, when it was hot and
sultry enough, but it was now cold and damp, and a wetting mist boiled in through the open sash, like
rolling wreaths of white smoke.

"What is that--where are we in the North Sea, or on the top of Mont Blanc? Why, clouds may be all in
your way, Massa Jupiter, but."

"Cloud!" rejoined the Deity--"him
no more den marning fag, massa; always hab him over de Vale in de
morning, until de sun melt him.  All four classes are delightful, but only
the last class is ever really decorative.  Acrobats and gymnasts can give the young painter
infinite suggestions, for they bring into their art an element of swiftness of motion and of
constant change that the studio model necessarily lacks.  What is interesting in these 'slaves
of the ring' is that with them Beauty is an unconscious result not a conscious aim, the result
in fact of the mathematical calculation of curves and distances, of absolute precision of eye,
of the scientific knowledge of the equilibrium of forces, and of perfect physical training.
A good acrobat is always graceful, though grace is never his object; he is graceful because
he does what he has to do in the best way in which it can be done - graceful because he is
natural.  If an ancient Greek were to come to life now, which considering the probable severity
of his criticisms would be rather trying to our conceit, he would be found far oftener at the
circus than at the theatre.  A good circus is an oasis of Hellenism in a world that reads too
much to be wise, and thinks too much to be beautiful.  If it were not for the running- ground
at Eton, the towing-path at Oxford, the Thames swimming- baths, and the yearly circuses, humanity
would forget the plastic perfection of its own form, and degenerate into a race of short- sighted
professors and spectacled PRECIEUSES.  Not that the circus proprietors are, as a rule, conscious
of their high mission.  Do they not bore us with the HAUTE ECOLE, and weary us with Shakespearean
clowns?  Still, at least, they give us acrobats, and the acrobat is an artist.  The mere fact
that he never speaks to the audience shows how well he appreciates the great truth that the
aim of art is not to reveal personality but to please.  The clown may be blatant, but the acrobat
is always beautiful.  He is an interesting combination of the spirit of Greek sculpture with
the spangles of the modern costumier.  He has even had his niche in the novels of our age,
and if MANETTE SALOMON be the unmasking of the model, LES FRERES ZEMGANNO is the apotheosis
of the acrobat.

As regards the influence of the ordinary model on our English school of painting, it cannot
be said that it is altogether good. It is, of course, an advantage for the young artist sitting
in his studio to be able to isolate 'a little corner of life,' as the French say, from disturbing
surroundings, and to study it under certain effects of light and shade.  But this very isolation
leads often to mere mannerism in the painter, and robs him of that broad acceptance of the
general facts of life which is the very essence of art.  Model-painting, in a word, while it
may be the condition of art, is not by any means its aim.

It is simply practice, not perfection.  Its use trains the eye and the hand of the painter,
its abuse produces in his work an effect of mere posing and prettiness.  It is the secret of
much of the artificiality of modern art, this constant posing of pretty people, and when art
becomes artificial it becomes monotonous.  Outside the little world of the studio, with its
draperies and its BRIC-E-BRAC, lies the world of life with its infinite, its Shakespearean
variety.  We must, however, distinguish between the two kinds of models, those who sit for
the figure and those who sit for the costume.  The study of the first is always excellent,
but the costume-model is becoming rather wearisome in modern pictures.  It is really of very
little use to dress up a London girl in Greek draperies and to paint her as a goddess.  The
robe may be the robe of Athens, but the face is usually the face of Brompton. Boom, a long reverberating
noise thundered in the distance, and amongst the hills, gradually dying away in a hollow rumble.
"The admiral tumbling down the hatchway, Tom--the morning gun fired at Port Royal," said Mary;
and so it was.  Unfortunately
they are not, and, as a consequence, we are shown every year a series of scenes from fancy
dress balls which are called historical pictures, but are little more than mediocre representations
of modern people masquerading. In France they are wiser.  The French painter uses the model
simply for study; for the finished picture he goes direct to life.

However, we must not blame the sitters for the shortcomings of the artists.  The English models
are a well-behaved and hard-working class, and if they are more interested in artists than
in art, a large section of the public is in the same condition, and most of our modern exhibitions
seem to justify its choice.

Footnotes:

(1) Plato's LAWS; AEschylus' PROMETHEUS BOUND.

(2) Somewhat in the same spirit Plato, in his LAWS, appeals to the local position of Ilion
among the rivers of the plain, as a proof that it was not built till long after the Deluge.

(3) Plutarch remarks that the ONLY evidence Greece possesses of the truth that the legendary
power of Athens is no 'romance or idle story,' is the public and sacred buildings.  This is
an instance of the exaggerated importance given to ruins against which Thucydides is warning us.

(4) The fictitious sale in the Roman marriage PER COEMPTIONEM was originally, of course, a
real sale.

(5) Notably, of course, in the case of heat and its laws.

(6) Cousin errs a good deal in this respect. Four Pounds of Flour, or three Pounds of the same
with a Pound of Raisins, Half a Pound of Currans, or Half a Pound of Beef Suet pickled, are equal
to a four Pound Piece of Beef, or two Pound Piece of Pork with Peas.



(8) Polybius, vi. 9. [Greek text which cannot be reproduced]

(9) [Greek text which cannot be reproduced]

(10) The various stages are [Greek text which cannot be reproduced], [Greek text which cannot
be reproduced].

(11) Polybius, xii. 24.

(12) Polybius, i. 4, viii. 4, specially; and really PASSIM.

(13) He makes one exception.

(14) Polybius, viii. 4.

(15) Polybius, xvi. 12.

(16) Polybius, viii. 4:  [Greek text which cannot be reproduced]

(17) Polybius resembled Gibbon in many respects.  Like him he held that all religions were
to the philosopher equally false, to the vulgar equally true, to the statesman equally useful.

(18) Cf. Polybius, xii. 25, [Greek text which cannot be reproduced]

(19) Polybius, xxii. 8.

(20) I mean particularly as regards his sweeping denunciation of the complete moral decadence
of Greek society during the Peloponnesain War, which, from what remains to us of Athenian literature,
we know must have been completely exaggerated.  Or, rather, he is looking at men merely in
their political dealings: and in politics the man who is personally honourable and refined
will not scruple to do anything for his party.

(21) Polybius, xii. 25.

(22) THE TWO PATHS, Lect. iii. p. 123 (1859 ed.).

