Another cause for grievance against Harvey was the peace he made with the local Indians. The
colonists distrusted the Indians more than they distrusted other Europeans. The great massacre
of 1622, when the Indians made a desperate attempt to destroy the English settlement, had placed
Indian-white relations on a basis of perpetual enmity. Legally, the Indians had never been
considered to have the same rights as the English. English law throughout the seventeenth century
maintained the doctrine that between Christians and infidels there could exist nothing but
perpetual enmity, a view which was a hangover from the period of the Crusades, wars against
the Turks, and expansion by militant Christian nations into heathen lands during the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries. It is true that practical co-operation and on-the-spot recognition
of Indian rights had developed in Virginia in the early years. The massacre of 1622, however,
gave Virginians an excuse for abandoning all forms of co-operation with, and respect for, the
Indians. Deceit and breach of faith were elevated into acknowledged instruments of policy.
The right of the Indians even to occupy the land of their forefathers was denied. They were
admitted to exist and to hold land in fact, but the English refused to recognize in law either
their existence or their title to land. Total extirpation was resolved against those Indian
nations which had taken part in the massacre. "Marches" were periodically ordered against the
various tribes with the purpose of destroying or seizing their corn, burning their shelters,
and killing as many members of the tribe as possible.

Governor Harvey reversed this policy and made peace with the Indians against the advice of
Dr. Pott and other Councilors. He also attempted to see that some measure of equity was extended
to Indian-white relations. As a result, the more aggressive planters accused him of promoting
a second massacre.

What really set off the revolt against Harvey, however, was the injection of the hottest issue
of the day into the controversy: whether Harvey was "soft" on Catholicism. This issue was brought
to a head because of the grant of a portion of Virginia's original territory to George Calvert,
first Lord Baltimore. Harvey had extended a helping hand to Baltimore's colonists. Although
his actions in this regard were specifically required of him by the King, and although he received
especially warm commendation from the English government for doing so, the Virginia colonists
objected. The King's grant, for one thing, had been carved out of the Virginia Company's old
bounds which had been left undisturbed when the Company lost its right to govern the area.
Already Virginians were beginning to eye the benefits of settlement in the northern reaches
of Chesapeake Bay. One, Colonel William Claiborne, Secretary of the colony, had obtained a
royal commission to trade in the area and had established a settlement on Kent Island, opposite
the present Annapolis, far up Chesapeake Bay. By acting on the King's instructions and supporting
Baltimore's authority in the area against Claiborne's claims, Harvey turned the second most
important man in the colony against him.

Harvey at first backed the Virginia Council's assertion that Kent Island was a part of Virginia,
and not part of the supposedly uncultivated wilderness granted to Baltimore by the King. But
in the face of Charles's obvious desire to take the area away from Virginia, and because Claiborne's
patent authorized trade rather than settlement, Harvey soon accepted Lord Baltimore's position
that Claiborne's trading post lay within the limits of Baltimore's jurisdiction. Irritation
between the two men increased when Harvey attempted jointly with the Maryland authorities to
conduct an examination of charges that Claiborne was stirring up Maryland's Indians against
the new settlers. Claiborne was accused of telling the local Indians that the new settlers
were not Englishmen but Spaniards. The investigation which ensued was hampered at every turn
by Claiborne and his friends on the Virginia Council.

The Virginians were most concerned not by the apparent violation of Virginia's territorial
integrity, but by the fact that the new settlement was being established and settled by Roman
Catholics. The Virginians were less tolerant than the King in wishing success to Lord Baltimore,
a Catholic, and his fellow religionists, in establishing a colony on their northern border.
The Virginia Council wrote Charles in 1629 thanking him for "the freedome of our Religion which
wee have enjoyed," and asserting proudly that "noe papists have beene suffered to settle amongst
us." They insisted upon tendering the oaths of supremacy and allegiance to Lord Baltimore when
he arrived in Virginia in October 1629 to consider a possible settlement, and reported to the
King that he had refused to take those oaths. Charles I had married a Catholic, Henrietta Maria
of France, and, like his father, James I, was not disposed to allow too rigorous penalties
against those who professed religious allegiance to Rome. But the Parliament, and the people
in general, feared and hated Catholics, believing their religious beliefs to be incompatible
with loyalty to a Protestant state.

By means of the oaths of allegiance and supremacy Catholics were required to recognize the
English sovereign as their rightful ruler in matters spiritual and ecclesiastical as well as
temporal, to repudiate the papal claim to depose heretical princes, to promise to fight for
the King in case of rebellion caused by a papal sentence of deposition, and to denounce the
doctrine that princes, being excommunicated, could be deposed or murdered, or that subjects
could be absolved from their oath of allegiance. The oaths were based on a real fear which
identified Roman Catholicism with treason. Protestants felt that Catholics owed their highest
allegiance to a foreign power, and hence were not good Englishmen. The problem was a complicated
one, and much debated at the time and since. Now it is generally accepted that one can owe
spiritual allegiance to Rome while remaining a faithful subject of a non-Catholic state. In
England in the seventeenth century, however, the Church of Rome was too closely identified
with England's mortal enemies to allow her freely to tolerate Catholics in her midst. For a
long period England had feared Spain as the greatest threat to her existence. Even after the
defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 this fear persisted and to a certain extent was transferred
to France, another Catholic power. The measures taken against the Catholics in England were
similar to those taken against Communists in this country today, and they were taken for the
same reason: the fear that the followers of a universal ideology would turn against their local
allegiance if the two ever came in conflict.

Eventually Charles's easy attitude towards Catholics helped bring about his downfall. In a
similar way Harvey's compliance with the King's instructions to aid and respect Baltimore's
colonists weakened his popularity in Virginia.

As the locus of power in England shifted from the King and his lords towards the Parliament
and the people, a stronger Protestant and democratic policy became necessary. The eventual
result of this shift in power became evident with the beheading of Charles I in 1649 and, later,
with the Glorious Revolution of 1689 and the crowning of William and Mary as constitutional
symbols of the power of the English nation.

So great was the popular feeling in Virginia against the "Papists" in Maryland that many, in
casual conversation, exclaimed that they would rather knock their cattle on the head than sell
them to Maryland. NOTES ON BOOKS, CATALOGUES, SALES, ETC.

Such of our readers as do not possess Halliwell's Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words,
which Mr. Way, a very competent authority, lately designated in our
columns as Mr. Halliwell's "useful glossarial collections," will be
glad to learn that Mr. Russell Smith has announced a second and cheaper
edition of it.

The new number of the Archæological Journal is a very interesting one. That portion if it,
more particularly, which relates the Proceedings of the Meetings of the Archæological Institute,
contains a great mass of curious and valuable information; made the more available and instructive
by means of the admirable woodcuts by which it is illustrated.

We have received several curious communications on the subject of Parish Registers, with reference
to the article on "Early Statistics," and the "Registers of Chart, Kent," to which we shall
endeavour to give early insertion. We have also received a copy of A Letter addressed to R. Monckton
Milnes, Esq. M.P., on the Condition and unsafe State of Ancient Parochial Registers in England
and the Colonies, to which we beg to direct the attention of such of our friends as take an interest
in this important subject.

Messrs. Puttick and Simpson, of 191. Piccadilly, will sell on Monday, the 29th instant, and three
following days, a selection from the valuable library of the Rev. Dr. Maitland. Although only a
selection from the library of the learned historian of the Dark Ages, the Catalogue exhibits, in
addition to numerous Polyglot and other important editions of the Scriptures, and the great
collections of Baronius, Mabillon, Dupin, Martene, and Durand, &c., a vast number of works
of the highest value in the departments of Theology and Ecclesiastical History.

We have received the following Catalogues:--Part III. for 1850 of J. Russell Smith's (4. Old Compton
Street) Catalogue of Books and Autographs, chiefly Old and Curious. Part II. for 1850 of a
Catalogue of Choice, Useful, and Interesting Books, in fine condition, on sale by Waller and Son
(188. Fleet Street). Power, Strand.

SIR PETER PETT'S DISCOURSE OF THE GROWTH OF ENGLAND, &c. (being the 2nd edition of the "Happy
Future of England.")

MONK'S LETTERS RELATING TO THE RESTORATION, published by Toland, 1714-15.
LADY RUSSELL'S LETTERS, edited by Miss Berry.

DU QUESNE'S ACCOUNT
OF BOURBON, published in Holland about 1689. Paris, 1716.

SOUTH AFRICAN
QUARTERLY JOURNAL, 8vo. Cape Town, 1830 (all that is published).

Odd
Volumes

HUMBOLDT'S COSMOS, Nos. forming Vol. I. of Longman's 1st
edition, 1847-48.

PERUSSAC'S BULLETIN DES SCIENCES NATURELLES, Vols.
XIX. to XXVII., Paris, 1829-31.

SOUTHEY'S POETICAL WORKS, Vols. IX.
and X.

LANGARD'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 12mo. edition of 1839. Vols.
V. to IX. (both inclusive).

PENNY CYCLOPÆDIA. Monthly Parts 82, 84
to 90 (both inclusive), 92, 93, 94, 96, 97, 99 to 113 (both inclusive).

Adolphus'
History of England. Finally Harvey agreed to return to England. Francis Pott went on the same ship
home.

In England the Privy Council heard the charges against Harvey and his defense. None of the
accusations stood up, and he was able to show why the Council had private reasons to desire
his removal. The King directed him to return to his government with increased power, and ordered
the Councilors who had been instrumental in deposing him to be sent to England for trial. Harvey
was able to collect some of his back pay and to obtain the King's agreement that he should
return in a ship of war. Unfortunately, an old and unseaworthy prize ship was provided him
which had to turn back shortly after its departure, and Harvey was forced to take passage on
an ordinary merchant ship which arrived in Virginia January 18, 1637. Harvey suffered great
losses because of the unseaworthiness of the prize ship, and petitioned the King for recompense.
He was, however, ordered to pay out of his own pocket all the losses he had sustained by the
affair, although he was authorized to collect an equivalent amount from the estates of the
mutinous Councilors should they be convicted.

The sending of the mutinous Councilors--Capt. John West, Samuel Mathews, John Utie, and William
Pierce--as prisoners to England, strangely enough allowed them to accomplish what they had
been unable to do in Virginia. So many and so powerful were their friends, so wealthy were
they themselves, and so many were the charges that they contrived against Harvey now that he
was back in the colony and unable to answer them, that the King soon reversed himself and ordered
Harvey relieved of his post. The King's action illustrates one of the little appreciated factors
in American colonial history: the role played by petitions to the King. Three thousand miles
of ocean, and months, even years, in time, separated the assertion from the proof, encouraged
the most exaggerated charges, and contributed to the unjustified sympathy extended by the King
to many petitioners who did not deserve such consideration. Some of the "crimes" charged against
Harvey were even discovered to have their origin in the King's own commands or in earlier acts
of Assembly. Yet they contributed to clouding the atmosphere and blinding the lords of England
to the true worth of their representative in Virginia.

On the basis of unjustified or unsupported charges concerning Harvey's alleged misappropriation
of the mutinous Councilors' estates, which had been seized for the King pending their trial,
the King, on May 25, 1637, ordered these estates returned to their owners. Harvey complied
immediately as far as four of the Councilors were concerned, but he had already allowed legal
action to be directed against Mathews' estate by those who had claims against Mathews, and
judgments had been made in favor of the plaintiffs. When the English government heard he had
not turned back Mathews' property, it promptly ordered that he do so without delay, which order
Harvey then tried to put into effect as best he could. The damage had been done, however, and
the impression created that he had willfully misappropriated Mathews' property and disobeyed
the King's commands.

Harvey's fight against the charges his enemies brought against him in England suffered another
blow when Mr. Anthony Panton, a minister who had been twice banished from the colony, returned
to England to add his complaints to those of the others. Harvey was not given a chance to defend
himself against the new charges, and on January 11, 1639, Sir Francis Wyatt was appointed to
succeed him.

On Wyatt's arrival Harvey's estate was seized and the old Governor prevented from returning
to England until he could satisfy his creditors. To meet their demands, Harvey, in 1640, was
forced to sell all his land and much of his personal property. The fact that he was in debt
to many persons in the colony is itself a significant indication that he had not abused the
powers of his office. Human beings work together, play together, talk together, worship together,
fight together. If they happen to act alone, they are still closely related to one another.
Examine the daily newspaper record and see how few items have to
do with individuals acting in isolation.

Even if a person sits down alone to think, his mind is working along the line on which it received
the push of another mind shortly before. A large part of the work of the world is done in concert.
The ship and the train have their crew, the factory its hands, the city police and fire departments
their force. Men shout together on the ball field, and sing folk-songs in chorus. As an audience
they listen to the play or the sermon, as a mob they rush the jail to lynch a prisoner, or as
a crowd they riot in high carnival on Mardi Gras. The normal individual belongs to a family, a
community, a political party, a nation; he may belong, besides, to a church, a few learned societies,
a trade-union, or any number of clubs or fraternities.

Human beings associate because they possess common interests and means of intercourse. They are affected
by the same needs. They have the power to think in the same grooves and to feel a common sympathy.
Members of the same race or community have a common fund of custom or tradition; they are conscious
of like-mindedness in morals and religion; they are subject to the
same kind of mental suggestion; they have their own peculiar language
and literature.

As communication between different parts of the world improves and
ability to speak in different languages increases, there comes a better
understanding among the world's peoples and an increase of mutual
sympathy.

Experience has taught the value of association. By it the individual makes friends, gains in knowledge,
enlarges interests. Knowing this, he seeks acquaintances, friends, and companions. He finds the world
richer because of family, community, and national life, and if necessary
he is willing to sacrifice something of his own comfort and peace
for the advantages that these associations will bring. In Virginia
Berkeley had to work with many of the same Councilors who bedeviled Harvey, but Berkeley was
able to get along well with them and with the Assembly and people of Virginia. No Governor
of Virginia in the seventeenth century was ever so well or so deservedly loved by the people.
Since he ended his long career as Governor amidst a colonial rebellion against his rule in
1676, historians have found it hard to determine whether to bestow praise or blame upon him.
Usually he is praised for his early years in the government and condemned for his later years,
thus taking on a Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde character. The last word has not yet been written
on Governor Berkeley, however, and his character may prove to be more consistent than historians
have realized.

Berkeley's first action was to join the Burgesses and Council in a violent denunciation of
those who were attempting to reinstitute the old Virginia Company's control over the colony.
In a "Declaration against the Company" Berkeley and the Assembly asserted that government under
the Company had been intolerable and if introduced again would destroy all the democratic rights
allowed by the King's instructions, such as legal trial by jury, the right to petition the
King, and yearly Assemblies. The readmission of the Company would also, the declaration asserted,
impeach the "freedom of our trade (which is the blood and life of a commonwealth)." The declaration
went on to order that anyone who promoted the restoration of the Company's power would, upon
due conviction, be held an enemy to the colony and forfeit his whole estate.

Berkeley's next action was to recommend the repeal of the tax of four pounds of tobacco per
poll which formerly had been levied for the Governor's use. The Assembly acknowledged this
as "a benefit descending unto us and our posterity ... contributed to us by our present Governor."
Berkeley abolished certain other valuable emoluments due him by virtue of his office "wherein,"
the Assembly declared, "we may not likewise silence the bounty of our present Governor in preferring
the public freedom before his particular profit." Finally Berkeley recommended that taxes be
proportioned in some measure "according to mens abilities and estates" rather than by the old
poll tax system, and the new scheme was, for a brief period, put into effect.

Governor Berkeley not only showed himself selfless in restraining his own opportunities for
profit, but fearless in restraining the colonists' itch for land. A few months before his arrival,
the Assembly had authorized settlement both on the north side of the York and in the Rappahannock
area, if it could be done in great enough force. Opechancanough was to be offered fifty barrels
of corn a year for the area between the York and the Piankatank, although the English proposed
to take the area whether Opechancanough accepted the offer or not. Twenty-four years had elapsed
before English settlement jumped from the James to the York. Now, ten years after the first
settlements on the York, Virginians were settling on the next great river to the north, the
Rappahannock. By the time Berkeley arrived, some settlers had established themselves in the
area, and many more had claimed grants. Indian hostility was great, however, and soon a number
of the settlers returned to more secure areas of the country.

Berkeley, working with the Assembly of March 1643, obtained a law which provided that the Rappahannock
River region should remain "unseated," though grants might be tentatively claimed in the area,
until the Governor, Council, and Burgesses, that is, the Grand Assembly, should authorize settlement
there. The Governor was attempting to regulate the expansion of the colony so that the twin
goals of security for the English and justice for the Indians could both be secured. In this
he was not entirely successful, since he could only guide, not arbitrarily direct, the representatives
of the people. The rich, virgin land of the frontier exerted a continuing attraction to the
tobacco planters, and five years later, in 1648, the restrictions on settlement in the Rappahannock
region, as well as in the Potomac region, were officially lifted.

Many other important policy decisions were made at the March 1643 meeting of the Grand Assembly.
One of these decisions concerned church government. The first act provided for the establishment
of church government according to the Anglican form. Virginia was not formed as a protest against
the Church of England, as were the Puritan colonies in New England in large measure. Conformity
in religious matters was considered a virtue in Virginia. The Assembly, indeed, enacted that
nonconformist ministers be compelled to depart the colony, an act which did much to sour Virginia's
relations with New England. What was significant about the act, however, was that, with certain
exceptions and qualifications, it gave the vestry of every parish power to elect the minister
of the parish. No doubt there was excessive meanness here on the part of government, of which Marlborough
had just cause to complain. Yet was it beneath the dignity of the greatest man of his age
to dispute with his ungrateful country about 9,000£. In such circumstances
it was natural that much of the power that remained in the hierarchy of church, state, and
society in England should, in Virginia, pass to the ordinary people and be exercised through
their representatives--the vestry and Burgesses. The people, not the King, became the patron
of the Church of England in Virginia. Popular responsibility replaced clerical responsibility
and added one more phase of life to those controlled directly by the people in the New World.
It is significant that Patrick Henry, years before the Revolution, should first have asserted
the doctrine of popular responsibility and authority in a case--the celebrated "Parsons' Cause"--involving
the people's authority over the church. 

The second paper, at p. 162., gives a more detailed account of the adage, "Quem Deus (potius Jupiter)
vult perdere," &c., than "F.C.B." (whose object, of course, was rather to compare results than
to trace derivations) has supplied in his interesting communication.


