Vs. 17-20.--We have the effect of the vision upon the beloved disciple. He who had leaned on
Christ's bosom at supper, and who had seen his Master transfigured on the holy mount, was now
utterly overwhelmed with the effulgence of his glory. John "fell at his feet as dead." So it
was with Daniel, "a man greatly beloved." (Daniel x. 4-8.) But the compassionate Saviour dispelled
his fears, as in all similar cases; making known to his astonished servant his supreme deity
and real humanity, as "the first and the last," who died for the sins, and was raised again
for the justification of his people. (Rom. iv. 25.) He is "alive for evermore,"--become "the
first fruits of them that slept." (1 Cor. xv. 20.) He "dieth no more. Death hath no more dominion
over him." (Rom. vi. 9.) And so complete is his victory over the king of terrors, the last
enemy of the believer, that he hath "the keys of hell and of death." He has the "key of the
bottomless pit," (xx. 1;) having triumphed over principalities and powers, making a show of
them openly. (Col. ii. 15.) Whether Christ used the word, "amen," to ratify the truth of his
immortality; or whether this is an expression by John of his joyful acquiescence in that truth,
is not material: we know on satisfactory evidence, that our Lord is a prophet and king, as
well as a priest, "after the power of an endless life." (Heb. vii. 16; Rom. xiv. 9.)

John is next commanded to write,--First, "the things which he had seen;" that is, the description
of the foregoing vision:--Second, "the things which are;" that is, the actual condition of
the church, as delineated in the diverse characters of the seven churches addressed, as in
the next two chapters:--Third, "the things which shall be hereafter:" that is, the prophetical
part of the book, from the beginning of the fourth chapter to the close, as containing the
prospective history of the church and of the nations, as she was to be affected by them, or
they by her, till the consummation of all things. This is the division of the book made by
the divine Author himself, and it is a natural and intelligible one. All attempts of learned
and pious men by other divisions to render this mysterious part of the Bible more clear to
the unlearned reader, tend only to display the ingenuity of the writers,--not to say their
temerity, while they "darken counsel by words without knowledge." Such artificial divisions
are as unfounded, in the apprehension of sober expositors, as the attempts of impious Arians
and others, to turn the historical narrative of the creation and fall of man into an allegory!

The meaning of the "seven stars and seven candlesticks" is then explained to John. The word,
"are," is used in a figurative sense, and not to be taken literally. It means here, symbolize,
represent or signify. It is to be interpreted in the same sense as in the following places
of sacred Scripture:--"It is the Lord's passover." (Exod. xii. 11.) "That rock was Christ."
(1 Cor. x. 4.) "This is my body." (Matt. xxvi. 26.) None but a Papist will have any difficulty
here, or perhaps,--a Lutheran! 

No possibility of making any arrangement with Salvinski.

Had he won of me as others have done, an arrangement, though painful, would perhaps have been
possible; but, by a singular fate, whenever I have chanced to be successful, it is of this man
that I have won. De Boeffleurs, then, was the only chance. He was inexorable. I prayed to him;
I promised him everything; I offered him any terms; in vain! At length, when he had worked me
up to the last point of despair, he whispered hope. I listened; let me be quick! why finish?
You know I fell!" The Baron again covered his face, and appeared perfectly overwhelmed.

"By God! it is too horrible," said St. George. "Grey, let us do something
for him."

"My dear St. George," said Vivian, "be calm. This is given as a specimen of the unbridled fancy
and licentious imagination with which even good men may be tempted to approach the reading
and interpreting of this important and instructive part of God's word. But Peter informs us
that some persons in his time, "wrested" those parts of Paul's writings which were "dark and
hard to be understood:" and this was not the worst of their conduct, for they treated "the
other scriptures also" in the same reckless and irreverent manner, which were neither dark
nor hard to be understood. (2 Pet. iii. 16.) These epistles are no more mystical or prophetical
than those of the apostle Paul. They are simply and properly descriptive, although like all
other epistles, they are applicable to the church general in all ages, and equally suited to
the case of individuals, as is clear in the close of each:--"If any man have an ear, let him hear."

1.

Verses 1-7.--This first epistle, addressed to the church in Ephesus, comes from the Lord Jesus,
who holds the stars in his right hand; who gives commission to the ministry, gives them authority
as his ambassadors to negotiate with mankind, communicates to them the light which they diffuse
in the world, sustains them in their respective spheres, and controls them as they move in
their orbits. He walks in the midst of the candlesticks, as the sun in the system of nature,
trimming and snuffing the lamps that they may burn more clearly.

This is the second epistle sent from Christ to the church of Ephesus. Paul, who is thought
to have planted this church, (Acts xviii. 19,) had written to those Christians some thirty
years before, while he was a prisoner in Rome. (Eph. i. 4; vi. 20.) Paul and John were nothing
more than Christ's amanuenses,--"the pen of a ready writer." (Ps. xlv. 1; 1 Cor. iii. 7.)--"The
angel of the church" is at once a symbolic and collective name, including also the idea of
representation:--not a pope or any other prelatic personage. No doubt in our Saviour's estimation
the saints take precedence here of the "bishops (overseers.) and deacons," as they do in Phil.
i. 1; Eph. iv. 8-12. All ecclesiastical officers are Christ's gift to the church; but the object
or recipient of the gift is more valued than the gift. And just here is the point where prelates
"do greatly err, not knowing the Scriptures." They have arrogated to themselves the honourary
title of "clergy;" and for the sake of distinction, and to give plausibility to their ambitious
pretensions, call the membership of the church the "laity,"--contrary to the express decision
of the unerring Spirit. Peter cautions the "elders" that they be not as "lords over God's heritage,"--lot,
clergy; where it is obvious that the body of the people, as distinguished from their rulers,
are denominated the clergy. Moreover, it is evident to any unbiased reader, that the membership,
and not a bishop only, are addressed by our Lord in these epistles; as when he says,--"some
of you." (v. 10.) Hence it may be inferred that there is no proof in these epistles on which
to erect the antichristian hierarchy of diocesan prelacy; and consequently that ecclesiastical
government is by divine right, lodged in the hands of a plurality of presbyters.

Christ notices what is commendable, before he administers reproof. "I know thy works."--There
seems to be an incompatibility between the "patience" commended, and not being able to "bear
them which were evil." But patience under persecution or any other providential dispensation,
is perfectly consistent with an enlightened zeal against error and immorality. Indeed, the
two graces,--patience and zeal, are inseparable in themselves, and as connected with all the
other graces of the Holy Spirit.--There were such in the primitive church, who claimed to be
apostles, and who, upon trial, were discovered to be impostors. Paul, in the exercise of the
miraculous gift of "discerning of spirits," could, without presbyterial examination of witnesses,
personally detect "false apostles, deceitful workers" in Corinth. (2 Cor. xi. 13.) But John
was not at Ephesus, and therefore the ordinary rulers are approved by Christ for the faithful
exercise of discipline. Persons who falsify the doctrines and corrupt the order and ordinances
of divine appointment, are the worst of liars, and having been by competent authority "found"
to be such; they may be so called without breach of charity. When discipline is neglected or
relaxed, error and tyranny soon enter, with "confusion and every evil work." But when false
teachers have gained followers and influence in the church, the friends of truth and order
will be in danger of yielding to the pressure. They are liable to become "weary and faint in
their minds," (Heb. xii. 3;) but zeal for their Master's honor will animate them to contend
for the faith so as to secure his approbation. It is remarkable that so much labor, patience,
zeal etc., should be found in this church while chargeable with having "fallen from first love."
Habits contracted in the fervor of early affection to Christ, may continue to influence an
individual or a church, when the fervency of affection is sensibly abated. This state of feeling
the exercised Christian will confess and lament. Nothing but repentance and reformation in
such a case will procure the approbation and restore the favor of Christ. Continued impenitence
is threatened with removing "the candlestick," the gospel, ministry and ordinances.

The Nicolaitans were a sect of corrupt professors of Christianity of whose doctrines and deeds
little or nothing is certainly known. It is most generally supposed that they were a sort of
Antinomians, who turned the grace of God into lasciviousness; and there is a tradition, not
well sustained, that their heresy was derived from Nicolas, a proselyte of Antioch, one of
the seven deacons of whom we read, Acts vi. 5. The similarity of name seems to have suggested
this fancy; for there is no historical evidence that one who was "of honest report, full of
the Holy Ghost and wisdom," was permitted thus to fall away. Their deeds, however, were hateful
to Christ, and therefore hateful to his real disciples: for one of the infallible marks of
a state of grace is to hate what,--yes and whom,--our Lord hates. (Ps. cxxxix. 21, 22.) All
who read or hear these things are interested in them, whether they will hear, or whether they
will forbear. What Christ saith in each of these epistles, the Spirit saith; and what is said
to each church is said to all the seven; that is, to the whole visible church. "To him that
overcometh" false apostles, the deeds of the Nicolaitans, any doctrines or practices in opposition
to the truth of Christ, or militating against the honor of Christ; to such he "will give to
eat of the tree of life," from which Adam was excluded upon the breach of the first covenant.
(Genesis iii. 22-24.) What the first Adam lost by the fall, the last Adam will restore with
interest, (1 Cor. ii. 9.) The felicity of the saints in glory can be represented only by sensible
things; and even then but very imperfectly. (1 Cor. xiii. 12; 1 John iii.

Vs. 8-11.--Smyrna is the second in order of the seven churches addressed through the ministry
as the official representatives. Our Saviour here assumes those titles mentioned in ch. i.
17, 18, which bespeak his divine personal dignity and voluntary humiliation, his eternal Godhead
and true manhood,--"God manifest in the flesh," having by death triumphed over death, to deliver
them who through fear of death were all their life-time subject to bondage. (Heb. ii. 15.)
This church was subjected to "tribulation,"--persecution in name, substance and person. The
members were either of the poorer sort of the citizens of Smyrna, or rendered poor by fines,--"the
spoiling of their goods."--"But thou art rich," rich in faith, in good works, in the gifts
and graces of the Spirit, the earnest of the heavenly inheritance.--In this place a colony
of Jews had gained such social influence as to move the populace, and even the local magistrates,
to offer violence to the servants of God. It does not appear that these Jews were professing
Christians of any creed, but just such as Paul often encountered in Judea and elsewhere. (Acts
xvi. 19-22.) The devil instigated the Jews, and they the Gentiles; and both, the magistrates,
to silence the testimony of Christ's witnesses, by which all were tormented. The design of
the devil, who was a murderer from the beginning, was to destroy that church; but Christ's
design was to try her members. Only some were to be imprisoned, and the time of trial would
be limited to "ten days,"--a definite for an indefinite, but short time. Those who resist the
truth contradict its advocates, and blaspheme the holy name of God, though professing to be
either Jews or Christians, area "synagogue of Satan." "A crown of life" is promised to such
as proved "faithful unto death." They shall not be "hurt of the second death;" that is, eternal
death. (Ch. xx.

Vs. 12-17.--To the church in Pergamos reproofs and threatenings are addressed by him who has
the "sharp sword." Satan had his throne in this place, whence he assailed the true doctrine
and disciples of Christ by heresy and persecution. In such a great fight of afflictions there
was one distinguished, like Stephen, for boldness and fortitude, who "resisted unto blood,
striving against sin." And wherever there is a "faithful martyr" for Christ, who "holds fast
his name, and will not deny his faith" at the risk of his life, his divine Lord will condescend
to register his name among that noble company who "by faith have obtained a good report." (Heb.
Xv. 2.) The "doctrine of Balaam" and that of the Nicolaitans led to gross immoralities in apostolic
times as of old in the days of Moses. (Num. xxxi. 16.) And thus it appears, that old heresies,
which have been condemned, are afterwards revived under new names, and patronized by new leaders.
In such a case, we have the authority of Christ for calling them by the same names of those
whose principles they adopt, and whose example they emulate. It was no breach of charity, therefore,
by our forefathers to designate those who "delated" them to the cruel persecutors in Scotland
by the name of "Ziphites," or to call the archtraitor Sharp,--"a Judas." The Lord Jesus "hates
the doctrine" as well as "deeds of Nicolaitans," which are subversive of truth and godliness.
Those who oppose the doctrines of Balaam and the Nicolaitans in any age when these are popular,
must expect persecution. But when "troubles abound for Christ's sake, consolations much more
abound by Christ." This is to "eat of the hidden manna." Also, the "white stone" or pebble,--the
token of justification,--will be given to the conqueror in the Christian conflict. The allusion
here is to the mode of procedure in courts of judgment among the ancient Greeks. White stones
were cast for acquittal; black for condemnation. The manna is hidden, and so is the white stone,
both signifying the sustaining and consoling evidence of the Comforter,--the Holy "Spirit witnessing
with the spirit" of the persecuted believer, that he is a "child of God." It is the same thing
as the "hundred-fold in this life," promised by Christ. (Matt. xix. 29.)

