The fixing is important, as upon this depends in a large measure the permanence of the prints.
The bath should be freshly made up, 3 ounces of hyposulphite of soda to 16 ounces of water.
Prints are placed in this bath face down, and one under, instead of on top of another. The
tray should be occasionally rocked. With a fresh bath prints will fix in ten minutes, but where
many prints are made at one time it will be well to use a second fixing bath. The emulsion
of an unfixed print will appear a yellowish tinge in the unfixed portions when examined by
transmitted light; but this is not an easy or certain test. It is better to make absolutely
certain of thorough fixing by continued immersion, occasional rocking and, where many prints
are made, a second bath. The fixing bath should not be allowed to get too warm in hot weather.
Blistering, staining and frilling will result in such a case, and I have known a print which
was left in a warm fixing bath for an hour or more to be reduced beyond redemption. With freshly
made hypo baths at a suitable temperature there is absolutely no danger of the paper frilling
or blistering.

The final washing must be thorough, as the hypo is difficult to eliminate from both the emulsion
and the paper. Care must be taken to see that the prints are well separated while washing.
This ensures uniform washing.

It frequently happens that a negative may require more or less dodging in printing. With bromide
paper this is particularly easy. We will take the simple case of a negative with dense sky
which will not print out in the ordinary way. All that we need in this case is a piece of paper
cut roughly to the sky line and kept moving during part of the exposure over the part which
is to be held back. If necessary, cut down the light in order to prolong the exposure, or expose
at a greater distance from the light. One or more test-strips will be required for this purpose
in order to ascertain the relative times of exposure. A modification of this method is when
a small portion of the negative only needs extra printing--a face or hand for instance. Here
we take a piece of paper a little larger than the negative and cut a small hole in it, moving
it in front of the light so as to throw the latter only upon the portions needing the extra
printing. Still another modification is where a portion only needs holding back. Here we use
a small piece of paper or cardboard stuck on a knitting needle, moving the latter so that it
will not intercept the light too long at one place.

In all these and similar instances which will occur to the reader, the dodging should be done
during the first part of the exposure. The subsequent exposure seems to obliterate traces of
such dodging better than when it is done at the end of the exposure, just as in cloud-printing
better results are achieved by printing the sky first and the foreground afterward.

It is quite possible to make bromide negatives in the camera. They have their advantages in
classes of work not requiring the finest definition, are much lighter, cheaper, more easily
stored and less liable to breakage or other mishaps. They are best made on a thin, smooth paper,
a soft paper being better than the hard. They are placed in the plate-holder by means of the
ordinary cut film holder. The exposure required is ascertained by a trial or two, but roughly
speaking is about one-twentieth that of a rapid plate. After development in the usual way--it
being carried only a little further than usual--and after fixing, washing and drying, the paper
negative can be spotted or retouched, after which it is waxed.

CHAPTER IV

ENLARGING--DAYLIGHT METHODS

In taking up enlarging a full knowledge of what has been said as to the manipulation of bromide
paper will be necessary, as the principles governing exposure apply here as in contact printing,
errors being even more serious, owing to the greater waste of material.

For the illuminant used in enlarging, we may employ either daylight or artificial light. The
former is cheap, but variable; the first cost of the latter is quite a little sum, but the
light is uniform. A daylight enlarging apparatus can be made for a dollar or two, and hence
is within the reach of all; and if the process be given up, the loss is not serious.

If the cost is of little or no moment, very serviceable enlarging cameras can be bought for
about twenty-five dollars. Such a camera is adapted for reducing as well as enlarging, and
so will be found useful for lantern slide making, copying, etc. As a matter of fact, few things
are as useful to the amateur as a good enlarging outfit.

We will first consider enlarging by daylight with home-made apparatus. For this purpose a room
with at least one window will be needed. It should preferably be convenient to the dark-room.
If the window of this room commands a view unobstructed by buildings, trees or the like, so
much the better. I personally prefer a south light. With this one can get soft enlargements
from the most contrasty negatives, while by shielding the negatives from the direct rays of
the sun we can work from negatives which are quite flat and lacking in contrasts.

But whatever the room chosen, all windows but the one at which we are to work must be blocked
up. This can be done by heavy dark curtains, or by specially constructed frames covered with
light-tight material and made to fit closely in the windows. If there are any transoms these
should likewise be covered. White light entering under the doors can be shut out by placing
a rug along the bottom of the door. Care must be taken that the window-frames fit closely,
as the light from openings at the windows would soon fog a sheet of bromide paper if it fell
upon it even for a few moments.

Assuming that the room chosen can be made practically light-tight, we will need some arrangement
to hold the negative. The details of a box for this purpose can best be shown by a diagram
(Fig. 3). ABCD is a strong and neatly made box open at both ends, and about two inches larger
each way than the largest negative from which enlargements are to be made. E represents a section
of a board which forms part of a window frame, a general view of which is given in Fig. 4.
Reverting to Fig. 3, F is an opening cut in the side of the negative box two inches or a little
less from the back of the box, AD, and wide enough to admit the free passage of a negative
in a kit or other holder. On the inside of the box are tacked strips, GGGG, to serve as a guide
to the kit when placing it in the box. An opening similar to F should be made in the other
side of the box to permit lateral adjustments when we come to use the apparatus, besides enabling
us to put the negative in or withdraw it from either side. A convenient modification of the
strips, G, is found by placing the front ones a short distance further forward, to wit, toward
BC, as they are shown in the cut (Fig. 3), and tacking to them a piece of watch spring, H,
this then serving both as a guide and as a means of pressing the kit or negative holder against
the other strips, GG (Fig. 5).

J is a sheet of ground-glass, which is tacked over the opening when the box is firmly set in
the board, E. It is well to have this ground-glass fixed in place so that it can be readily
removed if desired.

The necessity for having the box at least two inches larger each way than the largest negative
from which enlargements are to be made is shown in Fig. 6. Here AB represents the negative
in place, CA, DB and EG represent rays of light entering the box. It will be seen that the
rays CA and DB strike the ground-glass at an angle, but nevertheless at an angle which results
in their passing through it in a considerable degree. They strike the negative AB, but if the
negative were the full size of the box, to wit FG, it will be seen that while the section AB
would be fully lighted, the sections AF and BG would receive no oblique rays at all, and hence
the negative would not be even approximately uniformly lighted. This point is too often overlooked
in the construction of apparatus of this character, but is necessary in all cases of daylight
enlarging and especially when direct sunlight is used. Now with the negative box in place,
some arrangement must be made for holding the lens, which can be the lens used for making the
negative. This for enlargements of a fixed size from negatives of a given size can be accomplished
by simply extending the section BGGC Fig. 3, to a proper distance and placing the lens in the
end of it; but this permits too little opportunity for adjustments and is not advisable. The
Quay was alive with ferry-boats, blunt-nosed and squat like a flat-iron, churning the water
with invisible screws. A string of lascars from the P. & O. boat caught his eye with a patch of
colour, the white calico trousers, the gay embroidered vests, and the red or white turbans
bringing a touch of the East to Sydney. Suddenly the piles of the jetty slipped to the rear,
and the boat moved out past the huge mail-steamers from London, Marseilles, Bremen, Hongkong,
and Yokohama lying at the wharves.
 The screen on the easel can be made either to rest on the floor or
on a table. It can be made to run on a track or otherwise, and it can also be made so as to
admit of either vertical or lateral adjustment or both, or it can be nothing more than an ordinary
box set on a table. But however constructed it must be considerably larger than the largest
sheet of bromide paper which is to be used, thus allowing for nearly all necessary adjustments
of the paper. It is preferably covered with white paper or fine blotter to aid in focusing.
The reflector F is considerably larger than the negative-box, and adjusted at an angle which
will reflect the light from the sky or sun evenly upon the ground glass. It is best covered
with good white blotting paper. G is a hood which I have found useful in sunlight enlarging,
especially in summer when the sun is almost overhead. It is placed on the outside of the window-frame,
some distance above the ground-glass, and shields the latter from the direct rays of the sun,
which would otherwise cause uneven illumination owing to their too great obliquity. The direct
sun on the white reflector will give a light of high intensity. In winter, however, when the
sun is low, it will fall directly on the ground-glass, and this, if the negative box be constructed
as advised, is not objectionable, but on the contrary an advantage. In Fig. 4 the opening,
FGHI, represents a sheet of ruby glass, and can be screened while focusing if found to interfere
with the worker's convenience in that operation.

The apparatus as sketched will suffice for all ordinary work. Modifications of it will depend
upon the ingenuity of the man who attempts to design or construct one. It should be noted that
the distance of the ground-glass from the negative has its influence in the strength of the
light, and it is better to have this distance not over two inches. If less than one inch, however,
the diffusion of light is not so good. When the light is weak the ground-glass can be removed
entirely; the negative will thus be viewed directly against the white reflector. Very strong
negatives giving undue contrasts may also be dealt with in this way. Or, if the light is too
strong for flat negatives, the reflector can be removed entirely, or to the same end a sheet
of yellow glass can be substituted for the ground-glass, thus increasing contrasts. In fact,
a very useful and easily arranged modification of the negative-box consists of an opening in
the top of the box inside the room through which can be dropped an extra sheet of ground-glass
or opal to cut down the light, or of yellow glass to increase contrast. This opening should
be at the point K, Fig. 3.

I have referred to a kit as being the proper arrangement for holding the negative. This, after
much tribulation in working with home-made contrivances, I have found to be the best arrangement.
They come a size or two larger than the negative with which they are to be used, and can easily
be cut down to the proper dimensions. With it, also, other kits to hold smaller negatives can
readily be used. It is also simple with them to fasten the negatives in place. If they extend
beyond the box on either side so much the better; greater lateral adjustment can then be made.
The negative box, Fig. 3, is best painted dead black inside in the section GBCG, and white
in the section AGGD. The reasons for this will be obvious at a glance.

In enlarging from films it is well to place them between two sheets of glass of proper size,
and fasten the whole in the kit or negative-holder. For this purpose use thin glass without
flaws or scratches. If the films are smaller than the opening in the kit, it is well to paste
a black mat on one of the glasses, when, after proper adjustment, the film will remain in place
between the two glasses with very little pressure.

Enlarged negatives are very easily made with the apparatus described. A contact positive can
be made, preferably on carbon transparency tissue, and from this the enlargement made, or an
enlarged positive made first, and from this a contact negative. The latter plan is preferable,
since it admits of retouching on both positive and negative. Slow plates should be used throughout.
For those who do not care to go to the expense of experimenting with large plates, I would
suggest that good contact positives be first made and from these negatives on bromide paper,
Standard A, soft. These negatives are treated as already described. The best positive for this
purpose is a thin one with full gradations of tone from clear high light to deep shadow, without
veil or fog, but free from any suspicion of flatness.

CHAPTER V

ENLARGING BY ARTIFICIAL LIGHT

The apparatus for enlarging with artificial light is, as has been stated, more expensive than
that for use with daylight. The negative box and screen, however, remain as given. But we need
in addition two extra pieces, a light-box and a pair of condensing lenses.

The form of light-box presupposes the choice of illuminant, and in this there is a wide range.
Suffice it to say that a kerosene lamp with one or more one-and-a-half inch burners will be
found suitable for very small work or weak negatives. For larger work or stronger negatives
a stronger light will be needed.

