He passed a school that seemed to grow out of the very ground it stood on. He passed a library
that had been built around a huge tree, the branches of which had intertwined their foliage
into a living roof. He passed a block-long supermarket built of tinted glass. Finally he came
to the park.

He gasped then. Gasped at the delicate trees and the little blue-eyed lakes; at the fairy-fountains
and the winding, pebbled paths. Star-flowers shed their multicolored radiance everywhere, and
starlight poured prodigally down from the sky. He chose a path at random and walked along it
in the twofold radiance till he came to the cynosure.

The cynosure was a statue--a statue of a buck-toothed, wall-eyed youth gazing steadfastly up
into the heavens. In one hand the youth held a Phillips screw driver, in the other a six-inch
crescent wrench. Standing several yards away and staring raptly up into the statue's face was
the youth himself, and so immobile was he that if it hadn't been for the pedestal on which
the statue rested, Philip would have been unable to distinguish one from the other.

There was an inscription on the pedestal. He walked over and read it in the light cast by a
nearby parterre of star-flowers:

    FRANCIS FARNSWORTH
    PFLEUGER,
    DISCOVERER OF
    PFLEUGERSVILLE

    Born: May 5. 1941. Died: ----

    Profession Inventor. On the first day of April of the year of our
    Lord, 1962, Francis Farnsworth Pfleuger brought into being a Möbius
    coincidence field and established multiple contact with the
    twenty-first satellite of the star Sirius, thereby giving the
    people of Valleyview access, via their back doorways, to a New
    World. Here we have come to live. Here we have come to raise our
    children. Here, in this idyllic village, which the noble race that
    once inhabited this fair planet left behind them when they migrated
    to the Greater Magellanic Cloud, we have settled down to create a
    new and better Way of Life. Here, thanks to Francis Farnsworth
    Pfleuger, we shall know happiness prosperity and freedom from fear.

    FRANCIS FARNSWORTH PFLEUGER, WE, THE NEW INHABITANTS OF SIRIUS XXI,
    SALUTE YOU!

Philip wiped his forehead again.

Presently he noticed that the flesh-and-blood Francis Pfleuger was looking in his direction.
"Me," the flesh-and-blood Francis Pfleuger said, pointing proudly at the statue. "Me."

"So I gather," Philip said dryly. And then. "Zarathustra--come back here!"

The little dog had started down one of the paths that converged on the statue. At Philip's
command, he stopped but did not turn; instead he remained where he was, as though waiting for
someone to come down the path. After a moment, someone did--Judith Darrow.

She was wearing a simple white dress, reminiscent both in design and décor of a Grecian tunic.
A wide gilt belt augmented the effect, and her delicate sandals did nothing to mar it. In the
radiance of the star-flowers, her eyes were more gray than green. There were shadows under
them, Philip noticed, and the lids were faintly red.

She halted a few feet from him and looked at him without saying a word. "I ... I brought your
dog back," he said lamely. "I found him in the back seat of my car."

"Thank you. I've been looking all over Pfleugersville for him. I left my Valleyview doors open,
hoping he'd come home of his own accord, but I guess he had other ideas. Now that you've discovered
our secret, Mr. Myles, what do you think of our brave new world?"

"I think it's lovely," Philip said, "but I don't believe it's where you seem to think it is."

"Don't you?" she asked. "Then suppose you show me the full moon that rose over Valleyview tonight.
Or better yet, suppose I show you something else." She pointed to a region of the heavens just
to the left of the statue's turned-up nose. "You can't see them from here," she said, "but
around that insignificant yellow star, nine planets are in orbit. One of them is Earth."

"But that's impossible!" he objected. "Consider the--"

"Distance? In the sort of space we're dealing with, Mr. Myles, distance is not a factor. In
Möbius space--as we have come to call it for lack of a better term--any two given points are
coincidental, regardless of how far apart they may be in non-Möbius space. But this becomes
manifest only when a Möbius coincidence-field is established. As you probably know by now,
Francis Pfleuger created such a field."

At the mention of his name, Francis Pfleuger came hurrying over to where they were standing.
"E," he declared, "equals mc²."

"Thank you, Francis," Judith said. Then, to Philip, "Shall we walk?"

They started down one of the converging paths, Zarathustra bringing up the rear. Behind them,
Francis returned to his Narcissistic study of himself in stone. "We were neighbors back in
Valleyview," Judith said, "but I never dreamed he thought quite so much of himself. Ever since
we put up that statue last week, he's been staring at it night and day. Sometimes he even brings
his lunch with him."

"He seems to be familiar with Einstein."

"He's not really, though. He memorized the energy-mass equation in an attempt to justify his
new status in life, but he hasn't the remotest notion of what it means. It's ironic in a way
that Pfleugersville should have been discovered by someone with an IQ of less than seventy-five."

"No one with an IQ of less than seventy-five could create the sort of field you were talking
about."

"He didn't create it deliberately--he brought it into being accidentally by means of a machine
he was building to tie knots with. Or at least that's what he says. But we do know that there
was such a machine because we saw its fused parts in his kitchen, and there's no question but
what it was the source of the field. Francis, though, can't remember how he made the parts
or how he put them together. As a matter of fact, to this day he still doesn't understand what
happened--though I have a feeling that he knows more than he lets on."

"What did happen?" Philip asked.

For a while Judith was silent. Then, "All of us promised solemnly not to divulge our secret
to an outsider unless he was first accepted by the group as a whole," she said. "But thanks
to my negligence, you know most of it already, so I suppose you're entitled to know the rest."
She sighed. "Very well--I'll try to explain...."

When Francis Pfleuger's field had come into being, something had happened to the back doors
of Valleyview that caused them to open upon a planet which one of the local star-gazers promptly
identified as Sirius XXI. The good folk of Valleyview had no idea of how such a state of affairs
could exist, to say nothing of how it could have come about, till one of the scientists whom
they asked to join them as a part of the plan which they presently devised to make their forthcoming
utopia self-sufficient, came up with a theory that explained everything.

According to his theory, the round-trip distance between any two planetary or ²stella bodies
was curved in the manner of a Möbius strip--i.e., a strip of paper given a half-twist before
bringing the two ends together. In this case, the strip represented the round-trip distance
from Earth to Sirius XXI. Earth was represented on the strip by one dot, and Sirius XXI by
another, and, quite naturally, the two dots were an equal distance--or approximately 8.8 light
years--apart. This brought them directly opposite one another--one on one side of the strip,
the other on the other side; but since a Möbius strip has only one surface--or side--the two
dots were actually occupying the same space at the same time. In "Möbius space", then, Earth
and Sirius XXI were "coincidental".

       *       *       *       *       *

Philip looked over his shoulder at the little yellow sun twinkling in the sky. "Common sense,"
he said, "tells me differently."

"Common sense is a liar of the first magnitude," Judith said. "It has misled man ever since
he first climbed down from the trees. It was common sense that inspired Ptolemy's theory of
cosmogony. It was common sense that inspired the burning of Giordano Bruno...."

The fact that common sense indicated that 8.8 light years separated Earth and Sirius XXI in
common-sense reality didn't prove that 8.8 light years separated them in a form of reality
that was outside common-sense's dominion--i.e., Möbius space--and Francis Pfleuger's field
had demonstrated as much. The back-door nodal areas which it had established, however, were
merely limited manifestations of that reality--in other words, the field had merely provided
limited access to a form of space that had been in existence all along.

"Though why," Judith concluded, "our back doors should have been affected rather than our front
doors, for example, is inexplicable--unless it was because Francis built the machine in his
kitchen. In any event, when they did become nodal areas, they manifested themselves on Sirius
XXI, and the dogs in the immediate vicinity associated them with the doorways of their departed
masters and began whining to be let in."

"Their departed masters?"

"The race that built this village. The race that built the factories and developed the encompassing
farms. A year ago, according to the records they left behind them, they migrated to the Greater
Magellanic Cloud."

Philip was indignant. "Why didn't they take their dogs with them?"

"They couldn't. After all, they had to leave their cars and their furniture behind them too,
not to mention almost unbelievable stockpiles of every metal imaginable that will last us for
centuries. The logistics of space travel make taking even an extra handkerchief along a calculated
risk. Anyway, when their dogs 'found' us, they were overjoyed, and as for us, we fell in love
with them at first sight. Our own dogs, though, didn't take to them at all, and every one of
them ran away."

"This can't be the only village," Philip said. "There must be others somewhere."

"Undoubtedly there are. All we know is that the people who built this one were the last to leave."

The park was behind them now, and they were walking down a pleasant street. "And when you and
your neighbors discovered the village, did you decide to become expatriates right then and
there?" Philip asked.

She nodded. "Do you blame us? You've seen for yourself what a lovely place it is. But it's
far more than that. In Valleyview, we had unemployment. Here, there is work for everyone, and
a corresponding feeling of wantedness and togetherness. True, most of the work is farmwork,
but what of that? We have every conceivable kind of machine to help us in our tasks. Indeed,
I think that the only machine the Sirians lacked was one that could manufacture food out of
whole cloth. But consider the most important advantage of all: when we go to bed at night we
can do so without being afraid that sometime during our sleep a thermonuclear missile will
descend out of the sky and devour us in one huge incandescent bite. If we've made a culture
hero out of our village idiot, it's no more than right, for unwittingly or not, he opened up
the gates of paradise."

"And you immediately saw to it that no one besides yourselves and a chosen few would pass through
them."

Judith paused beside a white gate. "Yes, that's true," she said. "To keep our secret, we lived
in our old houses while we were settling our affairs, closing down our few industries and setting
up a new monetary system. In fact, we even kept our ... the children in the dark for fear that
they would talk at school. Suppose, however, we had publicized our utopia. Can't you imagine
the mockery opportunists would have made out of it? The village we found was large enough to
accommodate ourselves and the few friends, relatives and specialists we asked to join us, but
no larger; and we did, after all, find it in our own back yard." She placed her hand on the
white gate. "This is where I live."

He looked at the house, and it was enchanting. Slightly less enchanting, but delightful in
its own right, was the much smaller house beside it. Judith pointed toward the latter dwelling
and looked at Zarathustra. "It's almost morning, Zarathustra," she said sternly. "Go to bed
this minute!" She opened the gate so that the little dog could pass through and raised her
eyes to Philip. "Our time is different here," she explained. And then, "I'm afraid you'll have
to hurry if you expect to make it to my back door before the field dies out."

He felt suddenly empty. "Dies out?" he repeated numbly.

"Yes. We don't know why, but it's been diminishing in strength ever since it first came into
being, and our 'Möbius-strip scientist' has predicted that it will cease to exist during the
next twenty-four hours. I guess I don't need to remind you that you have important business
on Earth."

"No," he said, "I guess you don't." His emptiness bowed out before a wave of bitterness. He
had rested his hand on the gate, as close to hers as he had dared. Now he saw that while it
was inches away from hers in one sense, it was light years away in another. He removed it angrily.
"Business always comes first with you, doesn't it?"

"Yes. Business never lets you down."

"Do you know what I think?" Philip said. "I think that you were the one who did the selling
out, not your husband. I think you sold him out for a law practice."

Her face turned white as though he had slapped it, and in a sense, he had. "Good-by," she said,
and this time he was certain that if he were to reach out and touch her, she would shatter
into a million pieces. "Give my love to the planet Earth," she added icily.

"Good-by," Philip said, his anger gone now, and the emptiness rushing back. "Don't sell us
short, though--we'll make a big splash in your sky one of these days when we blow ourselves up."

He turned and walked away. Walked out of the enchanting village and down the highway and across
the flower-pulsing plain to Judith's back doorway. It was unlighted now, and he had trouble
distinguishing it from the others. Its shimmering blue framework was flickering. Judith had
not lied then: the field was dying out.

He locked the back door behind him, walked sadly through the dark and empty house and let himself
out the front door. He locked the front door behind him, too, and went down the walk and climbed
into his car. He had thought he had locked it, but apparently he hadn't. He drove out of town
and down the road to the highway, and down the highway toward the big bright bonfire of the city.

Dawn was exploring the eastern sky with pale pink fingers when at last he parked his car in
the garage behind his apartment building. He reached into the back seat for his brief case
and the manila envelopes. His brief case had hair on it. It was soft and warm. "Ruf," it barked.
"Ruf-ruf!"

He knew then that everything was all right. Just because no one had invited him to the party
didn't mean that he couldn't invite himself. He would have to hurry, though--he had a lot of
things to do, and time was running out.

