The Shelif was not more than a mile and a half from the meadow, but no time was to be lost
if the two men were to reach the town before nightfall. Though still hidden by heavy clouds,
the sun was evidently declining fast; and what was equally inexplicable, it was not following
the oblique curve that in these latitudes and at this time of year might be expected, but was
sinking perpendicularly on to the horizon.

As he went along, Captain Servadac pondered deeply. Perchance some unheard-of phenomenon had
modified the rotary motion of the globe; or perhaps the Algerian coast had been transported
beyond the equator into the southern hemisphere. Yet the earth, with the exception of the alteration
in its convexity, in this part of Africa at least, seemed to have undergone no change of any
very great importance. As far as the eye could reach, the shore was, as it had ever been, a
succession of cliffs, beach, and arid rocks, tinged with a red ferruginous hue. To the south--if
south, in this inverted order of things, it might still be called--the face of the country
also appeared unaltered, and some leagues away, the peaks of the Merdeyah mountains still retained
their accustomed outline.

Presently a rift in the clouds gave passage to an oblique ray of light that clearly proved
that the sun was setting in the east.

"Well, I am curious to know what they think of all this at Mostaganem," said the captain. "I
wonder, too, what the Minister of War will say when he receives a telegram informing him that
his African colony has become, not morally, but physically disorganized; that the cardinal
points are at variance with ordinary rules, and that the sun in the month of January is shining
down vertically upon our heads."

Ben Zoof, whose ideas of discipline were extremely rigid, at once suggested that the colony
should be put under the surveillance of the police, that the cardinal points should be placed
under restraint, and that the sun should be shot for breach of discipline.

Meantime, they were both advancing with the utmost speed. The decompression of the atmosphere
made the specific gravity of their bodies extraordinarily light, and they ran like hares and
leaped like chamois. Leaving the devious windings of the footpath, they went as a crow would
fly across the country. Hedges, trees, and streams were cleared at a bound, and under these
conditions Ben Zoof felt that he could have overstepped Montmartre at a single stride. The
earth seemed as elastic as the springboard of an acrobat; they scarcely touched it with their
feet, and their only fear was lest the height to which they were propelled would consume the
time which they were saving by their short cut across the fields.

It was not long before their wild career brought them to the right bank of the Shelif. Here
they were compelled to stop, for not only had the bridge completely disappeared, but the river
itself no longer existed. Of the left bank there was not the slightest trace, and the right
bank, which on the previous evening had bounded the yellow stream, as it murmured peacefully
along the fertile plain, had now become the shore of a tumultuous ocean, its azure waters extending
westwards far as the eye could reach, and annihilating the tract of country which had hitherto
formed the district of Mostaganem. 3. The true and radical analysis carries us back in both cases
to the Primitive Individual Sounds, the Vowels and Consonants of which Language is composed.

It
is clear enough that the analysis must be carried to the very ultimate in order to reach the
true foundation for an effective and sufficient alphabetic Representation
of Language.

Precisely the same necessity is upon us in order that we may lay a secure and adequate foundation
for a True Science of Language. This will explain more fully what was meant in a preceding paragraph,
when it was stated that the labors of Mr. Andrews begin, in this department of Language, just where
the labors of the whole school of Comparative Philologists have ended.

He first completes the analysis of Language, by going down and back
to the Phonetic Elements, the ulterior roots, the Vowels and Consonants
of Language.

Then by putting Nature to the crucial test, so to speak, to compel her to disclose the hidden
meaning with which each of these absolute (ultimate) Elements of Speech is inherently laden, he
discovers--what might readily be an à priori conception--that these
Elements, and not any compound root-syllables whatsoever, are the
true 'Phonetic Types,' representative in Nature of 'the Rational Conceptions
of the human mind.'

The ultimate Rational Conceptions of the Human
Mind are confessedly, among all Philosophers of the Mind, not four
or five hundred, but like the Alphabetic Sounds of Language, a mere
handful in number.

Precisely how many they are and how they are best distributed has not been agreed upon. Aristotle
classed them as Ten. Kant tells us there are Twelve only of the Categories of the Understanding.
Spencer, while finding the Ultimate of Ultimates in the idea of Force
alone, admits its immediate expansion into this handful of Primitive
Conceptions, but without attempting their inventory or classification.



"We must inquire into this to-morrow," he exclaimed, as darkness fell suddenly upon him. Then,
after a pause, he added: "That is to say, if there is to be a to-morrow; for if I were to be
put to the torture, I could not tell what has become of the sun."

"May I ask, sir, what we are to do now?" put in Ben Zoof.

"Stay where we are for the present; and when daylight appears--if it ever does appear--we will
explore the coast to the west and south, and return to the gourbi. If we can find out nothing
else, we must at least discover where we are."

"Meanwhile, sir, may we go to sleep?"

"Certainly, if you like, and if you can."

Nothing loath to avail himself of his master's permission, Ben Zoof crouched down in an angle
of the shore, threw his arms over his eyes, and very soon slept the sleep of the ignorant,
which is often sounder than the sleep of the just. Overwhelmed by the questions that crowded
upon his brain, Captain Servadac could only wander up and down the shore. Again and again he
asked himself what the catastrophe could portend. Had the towns of Algiers, Oran, and Mostaganem
escaped the inundation? Could he bring himself to believe that all the inhabitants, his friends,
and comrades had perished; or was it not more probable that the Mediterranean had merely invaded
the region of the mouth of the Shelif? But this supposition did not in the least explain the
other physical disturbances. Another hypothesis that presented itself to his mind was that
the African coast might have been suddenly transported to the equatorial zone. But although
this might get over the difficulty of the altered altitude of the sun and the absence of twilight,
yet it would neither account for the sun setting in the east, nor for the length of the day
being reduced to six hours.

"We must wait till to-morrow," he repeated; adding, for he had become distrustful of the future,
"that is to say, if to-morrow ever comes."

Although not very learned in astronomy, Servadac was acquainted with the position of the principal
constellations. It was therefore a considerable disappointment to him that, in consequence
of the heavy clouds, not a star was visible in the firmament. To have ascertained that the
pole-star had become displaced would have been an undeniable proof that the earth was revolving
on a new axis; but not a rift appeared in the lowering clouds, which seemed to threaten torrents
of rain.

It happened that the moon was new on that very day; naturally, therefore, it would have set
at the same time as the sun. What, then, was the captain's bewilderment when, after he had
been walking for about an hour and a half, he noticed on the western horizon a strong glare
that penetrated even the masses of the clouds.

"The moon in the west!" he cried aloud; but suddenly bethinking himself, he added: "But no,
that cannot be the moon; unless she had shifted very much nearer the earth, she could never
give a light as intense as this."

As he spoke the screen of vapor was illuminated to such a degree that the whole country was
as it were bathed in twilight. "What can this be?" soliloquized the captain. "It cannot be
the sun, for the sun set in the east only an hour and a half ago. Would that those clouds would
disclose what enormous luminary lies behind them! What a fool I was not to have learnt more
astronomy! Perhaps, after all, I am racking my brain over something that is quite in the ordinary
course of nature."

But, reason as he might, the mysteries of the heavens still remained impenetrable. For about
an hour some luminous body, its disc evidently of gigantic dimensions, shed its rays upon the
upper strata of the clouds; then, marvelous to relate, instead of obeying the ordinary laws
of celestial mechanism, and descending upon the opposite horizon, it seemed to retreat farther
off, grew dimmer, and vanished.

The darkness that returned to the face of the earth was not more profound than the gloom which
fell upon the captain's soul. Everything was incomprehensible. The simplest mechanical rules
seemed falsified; the planets had defied the laws of gravitation; the motions of the celestial
spheres were erroneous as those of a watch with a defective mainspring, and there was reason
to fear that the sun would never again shed his radiance upon the earth.

But these last fears were groundless. In three hours' time, without any intervening twilight,
the morning sun made its appearance in the west, and day once more had dawned. On consulting
his watch, Servadac found that night had lasted precisely six hours. Ben Zoof, who was unaccustomed
to so brief a period of repose, was still slumbering soundly.

"Come, wake up!" said Servadac, shaking him by the shoulder; "it is time to start."

"Time to start?" exclaimed Ben Zoof, rubbing his eyes. "I feel as if I had only just gone to
sleep."

"You have slept all night, at any rate," replied the captain; "it has only been for six hours,
but you must make it enough."

"Enough it shall be, sir," was the submissive rejoinder.

"And now," continued Servadac, "we will take the shortest way back to the gourbi, and see what
our horses think about it all."

"They will think that they ought to be groomed," said the orderly.

"Very good; you may groom them and saddle them as quickly as you like. I want to know what
has become of the rest of Algeria: if we cannot get round by the south to Mostaganem, we must
go eastwards to Tenes." And forthwith they started. Beginning to feel hungry, they had no hesitation
in gathering figs, dates, and oranges from the plantations that formed a continuous rich and
luxuriant orchard along their path. The district was quite deserted, and they had no reason
to fear any legal penalty.

In an hour and a half they reached the gourbi. Everything was just as they had left it, and
it was evident that no one had visited the place during their absence. All was desolate as
the shore they had quitted.

The preparations for the expedition were brief and simple. Ben Zoof saddled the horses and
filled his pouch with biscuits and game; water, he felt certain, could be obtained in abundance
from the numerous affluents of the Shelif, which, although they had now become tributaries
of the Mediterranean, still meandered through the plain. Captain Servadac mounted his horse
Zephyr, and Ben Zoof simultaneously got astride his mare Galette, named after the mill of Montmartre.
They galloped off in the direction of the Shelif, and were not long in discovering that the
diminution in the pressure of the atmosphere had precisely the same effect upon their horses
as it had had upon themselves. Their muscular strength seemed five times as great as hitherto;
their hoofs scarcely touched the ground, and they seemed transformed from ordinary quadrupeds
into veritable hippogriffs. Happily, Servadac and his orderly were fearless riders; they made
no attempt to curb their steeds, but even urged them to still greater exertions. Twenty minutes
sufficed to carry them over the four or five miles that intervened between the gourbi and the
mouth of the Shelif; then, slackening their speed, they proceeded at a more leisurely pace
to the southeast, along what had once been the right bank of the river, but which, although
it still retained its former characteristics, was now the boundary of a sea, which extending
farther than the limits of the horizon, must have swallowed up at least a large portion of
the province of Oran. Captain Servadac knew the country well; he had at one time been engaged
upon a trigonometrical survey of the district, and consequently had an accurate knowledge of
its topography. His idea now was to draw up a report of his investigations: to whom that report
should be delivered was a problem he had yet to solve.

During the four hours of daylight that still remained, the travelers rode about twenty-one
miles from the river mouth. To their vast surprise, they did not meet a single human being.
At nightfall they again encamped in a slight bend of the shore, at a point which on the previous
evening had faced the mouth of the Mina, one of the left-hand affluents of the Shelif, but
now absorbed into the newly revealed ocean. Ben Zoof made the sleeping accommodation as comfortable
as the circumstances would allow; the horses were clogged and turned out to feed upon the rich
pasture that clothed the shore, and the night passed without special incident.

At sunrise on the following morning, the 2nd of January, or what, according to the ordinary
calendar, would have been the night of the 1st, the captain and his orderly remounted their
horses, and during the six-hours' day accomplished a distance of forty-two miles. The right
bank of the river still continued to be the margin of the land, and only in one spot had its
integrity been impaired. This was about twelve miles from the Mina, and on the site of the
annex or suburb of Surkelmittoo. Here a large portion of the bank had been swept away, and
the hamlet, with its eight hundred inhabitants, had no doubt been swallowed up by the encroaching
waters. It seemed, therefore, more than probable that a similar fate had overtaken the larger
towns beyond the Shelif.

In the evening the explorers encamped, as previously, in a nook of the shore which here abruptly
terminated their new domain, not far from where they might have expected to find the important
village of Memounturroy; but of this, too, there was now no trace. "I had quite reckoned upon
a supper and a bed at Orleansville to-night," said Servadac, as, full of despondency, he surveyed
the waste of water.

"Quite impossible," replied Ben Zoof, "except you had gone by a boat. But cheer up, sir, cheer
up; we will soon devise some means for getting across to Mostaganem."

"If, as I hope," rejoined the captain, "we are on a peninsula, we are more likely to get to
Tenes; there we shall hear the news."

"Far more likely to carry the news ourselves," answered Ben Zoof, as he threw himself down
for his night's rest.

