HIDDEN WATER

By DANE COOLIDGE

With Four Illustrations in Color

By MAYNARD DIXON

A. L. BURT COMPANY

Publishers--New York

COPYRIGHT

A. C. McCLURG & CO.

1910

Published October 29, 1910

Second Edition, December 3, 1910

Entered at Stationers' Hall, London, England

All rights reserved

ILLUSTRATIONS

  "I never saw a sheepman yet that would fight, but
      you've got to"                                    Frontispiece
  "Put up them guns, you gawky fools! This man ain't
      going to eat ye!"                                            177
  "No!" said Kitty, "you do not love me"                           287
  Threw the sand full in his face                                  462

HIDDEN WATER

CHAPTER I

THE MOUSE

After many long, brooding days of sunshine, when the clean-cut mountains gleamed brilliantly
against the sky and the grama grass curled slowly on its stem, the rain wind rose up suddenly
out of Papaguería and swooped down upon the desolate town of Bender, whirling a cloud of dust
before it; and the inhabitants, man and horse, took to cover. New-born clouds, rushing out
of the ruck of flying dirt, cast a cold, damp shadow upon the earth and hurried past; white-crested
thunder-caps, piling-up above the Four Peaks, swept resolutely down to meet them; and the storm
wind, laden with the smell of greasewood and wetted alkali, lashed the gaunt desert bushes
mercilessly as it howled across the plain. Striking the town it jumped wickedly against the
old Hotel Bender, where most of the male population had taken shelter, buffeting its false
front until the glasses tinkled and the bar mirrors swayed dizzily from their moorings. Then
with a sudden thunder on the tin roof the flood came down, and Black Tex set up the drinks.

It was a tall cowman just down from the Peaks who ordered the round, and so all-embracing was
his good humor that he bid every one in the room drink with him, even a sheepman. Broad-faced
and huge, with four months' growth of hair and a thirst of the same duration, he stood at the
end of the bar, smiling radiantly, one sun-blackened hand toying with the empty glass.

"Come up, fellers," he said, waving the other in invitation, "and drink to Arizona. With a
little more rain and good society she'd be a holy wonder, as the Texas land boomer says down
in hell." They came up willingly, cowpunchers and sheepmen, train hands, prospectors, and the
saloon bums that Black Tex kept about to blow such ready spenders as he, whenever they came
to town. With a practised jolt of the bottle Tex passed down the line, filling each heavy tumbler
to the brim; he poured a thin one for himself and beckoned in his roustabout to swell the count--but
still there was an empty glass. There was one man over in the corner who had declined to drink.
He sat at a disused card table studiously thumbing over an old magazine, and as he raised his
dram the barkeeper glowered at him intolerantly.

"Well," said the big cowboy, reaching for his liquor, "here's how--and may she rain for a week!"
He shoved back his high black sombrero as he spoke, but before he signalled the toast his eye
caught the sidelong glance of Black Tex, and he too noticed the little man in the corner.

"What's the matter?" he inquired, leaning over toward Tex and jerking his thumb dubiously at
the corner, and as the barkeeper scowled and shrugged his shoulders he set down his glass and
stared.

The stranger was a small man, for Arizona, and his delicate hands were almost as white as a
woman's; but the lines in his face were graven deep, without effeminacy, and his slender neck
was muscled like a wrestler's. In dress he was not unlike the men about him--Texas boots, a
broad sombrero, and a canvas coat to turn the rain,--but his manner was that of another world,
a sombre, scholarly repose such as you would look for in the reference room of the Boston Public
Library; and he crouched back in his corner like a shy, retiring mouse. For a moment the cowman
regarded him intently, as if seeking for some exculpating infirmity; then, leaving the long
line of drinkers to chafe at the delay, he paused to pry into the matter.

"Say, partner," he began, his big mountain voice tamed down to a masterful calm, "won't you
come over and have something with us?"

There was a challenge in the words which did not escape the stranger; he glanced up suddenly
from his reading and a startled look came into his eyes as he saw the long line of men watching
him. They were large clear eyes, almost piercing in their intentness, yet strangely innocent
and childlike. For a moment they rested upon the regal form of the big cowboy, no less a man
than Jefferson Creede, foreman of the Dos S, and there was in them something of that silent
awe and worship which big men love to see, but when they encountered the black looks of the
multitude and the leering smile of Black Tex they lit up suddenly with an answering glint of
defiance.

"No, thank you," he said, nodding amiably to the cowman, "I don't drink."

An incredulous murmur passed along the line, mingled with sarcastic mutterings, but the cowman
did not stir.

"Well, have a cigar, then," he suggested patiently; and the barkeeper, eager to have it over,
slapped one down on the bar and raised his glass.

"Thank you just as much," returned the little man politely, "but I don't smoke, either. I shall
have to ask you to excuse me."

"Have a glass of milk, then," put in the barkeeper, going off into a guffaw at the familiar
jest, but the cowboy shut him up with a look.

"W'y, certainly," he said, nodding civilly to the stranger. "Come on, fellers!" And with a
flourish he raised his glass to his lips as if tossing off the liquor at a gulp. Then with
another downward flourish he passed the whiskey into a convenient spittoon and drank his chaser
pensively, meanwhile shoving a double eagle across the bar. As Black Tex rang it up and counted
out the change Creede stuffed it into his pocket, staring absently out the window at the downpour.
Then with a muttered word about his horse he strode out into the storm.

Deprived of their best spender, the crowd drifted back to the tables; friendly games of coon-can
sprang up; stud poker was resumed; and a crew of railroad men, off duty, looked out at the
sluicing waters and idly wondered whether the track would go out--the usual thing in Arizona.
After the first delirium of joy at seeing it rain at all there is an aftermath of misgiving,
natural enough in a land where the whole surface of the earth, mountain and desert, has been
chopped into ditches by the trailing feet of cattle and sheep, and most of the grass pulled
up by the roots. In such a country every gulch becomes a watercourse almost before the dust
is laid, the arroyos turn to rivers and the rivers to broad floods, drifting with trees and
wreckage. But the cattlemen and sheepmen who happened to be in Bender, either to take on hands
for the spring round-up or to ship supplies to their shearing camps out on the desert, were
not worrying about the railroad. Whether the bridges went out or held, the grass and browse
would shoot up like beanstalks in to-morrow's magic sunshine; and even if the Rio Salagua blocked
their passage, or the shearers' tents were beaten into the mud, there would still be feed,
and feed was everything.

But while the rain was worth a thousand dollars a minute to the country at large, trade languished
in the Hotel Bender. In a land where a gentleman cannot take a drink without urging every one
within the sound of his voice to join in, the saloon business, while running on an assured
basis, is sure to have its dull and idle moments. Having rung up the two dollars and a half
which Jefferson Creede paid for his last drink--the same being equivalent to one day's wages
as foreman of the Dos S outfit--Black Tex, as Mr. Brady of the Bender bar preferred to be called,
doused the glasses into a tub, turned them over to his roustabout, and polished the cherrywood
moodily. Then he drew his eyebrows down and scowled at the little man in the corner.

In his professional career he had encountered a great many men who did not drink, but most
of them smoked, and the others would at least take a cigar home to their friends. But here
was a man who refused to come in on a treat at all, and a poor, miserable excuse for a man
he was, too, without a word for any one. Mr. Brady's reflections on the perversity of tenderfeet
were cut short by a cold blast of air. The door swung open, letting in a smell of wet greasewood,
and an old man, his hat dripping, stumbled in and stood swaying against the bar. His aged sombrero,
blacksmithed along the ridge with copper rivets, was set far back on a head of long gray hair
which hung in heavy strings down his back, like an Indian's; his beard, equally long and tangled,
spread out like a chest protector across his greasy shirt, and his fiery eyes roved furtively
about the room as he motioned for a drink. Black Tex set out the bottle negligently and stood
waiting.

"Is that all?" he inquired pointedly, as the old man slopped out a drink.

"Well, have one yourself," returned the old-timer grudgingly. Then, realizing his breach of
etiquette, he suddenly straightened up and included the entire barroom in a comprehensive sweep
of the hand.

"Come up hyar, all of yoush," he said drunkenly. "Hev a drink--everybody--no, everybody--come
up hyar, I say!" And the graceless saloon bums dropped their cards and came trooping up together.
A few of the more self-respecting men slipped quietly out into the card rooms; but the studious
stranger, disdaining such puny subterfuges, remained in his place, as impassive and detached
as ever.

"Hey, young man," exclaimed the old-timer jauntily, "step up hyar and nominate yer pizen!"

He closed his invitation with an imperative gesture, but the young man did not obey.

"No, thank you, Uncle," he replied soberly, "I don't drink."

"Well, hev a cigar, then," returned the old man, finishing out the formula of Western hospitality,
and once more Black Tex glowered down upon this guest who was always "knocking a shingle off
his sign."

"Aw, cut it out, Bill," he sneered, "that young feller don't drink ner smoke, neither one--and
he wouldn't have no truck with you, nohow!"

They drank, and the stranger dropped back into his reading unperturbed. Once more Black Tex
scrubbed the bar and scowled at him; then, tapping peremptorily on the board with a whiskey
glass, he gave way to his just resentment.

"Hey, young feller," he said, jerking his hand arbitrarily, "come over here. Come over here,
I said--I want to talk with you!"

For a moment the man in the corner looked up in well-bred surprise; then without attempting
to argue the point he arose and made his way to the bar.

"What's the matter with you, anyway?" demanded Brady roughly. "Are you too good to drink with
the likes of us?"

The stranger lowered his eyes before the domineering gaze of his inquisitor and shifted his
feet uneasily.

"I don't drink with anybody," he said at last. "And if you had any other waiting-room in your
hotel," he added, "I'd keep away from your barroom altogether. As it is, maybe you wouldn't
mind leaving me alone."

At this retort, reflecting as it did upon the management, Black Tex began to breathe heavily
and sway upon his feet.

"I asked you," he roared, thumping his fist upon the bar and opening up his eyes, "whether
you are too good to drink with the likes of us--me, f'r instance--and I want to git an answer!"

He leaned far out over the bar as if listening for the first word before he hit him, but the
stranger did not reply immediately. Instead, with simple-minded directness he seemed to be
studying on the matter. The broad grin of the card players fell to a wondering stare and every
man leaned forward when, raising his sombre eyes from the floor, the little man spoke.

"Why, yes," he said quietly, "I think I am."

"Yes, what?" yelled the barkeeper, astounded. "You think you're what?"

"Now, say," protested the younger man. Then, apparently recognizing the uselessness of any
further evasion, he met the issue squarely.

"Well, since you crowd me to it," he cried, flaring up, "I am too good! I'm too good a man
to drink when I don't want to drink--I'm too good to accept treats when I don't stand treat!
And more than that," he added slowly and impressively, "I'm too good to help blow that old
man, or any other man, for his money!"

He rose to his utmost height as he spoke, turning to meet the glance of every man in the room,
and as he faced them, panting, his deep eyes glowed with a passion of conviction.

"If that is too good for this town," he said, "I'll get out of it, but I won't drink on treats
to please anybody."

The gaze of the entire assembly followed him curiously as he went back to his corner, and Black
Tex was so taken aback by this unexpected effrontery on the part of his guest that he made
no reply whatever. Then, perceiving that his business methods had been questioned, he drew
himself up and frowned darkly.

"Hoity-toity!" he sniffed with exaggerated concern. "Who th' hell is this, now? One of them
little white-ribbon boys, fresh from the East, I bet ye, travellin' for the W. P. S. Q. T.
H'm-m--tech me not--oh deah!" He hiked up his shoulders, twisted his head to a pose, and shrilled
his final sarcasms in the tones of a finicky old lady; but the stranger stuck resolutely to
his reading, whereupon the black barkeeper went sullen and took a drink by himself.

Like many a good mixer, Mr. Brady of the Hotel Bender was often too good a patron of his own
bar, and at such times he developed a mean streak, with symptoms of homicidal mania, which
so far had kept the town marshal guessing. Under these circumstances, and with the rumor of
a killing at Fort Worth to his credit, Black Tex was accustomed to being humored in his moods,
and it went hard with him to be called down in the middle of a spectacular play, and by a rank
stranger, at that. The chair-warmers of the Hotel Bender bar therefore discreetly ignored the
unexpected rebuke of their chief and proceeded noisily with their games, but the old man who
had paid for the drinks was no such time-server. After tucking what was left of his money back
into his overalls he balanced against the bar railing for a while and then steered straight
for the dark corner.

"Young feller," he said, leaning heavily upon the table where the stranger was reading, "I'm
old Bill Johnson, of Hell's Hip Pocket, and I wan'er shake hands with you!"

The young man looked up quickly and the card players stopped as suddenly in their play, for
Old Man Johnson was a fighter in his cups. But at last the stranger showed signs of friendliness.
As the old man finished speaking he rose with the decorum of the drawing-room and extended
his white hand cordially.

"I'm very glad to meet you, Mr. Johnson," he said. "Won't you sit down?"

"No," protested the old man, "I do' wanner sit down--I wanner ask you a question." He reeled,
and balanced himself against a chair. "I wanner ask you," he continued, with drunken gravity,
"on the squar', now, did you ever drink?"

"Why, yes, Uncle," replied the younger man, smiling at the question, "I used to take a friendly
glass, once in a while--but I don't drink now." He added the last with a finality not to be
mistaken, but Mr. Johnson of Hell's Hip Pocket was not there to urge him on.

"No, no," he protested. "You're mistaken, Mister--er--Mister--"

"Hardy," put in the little man.

"Ah yes--Hardy, eh? And a dam' good name, too. I served under a captain by that name at old
Fort Grant, thirty years ago. Waal, Hardy, I like y'r face--you look honest--but I wanner ask
you 'nuther question--why don't you drink now, then?"

Hardy laughed indulgently, and his eyes lighted up with good humor, as if entertaining drunken
men was his ordinary diversion.

"Well, I'll tell you, Mr. Johnson," he said. "If I should drink whiskey the way you folks down
here do, I'd get drunk."

"W'y sure," admitted Old Man Johnson, sinking shamelessly into a chair. "I'm drunk now. But
what's the difference?"

Noting the black glances of the barkeeper, Hardy sat down beside him and pitched the conversation
in a lower key.

"It may be all right for you, Mr. Johnson," he continued confidentially, "and of course that's
none of my business; but if I should get drunk in this town, I'd either get into a fight and
get licked, or I'd wake up the next morning broke, and nothing to show for it but a sore head."

"That's me!" exclaimed Old Man Johnson, slamming his battered hat on the table, "that's me,
Boy, down to the ground! I came down hyar to buy grub f'r my ranch up in Hell's Hip Pocket,
but look at me now, drunk as a sheep-herder, and only six dollars to my name." He shook his
shaggy head and fell to muttering gloomily, while Hardy reverted peacefully to his magazine.

After a long pause the old man raised his face from his arms and regarded the young man searchingly.

"Say," he said, "you never told me why you refused to drink with me a while ago."

"Well, I'll tell you," answered Hardy, honestly, "and I'm sure you'll understand how it is
with me. I never expect to take another drink as long as I live in this country--not unless
I get snake-bit. One drink of this Arizona whiskey will make me foolish, and two will make
me drunk, I'm that light-headed. Now, if I had taken a drink with you a minute ago I'd be considered
a cheap sport if I didn't treat back, wouldn't I? And then I'd be drunk. Yes, that's a fact.
So I have to cut it out altogether. I like you just as well, you understand, and all these
other gentlemen, but I just naturally can't do it."

"Oh, hell," protested the old man, "that's all right. Don't apologize, Boy, whatever you do.
D'yer know what I came over hyar fer?" he asked suddenly reaching out a crabbed hand. "Well,
I'll tell ye. I've be'n lookin' f'r years f'r a white man that I c'd swear off to. Not one
of these pink-gilled preachers but a man that would shake hands with me on the squar' and hold
me to it. Now, Boy, I like you--will you shake hands on that?"

"Sure," responded the young man soberly. "But I tell you, Uncle," he added deprecatingly, "I
just came into town to-day and I'm likely to go out again to-morrow. Don't you think you could
kind of look after yourself while I'm gone? I've seen a lot of this swearing-off business already,
and it don't seem to amount to much anyhow unless the fellow that swears off is willing to
do all the hard work himself."

There was still a suggestion of banter in his words, but the old man was too serious to notice it.

"Never mind, boy," he said solemnly, "I can do all the work, but I jist had to have an honest
man to swear off to."

He rose heavily to his feet, adjusted his copper-riveted hat laboriously, and drifted slowly
out the door. And with another spender gone the Hotel Bender lapsed into a sleepy quietude.
The rain hammered fitfully on the roof; the card players droned out their bids and bets; and
Black Tex, mechanically polishing his bar, alternated successive jolts of whiskey with ill-favored
glances into the retired corner where Mr. Hardy, supposedly of the W. P. S. Q. T., was studiously
perusing a straw-colored Eastern magazine. Then, as if to lighten the gloom, the sun flashed
out suddenly, and before the shadow of the scudding clouds had dimmed its glory a shrill whistle
from down the track announced the belated approach of the west-bound train. Immediately the
chairs began to scrape; the stud-poker players cut for the stakes and quit; coon-can was called
off, and by the time Number Nine slowed down for the station the entire floating population
of Bender was lined up to see her come in.

Rising head and shoulders above the crowd and well in front stood Jefferson Creede, the foreman
of the Dos S; and as a portly gentleman in an unseasonable linen duster dropped off the Pullman
he advanced, waving his hand largely.

"Hullo, Judge!" he exclaimed, grinning jovially. "I was afraid you'd bogged down into a washout
somewhere!"

"Not at all, Jeff, not at all," responded the old gentleman, shaking hands warmly. "Say, this
is great, isn't it?" He turned his genial smile upon the clouds and the flooded streets for
a moment and then hurried over toward the hotel.

"Well, how are things going up on the range?" he inquired, plunging headlong into business
and talking without a stop. "Nicely, nicely, I don't doubt. I tell you, Mr. Creede, that ranch
has marvellous possibilities--marvellous! All it needs is a little patience, a little diplomacy,
you understand--and holding on, until we can pass this forestry legislation. Yes, sir, while
the present situation may seem a little strained--and I don't doubt you are having a hard time--at
the same time, if we can only get along with these sheepmen--appeal to their better nature,
you understand--until we get some protection at law, I am convinced that we can succeed yet.
I want to have a long talk with you on this subject, Jeff--man to man, you understand, and
between friends--but I hope you will reconsider your resolution to resign, because that would
just about finish us off. It isn't a matter of money, is it, Jefferson? For while, of course,
we are not making a fortune--"

He paused and glanced up at his foreman's face, which was growing more sullen every minute
with restrained impatience.

"Well, speak out, Jeff," he said resignedly. "What is it?"

"You know dam' well what it is," burst out the tall cowboy petulantly. "It's them sheepmen.
And I want to tell you right now that no money can hire me to run that ranch another year,
not if I've got to smile and be nice to those sons of--well, you know what kind of sons I mean--that
dog-faced Jasper Swope, for instance."

He spat vehemently at the mention of the name and led the way to a card room in the rear of
the barroom.

"Of course I'll work your cattle for you," he conceded, as he entered the booth, "but if you
want them sheepmen handled diplomatically you'd better send up a diplomat. I'm that wore out
I can't talk to 'em except over the top of a six-shooter."

The deprecating protestations of the judge were drowned by the scuffle of feet as the hangers-on
and guests of the hotel tramped in, and in the round of drinks that followed his presence was
half forgotten. Not being a drinking man himself, and therefore not given to the generous practice
of treating, the arrival of Judge Ware, lately retired from the bench and now absentee owner
of the Dos S Ranch, did not create much of a furore in Bender. All Black Tex and the bunch
knew was that he was holding a conference with Jefferson Creede, and that if Jeff was pleased
with the outcome of the interview he would treat, but if not he would probably retire to the
corral and watch his horse eat hay, openly declaring that Bender was the most God-forsaken
hell-hole north of the Mexican line--for Creede was a man of moods.

In the lull which followed the first treat, the ingratiating drummer who had set up the drinks,
charging the same to his expense account, leaned against the bar and attempted to engage the
barkeeper in conversation, asking leading questions about business in general and Mr. Einstein
of the New York Store in particular; but Black Tex, in spite of his position, was uncommunicative.
Immediately after the arrival of the train the little man who had called him down had returned
to the barroom and immersed himself in those wearisome magazines which a lunger had left about
the place, and, far from being impressed with his sinister expression, had ignored his unfriendly
glances entirely. More than that, he had deserted his dark corner and seated himself on a bench
by the window from which he now looked out upon the storm with a brooding preoccupation as
sincere as it was maddening. His large deer eyes were fixed upon the distance, and his manner
was that of a man who studies deeply upon some abstruse problem; of a man with a past, perhaps,
such as often came to those parts, crossed in love, or hiding out from his folks.

Black Tex dismissed the drummer with an impatient gesture and was pondering solemnly upon his
grievances when a big, square-jowled cat rushed out from behind the bar and set up a hoarse,
raucous mewing.

"Ah, shet up!" growled Brady, throwing him away with his foot; but as the cat's demands became
more and more insistent the barkeeper was at last constrained to take some notice.

"What's bitin' you?" he demanded, peering into the semi-darkness behind the bar; and as the
cat, thus encouraged, plunged recklessly in among a lot of empty bottles, he promptly threw
him out and fished up a mouse trap, from the cage of which a slender tail was wriggling frantically.

"Aha!" he exclaimed, advancing triumphantly into the middle of the floor. "Look, boys, here's
where we have some fun with Tom!" And as the card players turned down their hands to watch
the sport, the old cat, scenting his prey, rose up on his hind legs and clutched at the cage,
yelling.

Grabbing him roughly by the scruff of the neck Black Tex suddenly threw him away and opened
the trap, but the frightened mouse, unaware of his opportunity, remained huddled up in the corner.

"Come out of that," grunted the barkeeper, shaking the cage while with his free hand he grappled
the cat, and before he could let go his hold the mouse was halfway across the room, heading
for the bench where Hardy sat.

"Ketch 'im!" roared Brady, hurling the eager cat after it, and just as the mouse was darting
down a hole Tom pinned it to the floor with his claws.

"What'd I tell ye?" cried the barkeeper, swaggering. "That cat will ketch 'em every time. Look
at that now, will you?"

With dainty paws arched playfully, the cat pitched the mouse into the air and sprang upon it
like lightning as it darted away. Then mumbling it with a nicely calculated bite, he bore it
to the middle of the floor and laid it down, uninjured.

"Ain't he hell, though?" inquired Tex, rolling his eyes upon the spectators. The cat reached
out cautiously and stirred it up with his paw; and once more, as his victim dashed for its
hole, he caught it in full flight. But now the little mouse, its hair all wet and rumpled,
crouched dumbly between the feet of its captor and would not run. Again and again the cat stirred
it up, sniffing suspiciously to make sure it was not dead; then in a last effort to tempt it
he deliberately lay over on his back and rolled, purring and closing his eyes luxuriously,
until, despite its hurts, the mouse once more took to flight. Apparently unheeding, the cat
lay inert, following its wobbly course with half-shut eyes--then, lithe as a panther, he leaped
up and took after it. There was a rush and a scramble against the wall, but just as he struck
out his barbed claw a hand closed over the mouse and the little man on the bench whisked it
dexterously away.

Instantly the black cat leaped into the air, clamoring for his prey, and with a roar like a
mountain bull Black Tex rushed out to intercede.

"Put down that mouse, you freak!" he bellowed, charging across the room. "Put 'im down, I say,
or I'll break you in two!" He launched his heavy fist as he spoke, but the little man ducked
it neatly and, stepping behind a table, stood at bay, still holding the mouse.

"Put 'im down, I tell you!" shouted the barkeeper, panting with vexation. "What--you won't,
eh? Well, I'll learn you!" And with a wicked oath he drew his revolver and levelled it across
the table.

"Put--down--that--mouse!" he said slowly and distinctly, but Hardy only shook his head. Every
man in the room held his breath for the report; the poker players behind fell over tables and
chairs to get out of range; and still they stood there, the barkeeper purple, the little man
very pale, glaring at one another along the top of the barrel. In the hollow of his hand Hardy
held the mouse, which tottered drunkenly; while the cat, still clamoring for his prize, raced
about under the table, bewildered.

"Hurry up, now," said the barkeeper warningly, "I'll give you five. One--come on, now--two--"

At the first count the old defiance leaped back into Hardy's eyes and he held the mouse to
his bosom as a mother might shield her child; at the second he glanced down at it, a poor crushed
thing trembling as with an ague from its wounds; then, smoothing it gently with his hand, he
pinched its life out suddenly and dropped it on the floor.

Instantly the cat pounced upon it, nosing the body eagerly, and Black Tex burst into a storm
of oaths.

"Well, dam' your heart," he yelled, raising his pistol in the air as if about to throw the
muzzle against his breast and fire. "What--in--hell--do you mean?"

Baffled and evaded in every play the evil-eyed barkeeper suddenly sensed a conspiracy to show
him up, and instantly the realization of his humiliation made him dangerous.

"Perhaps you figure on makin' a monkey out of me!" he suggested, hissing snakelike through
his teeth; but Hardy made no answer whatever.

"Well, say something, can't you?" snapped the badman, his overwrought nerves jangled by the
delay. "What d'ye mean by interferin' with my cat?"

For a minute the stranger regarded him intently, his sad, far-seeing eyes absolutely devoid
of evil intent, yet baffling in their inscrutable reserve--then he closed his lips again resolutely,
as if denying expression to some secret that lay close to his heart, turning it with undue
vehemence to the cause of those who suffer and cannot escape.

"Well, f'r Gawd's sake," exclaimed Black Tex at last, lowering his gun in a pet, "don't I git
no satisfaction--what's your i-dee?"

"There's too much of this cat-and-mouse business going on," answered the little man quietly,
"and I don't like it."

"Oh, you don't, eh?" echoed the barkeeper sarcastically; "well, excuse me! I didn't know that."
And with a bow of exaggerated politeness he retired to his place.

"The drinks are on the house," he announced, jauntily strewing the glasses along the bar. "Won't
drink, eh? All right. But lemme tell you, pardner," he added, wagging his head impressively,
"you're goin' to git hurt some day."

CHAPTER II

THE MAN FROM CHERRYCOW

After lashing the desert to a frazzle and finding the leaks in the Hotel Bender, the wind from
Papaguería went howling out over the mesa, still big with rain for the Four Peaks country,
and the sun came out gloriously from behind the clouds. Already the thirsty sands had sucked
up the muddy pools of water, and the board walk which extended the length of the street, connecting
saloon with saloon and ending with the New York Store, smoked with the steam of drying. Along
the edge of the walk, drying out their boots in the sun, the casual residents of the town--many
of them held up there by the storm--sat in pairs and groups, talking or smoking in friendly
silence. A little apart from the rest, for such as he are a long time making friends in Arizona,
Rufus Hardy sat leaning against a post, gazing gloomily out across the desert. For a quiet,
retiring young man, interested in good literature and bearing malice toward no one, his day
in the Bender barroom had been eventful out of all proportion to his deserts and wishes, and
he was deep in somber meditation when the door opened and Judge Ware stepped out into the sunshine.

In outward appearance the judge looked more like a large fresh-faced boy in glasses than one
of San Francisco's eminent jurists, and the similarity was enhanced by the troubled and deprecating
glances with which he regarded his foreman, who towered above him like a mentor. There was
a momentary conference between them at the doorway, and then, as Creede stumped away down the
board walk, the judge turned and reluctantly approached Hardy.

"I beg your pardon, sir," he began, as the young man in some confusion rose to meet him, "but
I should like a few words with you, on a matter of business. I am Mr. Ware, the owner of the
Dos S Ranch--perhaps you may have heard of it--over in the Four Peaks country. Well--I hardly
know how to begin--but my foreman, Mr. Creede, was highly impressed with your conduct a short
time ago in the--er--affray with the barkeeper. I--er--really know very little as to the rights
of the matter, but you showed a high degree of moral courage, I'm sure. Would you mind telling
me what your business is in these parts, Mr.--er--"

"Hardy," supplied the young man quietly, "Rufus Hardy. I am--"

"Er--what?" exclaimed the judge, hastily focussing his glasses. "Hardy--Hardy--where have I
heard that name before?"

"I suppose from your daughter, Miss Lucy," replied the young man, smiling at his confusion.
"Unless," he added hastily, "she has forgotten about me."

"Why, Rufus Hardy!" exclaimed the judge, reaching out his hand. "Why, bless my heart--to be
sure. Why, where have you been for this last year and more? I am sure your father has been
quite worried about you."

"Oh, I hope not," answered Hardy, shifting his gaze. "I guess he knows I can take care of myself
by this time--if I do write poetry," he added, with a shade of bitterness.

"Well, well," said the judge, diplomatically changing the subject, "Lucy will be glad to hear
of you, at any rate. I believe she--er--wrote you once, some time ago, at your Berkeley address,
and the letter was returned as uncalled for."

He gazed over the rims of his glasses inquiringly, and with a suggestion of asperity, but the
young man was unabashed.

"I hope you will tell Miss Lucy," he said deferentially, "that on account of my unsettled life
I have not ordered my mail forwarded for some time." He paused and for the moment seemed to
be considering some further explanation; then his manner changed abruptly.

"I believe you mentioned a matter of business," he remarked bluffly, and the judge came back
to earth with a start. His mind had wandered back a year or more to the mysterious disappearance
of this same self-contained young man from his father's house, not three blocks from his own
comfortable home. There had been a servant's rumor that he had sent back a letter or two postmarked
"Bowie, Arizona"--but old Colonel Hardy had said never a word.

"Er--yes," he assented absently, "but--well, I declare," he exclaimed helplessly, "I've quite
forgotten what it was about."

"Won't you sit down, then?" suggested Hardy, indicating the edge of the board walk with a courtly
sweep of the hand. "This rain will make good feed for you up around the Four Peaks--I believe
it was of your ranch there that you wished to speak."

Judge Ware settled down against a convenient post and caught his breath, meanwhile regarding
his companion curiously.

"Yes, that's it," he said. "I wanted to talk with you about my ranch, but I swear I'll have
to wait till Creede comes back, now."

"Very well," answered Hardy easily; "we can talk about home, then. How is Miss Lucy succeeding
with her art--is she still working at the Institute?"

"Yes, indeed!" exclaimed the judge, quite mollified by the inquiry. "Indeed she is, and doing
as well as any of them. She had a landscape hung at the last exhibit, that was very highly
praised, even by Mathers, and you know how hard he is to please. Tupper Browne won the prize,
but I think Lucy's was twice the picture--kind of soft and sunshiny, you know--it made you
think of home, just to look at it."

"Well, I'm glad to hear that," said Hardy, looking up the ragged street a little wistfully.
"I kind of lose track of things down here, knocking around from place to place." He seated
himself wearily on the edge of the sidewalk and drummed with his sinewy white hands against
a boot leg. "But it's a great life, sure," he observed, half to himself. "And by the way, Mr.
Ware," he continued, "if it's all the same to you I wish you wouldn't say anything to your
foreman about my past life. Not that there is anything disgraceful about it, but there isn't
much demand for college graduates in this country, you know, and I might want to strike him
for a job."

Judge Ware nodded, a little distantly; he did not approve of this careless young man in all
his moods. For a man of good family he was hardly presentable, for one thing, and he spoke
at times like an ordinary working man. So he awaited the lumbering approach of his foreman
in sulky silence, resolved to leave the matter entirely in his hands.

Jefferson Creede bore down upon them slowly, sizing up the situation as he came, or trying
to, for everything seemed to be at a standstill.

"Well?" he remarked, looking inquiringly from the judge to Hardy. "How about it?"

There was something big and dominating about him as he loomed above them, and the judge's schoolboy
state of mind instantly returned.

"I--I really haven't done anything about the matter, Jefferson," he stammered apologetically.
"Perhaps you will explain our circumstances to Mr. Hardy here, so that we can discuss the matter
intelligently." He looked away as he spoke, and the tall foreman grunted audibly.

"Well," he drawled, "they ain't much to explain. The sheepmen have been gittin' so free up
on our range that I've had a little trouble with 'em--and if I was the boss they'd be more
trouble, you can bet your life on that. But the judge here seems to think we can kinder suck
the hind teat and baby things along until they git that Forest Reserve act through, and make
our winnin' later. He wants to make friends with these sheepmen and git 'em to kinder go around
a little and give us half a chanst. Well, maybe it can be done--but not by me. So I told him
either to get a superintendent to handle the sheep end of it or rustle up a new foreman, because
I see red every time I hear a sheep-blat.

"Then come the question," continued the cowman, throwing out his broad hand as if indicating
the kernel of the matter, "of gittin' such a man, and while we was talkin' it over you called
old Tex down so good and proper that there wasn't any doubt in my mind--providin' you want
the job, of course."

He paused and fixed his compelling eyes upon Hardy with such a mixture of admiration and good
humor that the young man was won over at once, although he made no outward sign. It was Judge
Ware who was to pass upon the matter finally, and he waited deferentially for him to speak.

"Well--er--Jefferson," began the judge a little weakly, "do you think that Mr. Hardy possesses
the other qualities which would be called for in such a man?"

"W'y, sure," responded Creede, waving the matter aside impatiently. "Go ahead and hire him
before he changes his mind."

"Very well then, Mr. Hardy," said the judge resignedly, "the first requisite in such a man
is that he shall please Mr. Creede. And since he commends you so warmly I hope that you will
accept the position. Let me see--um--would seventy-five dollars a month seem a reasonable figure?
Well, call it seventy-five, then--that's what I pay Mr. Creede, and I want you to be upon an
equality in such matters.

"Now as to your duties. Jefferson will have charge of the cattle, as usual; and I want you,
Mr. Hardy, to devote your time and attention to this matter of the sheep. Our ranch house at
Hidden Water lies almost directly across the river from one of the principal sheep crossings,
and a little hospitality shown to the shepherds in passing might be like bread cast upon the
waters which comes back an hundred fold after many days. We cannot hope to get rid of them
entirely, but if the sheep owners would kindly respect our rights to the upper range, which
Mr. Creede will point out to you, I am sure we should take it very kindly. Now that is your
whole problem, Rufus, and I leave the details entirely in your hands. But whatever you do,
be friendly and see if you can't appeal to their better nature."

He delivered these last instructions seriously and they were so taken by Hardy, but Creede
laughed silently, showing all his white teeth, yet without attracting the unfavorable attention
of the judge, who was a little purblind. Then there was a brief discussion of details, an introduction
to Mr. Einstein of the New York Store, where Hardy was given carte blanche for supplies, and
Judge Ware swung up on the west-bound limited and went flying away toward home, leaving his
neighbor's son--now his own superintendent and sheep expert--standing composedly upon the platform.

"Well," remarked Creede, smiling genially as he turned back to the hotel, "the Old Man's all
right, eh, if he does have fits! He's good-hearted--and that goes a long ways in this country--but
actually, I believe he knows less about the cattle business than any man in Arizona. He can't
tell a steer from a stag--honest! And I can lose him a half-mile from camp any day."

The tall cattleman clumped along in silence for a while, smiling over some untold weakness
of his boss--then he looked down upon Hardy and chuckled to himself.

"I'm glad you're going to be along this trip," he said confidentially. "Of course I'm lonely
as a lost dog out there, but that ain't it; the fact is, I need somebody to watch me. W'y,
boy, I could beat the old judge out of a thousand dollars' worth of cattle and he'd never know
it in a lifetime. Did ye ever live all alone out on a ranch for a month or so? Well, you know
how lawless and pisen-mean a man can git, then, associatin' with himself. I'd've had the old
man robbed forty times over if he wasn't such a good-hearted old boy, but between fightin'
sheepmen and keepin' tab on a passel of brand experts up on the Tonto I'm gittin' so ornery
I don't dare trust myself. Have a smoke? Oh, I forgot--"

He laughed awkwardly and rolled a cigarette.

"Got a match?" he demanded austerely. "Um, much obliged--be kinder handy to have you along
now." He knit his brows fiercely as he fired up, regarding Hardy with a furtive grin.

"Say," he said abruptly, "I've got to make friends with you some way. You eat, don't you? All
right then, you come along with me over to the Chink's. I'm going to treat you to somethin',
if it's only ham 'n' eggs."

They dined largely at Charley's and then drifted out to the feed corral. Creede threw down
some hay to a ponderous iron-scarred roan, more like a war horse than a cow pony, and when
he came back he found Hardy doing as much for a clean-limbed sorrel, over by the gate.

"Yourn?" he inquired, surveying it with the keen concentrated gaze which stamps every point
on a cowboy's memory for life.

"Sure," returned Hardy, patting his pony carefully upon the shoulder.

"Kinder high-headed, ain't he?" ventured Creede, as the sorrel rolled his eyes and snorted.

"That's right," assented Hardy, "he's only been broke about a month. I got him over in the
Sulphur Springs Valley."

"I knowed it," said the cowboy sagely, "one of them wire-grass horses--an' I bet he can travel,
too. Did you ride him all the way here?"

"Clean from the Chiricahuas," replied the young man, and Jefferson Creede looked up, startled.

"What did you say you was doin' over there?" he inquired slowly, and Hardy smiled quietly as
he answered:

"Riding for the Cherrycow outfit."

"The hell you say!" exclaimed Creede explosively, and for a long time he stood silent, smoking
as if in deep meditation.

"Well," he said at last, "I might as well say it--I took you for a tenderfoot."

CHAPTER III

THE TRAIL OF THE SHEEP

The morning dawned as clear on Bender as if there had never been storm nor clouds, and the
waxy green heads of the greasewood, dotting the level plain with the regularity of a vineyard,
sparkled with a thousand dewdrops. Ecstatic meadow larks, undismayed by the utter lack of meadows,
sang love songs from the tops of the telegraph poles; and the little Mexican ground doves that
always go in pairs tracked amiably about together in the wet litter of the corral, picking
up the grain which the storm had laid bare. Before the early sun had cleared the top of the
eastern mountains Jefferson Creede and Hardy had risen and fed their horses well, and while
the air was yet chill they loaded their blankets and supplies upon the ranch wagon, driven
by a shivering Mexican, and went out to saddle up.

Since his confession of the evening before Creede had put aside his air of friendly patronage
and, lacking another pose, had taken to smoking in silence; for there is many a boastful cowboy
in Arizona who has done his riding for the Cherrycow outfit on the chuck wagon, swamping for
the cook. At breakfast he jollied the Chinaman into giving him two orders of everything, from
coffee to hot cakes, paid for the same at the end, and rose up like a giant refreshed--but
beneath this jovial exterior he masked a divided mind. Although he had come down handsomely,
he still had his reservations about the white-handed little man from Cherrycow, and when they
entered the corral he saddled his iron-scarred charger by feeling, gazing craftily over his
back to see how Hardy would show up in action.

Now, first the little man took a rope, and shaking out the loop dropped it carelessly against
his horse's fore-feet--and that looked well, for the sorrel stood stiffly in his tracks, as
if he had been anchored. Then the man from Cherrycow picked up his bridle, rubbed something
on the bit, and offered it to the horse, who graciously bowed his head to receive it. This
was a new one on Creede and in the excitement of the moment he inadvertently cinched his roan
up two holes too tight and got nipped for it, for old Bat Wings had a mind of his own in such
matters, and the cold air made him ugly.

"Here, quit that," muttered the cowboy, striking back at him; but when he looked up, the sorrel
had already taken his bit, and while he was champing on it Hardy had slipped the headstall
over his ears. There was a broad leather blind on the hacamore, which was of the best plaited
rawhide with a horsehair tie rope, but the little man did not take advantage of it to subdue
his mount. Instead he reached down for his gaudy Navajo saddle blanket, offered it to the sorrel
to smell, and then slid it gently upon his back. But when he stooped for his saddle the high-headed
horse rebelled. With ears pricked suspiciously forward and eyes protruding he glared at the
clattering thing in horror, snorting deep at every breath. But, though he was free-footed,
by some obsession of the mind, cunningly inculcated in his breaking, the sorrel pony was afraid
to move.

As the saddle was drawn toward him and he saw that he could not escape its hateful embrace
he leaned slowly back upon his haunches, grunting as if his fore-feet, wreathed in the loose
rope, were stuck in some terrible quicksands from which he tried in vain to extricate them;
but with a low murmur of indifferent words his master moved the saddle resolutely toward him,
the stirrups carefully snapped up over the horn, and ignoring his loud snorts and frenzied
shakings of the head laid it surely down upon his back. This done, he suddenly spoke sharply
to him, and with a final groan the beautiful creature rose up and consented to his fate.

Hardy worked quickly now, tightening the cinch, lowering the stirrups, and gathering up the
reins. He picked up the rope, coiled it deftly and tied it to the saddle--and now, relieved
of the idea that he was noosed, the pony began to lift his feet and prance, softly, like a
swift runner on the mark. At these signs of an early break Creede mounted hurriedly and edged
in, to be ready in case the sorrel, like most half-broken broncos, tried to scrape his rider
off against the fence; but Hardy needed no wrangler to shunt him out the gate. Standing by
his shoulder and facing the rear he patted the sorrel's neck with the hand that held the reins,
while with his right hand he twisted the heavy stirrup toward him stealthily, raising his boot
to meet it. Then like a flash he clapped in his foot and, catching the horn as his fiery pony
shot forward, he snapped up into the saddle like a jumping jack and went flying out the gate.

"Well, the son of a gun!" muttered Creede, as he thundered down the trail after him. "Durned
if he can't ride!"

There are men in every cow camp who can rope and shoot, but the man who can ride a wild horse
can hold up his head with the best of them. No matter what his race or station if he will crawl
a "snake" and stay with him there is always room on the wagon for his blankets; his fame will
spread quickly from camp to camp, and the boss will offer to raise him when he shows up for
his time. Jefferson Creede's face was all aglow when he finally rode up beside Hardy; he grinned
triumphantly upon horse and man as if they had won money for him in a race; and Hardy, roused
at last from his reserve, laughed back out of pure joy in his possessions.

"How's that for a horse?" he cried, raising his voice above the thud of hoofs. "I have to turn
him loose at first--'fraid he'll learn to pitch if I hold him in--he's never bucked with me yet!"

"You bet--he's a snake!" yelled Creede, hammering along on his broad-chested roan. "Where'd
you git 'im?"

"Tom Fulton's ranch," responded Hardy, reining his horse in and patting him on the neck. "Turned
in three months' pay and broke him myself, to boot. I'll let you try him some day, when he's
gentled."

"Well, if I wasn't so big 'n' heavy I'd take you up on that," said Creede, "but I'm just as
much obliged, all the same. I don't claim to be no bronco-buster now, but I used to ride some
myself when I was a kid. But say, the old judge has got some good horses runnin' on the upper
range,--if you want to keep your hand in,--thirty or forty head of 'em, and wild as hawks. I
wish I was ready for my work."

"Hoot, man," she said with the same show of cheerfulness.

"We might have been worse, and you will be better some day, and able to work as well as ever
you did."

For a time there was silence, broken only by the loud ticking of the
clock, the clicking of the needles, and occasionally a low moan from
the bed, as the injured miner sank into a restless sleep.

There had been an accident some six weeks before, and Geordie Sinclair, badly wounded by a fall
of stone, had been brought home from the pit in a cart.

It was during the time known to old miners as the "two-and-sixpenny winter," that being the sum
of the daily wage then earned by the miners. A financial crisis had come upon the country
and the Glasgow City Bank had failed, trade was dull, and the whole industrial system was in chaos.
It had been a hard time for Geordie Sinclair's wife, for there were
four children to provide for besides her injured husband.

Work which was well paid for was not over plentiful, and she had to toil from early morning till
far into the night to earn the bare necessities of life.

There were times like to-night, when she felt rebellious and bitter at her plight, but her tired
eyes and fingers had to get to the end of the task, for that meant bread for the children in
the morning.

The silence deepened in the little kitchen. No sound came now from the bed, and the lamp threw
eerie shadows on the walls, and the chimney smoked incessantly.

Her eyes grew watery and smarted with the smoke. She dropped stitches occasionally, as she
hurried with her work, which had to be lifted again when she discovered that the pattern was wrong,
and sometimes quite a considerable part had to be "ripped out," so
that she could correct the mistake.

The dismal calling of a cat outside irritated her, and the loud complacent ticking of the clock
seemed to mock her misery; but still she worked on, the busy fingers turning the needles, as
the wool unwound itself from the balls which danced upon the floor. There was life in those
balls of wool as they spun to the tune of the woman's misery.

They advanced and retired, like dancers, touching hands when they met, then whirling away in
opposite directions again; they side-stepped and wheeled in a mad riot of joyous color, just as
they were about to meet: they stood for a little facing each other, feinting from side to
side, then were off again, as the music of her misery quickened, in an embracing whirl, as
if married in an ecstasy of colored flame, many-shaded, yet one;
then, at last, just as the tune seemed to have reached a crescendo
of spirit, she dashed her work upon the floor, as she discovered another
blunder, and burst into a fit of passionate weeping.

Suddenly there was a faint tap at the window, and she raised her head,
staying her breath to listen.

Soon she heard it again, just a faint but very deliberate tap, which convinced her that someone
was outside in the darkness. Softly she stole on tiptoe across the room, so as not to disturb her
sleeping husband, and opening the door quietly, craned forward and peered into the darkness
to discover the cause of the tap.

"It's just me," said a deep voice, in uneasy accents, from the darkness
by the window, and she saw then the form of a man edging nearer the
door.

"And who are you?" she asked a little nervously, but trying to master the alarm in her voice.

"Do you not ken me?" replied the voice with an attempt to speak as naturally as possible; yet
there was something in the tone that made her more uneasy.

Then the figure of the man drew nearer, and he whispered "Are they all sleeping?" alluding to
the inmates of the house.

"Ay," she answered, drawing back into the shelter of the doorway. "Why do you ask? And what is it
you want?"

"Oh, I just came along to see how you were all getting on," was the reply. "I ken you must be in
very straitened circumstances by this time, and thought I might be able to help you a bit,"
and there was an ingratiating tone in the words now as he sidled nearer. "You must have a very
hard battle just now, and I would like to do something to help you."

"Come away in," said the woman, with still an uneasy tremor in her voice, yet feeling more assured.
"Geordie is sleeping, but he'll not be hard to waken up. Come away in, and let us see who you are,
and tell us what you really want."

"No, I'm no' coming in," he whispered hoarsely. "Do you no' ken me? Shut the door and not let
any of them hear.

I'm wanting you!" and he stepped into the light and reached forward his hand, as if to draw
her to him.

Mrs. Sinclair gasped and recoiled in horror, as she recognized who it was that stood before her.

"No,"
she cried decisively, stepping further back into the shelter of the
house, her voice low and intense with indignation.

"No, I have not come to that yet, thank God.

Gang home, you dirty brute, that you are! I'll be very ill off when I ask anything, or take anything,
from you, Jock Walker!" For it was well known in Lowwood that Jock Walker's errands to people
in distress had always in them an ulterior motive.

He was the under manager at the pits, and his reputation was of the blackest. There were men in the
village of Lowwood who were well aware of this man's relations with their wives, and they openly
agreed to the sale of the honor of their women folk in return for what he gave them in the
shape of contracts, at which they could make more money than their neighbors, or good "places,"
where the coal was easier won. In fact, to be a contractor was a synonym for this sort of
dealing, for no one ever got a contract from Walker unless his wife, or his daughter, was a
woman of easy virtue, and at the service of this man.

"Very well," replied Walker with chagrined anger. "Please yourself. But let me tell you that
you'll maybe no' ay be so high and mighty; you'll maybe be dam'd glad yet of the chance that I have
given you."

"No, no," protested Mrs. Sinclair. "Go away--"

"Look here, Nellie," he said, his voice changing to a low pleading tone, "you're in a hole. You
must be. Be a sensible woman, and you'll never need to be so ill-grippet again. I can put Geordie
in a position that he'll make any amount of money as soon as he is able to start. You are not
a bit better than anyone else, and for the sake of your bairns you should be sensible. And forby,"
he went on, as if now more sure of his ground, "what the hell's wrang in it? It's no' what folk
do that is wrong. It's in being found out. Now come away and be sensible. You ken what is
wanted, and you ken that I can make you well off for it."

"No, by heavens," she cried, now tingling with anger at the insult.

"Never! Get out of this, you brute! If Geordie Sinclair had been able this nicht, I'd have got
him to deal with you. Get out of here, or I'll cleave your rotten body, and let out your rotten
heart." And she turned in, and closed and bolted the door, leaving Walker fuming with anger at
the repulse of his advances. Nellie Sinclair had never felt so outraged in all her life before.
She was trembling with anger at the insult of his proposals. She paced the floor in her stockinged
feet, as if a wild spirit were raging within her demanding release; then finally she flung herself
into the "big chair," disgust and anger in her heart, and for the second time that night burst into
a passionate fit of weeping, which seemed to shake her body almost asunder. For a long time
she sat thus, sobbing, her whole being burning with indignation, and her mind in a fury of disgust
and rebellion.

Then there was a faint stirring in the bed where the children slept,
and a little boy's form began to crawl from amongst the rough bedclothes,
his eyes gazing in amazement at the bowed figure of his mother.

She was crying, he concluded, for her shoulders were heaving and
it must be something very bad that made his beautiful mother cry like
this.

He crept across the bare wooden floor, his bare sturdy legs showing beneath the short and
meager shirt, and was soon at her side.

"What's wrang wi' you, mother?" he asked, as he put his soft little
hand upon her head.

"What's wrang wi' you? Will I kiss you held and make it better?" But his mother did not look up--only
the big sobs continued to shake her, and the boy becoming alarmed at this, also began to cry,
as he placed his little head against hers. "Oh, mother, dinna greet," he sobbed, "and I'll
kiss your heid till it's better."

At last she lifted her head, and seeing the naked boy, she caught
him in her arms and crushed him to her breast, as if she would smother
him.

This was strange conduct for his usually undemonstrative mother; but it was nice to be hugged
like that, even though she did cry.

"What made you greet, mother?" he queried, for he had never before, in all his four years,
seen his mother cry. For answer she merely caught him closer to her breast, her hair falling
soft and warm all over him as she did so.

"Was you hungry, mither?" he tried again.

"No' very," she answered, choking back her sobs.

"Are you often hungry, too, mither?" he persisted, feeling encouraged at getting an answer at
last.

"Sometimes," she replied. "But dinna bother me, Rob," she continued. "Gang away to your bed
like a man."

He was silent for a time at this repulse, and lay upon her knee puzzling over the matter.

"Do you greet when you are hungry?" he enquired, with: wide-eyed earnestness and surprise.

"There noo," she answered, "don't ask so many questions, Daddy'll
not be long till he is better again, and when he is at work there'll
be plenty of pieces to keep us all from being hungry."

"And will there be jeely for the pieces?" pursued the boy, for it seemed to him that there
had never been a time when there was plenty to eat.

"Yes, we'll get plenty o' jeely too," she replied, drying the remaining
tears from her eyes, and hugging him again to her breast.

"Oh, my," he said, with a deep sigh. "I wish my father was better!" and the little lips were moistened
by his tongue, as if in anticipation of the coming feast.

Another silence; and then came the query--"What way do we not get
plenty o' pieces when my daddy's no' working?

Does folk no' get them then?"

"No, Robin," she answered, "but dinna fash your wee noddle with that. You'll find out all about
it when you get big. Shut your eyes and mother'll sing, an' you'll go to sleep." And he snuggled
in and shut his eyes, while Mrs. Sinclair gathered him softly to her breast and began to croon
an old ballad.

As she sang it seemed to the boy that there were no such things as "jelly-pieces" to bother about.
He liked his mother to sing to him, for he seemed to get rolled up
in her soft, warm voice, and become restful and happy.

Gradually the low crooning song grew fainter in his ears, the flicker of the fire danced further
and further away, until long streaks of golden thready light seemed to reach out, straight from
his eyes to the fireplace, and all the comfort that it was possible to have flowed through his soul,
and at last he slept.

Mrs. Sinclair placed him beside his brothers and sisters in the bed and went back to finish her
knitting. The night was far gone before she accomplished her task, and she stood and surveyed
her humble home with weariness in her heart.

Through the dim smoke which hung like a blue cloud along the roof, and made more seemingly
thick by the small lamp upon the table, she looked at her husband lying asleep, and so far free
from pain. Then her eyes traveled to the children in the other bed, and they filled with tears
as she thought that she had had to put them supperless to bed that
night, and again rebellion surged through her blood as she thought
of all the misery of her life.

Was it worth living and going on in this way?

Was it worth while to continue? What had she done to reap all this suffering?

She was hungry and weak and exhausted.

Perhaps if she could sleep she would forget it, and in the morning
the socks she had finished would bring her a few pence, and that would
mean food.

She decided to go to bed, and in passing by the shelf at the window, her eye caught sight of
a plateful of potato skins, the remains of the meager dinner of boiled potatoes which the
children had had; and clutching them, she began greedily to devour them, filling her mouth
and cramming them in in handfuls, until it seemed as if she would choke herself. Then, licking
the plate clean of every crumb, she undressed and slipped quietly into bed, to lie and fret and
toss, as she thought of the insult which Black Jock had offered her, and pondered over the
unhappy lot of her children and their injured father.

CHAPTER II

A TURN OF THE SCREW

On the Friday following Jock Walker's visit to Mrs. Sinclair, a notice
was put up at the pit by Peter Pegg and Andrew Marshall, to the effect
that a collection would be taken next day on behalf of Geordie Sinclair.

The notice was posted up before Andrew and Peter descended the pit
for the day.

"Black Jock," as Walker was called by the miners, saw the notice before
it had been ten minutes posted, and deliberately tore it down.

He then visited Peter Pegg and Andrew Marshall at the coal face.

"I suppose you an' Andrew are goin' to gather for Geordie Sinclair the morn?" he said, addressing
Peter.

"Ay," Peter answered, "we were thinkin' it was aboot time somethin'
was done.

There's four bairns an' their two selves, an' though times are no' very guid for ony of us
now, it maun be a lot worse for them. Geordie has been a guid while off."

"Do ye think, Peter, they are in such need?" asked Walker, with a hint in his voice that was
meant to convey he knew better.

"Lord, they canna be aught else!" decisively returned Peter. "How can they be? I ken for mysel',"
he went on, "that if it was me, I wad hae been in starvation lang syne."

"Weel, wad ye believe me when I tell ye--an' it's a fact--they're about the best-off family
in this place, if ye only kent it."

"What!" cried Peter in surprise, "the best-off family in the place! Lord, I canna take that in!"

"Maybe
no'," said Walker, "but I ken, an' ye're no' the first that's been
taken in by Nellie Sinclair.

If ye notice, she never tells any thin' to anybody; but she lets
ye carry the notion in your mind that she's in great straits.

She's a cute one, Nellie."

"Weel, Nellie does keep hersel' to hersel'," admitted Peter.

"She's no' given to clashin' and claverin' about the doors like some o' the rest o' the women;
but I canna' for the life o' me see where she can be onythin' but
ill aff at this time."

"Weel, I ken when folk are bein' imposed on," said Walker, in a knowing tone, "an' I tore down
your notice this mornin'. I didna want to see you mak' a fool o' yersels. I ha'e been considerin'
for a while," he went on, speaking quickly, "about puttin' a stop to this collectin' business at
the office on pay Saturdays, for it just encourages some men to lie
off work when there's no' very muckle wrong wi' them; after they get
the collection they soon start work again.

Ye had better no' stand the morn, for I might as well begin at once and put a stop to it."

Up till now Andrew Marshall had not spoken; he was a silent man, given more to thought than
speech, but this was a way of doing things he did not like.

"But ye might let us tak' the collection first, and then put up a notice yersel sayin' that
a' collections have to be stopped.

It wad be best to gi'e the men notice."

"No," said Walker, "there's to be nae mair collections taken. I might as well stop it this
time as wait. So ye'll no' stand the morn."

"Will I no'?" returned Andrew challengingly. "How the hell do ye ken whether I will or no'?"

"I
ken ye'll no'," replied Walker, with quiet menacing tones; "the ground at the office belongs
to the company, and is private. So ye can do it if ye like, but ye'll be weel advised no' to bother."

"I
don't gi'e a damn," cried Andrew explosively, "whether the ground is private or no'. I'll take
that 'gathering' for Geordie Sinclair the morn, though ye ha'e a regiment o' sodgers at the office."

"Very
well," said Walker, as he departed, "if ye do, ye can look out."

Peter took his pipe out of his mouth and spat savagely on the ground; he then replaced it with great
deliberation and looked gloomily at the stoop-side. He was a man about thirty-five, tall, bony
and angular; his neck was long and thin, and his head seemed always
on the point of turning to allow him to look over his shoulder. His
right eye was half closed, while his left eye looked big and saucer-like,
and never seemed to wink; one eye was ready to laugh and the other
to "greet," as his comrades described it. He had been badly disfigured
in a burning accident in the pit when he was a young man, and a broken
nose added still more to the strangeness of his appearance. Andrew,
on the other hand, was stout and broadly built, with a bushy whisker
on each cheek, and a clump of tufty hair on his head.

"What do ye
mak' o' that, Andrew?" enquired Peter, after a few minutes, as he
again spat savagely at the stoop-side.

"What do I mak' o't?" echoed
Andrew, as he glowered across the little bing of dross at his mate,
"it's just in keepin' wi' the rest o' his dirty doin's, the dirty
black brute that he is!"

"I wonder what's wrong wi' him?" mused Peter
as he sucked quietly at his snoring pipe. But there was no answer
from Andrew, who was sitting silent and glum, gazing at his little
lamp.

"What are ye goin' to do about it, then?" broke in Peter again.

"Just
what I said," returned Andrew with quiet firmness. "I'll take that
collection the morn, some way or another, if I should be damned for
it. Does he mean to say that we can let folk starve?" He lifted his
pick and began to hew the coal with an energy that told of the passion
raging within him.

"Does he mean to think I'm goin' to see decent
folk starve afore my e'en?" he asked after a while, pausing to wipe
the sweat from his eyes. "No' damned likely! Things ha'e come to a
fine pass when folk are compelled to look at other folk starvin' an'
no' gi'e them a crust."

"Do ye think there's onything in what he
said about them bein' weel-aff?" asked Peter cautiously, while his
big eye tried to wink. "Nellie is a wee bit inclined to be prood an'
independent, ye ken, an' disna say muckle about her affairs. An forby
we don't ken very muckle about her; she's an incomer to the place,
and she might ha'e been weel-aff afore she married Geordie, for aught
we ken."

"It disna matter," replied Andrew, "I dinna care though
they had thousan's. What I don't like is this 'ye'll-no'-do-this-an'-ye'll-no'-do-that'
sort o' thing. What the hell right has ony gaffer wi' what a man does?
It's a' one to him what I do. I'm nae slave, an' forby, I dinna believe
they are weel-aff. They maun be hard up."

"But he'll maybe sack ye,"
suggested Peter, "if ye take the collection."

"Well, let him," cried
Andrew, now thoroughly roused, "the bastard! I would see the greyhounds
o' hell huntin' him roun' the rocks o' blazes afore I'd give in to
him!"

Nothing further was said of the matter until well on in the
day, when it suddenly occurred to Andrew that Peter, who had a large
family, might not care to incur the displeasure of Walker by taking
the collection the next day.

"Of course, Peter," he said, after he
had thought the matter over, "if ye don't care to take the collection
wi' me, I won't press ye. I'll no' think ony worse o' ye if ye don't.
Ye ha'e a big family, while I ha'e only the wife to look after. Sometimes
I think it's lucky we ha'e nae weans; I can flit, and ye might no'
be able to rise an' run. But I mean to take the collection onyway,
for I don't like a man to order me what I ha'e to do."

"Oh, I wasna
mindin' that, Andra," replied Peter, trying to make Andrew believe
that he had not guessed the truth. "I'll take the collectin wi' ye,
an' Black Jock can gang to hell if he likes." And now, amigo, I will tell you one
thing, and you may believe it, for I am an old man and have dwelt here long: it is not God
who sends the dry years, but the sheep!

"Mira! I have seen the mowing machine of the Americano cut the tall grass and leave all level--so
the starved sheep of Yavapai swept across our mesa and left it bare. Yet was there feed for
all, for our cattle took to the mountains and browsed higher on the bushes, above where the
sheep could reach; and the sheep went past and spread out on the southern desert and were lost
in it, it was so great.

"That was all, you will say--but no! In the Spring every ewe had her lamb, and many two, and
they grew fat and strong, and when the grass became dry on the desert because the rains had
failed again, they came back, seeking their northern range where the weather was cool, for
a sheep cannot endure the heat. Then we who had let them pass in pity were requited after the
way of the borregueros--we were sheeped out, down to the naked rocks, and the sheepmen went
on, laughing insolently. Ay, que malo los borregueros, what devils they are; for hunger took
the strength from our cows so that they could not suckle their calves, and in giving birth
many mothers and their little ones died together. In that year we lost half our cows, Don Luís
Creede and I, and those that lived became thin and rough, as they are to this day, from journeying
to the high mountains for feed and back to the far river for water.

"Then the father of Jeff became very angry, so that he lost weight and his face became changed,
and he took an oath that the first sheep or sheep-herder that crossed his range should be killed,
and every one thereafter, as long as he should live. Ah, what a buen hombre was Don Luís--if
we had one man like him to-day the sheep would yet go round--a big man, with a beard, and he
had no fear, no not for a hundred men. And when in November the sheep came bleating back, for
they had promised so to do as soon as the feed was green, Don Luís met them at the river, and
he rode along its bank, night and day, promising all the same fate who should come across--and,
umbre, the sheep went round!"

The old man slapped his leg and nodded his head solemnly. Then he looked across at Creede and
his voice took on a great tenderness. "My friend has been dead these many years," he said,
"but he was a true man."

As Don Pablo finished his story the Señora opened the door of the kitchen where the table was
already set with boiled beans, meat stewed with peppers, and thin corn cakes--the conventional
frijoles, carne con chili, and tortillas of the Mexicans--and some fried eggs in honor of the
company. As the meal progressed the Señora maintained a discreet silence, patting out tortillas
and listening politely to her husband's stock of stories, for Don Pablo was lord in his own
house. The big-eyed muchacho sat in the corner, watching the corn cakes cook on the top of
the stove and battening on the successive rations which were handed out to him. There were
stories, as they ate, of the old times, of the wars and revolutions of Sonora, wherein the
Señor Moreno had taken too brave a part, as his wounds and exile showed; strange tales of wonders
and miracles wrought by the Indian doctors of Altár; of sacred snakes with the sign of the
cross blazoned in gold on their foreheads, worshipped by the Indians with offerings of milk
and tender chickens; of primitive life on the haciendas of Sonora, where men served their masters
for life and were rewarded at the end with a pension of beans and carne seco.

Then as the day waned they sat at peace in the ramada, Moreno and Creede smoking, and Hardy
watching the play of colors as the sun touched the painted crags of the Bulldog and lighted
up the square summit of Red Butte across the river, throwing mysterious shadows into the black
gorge which split it from crown to base. Between that high cliff and the cleft red butte flowed
the Salagua, squirming through its tortuous cañon, and beyond them lay Hidden Water, the unknown,
whither a single man was sent to turn back the tide of sheep.

In the silence the tinkle of bells came softly from up the cañon and through the dusk Hardy
saw a herd of goats, led by a long-horned ram, trailing slowly down from the mesa. They did
not pause, either to rear up on their hind feet for browse or to snoop about the gate, but
filed dutifully into their own corral and settled down for the night.

"Your goats are well trained, Don Pablo," said Hardy, by way of conversation. "They come home
of their own accord."

"Ah, no," protested Moreno, rising from his chair. "It is not the goats but my goat dogs that
are well trained. Come with me while I close the gate and I will show you my flock."

The old gentleman walked leisurely down the trail to the corral, and at their approach Hardy
saw two shaggy dogs of no breed suddenly detach themselves from the herd and spring defiantly
forward.

"Quita se, quita se!" commanded Don Pablo, and at his voice they halted, still growling and
baring their fangs at Hardy. 

If one only of several counts in an indictment be bad; a verdict given of "guilty" generally;
judgment awarded against the defendant "for his offences aforesaid," and the punishment discretionary--can
judgment be reversed on a writ of error?

First, then, were there any bad counts in the indictment?

The judges were unanimously of opinion that TWO of the counts were bad, or insufficient in law--and
two only--which were the SIXTH and SEVENTH counts. They hold positively and explicitly, that the
remaining NINE COUNTS WERE PERFECTLY VALID.

The Chief-Justice (Tindal) thus delivered this unanimous opinion of himself and his brethren
on this point.[9]

"No serious objection appears to have been made by counsel for the prisoners, against the sufficiency
of any of the counts prior to the sixth.

Indeed, there can be no question that the charges contained in the FIRST FIVE COUNTS, do amount
in each to the legal offence of conspiracy, and are sufficiently described therein.

"We all concur in opinion as to the EIGHTH, NINTH, and TENTH counts, (no doubt whatever having
been raised as to the sufficiency of the ELEVENTH count,) that the object and purpose of the agreement
entered into by the defendants and others, as disclosed upon those counts, is an agreement
for the performance of an act, and the attainment of an object, which is a violation of the
law of the land."

With reference to the SIXTH and SEVENTH counts, in the form in which
they stand upon their record, the judges were unanimously of opinion,
that these counts "did not state the illegal purpose and design of
the agreement entered into between the defendants, with such proper
and sufficient certainty as to lead to the necessary conclusion that
it was an agreement to do an act in violation of the law."

They did not show what sort of fear was intended by the alleged intimidation,
nor upon whom it was intended to operate, nor was it alleged that
the "physical force exhibited" was to be used, or intended to be used.

Observed, therefore, on what grounds these two counts--two only out of eleven--are held defective:
they are deficient in that rigorous "certainty" now held requisite to constitute a perfectly
legal charge of crime. To the eye of plain common sense--we submit, with the deepest deference,
to those who have held otherwise--they distinctly disclose a corpus
delicti; but when stretched upon the agonizing rack of legal logic
to which they were exposed, it seems that they gave way.

The degree of "certainty" here insisted upon, would seem to savour a little (possibly) of
that nimia subtilitas quæ in jure reprobatur; et talis certitudo certitudinem confundit: and which,
in the shape of "certainty to a certain intent in every particular," is rejected in law, according
to Lord Coke, (5 Rep. 121.) It undoubtedly tends to impose inevitable
difficulty upon the administration of criminal justice.

Sir Matthew Hale complained strongly of this "strictness, which has grown to be a blemish and
inconvenience in the law, and the administration thereof; for that more offenders escape by the
over-easy ear given to exceptions in indictments, than by their own innocence."--12 Hal. P. C.
193; 4 Bla. Co. 376. The words, in the present case, are pregnant with irresistible "inference"
of guilt; an additional word or two, which to us appear already implicitly
there, as they are actually in the eleventh count, would have dispersed
every possible film of doubt; and Lord Brougham, in giving judgment,
appeared to be of this opinion.

But now for the general result: The indictment contained two imperfect
counts, and nine perfect counts, distinctly disclosing offences not
very far short of treason.

Thus, then, the first question was answered.

To the second question the judges replied unanimously, "that the findings of the jury in the first
four counts were not authorized by the law, and are incorrectly entered on the record." One
of the judges, however, and a most eminent judge, (Mr Justice Patteson,)
being of a contrary opinion.

Thus we have it unanimously decided by the judges, whose decision was acquiesced in by the House of
Lords, that there were two bad counts, (the 6th and 7th,) on which there were good findings
by the jury, and, with the exception of Mr Justice Patteson, four good counts, (the 1st, 2d,
3d, and 4th,) on which there were bad findings.

The effect of this twofold error was thus tersely stated by Mr Baron Gurney, and adopted by
the Lord Chancellor.[10]

"I cannot distinguish between a bad finding
on a good count, and a good finding on a bad count.

They appear to me to amount to precisely the same thing--namely, that upon which no judgment
can be pronounced. The judgment must be taken to have proceeded upon the concurrence of good
counts and good findings, and upon nothing else."

Here, then, at length, it seems that we have hit upon a blot--a petty,
circumscribed blot to be sure, upon a vast surface of otherwise unsullied
legal sufficiency; but still--in the opinion of the judges--a blot.

What was to be held the effect of it? Or had it any effect?

The traversers' counsel, at the bar of the House of Lords, took by surprise every one whom they
addressed--all their opponents, all the judges, all the law lords, and all the legal profession, as soon
as they had heard of it--by boldly affirming, that if this blot really existed, it would invalidate
and utterly nullify the whole proceedings from the beginning to the end! They hammered away
at this point accordingly, hour after hour--day after day--with desperate
pertinacity; being compelled from time to time, during their hopeful
argument, to admit, that up to that moment the rule or custom which
they were seeking to impeach had been universally acted upon from
time immemorial, to the contrary of that for which they were contending.

This strange and novel point of theirs gave rise to the third and eleventh questions put to the
judges.

These questions are substantially identical, viz., whether a single bad count in an indictment on
which there has been a general verdict of guilty, with judgment accordingly, will entitle the
fortunate defendant to a reversal of that judgment?

We heard a considerable portion of the argument; and listened to this
part of it with a comfortable consciousness that we beheld, in each
counsel arguing it, as it were, a viper gnawing a file!

If this be law, thought we, then have many thousands of injured gentlemen been, in all human
probability, unjustly hanged, and transported for life or for years, been fined, imprisoned, sent
to the tread-mill, and publicly whipped; for Heaven only knows how many of the counts in the
indictments against--say Mr Fauntleroy; Messrs Thistlewood, Brunt, Tidd, and Ings; Messrs Greenacre,
Courvoisier, and many others--have been defective in law!

How many hundreds are now luxuriating in Norfolk Island who have,
on this supposition, no just right to be there; and who, had they
been but popular miscreants, might have collected sufficient funds
from their friends and admirers to enable them to prove this--to try
a fall with justice and show her weakness; to overhaul the proceedings
against them, detect the latent flaws therein, return in triumph to
the bosom of their families and friends, and exhibit new and greater
feats of dexterity in their art and mystery!

Why should not that "innocent" convict--now passing over the seas--Mr Barber, on hearing of
this decision, soon after his arrival at the distant paradise to which he is bound, take new
heart and remit instructions by the next homeward bound ship for a writ of error, in order that
he may have his chance of detecting a flaw in one of the many counts of his indictment?

But, to be serious again, how stands the case in the present instance? Of eleven counts, six
must be in legal contemplation expunged from the record: FOUR, (the first, second, third, and
fourth,) because, though in themselves sufficient in law, the findings upon them were technically
defective; and TWO, (the sixth and seventh,) because they were technically
defective in point of law, though the findings on them were unobjectionable.

Then

there remain FIVE PERFECT COUNTS WITH FIVE PERFECT FINDINGS, in the opinion of all the judges
and of all the law lords; those five counts containing the gist of the whole charge against O'Connell
and his confederates--those five findings establishing that the defendants were guilty of the offences
so laid to their charge.

Blot out, then, altogether from the record the six counts objectionable on the above-mentioned
grounds, how are the other five to be got rid of? Thus, said the traversers' counsel. We have the entire
record before us containing all the eleven counts and findings, both good and bad; and we find
by the language of the record itself, that the judges, in passing sentence, took into consideration
all the eleven counts, as if they had been valid counts with valid findings--for the judges
expressly inflicted punishment on each of the traversers "for his OFFENCES aforesaid." Is it not
therefore plain to demonstration, that the measure of punishment was governed by reference to
six--i. e. a majority--of eleven counts, which six counts had no more right to stand on the
record, entailing liability to punishment on the parties named in them, than six of the odes
of Horace? The punishment here, moreover, being discretionary, and consequently dependent upon,
and influenced by, the ingredients of guilt, which it appears conclusively that the judges took
into their consideration?

Such was the general drift of the reasonings of the traversers' counsel. What was their effect
upon the assembled judges--those experienced and authoritative expositors of the law of the land?
Why, after nearly two months' time taken to consider and ponder over the various points which
had been started--after anxious consideration and communication one with another--they re-appeared
in the House of Lords on the 2d of September; and, led by one who will be on all hands admitted
to be one of the most experienced, gifted, profoundly learned, and perfectly impartial and
independent lawyers that ever presided over a court of justice--Sir Nicholas Tindal--SEVEN
out of nine of the judges expressed a clear unhesitating opinion, that the third and eleventh
questions should be answered in the negative--viz. that the judgment
was in no way invalidated--could be in no way impeached, by reason
of the defective counts and findings.

The two dissenting judges who had been hit by the arguments of the traversers' counsel, were
Baron Parke and Mr Justice Coltman--the latter speaking in a confident, the former in a remarkably
hesitating and doubting tone. The majority consisted of Chief-Justice Sir Nicholas Tindal,
Mr Justice Patteson, Mr Justice Maule, Mr Justice Williams, Mr Baron Gurney, Mr Baron Alderson,
and Mr Justice Coleridge.

We have no hesitation in expressing our opinion, that the judgments
delivered by this majority of the judges stand on the immovable basis
of sound logic, accurate law, and good sense; and lament that our
space will not allow us to present our readers with the many striking
and conclusive reasonings and illustrations with which those judgments
abound.

We can but glance at the result--leaving the process to be examined at leisure by those so
disposed. The artful fallacies of the traversers' counsel will be found utterly demolished. The first
grand conclusion of the judges was thus expressed by the Chief-Justice--

"I
conceive it to be the law, that in the case of an indictment, if there
be ONE GOOD COUNT in an indictment upon which the defendants have
been declared guilty by proper findings on the record, and a judgment
given for the crown, imposing a sentence authorized by law to be awarded
in respect of the particular offence, that such judgment cannot be
reversed by a writ of error, by reason of one or more of the counts
in the indictment being bad in point of law."

The main argument of the traversers' counsel was thus disposed of--

"It was urged at your lordships' bar, that all the instances which
have been brought forward in support of the proposition, that one
good count will support a general judgment upon an indictment in which
there are also bad counts, are cases in which there was a motion in
arrest of judgment, not cases where a writ of error has been brought.

This may be true; for so far as can be ascertained, there is no single
instance in which a writ of error has been ever brought to reverse
a judgment upon an indictment, upon this ground of objection.

But the very circumstance of the refusal by the court to arrest the judgment, where such arrest
has been prayed on the ground of some defective count appearing on the record, and the assigning
by the court as the reason for such refusal, that there was one good count upon which the judgment
might be entered up, affords the strongest argument, that they thought the judgment, when entered
up, was irreversible upon a writ of error.

For such answer could not otherwise have been given; it could have had no other effect than
to mislead the prosecutor, if the court were sensible at the time, that the judgment, when
entered up, might afterwards be reversed by a court of error."

The grand argument derived from the language of the judgment, was thus encountered:--

"I interpret the words, 'that the defendant for his offences aforesaid, be fined and imprisoned,'
in their plain literal sense, to mean such offences as are set out in the counts of the indictment
which are free from objection, and of which the defendant is shown
by proper findings on the record to have been guilty--that is in effect
the offences contained in the fifth and eighth, and all the subsequent
counts.

And I see no objection to the word offences, in the plural, being
used, whether the several counts last enumerated do intend several
and distinct offences, or only one offence described in different
manners in those counts.

For whilst the record remains in that shape, and unreversed, there can be no objection in
point of law, that they should be called 'offences' as they appear on the record."

Now, however, let us see the view taken of the matter by Mr Baron Parke--a man undoubtedly of acute
and powerful mind, as well as accurate and extensive learning. It is impossible not to be struck
by the tone of diffidence which pervades his judgment; and it was delivered in a very subdued
manner, not usual with that learned judge; occasioned doubtless by the pain with which he
found himself, on an occasion of such transcendent importance, differing from all his brethren
but one. He commenced by acknowledging the astonishment with which he had heard counsel at
the bar question the proposition which he (Baron Parke) had always considered, ever since he had
been in the profession, perfectly settled and well established, viz. that in criminal cases one
good count, though associated with many bad ones, would, nevertheless, suffice to support a general
judgment. But "he had been induced to doubt whether the rule had not been carried too far, by
a misunderstanding of the dicta of judges on applications in arrest
of judgment."

To enable the lay reader to appreciate the novel doctrine which has been sanctioned in the present
case, it is requisite to understand clearly the distinction to which
we have already briefly adverted, between a motion in arrest of judgment
and a writ of error.

When a defendant has been found guilty of an offence by the verdict of a jury, judgment must follow
as a matter of course, "judgment being the sentence of the law pronounced by the court upon
the matter contained in the record."[11] If, however, the defendant can satisfy the court that
the indictment is entirely defective, he will succeed in "arresting," or staying the passing of
judgment; but if he cannot, the court will proceed to give judgment. That judgment having been
entered on the record, the defendant, if still persuaded that the
indictment is defective, and consequently the judgment given on it
erroneous, has one more chance; viz. to reverse the judgment which
has been so given, by bringing a writ of error before an appellate
tribunal.

Now, the exact proposition for which the traversers' counsel contended
was this--that the rule that "one good count will sustain a general
judgment, though there are also bad counts in the indictment," is
applicable to that stage only of the proceedings at which a motion
is made in arrest of judgment; i. e. before the judgment has been
actually given, and not to the stage at which a writ of error has
been obtained, viz. after the judgment has been actually given.

This proposition was adopted by Mr Justice Coltman; while Mr Baron Parke--for reasons substantially
identical with those of Lords Denman, Cottenham, and Campbell--declared himself unable to overthrow
it.

As to the "opinion that one good count, properly found, will support a judgment warranted by
it, whatever bad counts there may be," Mr Baron Parke said,--"I doubt whether this received
opinion is so sufficiently established by a course of usage and practical
recognition, though generally entertained, as to compel its adoption
in the present case, and prevent me considering its propriety.

After much anxious consideration, and weighing the difficulties of reconciling such a doctrine
with principle, I feel so much doubt, that I cannot bring myself to concur with the majority
of the judges upon this question."

Without for one moment presuming to suggest any invidious comparison, we may observe, that
whatever may be the learning and ability of the two dissenting judges, the majority, with Sir
Nicholas Tindal at their head, contains some of the most powerful, well-disciplined, long-experienced,
and learned intellects that ever were devoted to the administration of justice, and all of them
thoroughly familiar with the law and practice in criminal proceedings; and as we have already suggested,
no competent reader can peruse their judgments without feeling admiration of the logical power
evinced by them.

While Mr Baron Parke "doubts" as to the soundness of his conclusions, they all express a clear
and decisive opinion as to the existence of the rule or custom in question as a rule of law,
and as to its reasonableness, utility, and justice.

The reading of these judgments occupied from ten o'clock on the Monday
morning till three o'clock in the afternoon, when the House adjourned
till Wednesday; having first ordered the opinions of the judges to
be printed.

There were a considerable number of peers (among whom was the Duke of Cambridge) present, and they
listened attentively to those whom they had summoned to advise them on so great an occasion.
Lords Brougham, Denman, Cottenham, and Campbell sat near one another on the opposition side of
the House, each with writing-tables before him; and they, together
with the Lord Chancellor, appeared to pay close attention to what
fell from the judges.

The House of Lords on these great occasions presents a very interesting and impressive appearance.
The Chancellor sits robed in his usual place, surrounded by the judges,
who are seated on the woolsacks in the centre of the house, all in
their full official costume, each rising to read his written judgment.

If ever man made a magnificent personal appearance among his fellows, it is Lord Lyndhurst
thus surrounded. At the bar of the house stood, or sat, the majority of the counsel engaged
on each side, as well as others; and the whole space behind was crowded by anxious spectators,
conspicuous among whom were Messrs Mahoney and Ford, (two tall, stout, shrewd-looking men,)
the Irish attorneys engaged on behalf of the traversers.

They and their counsel appeared a trifle less desponding at the conclusion of Baron Parke's
judgment; but the impression was universal that the Chancellor would advise the House to affirm
the judgment, in accordance with the opinions of so overwhelming a majority of the judges. No
one, however, could do more than guess the inclination of the law lords, or what impression had
been made upon them by the opinions of the judges.

When therefore Wednesday, the day of final judgment upon this memorable and agitating case,
had arrived, it is difficult to describe the excitement and anxiety manifest among all the parties
who densely crowded the space between the door and the bar of the House. There were, of course,
none of the judges present, with the exception of Mr Baron Rolfe, who, in plain clothes, sat on
the steps of the throne, a mere private spectator.

There were about a dozen peers on the ministerial benches, including Lord Wharncliffe, Lord
Redesdale, Lord Stradbroke, and others; and several peers (including
Lord Clanricarde) sat on the opposite benches.

Lords Cottenham and Campbell sat together, frequently in communication with each other, and
occasionally with Lord Denman, who sat near them, at the cross-benches, busily engaged in referring
to books and papers. Lord Brougham occupied his usual place, a little nearer the bar of the House
than Lords Cottenham and Campbell; and on the writing-desks of all
three lay their written judgments.

All the law-peers wore a serious and thoughtful expression of countenance--which
you scrutinized with eager anxiety in vain for any sign of the sort
of judgments which they had come prepared to deliver.

The traversers' leading counsel, Sir Thomas Wilde and Mr Hill, both stood at the bar of the
House in a state of very perceptible suspense and anxiety. The Attorney-General for Ireland
sat in his usual place--almost motionless, as usual, from first to last--very calm, and watching
the proceedings with deep attention, seldom uttering more than a
passing syllable to those who sat next to him, i. e. the English Solicitor-General,
and Mr Waddington, and Mr Maule of the Treasury.

After judgment had been briefly given in Gray's case, a few moments' interval of silence elapsed--the
silence of suppressed anxiety and expectation. At length the Lord Chancellor, who had been sitting
with a very thoughtful air for a few moments, slowly rose from the woolsack, and advanced
to his proper post when addressing the House, viz. at about a couple of yards' distance to the
left of the woolsack.

Finding that his robes, or train, had in some way got inconveniently disarranged, so as to interfere
with the freedom of his motions, he occupied several seconds in very calmly putting it to rights;
and then his tall commanding figure stood before you, in all that tranquil grace and dignity
of appearance and gesture, for which he has ever been so remarkably distinguished. During the whole
time--exactly an hour--that he was speaking, his voice clear and harmonious as usual, and
his attitude and gesture characterized by a graceful and easy energy, he never once slipped,
or even hesitated for want of an apt expression; but, on the contrary, invariably hit upon the
very expression which was the most accurate, appropriate, and elegant, for conveying his meaning.


"Yes, sir--Susie and Sallie, that was as nice and eddicated girls as you ever see, they jest
put on overalls and climbed their horses and worked them cattle themselves. Course they had
rodér hands to do the dirty work in the corrals--brandin' and ear-markin' and the like--but
for ridin' the range and drivin' they was as good as the best. Well, sir, you'd think every
man in Arizona, when he heard what they was doin', would do everythin' in his power to help
'em along, even to runnin' a Dos S on an orehanna once in a while instead of hoggin' it himself;
but they's fellers in this world, I'm convinced, that would steal milk from a sick baby!"

The brawny foreman of the Dos S dropped the cat and threw out his hands impressively, and once
more the wild glow crept back into his eyes.

"You remember that Jim Swope that I introduced you to down on the desert? Well, he's a good
sheepman, but he's on the grab for money like a wolf. He's got it, too--that's the hell of it."

Creede sighed, and threw a scrap of bacon to Tommy.

"He keeps a big store down at Moroni," he continued, "and the widde', not wantin' to shove
her cows onto a fallin' market, runs up an account with him--somethin' like a thousand dollars--givin'
her note for it, of course. It's about four years ago, now, that she happened to be down in
Moroni when court was in session, when she finds out by accident that this same Jim Swope,
seein' that cattle was about to go up, is goin' to close her out. He'd 'a' done it, too, like
fallin' off a log, if the old judge hadn't happened to be in town lookin' up some lawsuit.
When he heard about it he was so durned mad he wrote out a check for a thousand dollars and
give it to her; and then, when she told him all her troubles, he up and bought the whole ranch
at her own price--it wasn't much--and shipped her and the girls back to St. Louie."

Creede brushed the dirt and flour off the table with a greasy rag and dumped the biscuits out
of the oven.

"Well," he said, "there's where I lost my last chanst to git a girl. Come on and eat."

CHAPTER VI

THE CROSSING

From lonely ranches along the Salagua and Verde, from the Sunflower and up the Alamo, from
all the sheeped-out and desolate Four Peaks country the cowboys drifted in to Hidden Water
for the round-up, driving their extra mounts before them. Beneath the brush ramada of the ranch
house they threw off their canvas-covered beds and turned their pack horses out to roll, strapping
bells and hobbles on the bad ones, and in a day the deserted valley of Agua Escondida became
alive with great preparations. A posse of men on fresh mounts rode out on Bronco Mesa, following
with unerring instinct the trail of the Dos S horses, balking their wild breaks for freedom
and rushing them headlong into the fenced pasture across the creek. As the hired hands of the
Dos S outfit caught up their mounts and endeavored to put the fear of God into their hearts,
the mountain boys got out the keg of horseshoes and began to shoe--every man his own blacksmith.

It was rough work, all around, whether blinding and topping off the half-wild ponies or throwing
them and tacking cold-wrought "cowboy" shoes to their flint-like feet, and more than one enthusiast
came away limping or picking the loose skin from a bruised hand. Yet through it all the dominant
note of dare-devil hilarity never failed. The solitude of the ranch, long endured, had left
its ugly mark on all of them. They were starved for company and excitement; obsessed by strange
ideas which they had evolved out of the tumuli of their past experience and clung to with dogged
tenacity; warped with egotism; stubborn, boastful, or silent, as their humor took them, but
now all eager to break the shell and mingle in the rush of life.

In this riot of individuals Jefferson Creede, the round-up boss, strode about like a king,
untrammelled and unafraid. There was not a ridge or valley in all the Four Peaks country that
he did not know, yet it was not for this that he was boss; there was not a virtue or weakness
in all that crowd that he was not cognizant of, in the back of his scheming brain. The men
that could rope, the men that could ride, the quitters, the blowhards, the rattleheads, the
lazy, the crooked, the slow-witted--all were on his map of the country; and as, when he rode
the ridges, he memorized each gulch and tree and odd rock, so about camp he tried out his puppets,
one by one, to keep his map complete.

As they gathered about the fire that evening it was Bill Lightfoot who engaged his portentous
interest. He listened to Bill's boastful remarks critically, cocking his head to one side and
smiling whenever he mentioned his horse.

"Yes, sir," asserted Bill belligerently, "I mean it--that gray of mine can skin anything in
the country, for a hundred yards or a mile. I've got money that says so!"

"Aw, bull!" exclaimed Creede scornfully.

"Bull, nothin'," retorted Lightfoot hotly. "I bet ye--I bet ye a thousand dollars they ain't
a horse in Arizona that can keep out of my dust for a quarter!"

"Well, I know you ain't got no thousand dollars--ner ten," sneered Creede. "Why don't you bet
yearlings? If you'd blow some of that hot air through a tube it'd melt rocks, I reckon. But
talk cow, man; we can all savvy that!"

"Well, where's the horse that can beat me?" demanded Lightfoot, bristling.

"That little sorrel out in the pasture," answered Creede laconically.

"I'll bet ye!" blustered Lightfoot. "Aw, rats! He ain't even broke yet!"

"He can run, all right. I'll go you for a yearling heifer. Put up or shut up."

And so the race was run. Early in the morning the whole rodéo outfit adjourned to the parada
ground out by the pole corrals, the open spot where they work over the cattle. Hardy danced
his sorrel up to the line where the gray was waiting, there was a scamper of feet, a streak
of dust, and Bill Lightfoot was out one yearling heifer. A howling mob of cowboys pursued them
from the scratch, racing each other to the finish, and then in a yell of laughter at Bill Lightfoot
they capered up the cañon and spread out over The Rolls--the rodéo had begun.

As the shadow of the great red butte to the west, around which the wagon road toiled for so
many weary miles, reached out and touched the valley, they came back in a body, hustling a
bunch of cattle along before them. And such cattle! After his year with the Chiricahua outfit
in that blessed eastern valley where no sheep as yet had ever strayed Hardy was startled by
their appearance. Gaunt, rough, stunted, with sharp hips and hollow flanks and bellies swollen
from eating the unprofitable browse of cactus and bitter shrubs, they nevertheless sprinted
along on their wiry legs like mountain bucks; and a peculiar wild, haggard stare, stamped upon
the faces of the old cows, showed its replica even in the twos and yearlings. Yet he forbore
to ask Creede the question which arose involuntarily to his lips, for he knew the inevitable
answer.

Day after day, as they hurriedly combed The Rolls for what few cattle remained on the lower
range, the cowmen turned their eyes to the river and to the cañons and towering cliffs beyond,
for the sheep; until at last as they sat by the evening fire Creede pointed silently to the
lambent flame of a camp fire, glowing like a torch against the southern sky.

"There's your friends, Rufe," he said, and the cowmen glanced at Hardy inquiringly.

"I might as well tell you fellers," Creede continued, "that one reason Rufe come up here was
to see if he couldn't do somethin' with these sheepmen."

He paused and looked at the circle of faces with a smile that was almost a sneer.

"You fellers wouldn't back me up when it come to fightin'--none except Ben Reavis and the Clark
boys--so I told the old judge we might as well lay down, and to send up some smooth hombre
to try and jockey 'em a little. Well, Hardy's the hombre; and bein' as you fellers won't fight,
you might as well look pleasant about it. What's that you say, Bill?"

He turned with a sardonic grin to Lightfoot, who had already been reduced to a state of silence
by the relentless persecutions of the rodéo boss.

"I never said nawthin'," replied Lightfoot sullenly. "But if you'd've gone at 'em the way we
wanted to," he blurted out, as the grin broadened, "instead of tryin' to move the whole outfit
by daylight, I'd've stayed with you till hell froze over. I don't want to git sent up fer ten
years."

"No," said Creede coolly, "ner you never will."

"Well, I don't see what you're pickin' on me fer," bellowed Lightfoot, "the other fellers was
there too. Why don't you sass Ensign or Pete a while?"

"For a durned good reason," replied Creede steadily. "They never was for fightin', but you,
with that yawp of yours, was always a-hollerin' and ribbin' me on to fight, and then, when
the time come, you never said 'Boo!' at 'em. Tucked your young cannon into the seat of your
pants and flew, dam' ye, and that's all there was to it. But that's all right," he added resignedly.
"If you fellers don't want to fight you don't have to. But, dam' it, keep shut about it now,
until you mean business."

As to just who this man Hardy was and what he proposed to do with the sheep the members of
the Four Peaks round-up were still in ignorance. All they knew was that he could ride, even
when it came to drifting his horse over the rocky ridges, and that Jeff Creede took him as
a matter of course. But, for a superintendent, he never seemed to have much to say for himself.
It was only when he walked up to his sorrel pony in that gentle, precise way he had, and went
through the familiar motions of climbing a "bad one" that they sensed, dimly, a past not without
experience and excitement. Even in the preoccupation of their own affairs and doings they could
not fail to notice a supple strength in his white hands, a military precision in his movements,
and above all a look in his eyes when he became excited--the steady resolute stare with which
his militant father had subdued outlaw horses, buck soldiers, and Apaches, even his own son,
when all had not gone well. It was this which had inspired Bill Lightfoot to restrain his tongue
when he was sore over his defeat; and even though Hardy confessed to being a rider, somehow
no one ever thought of sawing off Spike Kennedy's "side winder" on him. The quiet, brooding
reserve which came from his soldier life protected him from such familiar jests, and without
knowing why, the men of the Four Peaks looked up to him.

Even after his mission was announced, Hardy made no change in his manner of life. He rode out
each day on the round-up, conning the lay of the land; at the corral he sat on the fence and
kept tally, frankly admitting that he could neither rope nor brand; in camp he did his share
of the cooking and said little, listening attentively to the random talk. Only when sheep were
mentioned did he show a marked interest, and even then it was noticed that he made no comment,
whatever his thoughts were. But if he told no one what he was going to do, it was not entirely
due to an overrated reticence, for he did not know himself. Not a man there but had run the
gamut of human emotions in trying to protect his ranch; they had driven herders off with guns;
they had cut their huddled bands at night and scattered them for the coyotes; they had caught
unwary Mexican borregueros in forbidden pastures and administered "shap lessons," stretching
them over bowlders and spanking them with their leather leggings; they had "talked reason"
to the bosses in forceful terms; they had requested them politely to move; they had implored
them with tears in their eyes--and still like a wave of the sea, like a wind, like a scourge
of grasshoppers which cannot be withstood, the sheep had come on, always hungry, always fat,
always more.

Nor was there any new thing in hospitality. The last bacon and bread had been set upon the
table; baled hay and grain, hauled in by day's works from the alfalfa fields of Moroni and
the Salagua, had been fed to the famished horses of the very men who had sheeped off the grass;
the same blanket had been shared, sometimes, alas, with men who were "crumby." And it was equally
true that, in return, the beans and meat of chance herders had been as ravenously devoured,
the water casks of patient "camp-rustlers" had been drained midway between the river and camp,
and stray wethers had showed up in the round-up fry-pans in the shape of mutton. Ponder as
he would upon the problem no solution offered itself to Hardy. He had no policy, even, beyond
that of common politeness; and as the menacing clamor of the sheep drifted up to them from
the river the diplomat who was to negotiate the great truce began to wonder whether, after
all, he was the man of the hour or merely another college graduate gone wrong.

On the opposite side of the river in bands of two and three thousand the cohorts of the sheep
gathered to make the crossing--gathered and waited, for the Salagua was still high. At the
foot of the high cliffs, from the cleft cañon of which water flowed forth as if some rod had
called it from the rock, the leaders of the sheepmen were sitting in council, gazing at the
powerful sweep of the level river, and then at the distant sand bar where their charges must
win the shore or be swept into the whirlpool below. Ah, that whirlpool! Many a frightened ewe
and weakling lamb in years past had drifted helplessly into its swirl and been sucked down,
to come up below the point a water-logged carcass. And for each stinking corpse that littered
the lower bar the boss sheep owner subtracted five dollars from the sum of his hard-earned
wealth. Already on the flats below them the willows and burro bushes were trembling as eager
teeth trimmed them of their leaves--in a day, or two days, the river bottom would be fed bare;
and behind and behind, clear to the broad floor of the desert, band after band was pressing
on to the upper crossing of the Salagua.

As Hardy rode up over the rocky point against which the river threw its full strength and then,
flung inexorably back, turned upon itself in a sullen whirlpool, he could see the sheep among
the willows, the herders standing impassive, leaning upon their guns as more rustic shepherds
lean upon their staves, and above, at the head of the crossing, the group of men, sitting within
the circle of their horses in anxious conference. If any of them saw him, outlined like a sentinel
against the sky, they made no sign; but suddenly a man in a high Texas hat leaped up from the
group, sprang astride his mule and spurred him into the cold water. For the first twenty feet
the mule waded, shaking his ears; then he slumped off the edge of a submerged bench into deeper
water and swam, heading across the stream but drifting diagonally with the current until, striking
bottom once more, he struggled out upon the sand spit. The rider looked eagerly about, glanced
up casually at the man on the point below, and then plunged back into the water, shouting out
hoarse orders to his Mexicans, who were smoking idly in the shade of overhanging rocks. Immediately
they scrambled to their feet and scattered along the hillside. The stroke of axes echoed from
the crags above, and soon men came staggering down to the river, dragging the thorny limbs
of palo verdes behind them. With these they quickly constructed a brush fence in the form of
a wing, running parallel to the cliff and making a chute which opened into the river.

Then with a great braying and bleating a huddle of sheep moved unwillingly along it, led by
bold goats with crooked horns and resolute beards, and pushed forward by that same reckless
rider on his black mule, assisted by a horde of shouting Mexicans. But at the touch of the
cold water, two days from the snow beds of the White Mountains, even the hardy bucks stepped
back and shook their heads defiantly. In vain with showers of rocks and flapping tarpaulins
the herders stormed the rear of the press--every foot was set against them and the sheep only
rushed about along the edge of the herd or crowded in close-wedged masses against the bluff.
At last a line of men leaped into the enclosure, holding up a long canvas wagon-cover and,
encircling the first section of the leaders, shoved them by main force into the river.

Instantly the goats took water, swimming free, and below them the man on the black mule shouted
and waved his broad Texas hat, heading them across the stream. But the timid sheep turned back
behind him, landing below the fence against all opposition, and the babel of their braying
rose higher and higher, as if in protest against their unlucky fate. Again and again the herders,
stripped to their underclothes, pushed the unwilling sheep into the current, wading out to
their chins to keep them headed across; each time the sodden creatures evaded them and, drifting
with the current, landed far below on the same side, whence they rushed back to join their fellows.

Upon the opposite shore the goats stood shivering, watching the struggle with yellow, staring
eyes which showed no trace of fear. Like brave generals of a craven band they were alone in
their hardihood and, with their feet upon the promised land, were doomed either to proceed
alone or return to their companions. So at last they did, plunging in suddenly, while the man
on the mule spurred in below in a vain effort to turn them back.

That night by the camp fire Hardy mentioned the man on a black mule.

"My old friend, Jasp Swope," explained Creede suavely, "brother of Jim, the feller I introduced
you to. Sure, Jasp and I have had lo-ong talks together--but he don't like me any more." He
twisted his nose and made a face, as if to intimate that it was merely a childish squabble,
and Hardy said no more. He was growing wise.

The next morning, and the next, Jasper Swope made other attempts at the crossing; and then,
as the snow water from the high mountains slipped by and the warm weather dried up by so much
each little stream, he was able at last to ford the diminished river. But first, with that
indomitable energy which marked him at every move, he cleared a passage along the base of the
cliff to a place where the earth-covered moraine broke off at the edge of the water. Here a
broad ledge shot down to the river like a toboggan slide, with a six-foot jump off at the bottom.

Once on this chute, with the strong tug of the canvas wagon-covers behind, there was nothing
for the sheep to do but to take the plunge, and as his brawny herders tumbled them head over
heels into the deep current Swope and his helpers waded out in a line below, shunting each
ewe and wading toward the farther shore. There on the edge of the sand spit they huddled in
a bunch, gathering about the hardier bucks and serving as a lure for those that followed. As
cut after cut was forced into the stream a long row of bobbing heads stretched clear across
the river, each animal striving desperately to gain the opposite bank and landing, spent and
puffing, far below. A Mexican boy at intervals drove these strays up the shore to the big bunch
and then concealed himself in the bushes lest by his presence he turn some timid swimmer back
and the whirlpool increase its toll. So they crossed them in two herds, the wethers first,
and then the ewes and lambs--and all the little lambs that could not stem the stream were floated
across in broad pieces of tarpaulin whose edges were held up by wading men.

From Lookout Point it was a majestic spectacle, the high cliffs, the silvery river gliding
noiselessly out from its black cañon, the white masses of sheep, clustering on either side
of the water--and as the work went ahead merrily the Mexicans, their naked bodies gleaming
like polished bronze in the ardent sun, broke into a wild refrain, a love song, perhaps, or
a cancion of old Mexico. Working side by side with his men Jasper Swope joined in the song
himself, and as they returned empty-handed he seized the tallest and strongest of them and
ducked him in the water while his retainers roared with laughter. And Hardy, sitting unnoticed
upon his horse, began to understand why these low-browed barbarians from Mexico were willing
to fight, and if need be to die, for their masters. The age of feudalism had returned--the
lords of the sheep went forth like barons, sharing every hardship and leading the way in danger,
and their men followed with the same unthinking devotion that the Myrmidons showed for noble
Achilles or the Crusaders for their white-crossed knights.

Upon this and many other feats Hardy had ample leisure to meditate, for the sheepmen regarded
him no more than if he had been a monument placed high upon the point to give witness to their
victory. As the sheep crossed they were even allowed to straggle out along the slopes of the
forbidden mesa, untended by their shepherds; and if the upper range was the special reserve
of the cowmen the sheep owners showed no knowledge of the fact. For two days the grazing herd
crept slowly along the mesquite-covered flat toward Lookout Point, and on the third morning
they boiled up over the rocks and spewed down into the valley of the Alamo.

"Well," observed Creede, as he watched the slow creeping of the flock, "here's where I have
to quit you, Rufe. In a week this ground around here will be as level as a billiard table and
they won't be enough horse feed in the valley to keep a burro. The town herd pulls out for
Bender this mornin' and the rest of us will move up to Carrizo Creek."

He hurried away to oversee the packing, but when all was ready he waved the boys ahead and
returned to the conversation.

"As I was sayin' a while ago, you won't see nothin' but sheep around here now for the next
two weeks--and all I want to say is, keep 'em out of the pasture, and f'r God's sake don't
let 'em corral in the brandin' pens! They're dirty enough already, but if you git about six
inches of sheep manure in there and then mill a few hundred head of cattle around on top of
it, the dust would choke a skunk. Our cows ain't so over-particular about that sheep smell,
but if we poor cowboys has got to breathe sheep and eat sheep and spit up sheep every time
we brand, it's crowdin' hospitality pretty strong. But if they want grub or clothes or tabac,
go to it--and see if you can't keep 'em off the upper range."

He paused and gazed at Hardy with eyes which suggested a world of advice and warning--then,
leaving it all unsaid, he turned wearily away.

"I look to find you with a sprained wrist," he drawled, "when I come back--throwin' flapjacks
for them sheepmen!" He made the quick motion of turning a pancake in midair, smiled grimly,
and galloped after the long line of horses and packs that was stringing along up the Bronco
Mesa trail. And, having a premonition of coming company, Hardy went in by the fireplace and
put on a big kettle of beef. He was picking over another mess of beans when he heard the clatter
of hoofs outside and the next moment the door was kicked violently open.

It was Jasper Swope who stood on the threshold, his high Texas hat thrust far back upon his
head--and if he felt any surprise at finding the house occupied he gave no expression to it.

"Hello, there!" he exclaimed. "I thought you folks was all gone!"

"Nope," replied Hardy, and continued his work in silence.

"Cookin' for the outfit?" queried Swope, edging in at the door.

"Nope," replied Hardy.

"Well, who the hell air ye cookin' fer then?" demanded Swope, drawing nearer. "'Scuse me if
I pry into this matter, but I'm gittin' interested." He paused and showed a jagged set of teeth
beneath his bristling red mustache, sneeringly.

"Well, I'll tell you," answered Hardy easily. "I thought some white man might come along later
and I'd ask him to dinner." He fixed his eyes upon the sheepman with an instant's disapproval
and then resumed his cookery. As for Swope, his gray eyes flashed sudden fire from beneath
bushy eyebrows, and then a canny smile crept across his lips.

"I used to be a white man, myself," he said, "before I lost my soap. What's the chance to git
a bite of that bymeby?" He threw his hand out toward the pot of beef, which was sending out
odors of a rich broth, flavored with onions and chili.

Hardy looked at him again, little shrimp of a man that he was, and still with disapproval.

"D'ye call that a white man's way of entering another man's house?" he inquired pointedly.

"Well," temporized Swope, and then he stopped. "A man in my line of business gits in a hurry
once in a while," he said lamely. "But I'm hungry, all right," he remarked, sotto voce.

"Yes," said Hardy, "I've noticed it. But here--sit down and eat."

The sheepman accepted the dish of beef, dipped out a spoonful of beans, broke off a slab of
bread, and began his meal forthwith, meanwhile looking at Hardy curiously.

"What's that you say you've noticed?" he inquired, and a quizzical smile lurked beneath his
dripping mustache as he reached over and hefted the coffeepot.

"I've noticed," replied Hardy, "that you sheepmen get in a hurry once in a while. You can't
stop to knock on a door so you kick it open; can't stop to go around a ranch, so you go through
it, and so on."

"Ah," observed Swope slyly, "so that's what's bitin' you, eh? I reckon you must be that new
superintendent that Jim was tellin' about."

"That's right," admitted Hardy, "and you're Mr. Swope, of course. Well, I'll say this for you,
Mr. Swope, you certainly know how to get sheep across a river. But when it comes to getting
along with cowmen," he added, as the sheepman grinned his self-approval, "you don't seem to
stack up very high."

"Oh, I don't, hey?" demanded Swope defiantly. "Well, how about the cowmen? Your friend Creede
gets along with sheepmen like a house afire, don't he? Him and a bunch of his punchers jumped
on one of my herders last Fall and dam' nigh beat him to death. Did you ever hear of a sheepman
jumpin' on a cowboy? No, by Gad, and you never will! We carry arms to protect ourselves, but
we never make no trouble."

He paused and combed the coffee grounds out of his heavy red mustache with fingers that were
hooked like an eagle's talons from clutching at sheep in the cold water.

"I don't doubt, Mr. Superintendent," he said, with sinister directness, "that these cowmen
have filled you up about what bad hombres we are--and of course it ain't no use to say nothin'
now--but I jest want to tell you one thing, and I want you to remember it if any trouble should
come up; we sheepmen have never gone beyond our legal rights, and we've got the law behind
us. The laws of the United States and the statutes of this Territory guarantee us the right
to graze our sheep on public lands and to go where we dam' please--and we'll go, too, you can
bank on that."

He added this last with an assurance which left no doubt as to his intentions, and Hardy made
no reply. His whole mind seemed centred on a handful of beans from which he was picking out
the rocks and little lumps of clay which help to make up full weight.

"Well!" challenged Swope, after waiting for his answer, "ain't that straight?"

"Sure," said Hardy absently.

Swope glared at him for a moment disapprovingly.

"Huh, you're a hell of a cowman," he grunted. "What ye goin' to do about it?"

"About what?" inquired Hardy innocently.

"Aw, you know," replied Swope impatiently. "How about that upper range?" He shoved back his
chair as he spoke, and his eyes lit up in anticipation of the battle.

"Well," responded Hardy judicially, "if you've got the legal right to go up there, and if you're
goin' where you dam' please, anyhow, it don't look like I could do anything." He paused and
smiled patiently at the sheepman.

"You know very well, Mr. Swope," he said, "that if you want to go up on that mesa and sheep
off the feed we haven't got any legal means of preventing you. But you know, too, that there
isn't more than enough feed for what cows the boys have left. If you want to go up there, that's
your privilege--and if you want to go out over The Rolls, that's all right, too."

"Of course you don't give a dam'!" said Swope satirically.

"I guess you know how I feel, all right," returned Hardy, and then he lapsed into silence,
while Swope picked his teeth and thought.

"Where'd you come from?" he said at last, as if, forgetting all that had passed, his mind had
come back from a far country, unbiassed by the facts.

"Over the mountains," replied Hardy, jerking his thumb toward the east.

"Don't have no sheep over there, do they?" inquired Swope.

"Nope, nothing but cattle and horses."

"Ump!" grunted the sheepman, and then, as if the matter was settled thereby, he said: "All
right, pardner, bein' as you put it that way, I reckon I'll go around."

CHAPTER VII

HELL'S HIP POCKET

In the days of Ahaz, king of Judah, Isaiah the son of Amoz is reported to have seen in a vision
a wolf which dwelt with a lamb, while a lion ate straw like an ox, and a weaned child put his
hand in the cockatrice's den. Equally beautiful, as a dream, was the peace at Hidden Water,
where sheepman and cattleman sat down together in amity; only, when it was all over, the wolf
wiped his chops and turned away with a wise smile--the millennium not having come, as yet,
in Arizona.

Hardy's wrist was a little lame, figuratively speaking, from throwing flapjacks for hungry
sheep herders, and the pile of grain and baled hay in the storehouse had dwindled materially;
but as the sheep came through, band after band, and each turned off to the west, stringing
in long bleating columns out across The Rolls, he did not begrudge the hard labor. After Jasper
Swope came Jim, and Donald McDonald, as jolly a Scottish shepherd as ever lived, and Bazan,
the Mexican, who traced his blood back to that victorious general whom Maximilian sent into
Sonora. There were Frenchmen, smelling rank of garlic and mutton tallow; Basques with eyes
as blue and vacant as the summer skies; young Mormons working on shares, whose whole fortune
was wrapped up in the one huddle of sheep which they corralled and counted so carefully; and
then the common herders, fighting Chihuahuanos, with big round heads and staring eyes, low-browed
Sonorans, slow and brutal in their ways, men of all bloods and no blood, lumped together in
that careless, all-embracing Western term "Mexicans."

But though they were low and primitive in mental processes, nearer to their plodding burros
than to the bright-eyed sensitive dogs, they were the best who would consent to wander with
the sheep through the wilderness, seeing nothing, doing nothing, knowing nothing, having before
them nothing but the vision of a distant pay day, a drunk, the calabozo, and the kind boss
who would surely bail them out. Ah, that was it--the one love and loyalty of those simple-minded
creatures who, unfit for the hurry and competition of the great world, sold their lives by
spans of months for twenty dollars and found; it was always to the boss that they looked for
help, and in return they did his will.

When the great procession had drifted past, with its braying clamor, its dogs, its men on muleback
and afoot, the herders with their carbines, the camp rustlers with their burros, belled and
laden with water casks and kyacks of grub, the sheep owners hustling about with an energy that
was almost a mania, Hardy sat beneath the ramada of the ranch house with dog-fighting Tommy
in his lap and pondered deeply upon the spectacle. A hundred thousand sheep, drifting like
the shadows of clouds across the illimitable desert, crossing swift rivers, climbing high mountains,
grazing beneath the northern pines; and then turning south again and pouring down through the
passes like the resistless front of a cloudburst which leaves the earth bare and wasted in
its wake. For this one time he had turned the stream aside and the tall grass still waved upon
the upper range; but the next time, or the next--what then?

Long and seriously he contemplated the matter, dwelling now upon the rough good nature of the
sheepmen and this almost miraculous demonstration of their good will; then remembered with
vague misgivings their protestations against the unlawful violence which presumed to deny them
what was their legal right--free grazing on all government lands. And in the end he wrote a
brief note to Judge Ware, telling him that while the sheepmen had accepted his hospitality
in a most friendly spirit and had respected the upper range, it was in his opinion only a question
of time until they would take the whole country, unless they were restrained by law. He therefore
recommended that the judge look up the status of the bill to set aside the watershed of the
Salagua as a National Forest Reserve, and in case the opposition to it indicated any long delay
it would be well either to sell out or reduce his stock. This note he sent out by Rafael, the
Mexican roustabout, who was still hauling in supplies from Bender, and then with a glad heart
he saddled up his horse, left a bait of meat on the floor for Tommy, and struck out over the
mesa for Carrizo Creek.

After his long confinement in the pasture the sorrel galloped along the rocky trail with the
grace and swiftness of an antelope, the warm dry wind puffed little whirls of dust before them,
and once more Hardy felt like a man. If for the best interests of his employer it was desirable
that he cook beef and bread for sheepmen, he could do so with good grace, but his spirit was
not that of a man who serves. Since he had left home he had taken a great deal from the world,
patiently accepting her arrogance while he learned her ways, but his soul had never been humbled
and he rode forth now like a king.

Upon that great mesa where the bronco mustangs from the Peaks still defied the impetuosity
of men, the giant sahuaros towered in a mighty forest as far as the eye could see, yet between
each stalk there lay a wide space, studded here and there with niggerheads of bristling spines,
and fuzzy chollas, white as the backs of sheep and thorny beyond reason. Nor was this all:
in the immensity of distance there was room for sahuaros and niggerheads and chollas, and much
besides. In every gulch and sandy draw the palo verdes, their yellow flowers gleaming in the
sun, stood out like lines of fire; the bottoms of the steep ravines which gashed the mesa were
illuminated with the gaudy tassels of mesquite blossoms; gray coffee-berry bushes clumped up
against the sides of ridges, and in every sheltered place the long grass waved its last-year's
banners, while the fresh green of tender growth matted the open ground like a lawn. Baby rabbits,
feeding along their runways in the grass, sat up at his approach or hopped innocently into
the shadow of the sheltering cat-claws; jack-rabbits with black-tipped ears galloped madly
along before him, imagining themselves pursued, and in every warm sandy place where the lizards
took the sun there was a scattering like the flight of arrows as the long-legged swift-jacks
rose up on their toes and flew. All nature was in a gala mood and Rufus Hardy no less. Yet
as he rode along, gazing at the dreamy beauty of this new world, the old far-away look crept
back into his eyes, a sad, brooding look such as one often sees in the faces of little children
who have been crossed, and the stern lines at the corners of his mouth were deeper when he
drew rein above Carrizo Creek.

Below him lay the panorama of a mountain valley--the steep and rocky walls; the silvery stream
writhing down the middle; the green and yellow of flowers along the lowlands; and in the middle,
to give it life, a great herd of cattle on the parada ground, weaving and milling before the
rushes of yelling horsemen, intent on cutting out every steer in the herd. Beyond lay the corrals
of peeled cottonwood, and a square house standing out stark and naked in the supreme ugliness
of corrugated iron, yet still oddly homelike in a land where shelter was scarce. As he gazed,
a mighty voice rose up to him from the midst of the turmoil, the blatting of calves, the mooing
of cows and the hoarse thunder of mountain bulls:

"Hel-lo, Rufe!"

From his place on the edge of the herd Hardy saw Jefferson Creede, almost herculean on his
tall horse, waving a large black hat. Instantly he put spurs to his sorrel and leaped down
the narrow trail, and at the edge of the herd they shook hands warmly, for friends are scarce,
wherever you go.

"Jest in time!" said Creede, grinning his welcome, "we're goin' over into Hell's Hip Pocket
to-morrow--the original hole in the ground--to bring out Bill Johnson's beef critters, and
I sure wanted you to make the trip. How'd you git along with Jasp?"

"All right," responded Hardy, "he didn't make me any trouble. But I'm glad to get away from
that sheep smell, all the same."

The big cowboy fixed his eyes upon him eagerly.

"Did they go around?" he asked incredulously. "Jasp and all?"

"Sure," said Hardy. "Why?"

For a long minute Creede was silent, wrinkling his brows as he pondered upon the miracle.

"Well, that's what I want to know," he answered ambiguously. "But say, you've got a fresh horse;
jest take my place here while me and Uncle Bill over there show them ignorant punchers how
to cut cattle."

He circled rapidly about the herd and, riding out into the runway where the cattle were sifted,
the beef steers being jumped across the open into the hold-up herd and the cows and calves
turned back, he held up his hand for the work to stop. Then by signals he sent the galloping
horsemen back to the edge of the herd and beckoned for old Bill Johnson.

For a few minutes he sat quietly on his horse, waiting for the harassed cattle to stop their
milling. Then breaking into a song such as cowboys sing at night he rode slowly in among them,
threading about at random, while old Bill Johnson on his ancient mare did likewise, his tangled
beard swaying idly in the breeze. On the border of the herd they edged in as if by accident
upon a fat steer and walked him amiably forth into the open. Another followed out of natural
perversity, and when both were nicely started toward the beef cut the two men drifted back
once more into the herd. There was no running, no shouting, no gallant show of horsemanship,
but somehow the right steers wandered over into the beef cut and stayed there. As if by magic
spell the outlaws and "snakes" became good, and with no breaks for the hills the labor of an
afternoon was accomplished in the space of two dull and uneventful hours.

"That's the way to cut cattle!" announced Creede, as they turned the discard toward the hills.
"Ain't it, Bill?"

He turned to Johnson who, sitting astride a flea-bitten gray mare that seemed to be in a perpetual
doze, looked more like an Apache squaw than a boss cowboy. The old man's clothes were even
more ragged than when Hardy had seen him at Bender, his copper-riveted hat was further reinforced
by a buckskin thong around the rim, and his knees were short-stirruped almost up to his elbows
by the puny little boy's saddle that he rode, but his fiery eyes were as quick and piercing
as ever.

"Shore thing," he said, straightening up jauntily in his saddle, "that's my way! Be'n doin'
it fer years, while you boys was killin' horses, but it takes Jeff hyar to see the p'int. Be
gentle, boys, be gentle with um--you don't gain nawthin' fer all yer hard ridin'."

He cut off a chew of tobacco and tucked it carefully away in his cheek.

"Jeff hyar," he continued, as the bunch of cowboys began to josh and laugh among themselves,
"he comes by his savvy right--his paw was a smart man before him, and mighty clever to his
friends, to boot. Many's the time I hev took little Jeffie down the river and learned him tracks
and beaver signs when he wasn't knee-high to a grasshopper--hain't I, Jeff? And when I tell
him to be gentle with them cows he knows I'm right. I jest want you boys to take notice when
you go down into the Pocket to-morrer what kin be done by kindness; and the first man that
hollers or puts a rope on my gentle stock, I'll sure make him hard to ketch.

"You hear me, naow," he cried, turning sharply upon Bill Lightfoot, who was getting off something
about "Little Jeffie," and then for the first time he saw the face of the new cowboy who had
ridden in that afternoon. Not since the day he was drunk at Bender had Bill Johnson set eyes
upon the little man to whom he had sworn off, but he recognized him instantly.

"Hello thar, pardner!" he exclaimed, reining his mare in abruptly. "Whar'd you drop down from?"

"Why howdy do, Mr. Johnson!" answered Hardy, shaking hands, "I'm glad to see you again. Jeff
told me he was going down to your ranch to-morrow and I looked to see you then."

Bill Johnson allowed this polite speech to pass over his shoulder without response. Then, drawing
Hardy aside, he began to talk confidentially; expounding to the full his system of gentling
cattle; launching forth his invective, which was of the pioneer variety, upon the head of all
sheepmen; and finally coming around with a jerk to the subject that was uppermost in his mind.

"Say," he said, "I want to ask you a question--are you any relation to the Captain Hardy that
I served with over at Fort Apache? Seems's if you look like 'im, only smaller."

His stature was a sore point with Hardy, and especially in connection with his father, but
making allowance for Mr. Johnson's ways he modestly admitted his ancestry.

"His son, eh!" echoed the old man. "Waal--now! I tell you, boy, I knowed you--I knowed you
the minute you called down that dog-robber of a barkeep--and I was half drunk, too. And so
you're the new superintendent down at the Dos S, eh? Waal, all I can say is: God help them
pore sheepmen if you ever git on their trail. I used to chase Apaches with yore paw, boy!"

It was Bill Johnson's turn to talk that evening and like most solitaries who have not "gone
into the silence," he availed himself of a listener with enthusiasm.

Stories of lion hunts and "b'ar fights" fell as trippingly from his lips as the words of a
professional monologist, and when he had finished his account of the exploits of Captain Samuel
Barrows Hardy, even the envious Lightfoot regarded Rufus with a new respect, for there is no
higher honor in Arizona than to be the son of an Indian fighter. And when the last man had
crawled wearily into his blankets the old hermit still sat by the dying fire poking the charred
ends into the flames and holding forth to the young superintendent upon the courage of his sire.

Hardly had the son of his father crept under the edge of Creede's blankets and dropped to sleep
before that huge mountain of energy rose up and gave the long yell. The morning was at its
blackest, that murky four A. M. darkness which precedes the first glimmer of light; but the
day's work had to be done. The shivering horse-wrangler stamped on his boots and struck out
down the cañon after the remuda, two or three cooks got busy about the fire which roared higher
and higher as they piled on the ironwood to make coals, and before the sun had more than mounted
the southern shoulder of the Four Peaks the long line of horsemen was well on the trail to
Hell's Hip Pocket.

The frontier imagination had in no wise overleaped itself in naming this abyss. Even the tribute
which Facilis Descensus Vergil paid to the local Roman hell could hardly be said of the Pocket--it
is not even easy to get into it. From the top of the divide it looks like a valley submerged
in a smoky haze through which the peaks and pinnacles of the lower parks rise up like cathedral
spires, pointing solemnly to heaven. As the trail descends through washed-out gulches and "stone-patches,"
now skating along the backbone of a ridge and now dropping as abruptly into some hollow waterway,
the cliffs and pinnacles begin to loom up against the sky; then they seem to close in and block
the way, and just as the cañon boxes in to nothing the trail slips into a gash in the face
of the cliff where the soft sandstone has crumbled away between two harder strata, and climbs
precariously along through the sombre gloom of the gorge to the bright light of the fair valley
beyond.

It is a kind of fairy land, that hidden pocket in the hills, always covered by a mystic haze,
for which the Mexicans give it the name Humada. Its steep cañon comes down from the breast
of the most easterly of the Four Peaks, impassable except by the one trail; it passes through
the box and there widens out into a beautiful valley, where the grass lies along the hillsides
like the tawny mane of a lion, and tender flowers stand untrampled in the rich bottoms. For
three miles or more it spreads out between striated cliffs where hawks and eagles make their
nests; then once more it closes in, the creek plunges down a narrow gorge and disappears, writhing
tortuously on its way to the Salagua whose fire-blasted walls rise in huge bulwarks against
the south, dwarfing the near-by cliffs into nothingness by their majestic height.

In the presence of this unearthly beauty and grandeur old Bill Johnson--ex-trapper, ex-soldier,
ex-prospector, ex-everything--had dwelt for twenty years, dating from the days when his house
was his fortress, and his one desire was to stand off the Apaches until he could find the Lost
Dutchman.

Where the valley narrowed down for its final plunge into the gorge the old trapper had built
his cabin, its walls laid "square with the world" by sighting on the North Star. When the sun
entered the threshold of the western door it was noon, and his watch never ran down. The cabin
was built of shaly rocks, squared and laid in mud, like bricks; a tremendous stone chimney
stood against the north end and a corral for his burros at the south. Three hounds with bleared
eyes and flapping ears, their foreheads wrinkled with age and the anxieties of the hunt, bayed
forth a welcome as the cavalcade strung in across the valley; and mild-eyed cattle, standing
on the ridges to catch the wind, stared down at them in surprise. Never, even at San Carlos,
where the Chiricahua cattle fatten on the best feed in Arizona, had Hardy seen such mountains
of beef. Old steers with six and seven rings on their horns hung about the salting places,
as if there were no such things as beef drives and slaughter houses in this cruel world, and
even when the cowboys spread out like a fan and brought them all in to the cutting grounds
there was hardly a calf that bawled.

As the three or four hundred head that made up his entire earthly possession drifted obediently
in, the old man rode up to Creede and Hardy and waved his hand expansively.

"Thar, boys," he said, "thar's the results of peace and kindness. Nary a critter thar that
I heven't scratched between the horns since the day his maw brought him down to the salt lick.
I even git Jeff and the boys to brand and earmark 'em fer me, so they won't hev no hard feelin'
fer the Old Man. D'ye see that big white-faced steer?" he asked, pointing with pride to the
monarch of the herd. "Waal, how much ye think he'll weigh?" he demanded, turning to Creede.
"Fifteen hundred?"

"Um, more 'n that," responded Creede, squinting his eyes down judicially. "Them Herefords are
awful solid when they git big. I reckon he'll run nigh onto seventeen hundred, Bill." He paused
and winked furtively at Hardy. "I kin git fifty dollars fer that old boy, jest the way he stands,"
he said, "and bein' as he can't carry no more weight nohow, I'll jest cut him into the town
herd right now, and--"

"Hyar!" shouted Johnson, grabbing the cowboy's bridle, "who's doin' this, anyhow?"

"W'y you, Bill," answered Creede innocently, "but--"

"That's all right, then," said the old man shortly, "you leave that steer alone. I'll jest
cut this herd to suit myself."

Over at the branding pen the irons were on the fire and the marking was progressing rapidly,
but out in the open Mr. Bill Johnson was making slow work of his cut.

"He gets stuck on them cows, like an Irishman with his pig," observed Creede, as the old man
turned back a prime four-year-old. "He'd rather be barbecued by the Apaches than part with
that big white-faced boy. If I owned 'em I'd send down a lot of them big fat brutes and buy
doggies; but Bill spends all the money he gits fer booze anyhow, so I reckon it's all right.
He generally sends out about twenty runts and roughs, and lets it go at that. Say! You'll have
to git a move on, Bill," he shouted, "we want to send that beef cut on ahead!"

The old man reined in his mare and surveyed the big herd critically.

"Waal," he drawled, "I reckon that'll do fer this trip, then. Take 'em along. And the fust
one of you punchers that hits one of them critters over the tail with his hondu," he shouted,
as the eager horsemen trotted over to start them, "will hev me to lick!"

He placed an order for provisions with Creede, asked him to keep the supplies at Hidden Water
until he came over for them with the burros, and turned away contentedly as the cowboys went
upon their way.

Down by the branding pen the mother cows licked the blood from their offsprings' mangled ears
and mooed resentfully, but the big white-faced steer stood in brutish content on the salting
grounds and gazed after the town herd thoughtfully.

CHAPTER VIII

A YEAR'S MAIL

The beef herd was safely delivered at Bender, the feeders disposed of at Moroni, and the checks
sent on to the absentee owner, who did not know a steer from a stag; the rodéo hands were paid
off and successfully launched upon their big drunk; bills were paid and the Summer's supplies
ordered in, and then at last the superintendent and rodéo boss settled down to a little domesticity.

Since the day that Hardy had declined to drink with him Creede had quietly taken to water,
and he planted a bag of his accumulated wages in a corner of the mud floor, to see, as he facetiously
expressed it, if it would grow. Mr. Bill Johnson had also saved his "cow money" from Black
Tex and banked it with Hardy, who had a little cache of his own, as well. With their finances
thus nicely disposed of the two partners swept the floor, cleaned up the cooking dishes, farmed
out their laundry to a squaw, and set their house in order generally. They were just greasing
up their reatas for a run after the wild horses of Bronco Mesa when Rafael pulled in with a
wagon-load of supplies and destroyed their peaceful life.

It was late when the grinding and hammering of wheels upon the boulders of the creek-bed announced
his near approach and Creede went out to help unload the provisions. A few minutes later he
stepped into the room where Hardy was busily cooking and stood across the table from him with
his hands behind his back, grinning mischievously.

"Rufe," he said, "you've got a girl."

Hardy looked up quickly and caught the significance of his pose, but he did not smile. He did
not even show an interest in the play.

"How do you figure that out?" he asked, indifferently.

"Oh, I know," drawled Creede. "Got a letter from her."

A single hawk-like glance was the only answer to this sally.

"She says: 'Why the hell don't you write!'" volunteered the cowboy.

"'S that so!" commented Hardy, and then he went on with his cooking.

For a minute Creede stood watching him, his eyes keen to detect the slightest quaver, but the
little man seemed suddenly to have forgotten him; he moved about absently, mechanically, dropping
nothing, burning nothing, yet far away, as in a dream.

"Huh!" exclaimed Creede, disgusted with his own make-believe, "you don't seem to care whether
school keeps or not. I'll excuse you from any further work this evenin'--here's your mail."

He drew a bundle of letters from behind his back and dropped it heavily upon the table, but
even then Hardy did not rise.

"Guess the Old Man must've forwarded my mail," he remarked, smiling at the size of the pack.
"I've been knocking around so, I haven't received a letter in a year. Chuck 'em on my desk,
will ye?"

"Sure," responded Creede, and stepping across the broad living-room he threw the bundle carelessly
on the bed.

"You're like me," he remarked, drawing his chair up sociably to supper, "I ain't got a letter
fer so long I never go near the dam' post office."

He sighed, and filled his plate with beans.

"Ever been in St. Louis?" he inquired casually. "No? They say it's a fine burg. Think I'll
save up my dinero and try it a whirl some day."

The supper table was cleared and Creede had lit his second cigarette before Hardy reverted
to the matter of his mail.

"Well," he said, "I might as well look over those letters--may be a thousand-dollar check amongst
them."

Then, stepping into his room, he picked up the package, examined it curiously, and cut the
cords with his knife.

A sheaf of twenty or more letters spilled out and, sitting on the edge of the bed, he shuffled
them over in the uncertain light of the fire, noting each inscription with a quick glance;
and as he gathered up the last he quietly tucked three of them beneath the folds of his blankets--two
in the same hand, bold and dashing yet stamped with a certain feminine delicacy and grace,
and each envelope of a pale blue; the third also feminine, but inscribed in black and white,
a crooked little hand that strayed across the page, yet modestly shrank from trespassing on
the stamp.

With the remainder of his mail Hardy blundered over to the table, dumping the loose handful
in a great pile before the weak glimmer of the lamp.

"There," he said, as Creede blinked at the heap, "I reckon that's mail enough for both of us.
You can read the advertisements and I'll see what the judge has to say for himself. Pitch in,
now." He waved his hand towards a lot of business envelopes, but Creede shook his head and
continued to smoke dreamily.

"Nope," he said briefly, "don't interest me."

He reached out and thumbed the letters over dumbly, spelling out a long word here and there
or scrutinizing some obscure handwriting curiously, as if it were Chinese, or an Indian sign
on a rock. Then, shoving back his chair, he watched Hardy's face as he skimmed rapidly through
the first letter.

"Good news in the first part of it and bad in the last," he remarked, as Hardy put it down.

"That's right," admitted Hardy, "but how'd you know?"

He gazed up at his complacent partner with a look of innocent wonder, and Creede laughed.

"W'y, hell boy," he said, "I can read you like a book. Your face tells the whole story as you
go along. After you've been down here in Arizona a few seasons and got them big eyes of yourn
squinched down a little--well, I may have to ast you a few questions, then."

He waved his hand in a large gesture and blew out a cloud of smoke, while a twinkle of amusement
crept into Hardy's unsquinched eyes.

"Maybe I'm smoother than I look," he suggested dryly. "You big, fat fellows get so self-satisfied
sometimes that you let lots of things go by you."

"Well, I'll take my chances on you," answered Creede placidly. "What did the old judge say?"

"He says you did fine with the cattle," said Hardy, "and sold 'em just in time--the market
fell off within a week after we shipped."

"Um-huh," grunted Creede. "And what's the bad bunch of news at the end?"

The bad bunch of news was really of a personal nature, stirring up unpleasant memories, but
Hardy passed it off by a little benevolent dissimulation.

"He says he's mighty glad I steered the sheep away, but there is something funny going on back
in Washington; some combine of the sheep and lumber interests has got in and blocked the whole
Forest Reserve business and there won't be any Salagua Forest Reserve this year. So I guess
my job of sheep-wrangler is going to hold; at least the judge asked me to stay with it until Fall."

"Well, you stay then, Rufe," said Creede earnestly, "because I've kinder got stuck on you--I
like your style," he added half apologetically.

"All right, Jeff," said Hardy. "Here's another letter--from my father. See if you can guess
what it is like."

He set his face rigidly and read the short letter through without a quaver.

"You and the Old Man have had a fallin'-out," observed Creede, with a shrewd grin, "and he
says when you git good and tired of bein' a dam' fool you might as well come home."

"Well, that's about the size of it," admitted Hardy. "I never told you much about my father,
did I?"

"Never knew you had one," said Creede, "until Bill Johnson began to blow about what an Injun-fighter
he was. I reckon that's where you git your sportin' blood, ain't it?"

"Well, I'll tell you," began Hardy. "The Old Man and I never did get along together. He's used
to commanding soldiers and all that, and I'm kind of quiet, but he always took a sneaking pride
in me when I was a boy, I guess. Anyway, every time I'd get into a fight around the post and
lick two or three Mexican kids, or do some good work riding or shooting, he'd say I'd be a
man before my mother, or something like that--but that was as far as he got. And all the time,
on the quiet, he was educating me for the Army. His father was a captain, and he's a colonel,
and I can see now he was lotting on my doing as well or better--but hell, that only made matters
worse."

He slid down in his chair and gazed into the fire gloomily. It was the first time Creede had
heard his partner use even the mildest of the range expletives, for in that particular he was
still a tenderfoot, and the word suddenly conveyed to him the depths of the little man's abandonment
and despair.

"Why--what was the matter?" he inquired sympathetically. "Couldn't you git no appointment?"

"Huh!" growled Hardy. "I guess you know, all right. Look at me!" he exclaimed, in a sudden
gust of passion and resentment. "Why, damn it, man, I'm an inch too short!"

"Well--I'll--be--dogged!" breathed Creede. "I never thought of that!"

"No," rejoined Hardy bitterly, "nor the Old Man, either--not until I stopped growing! Well,
he hasn't had a bit of use for me since. That's the size of it. And he didn't take any pains
to conceal the fact--most army men don't. There's only one man in the world to them, and that's
a soldier; and if you're not a soldier, you're nothing."

He waved a hand as if dismissing himself from the universe, and sank moodily into his seat,
while Creede looked him over in silence.

"Rufe," he said quietly, "d'ye remember that time when I picked you to be boss sheep-wrangler,
down at Bender? Well, I might as well tell you about that now--'t won't do no harm. The old
judge couldn't figure out what it was I see in you to recommend you for the job. Like's not
you don't know yourself. He thought I was pickin' you because you was a peaceful guy, and wouldn't
fight Black Tex; but that's where he got fooled, and fooled bad! I picked you because I knew
dam' well you would fight!"

He leaned far over across the table and his eyes glowed with a fierce light.

"D'ye think I want some little suckin' mamma's-joy of a diplomat on my hands when it comes
to a show-down with them sheepmen?" he cried. "No, by God, I want a man, and you're the boy,
Rufe; so shake!"

He rose and held out his hand. Hardy took it.

"I wouldn't have sprung this on you, pardner," he continued apologetically, "if I didn't see
you so kinder down in the mouth about your old man. But I jest want you to know that they's
one man that appreciates you for a plain scrapper. And I'll tell you another thing; when the
time comes you'll look jest as big over the top of a six-shooter as I do, and stand only half
the chanst to git hit. W'y, shucks!" he exclaimed magnanimously, "my size is agin' me at every
turn; my horse can't hardly pack me, I eat such a hell of a lot, and, well, I never can git
a pair of pants to fit me. What's this here letter?"

He picked one up at random, and Hardy ascertained that his tailor some six months previously
had moved to a new and more central location, where he would be pleased to welcome all his
old customers. But the subject of diminutive size was effectually dismissed and, having cheered
up his little friend as best he could, Creede seized the occasion to retire. Lying upon his
broad back in his blankets, with Tommy purring comfortably in the hollow of his arm, he smoked
out his cigarette in speculative silence, gazing up at the familiar stars whose wheelings mark
off the cowboy's night, and then dropped quietly to sleep, leaving his partner to brood over
his letters alone.

For a long time he sat there, opening them one by one--the vague and indifferent letters which
drift in while one is gone; and at last he stole silently across the dirt floor and brought
out the three letters from his bed. There in a moment, if he had been present, Creede might
have read him like a book; his lips drawn tight, his eyes big and staring, as he tore open
one of the pale blue envelopes with trembling hands. The fragments of a violet, shattered by
the long journey, fell before him as he plucked out the note, and its delicate fragrance rose
up like incense as he read. He hurried through the missive, as if seeking something which was
not there, then his hungry eyes left the unprofitable page and wandered about the empty room,
only to come back to those last words: "Always your Friend, Kitty Bonnair."

"Always your friend," he repeated bitterly--"always your friend. Ah, God!" He sighed wearily
and shook his head. For a moment he lapsed into dreams; then, reaching out, he picked up the
second letter, postmarked over a year before, and examined it idly. The very hour of its collection
was recorded--"Ferry Sta. 1.30 A. M."--and the date he could never forget. Written on that
very same day, and yet its message had never reached him!

He could see as in a vision the shrouded form of Kitty Bonnair slipping from her door at midnight
to fling a final word after him, not knowing how far he would flee; he could see the lonely
mail collector, half obscured in the San Francisco fog, as he scooped the letter from the box
with many others and boarded the car for the ferry. It was a last retort, and likely bitter,
for he had spoken in anger himself, and Kitty was not a woman to be denied. There was an exaggerated
quirk to the square corners of her letters, a brusque shading of the down strokes--undoubtedly
Kitty was angry. But for once he had disarmed her--it was a year after, now, and he had read
her forgiveness first! Yet it was with a strange sinking of the heart that he opened the blue
envelope and stared at the scribbled words:

DEAR FRIEND THAT WAS: My heart is very sore to-night--I had trusted you so--I had depended
upon you so--and now you have deliberately broken all your faith and promises. Rufus, I had
thought you different from other men--more gentle, more considerate, more capable of a true
friendship which I fondly hoped would last forever--but now, oh, I can never forgive you! Just
when life was heaviest with disappointments, just when I was leaning upon you most as a true
friend and comrade--then you must needs spoil it all. And after I had told you I could never
love any one! Have you forgotten all that I told you in the balcony? Have you forgotten all
that I have risked for the friendship I held so dear? And then to spoil it all! Oh, I hate
you--I hate you!

He stopped and stiffened in his chair, and his eyes turned wild with horror; then he gathered
his letters together blindly and crept away to bed. In the morning he arose and went about
his work with mouse-like quietness, performing all things thoroughly and well, talking, even
laughing, yet with a droop like that of a wounded creature that seeks only to hide and escape.

Creede watched him furtively, hung around the house for a while, then strode out to the pasture
and caught up his horse.

"Be back this aft," he said, and rode majestically away up the cañon, where he would be out
of the way. For men, too, have their instincts and intuitions, and they are even willing to
leave alone that which they cannot remedy and do not understand.

As Creede galloped off, leaving the ranch of a sudden lonely and quiet, Tommy poked his head
anxiously out through a slit in the canvas bottom of the screen door and began to cry--his
poor cracked voice, all broken from calling for help from the coyotes, quavering dismally.
In his most raucous tones he continued this lament for his master until at last Hardy gathered
him up and held him to his breast.

"Ah, Kitty, Kitty," he said, and at the caressing note in his voice the black cat began to
purr hoarsely, raising his scrawny head in the ecstasy of being loved. Thief and reprobate
though he was, and sadly given to leaping upon the table and flying spitefully at dogs, even
that rough creature felt the need of love; how much more the sensitive and high-bred man, once
poet and scholar, now cowboy and sheep-wrangler, but always the unhappy slave of Kitty Bonnair.

The two letters lay charred to ashes among the glowing coals, but their words, even the kindest
meant, were seared deep in his heart, fresh hurts upon older scars, and as he sat staring at
the gaunt sahuaros on the hilltops he meditated gloomily upon his reply. Then, depositing Tommy
on the bed, he sat down at his desk before the iron-barred window and began to write.

  DEAR FRIEND THAT WAS: Your two letters came together--the one that
  you have just sent, and the one written on that same night, which
  I hope I may some day forget. It was not a very kind letter--I am
  sorry that I should ever have offended you, but it was not gently
  done. No friend could ever speak so to another, I am sure. As for
  the cause, I am a human being, a man like other men, and I am not
  ashamed. Yet that I should so fail to read your mind I am ashamed.
  Perhaps it was my egotism, which made me over-bold, thinking that
  any woman could love me. But if what I offered was nothing to you,
  if even for a moment you hated me, it is enough. Now for all this
  talk of friendship--I am not your friend and never will be; and
  if, after what has passed, you are my friend, I ask but one
  thing--let me forget. For I will never come back, I will never
  write, I will never submit. Surely, with all that life offers you,
  you can spare me the humiliation of being angry with you.

  I am now engaged in work which, out of consideration for Judge
  Ware, I cannot leave; otherwise I would not ask you not to write
  to me.

  Trusting that you will remember me kindly to your mother, I
  remain, sincerely,

                                                        Rufus Hardy.

He signed his name at the bottom, folded the sheet carefully, and thrust the sealed envelope
into an inner pocket. Then for the first time, he drew out the third letter and spread its
pages before him--a long letter, full of news, yet asking no questions. The tense lines about
his lips relaxed as he read, he smiled whimsically as he heard of the queer doings of his old-time
friends; how these two had run away and got married in order to escape a church wedding, how
Tupper Browne had painted a likeness of Mather in Hades--after the "Dante" of Doré--and had
been detected in the act; and then this little note, cued in casually near the end:

  Kitty Bonnair has given up art for the present on account of her
  eyes, and has gone in for physical culture and riding lessons in
  the park. She dropped in at the last meeting of The Circle, and I
  told her how curiously father had encountered you at Bender. We
  all miss you very much at The Circle--in fact, it is not doing so
  well of late. Kitty has not attended a meeting in months, and I
  often wonder where we may look for another Poet, Philosopher, and
  Friend--unless you will come back! Father did not tell me where
  you had been or what you intended to do, but I hope you have not
  given up the Muse. To encourage you I will send down a book, now
  and then, and you may send me a poem. Is it a bargain? Then
  good-bye.

                                 With best wishes,
                                                   LUCY WARE.

  P. S.--I met your father on the street the other day, and he
  seemed very much pleased to hear how well you were getting along.

Hardy put the letter down and sighed.

"Now there's a thoroughly nice girl," he said. "I wonder why she doesn't get married." Then,
reaching for a fresh sheet of paper, he began to write, describing the beauty of the country;
the noble qualities of his horse, Chapuli, the Grasshopper; the march of the vast army of sheep;
Creede, Tommy, and whatnot, with all the pent-up enthusiasm of a year's loneliness. When it
was ended he looked at the letter with a smile, wondering whether to send it by freight or
express. Six cents in stamps was the final solution of the problem, and as his pocketbook contained
only four he stuck them on and awaited his partner's return.

"Say, Jeff," he called, as Creede came in from the pasture, "have you got any stamps?"

"Any which?" inquired Creede suspiciously.

"Any postage stamps--to put on letters."

"Huh!" exclaimed Creede. "You must think I've got a girl--or important business in the States.
No, I'll tell you. The only stamp I've got is in a glass frame, hung up on the wall--picture
of George Washington, you know. Haven't you never seen it? W'y, it's right there in the parler--jest
above the pianney--and a jim-dandy piece of steel engraving she is, too." He grinned broadly
as he concluded this running fire of jest, but his partner remained serious to the end.

"Well," he said, "I guess I'll go down to Moroni in the morning, then."

"What ye goin' down there for?" demanded Creede incredulously.

"Why, to buy a stamp, of course," replied Hardy, "it's only forty miles, isn't it?" And early
in the morning, true to his word, he saddled up Chapuli and struck out down the river.

From the doorway Creede watched him curiously, his lips parted in a dubious smile.

"There's something funny goin' on here, ladies," he observed sagely, "something funny--and
I'm dogged if I savvy what it is." He stooped and scooped up Tommy in one giant paw. "Well,
Tom, Old Socks," he said, holding him up where he could sniff delicately at the rafters, "you've
got a pretty good nose, how about it, now--can you smell a rat?" But even Tommy could not explain
why a man should ride forty miles in order to buy a stamp.

CHAPTER IX

MORONI

The Mormon settlement of Moroni proved to belong to that large class of Western "cities" known
as "string-towns"--a long line of stores on either side of a main street, brick where fires
have swept away the shacks, and wood with false fronts where dynamite or a change of wind has
checked the conflagration; a miscellaneous conglomeration of saloons, restaurants, general
stores, and livery stables, all very satisfying to the material wants of man, but in the ensemble
not over-pleasing to the eye.

At first glance, Moroni might have been Reno, Nevada; or Gilroy, California; or Deming, New
Mexico; or even Bender--except for the railroad. A second glance, however, disclosed a smaller
number of disconsolate cow ponies standing in front of the saloons and a larger number of family
rigs tied to the horse rack in front of Swope's Store; there was also a tithing house with
many doors, a brick church, and women and children galore. And for twenty miles around there
was nothing but flowing canals and irrigated fields waving with wheat and alfalfa, all so green
and prosperous that a stranger from the back country was likely to develop a strong leaning
toward the faith before he reached town and noticed the tithing house.

As for Hardy, his eyes, so long accustomed to the green lawns and trees of Berkeley, turned
almost wistful as he gazed away across the rich fields, dotted with cocks of hay or resounding
to the whirr of the mower; but for the sweating Latter Day Saints who labored in the fields,
he had nothing but the pitying contempt of the cowboy. It was a fine large country, to be sure,
and produced a lot of very necessary horse feed, but Chapuli shied when his feet struck the
freshly sprinkled street, and somehow his master felt equally ill at ease.

Having purchased his stamp and eaten supper, he was wandering aimlessly up and down the street--that
being the only pleasure and recourse of an Arizona town outside the doors of a saloon--when
in the medley of heterogeneous sounds he heard a familiar voice boom out and as abruptly stop.
It was evening and the stores were closed, but various citizens still sat along the edge of
the sidewalk, smoking and talking in the semi-darkness. Hardy paused and listened a moment.
The voice which he had heard was that of no ordinary man; it was deep and resonant, with a
rough, overbearing note almost military in its brusqueness; but it had ceased and another voice,
low and protesting, had taken its place. In the gloom he could just make out the forms of the
two men, sitting on their heels against the wall and engaged in a one-sided argument. The man
with the Southern drawl was doing all the talking, but as Hardy passed by, the other cut in
on him again.

"Well," he demanded in masterful tones, "what ye goin' to do about it?" Then, without waiting
for an answer, he exclaimed:

"Hello, there, Mr. Hardy!"

"Hello," responded Hardy. "Who is this, anyway?"

"Jim Swope," replied the voice, with dignified directness. "What're you doing in these parts?"

"Came down to buy a postage stamp," replied Hardy, following a habit he had of telling the
truth in details.

"Huh!" grunted Swope. "It's a wonder you wouldn't go to Bender for it--that Jew over there
might make you a rate!"

"Nope," responded Hardy, ignoring the too-evident desire of the Moroni storekeeper to draw
him into an argument. "He couldn't do it--they say the Government loses money every time it
sells one. Nice town you've got down here," he remarked, by way of a parting compliment; but
Swope was not satisfied to let him escape so easily.

"Hold on, there!" he exclaimed, rousing up from his place. "What's your bloody hurry? Come
on back here and shake hands with Mr. Thomas--Mr. Thomas is my boss herder up in Apache County.
Thinking of bringing him down here next Fall," he added laconically, and by the subtle change
in his voice Hardy realized intuitively that that move had been the subject of their interrupted
argument. More than that, he felt vaguely that he himself was somehow involved in the discussion,
the more so as Mr. Thomas balked absolutely at shaking hands with him.

"I hope Mr. Thomas will find it convenient to stop at the ranch," he murmured pleasantly, "but
don't let me interfere with your business."

"Well, I guess that's all to-night, Shep," remarked Swope, taking charge of the situation.
"I jest wanted you to meet Hardy while you was together. This is the Mr. Hardy, of the Dos
S outfit, you understand," he continued, "and a white cowman! If you have to go across his
range, go quick--and tell your men the same. I want them dam' tail-twisters up in that Four
Peaks country to know that it pays to be decent to a sheepman, and I'm goin' to show some of
'em, too, before I git through! But any time my sheep happen to git on your range, Mr. Hardy,"
he added reassuringly, "you jest order 'em off, and Mr. Thomas here will see to it that they go!"

He turned upon his boss herder with a menacing gesture, as if charging him with silence, and
Thomas, whose sole contribution to the conversation had been a grunt at the end, swung about
and ambled sullenly off up the street.

"Feelin' kinder bad to-night," explained Swope, as his mayordomo butted into the swinging doors
of a saloon and disappeared, "but you remember what I said about them sheep. How do things
look up your way?" he inquired. "Feed pretty good?"

"It's getting awfully dry," replied Hardy noncommittally. "I suppose your sheep are up on the
Black Mesa by this time."

"Ump!" responded the sheepman, and then there was a long pause. "Sit down," he said at last,
squatting upon the edge of the sidewalk, "I want to talk business with you."

He lit a short black pipe and leaned back comfortably against a post.

"You seem to be a pretty smooth young feller," he remarked, patronizingly. "How long have you
been in these parts? Two months, eh? How'd Judge Ware come to get a-hold of you?"

"Just picked me up down at Bender," replied Hardy.

"Oh, jest picked you up, hey? I thought mebby you was some kin to him. Ain't interested in
the cattle, are you? Well, I jest thought you might be, being put in over Jeff that way, you
know. Nice boy, that, but hot-headed as a goat. He'll be making hair bridles down in Yuma some
day, I reckon. His old man was the same way. So you ain't no kin to the judge and've got no
int'rest in the cattle, either, eh? H'm, how long do you figure on holding down that job?"

"Don't know," replied Hardy; "might quit to-day or get fired to-morrow. It's a good place, though."

"Not the only one, though," suggested the sheepman shrewdly, "not by a dam' sight! Ever investigate
the sheep business? No? Then you've overlooked something! I've lived in this country for nigh
onto twenty years, and followed most every line of business, but I didn't make my pile punching
cows, nor running a store, neither--I made it raising sheep. Started in with nothing at the
time of the big drought in '92, herding on shares. Sheep did well in them good years that followed,
and first thing I knew I was a sheepman. Now I've got forty thousand head, and I'm making a
hundred per cent on my investment every year. Of course, if there comes a drought I'll lose
half of 'em, but did you ever sit down and figure out a hundred per cent a year? Well, five
thousand this year is ten next year, and ten is twenty the next year, and the twenty looks
like forty thousand dollars at the end of three years. That's quite a jag of money, eh? I won't
say what it would be in three years more, but here's the point. You're a young man and out
to make a stake, I suppose, like the rest of 'em. What's the use of wasting your time and energy
trying to hold that bunch of half-starved cows together? What's the use of going into a poor
business, man, when there's a better business; and I'll tell you right now, the sheep business
is the coming industry of Arizona. We have shown one form of connection which may be used for
this purpose in Figs. 4 and 5 of the drawings.

In this construction each end of the standard 8 has secured to it an eye 9 which engages with a hook
10, secured to a bracket plate 11, which latter plate is in turn
fastened to the spar 3.

Diagonal braces or stay-wires 12 extend from each end of each standard to the opposite ends
of the adjacent standards, and as a convenient mode of attaching these parts I have shown a hook
13 made integral with the hook 10 to receive the end of one of the stay-wires, the other stay-wire
being mounted on the hook 10. The hook 13 is shown as bent down to retain the stay-wire in connection
to it, while the hook 10 is shown as provided with a pin 14 to hold
the staywire 12 and eye 9 in position thereon.

It will be seen that this construction forms a truss system which gives the whole machine
great transverse rigidity and strength, while at the same time the
jointed connections of the parts permit the aeroplanes to be bent
or twisted in the manner which we will now proceed to describe.

15 indicates a rope or other flexible connection extending lengthwise of the front of the machine
above the lower aeroplane, passing under pulleys or other suitable guides 16 at the front corners
e and f of the lower aeroplane, and extending thence upward and rearward to the upper rear corners
c and d, of the upper aeroplane, where they are attached, as indicated at 17. To the central
portion of the rope there is connected a laterally-movable cradle 18, which forms a means for
moving the rope lengthwise in one direction or the other, the cradle
being movable toward either side of the machine.

We have devised this cradle as a convenient means for operating the rope 15, and the machine is
intended to be generally used with the operator lying face downward on the lower aeroplane, with
his head to the front, so that the operator's body rests on the cradle, and the cradle can be
moved laterally by the movements of the operator's body.

It will be understood, however, that the rope 15 may be manipulated in any suitable manner.

19 indicates a second rope extending transversely of the machine along
the rear edge of the body portion of the lower aeroplane, passing
under suitable pulleys or guides 20 at the rear corners g and h of
the lower aeroplane and extending thence diagonally upward to the
front corners a and b of the upper aeroplane, where its ends are secured
in any suitable manner, as indicated at 21.

Considering the structure so far as we have now described it, and
assuming that the cradle 18 be moved to the right in Figs.

1 and 2, as indicated by the arrows applied to the cradle in Fig. 1 and by the dotted lines
in Fig. 2, it will be seen that that portion of the rope 15 passing
under the guide pulley at the corner e and secured to the corner d
will be under tension, while slack is paid out throughout the other
side or half of the rope 15.

The part of the rope 15 under tension exercises a downward pull upon
the rear upper corner d of the structure and an upward pull upon the
front lower corner e, as indicated by the arrows.

This causes the corner d to move downward and the corner e to move upward. As the corner e moves
upward it carries the corner a upward with it, since the intermediate standard 8 is substantially
rigid and maintains an equal distance between the corners a and e at all times. Similarly, the
standard 8, connecting the corners d and h, causes the corner h to
move downward in unison with the corner d. Since the corner a thus
moves upward and the corner h moves downward, that portion of the
rope 19 connected to the corner a will be pulled upward through the
pulley 20 at the corner h, and the pull thus exerted on the rope 19
will pull the corner b on the other wise of the machine downward and
at the same time pull the corner g at said other side of the machine
upward.

This results in a downward movement of the corner b and an upward movement of the corner c.
Thus it results from a lateral movement of the cradle 18 to the right
in Fig. 1 that the lateral margins ad and eh at one side of the machine
are moved from their normal positions in which they lie in the normal
planes of their respective aeroplanes, into angular relations with
said normal planes, each lateral margin on this side of the machine
being raised above said normal plane at its forward end and depressed
below said normal plane at its rear end, said lateral margins being
thus inclined upward and forward.

At the same time a reverse inclination is imparted to the lateral
margins bc end fg at the other side of the machine, their inclination
being downward and forward.

These positions are indicated in dotted lines in Fig. 1 of the drawings.

A movement of the cradle 18 in the opposite direction from its normal position will reverse
the angular inclination of the lateral margins of the aeroplanes
in an obvious manner.

By reason of this construction it will be seen that with the particular
mode of construction now under consideration it is possible to move
the forward corner of the lateral edges of the aeroplane on one side
of the machine either above or below the normal planes of the aeroplanes,
a reverse movement of the forward corners of the lateral margins on
the other side of the machine occurring simultaneously.

During this operation each aeroplane is twisted or distorted around a line extending centrally
across the same from the middle of one lateral margin to the middle of the other lateral margin,
the twist due to the moving of the lateral margins to different angles
extending across each aeroplane from side to side, so that each aeroplane
surface is given a helicoidal warp or twist.

We prefer this construction and mode of operation for the reason that it gives a gradually increasing
angle to the body of each aeroplane from the centre longitudinal
line thereof outward to the margin, thus giving a continuous surface
on each side of the machine, which has a gradually increasing or decreasing
angle of incidence from the centre of the machine to either side.

We wish it to be understood, however, that our invention is not limited to this particular
construction, since any construction whereby the angular relations of the lateral margins of the
aeroplanes may be varied in opposite directions with respect to the
normal planes of said aeroplanes comes within the scope of our invention.

Furthermore, it should be understood that while the lateral margins
of the aeroplanes move to different angular positions with respect
to or above and below the normal planes of said aeroplanes, it does
not necessarily follow that these movements bring the opposite lateral
edges to different angles respectively above and below a horizontal
plane since the normal planes of the bodies of the aeroplanes are
inclined to the horizontal when the machine is in flight, said inclination
being downward from front to rear, and while the forward corners on
one side of the machine may be depressed below the normal planes of
the bodies of the aeroplanes said depression is not necessarily sufficient
to carry them below the horizontal planes passing through the rear
corners on that side.

Moreover, although we prefer to so construct the apparatus that the movements of the lateral
margins on the opposite sides of the machine are equal in extent and opposite m direction,
yet our invention is not limited to a construction producing this result, since it may be desirable
under certain circumstances to move the lateral margins on one side of the machine just described
without moving the lateral margins on the other side of the machine to an equal extent in the opposite
direction. Turning now to the purpose of this provision for moving the lateral margins of the
aeroplanes in the manner described, it should be premised that owing
to various conditions of wind pressure and other causes the body of
the machine is apt to become unbalanced laterally, one side tending
to sink and the other side tending to rise, the machine turning around
its central longitudinal axis.

The provision which we have just described enables the operator to
meet this difficulty and preserve the lateral balance of the machine.

Assuming that for some cause that side of the machine which lies to the left of the observer
in Figs. 1 and 2 has shown a tendency to drop downward, a movement of the cradle 18 to the
right of said figures, as herein before assumed, will move the lateral
margins of the aeroplanes in the manner already described, so that
the margins ad and eh will be inclined downward and rearward, and
the lateral margins bc and fg will be inclined upward and rearward
with respect to the normal planes of the bodies of the aeroplanes.

With the parts of the machine in this position it will be seen that the lateral margins ad and
eh present a larger angle of incidence to the resisting air, while the lateral margins on the other
side of the machine present a smaller angle of incidence. Owing to this fact, the side of the machine
presenting the larger angle of incidence will tend to lift or move upward, and this upward
movement will restore the lateral balance of the machine. When the other side of the machine
tends to drop, a movement of the cradle 18 in the reverse direction will restore the machine
to its normal lateral equilibrium. Of course, the same effect will be produced in the same
way in the case of a machine employing only a single aeroplane.

In connection with the body of the machine as thus operated we employ
a vertical rudder or tail 22, so supported as to turn around a vertical
axis.

This rudder is supported at the rear ends on supports or arms 23, pivoted at their forward ends to
the rear margins of the upper and lower aeroplanes, respectively.

These supports are preferably V-shaped, as shown, so that their forward ends are comparatively
widely separated, their pivots being indicated at 24. Said supports are free to swing upward at
their free rear ends, as indicated in dotted lines in Fig. 3, their downward movement being limited
in any suitable manner. The vertical pivots of the rudder 22 are indicated at 25, and one of
these pivots has mounted thereon a sheave or pulley 26, around which passes a tiller-rope 27,
the ends of which are extended out laterally and secured to the rope
19 on opposite sides of the central point of said rope.

By reason of this construction the lateral shifting of the cradle
18 serves to turn the rudder to one side or the other of the line
of flight.

It will be observed in this connection that the construction is such that the rudder will always
be so turned as to present its resisting surface on that side of
the machine on which the lateral margins of the aeroplanes present
the least angle of resistance.

The reason of this construction is that when the lateral margins
of the aeroplanes are so turned in the manner hereinbefore described
as to present different angles of incidence to the atmosphere, that
side presenting the largest angle of incidence, although being lifted
or moved upward in the manner already described, at the same time
meets with an increased resistance to its forward motion, while at
the same time the other side of the machine, presenting a smaller
angle of incidence, meets with less resistance to its forward motion
and tends to move forward more rapidly than the retarded side.

This gives the machine a tendency to turn around its vertical axis, and this tendency if not
properly met will not only change the direction of the front of the
machine, but will ultimately permit one side thereof to drop into
a position vertically below the other side with the aero planes in
vertical position, thus causing the machine to fall.

The movement of the rudder, hereinbefore described, prevents this action, since it exerts
a retarding influence on that side of the machine which tends to
move forward too rapidly and keeps the machine with its front properly
presented to the direction of flight and with its body properly balanced
around its central longitudinal axis.

The pivoting of the supports 23 so as to permit them to swing upward prevents injury to the rudder
and its supports in case the machine alights at such an angle as to cause the rudder to strike
the ground first, the parts yielding upward, as indicated in dotted
lines in Fig. 3, and thus preventing injury or breakage.

We wish it to be understood, however, that we do not limit ourselves to the particular description
of rudder set forth, the essential being that the rudder shall be vertical and shall be so moved
as to present its resisting surface on that side of the machine which offers the least resistance
to the atmosphere, so as to counteract the tendency of the machine
to turn around a vertical axis when the two sides thereof offer different
resistances to the air.

From the central portion of the front of the machine struts 28 extend horizontally forward from
the lower aeroplane, and struts 29 extend downward and forward from the central portion of the
upper aeroplane, their front ends being united to the struts 28,
the forward extremities of which are turned up, as indicated at 30.

These struts 28 and 29 form truss-skids projecting in front of the whole frame of the machine and
serving to prevent the machine from rolling over forward when it alights. The struts 29 serve
to brace the upper portion of the main frame and resist its tendency to move forward after the
lower aeroplane has been stopped by its contact with the earth, thereby
relieving the rope 19 from undue strain, for it will be understood
that when the machine comes into contact with the earth, further forward
movement of the lower portion thereof being suddenly arrested, the
inertia of the upper portion would tend to cause it to continue to
move forward if not prevented by the struts 29, and this forward movement
of the upper portion would bring a very violent strain upon the rope
19, since it is fastened to the upper portion at both of its ends,
while its lower portion is connected by the guides 20 to the lower
portion.

The struts 28 and 29 also serve to support the front or horizontal rudder, the construction
of which we will now proceed to describe.

The front rudder 31 is a horizontal rudder having a flexible body, the same consisting of three
stiff crosspieces or sticks 32, 33, and 34, and the flexible ribs
35, connecting said cross-pieces and extending from front to rear.

The frame thus provided is covered by a suitable fabric stretched
over the same to form the body of the rudder.

The rudder is supported from the struts 29 by means of the intermediate cross-piece 32, which
is located near the centre of pressure slightly in front of a line equidistant between the
front and rear edges of the rudder, the cross-piece 32 forming the pivotal axis of the rudder,
so as to constitute a balanced rudder. To the front edge of the rudder there are connected
springs 36 which springs are connected to the upturned ends 30 of
the struts 28, the construction being such that said springs tend
to resist any movement either upward or downward of the front edge
of the horizontal rudder.

The rear edge of the rudder lies immediately in front of the operator and may be operated by
him in any suitable manner. We have shown a mechanism for this purpose comprising a roller or shaft
37, which may be grasped by the operator so as to turn the same in
either direction.

Bands 38 extend from the roller 37 forward to and around a similar roller or shaft 39, both
rollers or shafts being supported in suitable bearings on the struts 28. The forward roller
or shaft has rearwardly-extending arms 40, which are connected by links 41 with the rear edge
of the rudder 31.

The normal position of the rudder 31 is neutral or substantially parallel with the aeroplanes
1 and 2; but its rear edge may be moved upward or downward, so as
to be above or below the normal plane of said rudder through the mechanism
provided for that purpose.

It will be seen that the springs 36 will resist any tendency of the
forward edge of the rudder to move in either direction, so that when
force is applied to the rear edge of said rudder the longitudinal
ribs 35 bend, and the rudder thus presents a concave surface to the
action of the wind either above or below its normal plane, said surface
presenting a small angle of incidence at its forward portion and said
angle of incidence rapidly increasing toward the rear.

This greatly increases the efficiency of the rudder as compared with a plane surface of equal
area.

By regulating the pressure on the upper and lower sides of the rudder
through changes of angle and curvature in the manner described a turning
movement of the main structure around its transverse axis may be effected,
and the course of the machine may thus be directed upward or downward
at the will of the operator and the longitudinal balance thereof maintained.

Contrary

to the usual custom, we place the horizontal rudder in front of the
aeroplanes at a negative angle and employ no horizontal tail at all.

By this arrangement we obtain a forward surface which is almost entirely free from pressure under
ordinary conditions of flight, but which even if not moved at all
from its original position becomes an efficient lifting-surface whenever
the speed of the machine is accidentally reduced very much below the
normal, and thus largely counteracts that backward travel of the centre
of pressure on the aeroplanes which has frequently been productive
of serious injuries by causing the machine to turn downward and forward
and strike the ground head-on.

 But those same orders, if they ever became
known, would call in the rapacious sheepmen like vultures to a feast, and the bones of his
cattle--that last sorry remnant of his father's herds--would bleach on Bronco Mesa with the
rest, a mute tribute to the triumph of sheep.

All that day Hardy rode up the Alamo until he stood upon the summit of the Juate and looked
over the divide to the north, and still there were no sheep. Not a smoke, not a dust streak,
although the chill of Autumn was in the air. In the distant Sierra Blancas the snow was already
on the peaks and the frosts lay heavy upon the black mesa of the Mogollons. Where then could
the sheep be, the tender, gently nurtured sheep, which could stand neither heat in Summer nor
cold in Winter, but must always travel, travel, feeding upon the freshest of green grass and
leaving a desert in their wake? The slow-witted Mexicans and Basques, who did not follow the
lead of the Swopes, had returned on their fall migration with the regularity of animals, but
all those cheery herders for whom he had cooked and slaved--Bazan, McDonald, the Swopes and
their kin, who used the upper ford--were lost as if the earth had swallowed them up.

The stars were shining when Hardy came in sight of the ranch at the end of that unprofitable
day, and he was tired. The low roof of the house rose up gloomily before him, but while he
was riding in a hound suddenly raised his challenge in the darkness. Instantly his yell was
answered by a chorus, and as Chapuli swerved from the rush of the pack the door was thrown
open and the tall, gaunt form of Bill Johnson stood outlined against the light.

"Yea, Ribs; hey, Rock; down, Ring!" he hollered. "Hey, boys; hey, Suke!" And in a mighty chorus
of bayings the long-eared hounds circled about and returned to the feet of their master, wagging
their tails but not abating their barking one whit. Standing bareheaded in the doorway with
his hair and beard bushed out like a lion's mane Johnson strove by kicks and curses to quiet
their uproar, shouting again and again some words which Hardy could not catch.

At last, grabbing old Suke, the leader of the pack, by an ear, he slapped her until her yelpings
silenced the rest; then, stepping out into the opening, he exclaimed:

"My God, Hardy, is that you?"

"Sure," replied Hardy impatiently. "Why, what's the matter?"

"Sheep!" shouted Johnson, throwing out his hands wildly, "thousands of 'em, millions of 'em!"

"Sheep--where?" demanded Hardy. "Where are they?"

"They're on your upper range, boy, and more comin'!"

"What?" cried Hardy incredulously. "Why, how did they get up there? I just rode the whole rim
to-day!"

"They come over the top of the Four Peaks," shouted the old man, shaking with excitement. "Yes,
sir, over the top of the Four Peaks! My hounds took after a lion last night, and this mornin'
I trailed 'em clean over into the middle fork where they had 'im treed. He jumped down and
run when I come up and jist as we was hotfoot after him we run spang into three thousand head
of sheep, drifting down from the pass, and six greasers and a white man in the rear with carbeens.
The whole dam' outfit is comin' in on us. But we can turn 'em yet! Whar's Jeff and the boys?"

"They've gone to town with the cattle."

"Well, you're dished then," said the old man grimly. "Might as well put up your horse and eat--I'm
goin' home and see that they don't none of 'em git in on me!"

"Whose sheep were they?" inquired Hardy, as he sat down to a hasty meal.

"Don't ask me, boy," replied Johnson. "I never had time to find out. One of them Mexicans took
a shot at Rye and I pulled my gun on him, and then the boss herder he jumped in, and there
we had it, back and forth. He claimed I was tryin' to stompede his sheep, but I knowed his
greaser had tried to shoot my dog, and I told him so! And I told him furthermore that the first
sheep or sheepman that p'inted his head down the Pocket trail would stop lead; and every one
tharafter, as long as I could draw a bead. And by Gawd, I mean it!" He struck his gnarled fist
upon the table till every tin plate jumped, and his fiery eyes burned savagely as he paced
about the room.

At first peep of dawn Bill Johnson was in the saddle, his long-barrelled revolver thrust pugnaciously
into his boot, his 30-30 carbine across his arm, and his hounds slouching dutifully along in
the rear. Close behind followed Hardy, bound for the Peaks, but though the morning was cold
he had stripped off his coat and shaps, and everything which might conceal a weapon, leaving
even his polished Colt's in his blankets. If the sheep were to be turned now it could never
be by arms. The sheepmen had stolen a march, Creede and his cowboys were far away, and his
only hope was the olive branch of peace. Yet as he spurred up the Carrizo trail he felt helpless
and abused, like a tried soldier who is sent out unarmed by a humanitarian commander. Only
one weapon was left to him--the one which even Jim Swope had noticed--his head; and as he worked
along up the hogback which led down from the shoulder of the Four Peaks he schooled himself
to a Spartan patience and fortitude.

At last from a high cliff which overshadowed the broad cañon of the middle fork, he looked
down and saw the sheep, like a huge, dirty-brown blot, pouring in a hundred diverging lines
down the valley and feeding as they came. Higher and higher up the sides the old ewes fought
their way, plucking at the long spears of grass which grew among the rocks; and the advance
guard, hurrying forward, nipped eagerly at the browse and foliage as they passed, until, at
last, some tempting bush detained them too long and they were swallowed up in the ruck. Little
paths appeared in the leaders' wake, winding in and out among the bowlders; and like soldiers
the sheep fell into line, moving forward with the orderly precision of an army. A herder with
his dogs trailed nonchalantly along the flank, the sun glinting from his carbine as he clambered
over rocks, and in the rear another silent shepherd followed up the drag. So far it was a peaceful
pastoral scene, but behind the herd where the camp rustler and his burros should have been
there was a posse of men, and each man carried a gun.

Hardly had Chapuli mounted the ridge before every head was raised; the swarthy Mexicans unslung
their guns with a flourish, and held them at a ready. Yet for half an hour the lone horseman
sat there like a statue, and if he resented their coming or saw the dust of other bands behind,
he made no sign. Even when the guard of men passed beneath him, craning their necks uneasily,
he still remained silent and immobile, like a man who has councils of his own or leads a force
behind.

The leader of the vanguard of the sheep was a white man, and not unversed in the principles
of war, for after trailing safely through the box of the cañon--where a single rock displaced
would kill a score of sheep, and where the lone horseman had he so willed could have potted
half of the invaders from the heights--he turned his herd up a side cañon to the west and hastily
pitched his camp on a ridge. As the heat of the day came on, the other bands up the cañon stopped
also, and when the faint smoke showed Hardy that the camp rustlers were cooking dinner, he
turned and rode for the leader's camp.

Dinner was already served--beans, fried mutton, and bread, spread upon a greasy canvas--and
the hungry herders were shovelling it down with knives in their own primitive way when Hardy
rode up the slope. As he came into camp the Chihuahuanos dropped their plates, reached for
their guns, and stood in awkward postures of defence, some wagging their big heads in a braggartly
defiance, others, their courage waning, grinning in the natural shame of the peasant. In Hardy
they recognized a gentleman of categoría--and he never so much as glanced at them as he reined
in his spirited horse. His eyes were fixed upon the lone white man, their commander, who stood
by the fire regarding him with cold suspicion, and to whom he bowed distantly.

"Good-morning," he said, by way of introduction, and the sheepman blinked his eyes in reply.

"Whose sheep are those?" continued Hardy, coming to the point with masterful directness, and
once more the boss sheepman surveyed him with suspicion.

"Mine," he said, and Hardy returned his stare with a glance which, while decorously veiled,
indicated that he knew he lied. The man was a stranger to him, rather tall and slender, with
drawn lips and an eye that never wavered. His voice was tense with excitement and he kept his
right thumb hooked carelessly into the corner of his pocket, not far from the grip of a revolver.
As soon as he spoke Hardy knew him.

"You are Mr. Thomas, aren't you?" he inquired, as if he had no thought of trouble. "I believe
I met you once, down in Moroni."

"Ump!" grunted Mr. Thomas unsociably, and at that moment one of the Mexicans, out of awkwardness,
dropped his gun. As he stooped to pick it up a slow smile crept over the cowman's lips, a smile
which expressed polite amusement along with a measured contempt--and the boss herder was stung
with a nameless shame at the false play.

"Put up them guns, you dam' gawky fools!" he yelled in a frenzy of rage. "Put 'em up, I say.
This man ain't goin' to eat ye!" And though the poor browbeaten Chihuahuanos understood not
a word of English they felt somehow that they had been overzealous and shuffled back to their
blankets, like watchdogs that had been rebuked.

"Now," said the sheepman, taking his hand from his gun, "what can I do for you, Mr. Hardy?"

"Well," responded Hardy, "of course there are several things you might do to accommodate me,
but maybe you wouldn't mind telling me how you got in here, just for instance?"

"Always glad to 'commodate--where I can, of course," returned the sheepman grimly. "I came
in over the top of them Four Peaks yonder."

"Um," said Hardy, glancing up at the rocky walls. "Then you must've had hooks on your eyebrows,
for sure. I suppose the rest of the family is coming, too! And, by the way, how is my friend,
Mr. Swope?"

He appended this last with an artless smile, quite lacking in bitterness, but somehow the boss
herder felt himself discredited by the inquiry, as if he were consorting with thieves. It was
the old shame of the sheepman, the shame which comes to the social outcast, and burns upon
the cheek of the dishonored bastard, but which is seared deepest into the heart of the friendless
herder, the Ishmaelite of the cow-country, whose hand is against every man and every man's
against him. Hunger and thirst he can endure, and the weariness of life, but to have all men
turn away from him, to answer him grudgingly, to feed him at their table, but refuse themselves
to eat, this it is which turns his heart to bitterness and makes him a man to be feared. As
Thomas had looked at this trim young cowboy, smooth-shaven and erect, sitting astride a blooded
horse which snorted and pawed the ground delicately, and then had glanced at the low and brutal
Mexicans with whom his lot was cast, a blind fury had swept over him, wreaking its force upon
his own retainers; and now, when by implication he was classed with Jim Swope, he resented
it still more bitterly.

"Dam'fino," he answered sullenly. "Haven't seen 'im for a month."

"Oh, isn't he with you this trip?" asked Hardy, in surprise. "I had hoped that I might find
him up here." There was a suggestion of irony in his words which was not lost upon the mayordomo,
but Thomas let the remark pass in silence.

"Perhaps his brother Jasper is along," ventured Hardy. "No? Well, that's Jim's earmark on those
sheep, and I know it. What's the matter?"

"Matter with what?" growled Thomas morosely.

"Why, with Jim, of course. I thought after the pleasant times we had together last Spring he'd
be sure to come around. In fact," he added meaningly, "I've been looking for him."

At this naive statement, the sheepman could not restrain a smile.

"You don't know Jim as well as I do," he said, and there was a suggestion of bitterness in
his voice which Hardy was not slow to note.

"Well, perhaps not," he allowed; "but you know, and I know, that this is no pleasure trip you're
on--in fact, it's dangerous, and I never thought that Jim Swope would send a man where he was
afraid to go himself. Now I've got nothing against you, Mr. Thomas, and of course you're working
for him; but I ask you, as a man, don't you think, after what I've done for him, that Jim Swope
ought to come along himself if he wants to sheep me out?

"I've fed him, and I've fed all his herders and all his friends; I've grained his horses when
they were ga'nted down to a shadow because his own sheep had cleaned up the feed; I've made
him welcome to my house and done everything I could for him; and all I asked in return was
that he would respect this upper range. He knows very well that if his sheep go through here
this Fall our cattle will die in the Winter, and he knows that there is plenty of feed out
on The Rolls where our cows can't go, and yet he sends you in where he's scared to go himself,
just to hog our last piece of good feed and to put us out of business. I asked him down in
Moroni if he thought a cowman had a right to live, and he dodged the question as if he was
afraid he'd say something."

He stopped abruptly and looked out over the country toward Hidden Water, while the Mexicans
watched him furtively from beneath their slouched hats.

"Expecting some friends?" inquired Thomas, with a saturnine grin.

Hardy shook his head. "No. I came out here alone, and I left my gun in camp. I haven't got
a friend within forty miles, if that's what you mean. I suppose you've got your orders, Mr.
Thomas, but I just want to talk this matter over with you."

"All right," said the sheepman, suddenly thawing out at the good news. "I don't have so much
company as to make me refuse, even if it is a warm subject. But mebby you'd like a bite to
eat before we git down to business?" He waved a deprecating hand at the greasy canvas, and
Hardy swung quickly down from his saddle.

"Thanks. But don't let me keep you from your dinner. Here's where I break even with Jim Swope
for all that grub I cooked last Spring," he remarked, as he filled his plate. "But if it was
him that asked me," he added, "I'd starve to death before I'd eat it."

He sat on his heels by the canvas, with the boss sheepman on the other side, and the Mexicans
who had been so cocky took their plates and retired like Apaches to the edge of the brush,
where they would not obtrude upon their betters.

"They say it's bad for the digestion," observed Hardy, after the first silence, "to talk about
things that make you mad; so if you don't mind, Mr. Thomas, we'll forget about Jim Swope. What
kind of a country is it up there in Apache County, where you keep your sheep all Summer?"

"A fine country," rejoined Thomas, "and I wish to God I was back to it," he added.

"Why, what's the matter with this country? It looks pretty good to me."

"Ye-es," admitted the sheepman grudgingly, "it looks good enough, but--well, I lived up there
a long time and I got to like it. I had one of the nicest little ranches in the White Mountains;
there was good huntin' and fishin' and--well, I felt like a white man up there--never had no
trouble, you understand--and I was makin' good money, too."

His voice, which before had been harsh and strident, softened down as he dwelt upon the natural
beauty of the mountains which had been his home, but there was a tone of sadness in his talk
which told Hardy that ultimately he had suffered some great misfortune there. His occupation
alone suggested that--for there are few white men working as sheep-herders who lack a hard
luck story, if any one will listen to it. But this Shep Thomas was still young and unbroken,
with none of the black marks of dissipation upon his face, and his eyes were as keen and steady
as any hunter's. He was indeed the very type of fighter that Swope had sought, hardy and fearless,
and at the same time careful. As they sat together Hardy looked him over and was glad that
he had come out unarmed, yet though his host seemed a man of just and reasonable mind there
was a set, dogged look in his eyes which warned the cowman not to interfere, but let him talk
his fill. And the boss herder, poor lonely man, was carried away in spite of himself by the
temptation of a listener; after many days of strife and turmoil, cutting trails, standing off
cowmen, cursing Mexicans, at last to meet a white man who would just sit silent and let him
talk! His stories were of hunting and fishing, of prospecting, and restless adventures among
the Indians, and every time the conversation worked around towards sheep he led it resolutely
away. And for his part, never for a moment did Hardy try to crowd him, but let the talk lead
where it would, until of his own volition the sheepman told his story.

"I suppose you wonder what I'm doing down here," he said at last, "if I was so stuck on the
Concho country? Well, I bet you wouldn't guess in a thousand years--and you ought to be a pretty
good guesser, too," he added, with a gruff laugh. "Now, what do you think it was that put me
on the bum?"

"Poker game?" queried Hardy politely.

"Nope," replied the sheepman, showing his teeth, "I'm winners on poker."

"You don't look like a drinking man."

"Naw--nor it wasn't women, either. It's something unusual, I tell you. I stood and looked at
it for ten years, and never turned a hair. But here, I've been holdin' out on you a little--I
never told you what it was I raised on my ranch. Well, it was sheep."

"Sheep?" echoed Hardy, "did you keep 'em there all Winter?"

"W'y sure, man. There's lots of sheep in Apache County that was never ten miles from home."

"Then why does Jim Swope bring his bands south every Fall? I hear he loses five per cent of
them, at the least, coming and going."

"Ah, you don't understand Jim as well as I do. I was tryin' to make a livin'; he's tryin' to
git rich. He's doin' it, too."

Once more the note of bitterness came into his voice, and Hardy saw that the time had come.

"How's that?" he inquired quietly, and the sheepman plunged into his story.

"Well, it was this way. I kept a few thousand sheep up there in my valley. In the Summer we
went up the mountain, followin' the grass, and in the Winter we fed down below, where the ground
was bare. It never got very cold, and my sheep was used to it, anyhow. The Navajos don't move
their sheep south, do they? Well, they're away north of where I was. We jest give 'em a little
shelter, and looked after 'em, and, as I says, I was doin' fine--up to last year."

He paused again, with his secret on his lips, and once more Hardy supplied the helping word.

"And what happened then?" he asked.

"What happened then?" cried Thomas, his eyes burning. "Well, you ought to know--I was sheeped out."

"Sheeped out? Why, how could that happen? You were a sheepman yourself!"

The boss herder contemplated him with an amused and cynical smile. "You ask Jim Swope," he
suggested.

For a minute Hardy sat staring at him, bewildered. "Well," he said, "I can't figure it out--maybe
you wouldn't mind telling me how it happened."

"Why hell, man," burst out the sheepman, "it's as plain as the nose on your face--I didn't
belong to the Association. All these big sheepmen that drive north and south belong to the
Sheepmen's Protective Association, and they stand in with each other, but we little fellows
up in 'Pache County was nobody. It's about ten years ago now that the Swope outfit first came
in through our country; and, bein' in the sheep business ourselves, we was always friendly,
and never made no trouble, and naturally supposed that they'd respect our range. And so they
did, until I found one of Jim's herders in on my ranch last Summer.

"Well, I thought there was some misunderstandin', but when I told him and his compadres to
move it was a bad case of 'No savvy' from the start; and while I was monkeyin' around with
them a couple of more bands sneaked in behind, and first thing I knew my whole lower range
was skinned clean. Well, sir, I worked over one of them paisanos until he was a total wreck,
and I took a shot at another hombre, too--the one that couldn't savvy; but there was no use
cavin' round about it--I was jest naturally sheeped out.

"It looked like I was busted, but I wouldn't admit it, and while I was studyin' on the matter
along comes Jim himself and offers me five thousand dollars for my sheep. They was worth ten
if they was worth a cent, all fine and fat; but my winter feed was gone and of course I was
up against it. I see somethin' would have to be done, and dam' quick, too; so I chased down
to St. John and tried to git a higher bid. But these sheepmen stand in with each other on a
proposition like that, and I couldn't git nawthin'.

"'All right,' I says to Jim, 'take 'em, and be dam'ed to you.'

"'The price has gone down,' says Jim. 'I'll give you four thousand.'

"'What!' I says.

"'Three thousand,' says Jim.

"'You'll give me five thousand,' says I, crowdin' my gun against his short ribs, 'or I'll let
the light in on you,' and after that Jim and me understood each other perfectly. In fact, we
got stuck on each other. Yes, sir, after I got over bein' excited and could listen to reason,
he put it to me straight--and he was right.

"'What's the use of bein' the yaller dog?' he says. 'You can't buck the whole Association.
But we've got room for you,' he says, 'so git on and ride.' And here I am, by Joe, leadin'
the procession."

The sheepman paused and gazed at the band of sheep as they stood in a solid mass, their heads
tucked under each other's bellies to escape the sun.

"Some of them sheep used to be mine," he observed, and laughed slyly. "That's the only thing
between me and the boss. He's begged and implored, and cursed and said his prayers, tryin'
to git me interested in the sheep business again; but like the pore, dam' fool I am I keep
that five thousand dollars in the bank." His shoulders heaved for a moment with silent laughter,
and then his face turned grave.

"Well, Mr. Hardy," he said, "business is business, and I've got to be movin' along pretty soon.
I believe you said you'd like to talk matters over for a minute."

"Yes," answered Hardy promptly, "I'd like to make arrangements to have you turn out through
that pass yonder and leave us a little feed for next Winter."

The sheepman cocked his head to one side and shut one eye knowingly.

"Oh, you would, would you? And what word shall I take back to the boss, then?"

"I expect I'll see him before you do," said Hardy, "but if you get ahead of me you can just
say that I asked you to move, and so you followed out your orders."

"Yes," responded Thomas, smiling satirically, "that'd be lovely. But how long since I've been
takin' orders off of you?"

"Oh, I'm not trying to give you any orders," protested Hardy. "Those come straight from Jim Swope."

"How's that?" inquired the sheepman, with sudden interest.

"Why, don't you remember what he said when he introduced me to you, down in Moroni? Our invention
relates to that class of flying-machines in which the weight is sustained by the reactions resulting
when one or more aeroplanes are moved through the air edgewise at a small angle of incidence,
either by the application of mechanical power or by the utilisation of the force of gravity.

The
objects of our invention are to provide means for maintaining or
restoring the equilibrium or lateral balance of the apparatus, to
provide means for guiding the machine both vertically and horizontally,
and to provide a structure combining lightness, strength, convenience
of construction and certain other advantages which will hereinafter
appear.

To these ends our invention consists in certain novel features, which we will now proceed to
describe and will then particularly point out in the claims.


"Well," commented Hardy, "that may be good Scripture, but what about my cows? There's plenty
of feed out on The Rolls for Jim's sheep, but my cows have got to drink. We cowmen have been
sheeped out of all the lower country down there, and here we are, crowded clear up against
the rocks. You've stolen a march on us and of course you're entitled to some feed, but give
us a chance. You've been sheeped out yourself, and you know what it feels like. Now all I ask
of you is that you turn out through this pass and go down onto The Rolls. If you'll do that
I can turn all the rest of the sheep and keep my cows from starving, but if you go through
me they'll all go through me, and I'm done for. I don't make any threats and I can't offer
any inducements, but I just ask you, as a white man, to go around."

As he ended his appeal he stood with his hands thrown out, and the sheepman looked at him,
smiling curiously.

"Well," he said, at last, "you're a new kind of cowman on me, pardner, but I'll go you, if
Jim throws a fit."

He advanced, and held out his hand, and Hardy took it.

"If all sheepmen were like you," he said, "life would be worth living in these parts." And
so, in a friendship unparalleled in the history of the Four Peaks country, a sheepman and a
cowman parted in amity--and the sheep went around.

CHAPTER XI

JUMPED

Winter, the wonted season of torrential rains, six weeks' grass, and budding flowers, when
the desert is green and the sky washed clean and blue, followed close in the wake of the sheep,
which went drifting past Hidden Water like an army without banners. But alas for Hidden Water
and the army of sheep!--in this barren Winter the torrential rains did not fall, the grass
did not sprout, and the flowers did not bloom. A bleak north wind came down from the mountains,
cold and dry and crackling with electricity, and when it had blown its stint it died down in
a freezing, dusty silence.

Then the mighty south--the rain--wind that blows up out of Papaguería, rose up, big with promise,
and whirled its dust clouds a thousand feet high against the horizon. But, after much labor,
the keen, steely, north wind rushed suddenly down upon the black clouds, from whose edges the
first spatter of rain had already spilled, and swept them from the horizon, howling mournfully
the while and wrestling with the gaunt trees at night. In shaded places the icicles from slow-seeping
waters clung for days unmelted, and the migrant ducks, down from the Arctic, rose up from the
half-frozen sloughs and winged silently away to the far south. Yet through it all the Dos S
cattle came out unscathed, feeding on what dry grass and browse the sheep had left on Bronco
Mesa; and in the Spring, when all hope seemed past, it rained.

Only those who have been through a drought know what music there is hidden in rain. It puts
a wild joy into the heart of every creature, the birds sing, the rabbits leap and caper, and
all the cattle and wild horses take to roaming and wandering out of pure excess of spirits.
It was early in March when the first showers came, and as soon as the new feed was up Creede
began his preparations for the spring rodéo. The Winter had been a hard one, and not without
its worries. In an interview, which tended on both sides to become heated and personal, Jim
Swope had denounced Hardy for misrepresenting his orders to his mayordomo, and had stated in
no uncertain terms his firm intention of breaking even in the Spring, if there was a blade
of grass left on the upper range.

The season had been a bad one for his sheep, windy and cold, with sand storms which buried
the desert in a pall and drove many flocks to the hills; and as the feed became shorter and
shorter vagrant bands began to drift in along the Salagua. In the battle for the range that
followed herders and punchers greeted each other with angry snarls which grew more wolfish
every day, and old Pablo Moreno, shaking his white head over their quarrels, uttered gloomy
prophecies of greater evils to come. Sheep would die, he said, cattle would die--it was only
a question now of how many, and of which. It was a coming año seco; nay, the whole country
was drying up. In Hermosillo, so they said, the women stood by the public well all night, waiting
to fill their ollas; not for nine years had the rains fallen there, and now the drought was
spreading north. Arizona, California, Nevada, all were doomed, yet paciencia, perhaps--and
then came the rain. Yes, it was a good rain but--and then it rained again. Que bueno, who would
not be made a liar for rain? But cuidado--behold, the ground was still dry; it drank up the
water as it fell and was thirsty again; the river fell lower and lower and the water was clear;
a bad sign, a very bad sign!

But if the young should wait upon the advice of the old there would be no more miracles. Creede
and Hardy passed up the weather, strapped on their six-shooters, and began to patrol the range,
"talking reason" to the stray Mexicans who thought that, because their sheep were getting poor,
they ought to move them to better feed.

The time for friendship and diplomacy was past, as Hardy politely informed his employer by
letter--after which he told Rafael to keep away from the post office and not bring him any
more corréo, if he valued his job. But though he had made his note to Judge Ware brief, it
had said too much. He had suggested that if the judge did not like his change of policy he
had better come down and see the actual conditions for himself--and the old judge came.

It was midafternoon of that fateful day when Creede and Hardy, riding in from up the river,
saw Rafael's wagon in front of the house. This was not surprising in itself as he had been
down to Bender for round-up supplies, but as the two partners approached the house Creede suddenly
grabbed Hardy's rein and drew back as if he were on top of a rattlesnake.

"For God's sake," he said, "what's that? Listen!"

He jerked a thumb toward the house, and in the tense silence Hardy could clearly discern the
sound of women's voices. Now you could ride the Four Peaks country far and wide and never hear
the music of such voices, never see calico on the line, or a lace curtain across the window.
There were no women in that godless land, not since the Widow Winship took Sallie and Susie
and left precipitately for St. Louis, none save the Señora Moreno and certain strapping Apache
squaws who wore buckskin téwas and carried butcher knives in their belts. Even the heart of
Rufus Hardy went pit-a-pat and stopped, at the sound of that happy chatter.

"They're rustlin' the whole dam' house," exclaimed Creede, all nerves and excitement. "Didn't
you hear that pan go 'bamp'? Say, I believe they're cleanin' house! Rufe," he whispered, "I
bet you money we're jumped!"

The possibility of having their ranch preëmpted during their absence had been spoken of in
a general way, since Jim Swope had gone on the warpath, but in his secret soul Rufus Hardy
had a presentiment which made claim-jumping look tame. There was a chastened gayety in the
voices, a silvery ripple in the laughter, which told him what Creede with all his cunning could
never guess; they were voices from another world, a world where Hardy had had trouble and sorrow
enough, and which he had left forever. There was soldier blood in his veins and in two eventful
years he had never weakened; but the suddenness of this assault stampeded him.

"You better go first, Jeff," he said, turning his horse away, "they might--"

But Creede was quick to intercept him.

"None o' that, now, pardner," he said, catching his rein. "You're parlor-broke--go on ahead!"

There was a wild, uneasy stare in his eye, which nevertheless meant business, and Hardy accepted
the rebuke meekly. Perhaps his conscience was already beginning to get action for the subterfuge
and deceit which he had practised during their year together. He sat still for a moment, listening
to the voices and smiling strangely.

"All right, brother," he said, in his old quiet way, and then, whirling Chapuli about, he galloped
up to the house, sitting him as straight and resolute as any soldier. But Creede jogged along
more slowly, tucking in his shirt, patting down his hair, and wiping the sweat from his brow.

At the thud of hoofs a woman's face appeared at the doorway--a face sweet and innocent, with
a broad brow from which the fair hair was brushed evenly back, and eyes which looked wonderingly
out at the world through polished glasses. It was Lucy Ware, and when Hardy saw her he leaped
lightly from his horse and advanced with hat in hand--smiling, yet looking beyond her.

"I'm so glad to see you, Miss Lucy," he said, as he took her hand, "and if we had only known
you were coming--"

"Why, Rufus Hardy!" exclaimed the young lady, "do you mean to say you never received any of
my letters?"

At this Creede stared, and in that self-same moment Hardy realized how the low-down strategy
which he had perpetrated upon his employer had fallen upon his own head a thousandfold. But
before he could stammer his apologies, Kitty Bonnair stood before him--the same Kitty, and
smiling as he had often seen her in his dreams.

She was attired in a stunning outing suit of officer's cloth, tailored for service, yet bringing
out the graceful lines of her figure; and as Hardy mumbled out his greetings the eyes of Jefferson
Creede, so long denied of womankind, dwelt eagerly upon her beauty. Her dainty feet, encased
in tan high boots, held him in rapt astonishment; her hands fascinated him with their movements
like the subtle turns of a mesmerist; and the witchery of her supple body, the mischief in
the dark eyes, and the teasing sweetness of her voice smote him to the heart before he was
so much as noticed.

No less absolute, for all his strivings, was the conquest of Rufus Hardy, the frozen bulwarks
of whose heart burst suddenly and went out like spring ice in the radiance of her first smile.

"I knew you'd be glad to see me, too," she said, holding out her hand to him; and forgetful
of all his bitterness he grasped it warmly. Then, tardily conscious of his duty, he turned to Jeff.

"Miss Kitty," he said, "this is my friend, Jefferson Creede--Miss Bonnair."

"I'm glad to meet you, Mr. Creede," said Kitty, bestowing her hand upon the embarrassed cowboy.
"Of course you know Miss Ware!"

"Howdy do, Miss," responded Creede, fumbling for his hat, and as Miss Lucy took his hand the
man who had put the fear of God into the hearts of so many sheep-herders became dumb and tongue-tied
with bashfulness. There was not a man in the Four Peaks country that could best him, in anger
or in jest, when it called for the ready word; but Kitty Bonnair had so stolen his wits that
he could only stand and sweat like a trick-broken horse. As for Hardy he saw rainbows and his
heart had gone out of business, but still he was "parlor-broke."

"I am afraid you didn't find the house very orderly," he observed, as Creede backed off and
the conversation sagged; and the two girls glanced at each other guiltily. "Of course you're
just as welcome," he added hastily, "and I suppose you couldn't help cleaning house a bit;
but you gave us both a bad scare, all the same. Didn't you notice how pale we looked?" he asked,
to mask his embarrassment. "But you were right, Jeff," he continued enigmatically.

"Does he always defer to you that way, Mr. Creede?" inquired Kitty Bonnair, with an engaging
smile. "We used to find him rather perverse." She glanced roguishly at Hardy as she gave this
veiled rebuke. "But what was it that you were right about?--I'm just dying to ask you questions!"

She confessed this with a naive frankness which quite won the big cowboy's heart, and, his
nerve coming back, he grinned broadly at his former suspicions.

"Well," he said, "I might as well come through with it--I told him I bet we'd been jumped."

"Jumped?" repeated Miss Kitty, mystified. "Oh, is that one of your cowboy words? Tell me what
it means!"

"W'y, it means," drawled Creede, "that two young fellers like me and Rufe goes out to ride
the range and when we come back some other outfit has moved into our happy home and we're orphans.
We've been havin' a little trouble with the sheep lately, and when I heard them pots and kittles
rattlin' around in here I thought for sure some Mormon sheepman had got the jump on us and
located the ranch."

"And what would you have done if he had?" continued Kitty eagerly. "Would you have shot him
with that big pistol?" She pointed to the heavy Colt's which Creede had slung on his hip.

But this was getting too romantic and Western, even for Jeff. "No, ma'am," he said modestly.
"We just carry that to balance us in the saddle."

"Oh!" exclaimed Kitty, disappointed, "and didn't you ever shoot anybody?"

Creede blushed for her, in spite of himself. "Well," he replied evasively, "I don't know how
it would be up where you come from, but that's kind of a leadin' question, ain't it?"

"Oh, you have, then!" exclaimed Kitty Bonnair ecstatically. "Oh, I'm so glad to see a really,
truly cowboy!" She paused, and gazed up at him soulfully. "Won't you let me have it for a minute?"
she pleaded, and with a sheepish grin Creede handed over his gun.

But if there had been another cowboy within a mile he would have hesitated, infatuated as he
was. Every land has its symbolism and though the language of flowers has not struck root in
the cow country--nor yet the amorous Mexican system of "playing the bear"--to give up one's
pistol to a lady is the sign and token of surrender. However, though it brought the sweat to
his brow, the byplay was pulled off unnoticed, Hardy and Lucy Ware being likewise deep in confidences.

"How strange you look, Rufus!" exclaimed Lucy, as Kitty Bonnair began her assault upon the
happiness of Jefferson Creede. "What have you been doing to yourself in these two years?"

"Why, nothing," protested Hardy, a little wan from his encounter with Kitty. "Perhaps you have
forgotten how I used to look--our hair gets pretty long up here," he added apologetically, "but--"

"No," said Lucy firmly. "It isn't a matter of hair, although I will admit I hardly knew you.
It's in your eyes; and you have some stern, hard lines about your mouth, too. Father says you
spend all your time trying to keep the sheep out--and he's very much displeased with you for
disobeying his directions, too. He gave up some important business to come down here and see
you, and I hope he scolds you well. Have you been writing any lately?" she asked accusingly.

"No!" answered Hardy absently, "we don't have to fight them--"

"But, Rufus," protested Lucy Ware, laying her hand on his arm, "do take your mind from those
dreadful sheep. I asked you if you have been doing any writing lately--you promised to send
me some poems, don't you remember? And I haven't received a thing!"

"Oh!" said Hardy, blushing at his mistake. "Well, I acknowledge that I haven't done right--and
you have been very kind, too, Miss Lucy," he added gently. "But somehow I never finish anything
down here--and the sheep have been pretty bad lately. I have to do my work first, you know.
I'll tell you, though," he said, lowering his voice confidentially, "if I can see you when
no one is around I'll give you what little I've written--at least, some of the best. A poet
at his worst, you know," he added, smiling, "is the poorest man in the world. He's like a woman
who tells everything--no one could respect him. But if we can take our finer moods, and kind
of sublimate them, you know, well--every man is a poet some time."

He hesitated, ended lamely, and fell suddenly into a settled silence. The hard lines about
his lips deepened; his eyes, cast to the ground, glowed dully; and in every feature Lucy read
the despair that was gnawing at his heart. And with it there was something more--a tacit rebuke
to her for having brought Kitty there to meet him.

"We have missed you very much," she began softly, as if reading his thoughts, "and your letters
were so interesting! Ever since I showed Kitty the first one she has been crazy to come down
here. Yes, she has been reading 'The Virginian' and O. Henry and 'Wolfville' until it is simply
awful to hear her talk. And ride--she has been taking lessons for a year! Her saddle is out
there now in the wagon, and if she could have caught one of those wild horses out in that inclosed
field I really believe she would have mounted him and taken to the hills like an Indian. I
had to come down to take care of father, you know, and--aren't you glad to see us, Rufus?"

She gazed up at him anxiously, and her eyes became misty as she spoke; but Hardy was far away
and he did not see.

"Yes," he said absently, "but--I shall be very busy. Oh, where is your father?"

A light went suddenly from Lucy's eyes and her lips quivered, but her voice was as steady as ever.

"He has gone down to the river," she said patiently. "Would you like to see him?"

"Yes," he replied, still impersonally; and with his head down, he walked out to where Chapuli
was standing. Then, as if some memory of her voice had come to him, he dropped the bridle lash
and stepped back quickly into the house.

"You mustn't notice my rudeness, Miss Lucy," he began abjectly. "Of course I am glad to see
you; but I am a little confused, and--well, you understand." He smiled wanly as he spoke, and
held out his hand. "Is it all right?" he asked. "Good-bye, then." And as he stepped quietly
out the light came back into Lucy's eyes.

"I am going to hunt up the judge," he said, as he swung up on his horse; and, despite the protests
of Jeff and Kitty Bonnair, who were still deep in an animated conversation, he rode off down
the river.

It was not exactly like a draught of Nepenthe to go out and face the righteous indignation
of Judge Ware, but Hardy's brain was in such a whirl that he welcomed the chance to escape.
Never for a moment had he contemplated the idea of Kitty's coming to him, or of his seeing
her again until his heart was whole. He had felt safe and secure forever within the walled
valley of Hidden Water--but now from a cloudless sky the lightning had fallen and blinded him.
Before he could raise a hand or even turn and flee she had come upon him and exacted his forgiveness.
Nay, more--she had won back his love and enslaved him as before. Could it mean--what else could
it mean? Nothing but that she loved him; or if not love, then she cared for him above the others.
And Kitty was proud, too! Those who became her slaves must respect her whims; she would acknowledge
no fault and brook no opposition; whatever she did was right. Yes, it had always been the same
with her: the Queen could do no wrong--yet now she had put aside her regal prerogatives and
come to him!

He hugged the thought to his bosom like a man infatuated, and then a chill misgiving came upon
him. Perhaps after all it was but another of those childish whims which made her seem so lovable--always
eager, always active, always striving for the forbidden and unusual, yet so dear with her laughing
eyes and dancing feet that all the world gave way before her. He bowed his head in thought,
following the judge's tracks mechanically as he cantered down the trail, and when he came to
the hill above the whirlpool and looked down at the empty landscape he was still wrestling
with his pride. Never in the two years of his exile had he so much as mentioned her name to
any one; it was a thing too sacred for confidences, this love which had changed the deep current
of his life, a secret for his own soul and God--and yet, Lucy Ware might help him!

And where in all the world would he find a more faithful friend than Lucy Ware? A secret shared
with her would be as safe as if still locked in his own breast--and Lucy could understand.
Perhaps she understood already; perhaps--his heart stopped, and pounded against his side--perhaps
Kitty had told Lucy her story already and asked her to intercede! He dwelt upon the thought
again as he gazed dumbly about for his employer; and then suddenly the outer world--the plain,
rough, rocks-and-cactus world that he had lived in before they came--flashed up before him
in all its uncompromising clearness; the judge was nowhere in sight!

A sudden memory of Creede's saying that he could lose his boss any time within half a mile
of camp startled Hardy out of his dreams and he rode swiftly forward upon the trail. At the
foot of the hill the tracks of Judge Ware's broad shoes with their nice new hob-nails stood
out like a bas-relief, pointing up the river. Not to take any chances, Hardy followed them
slavishly through the fine sand until they turned abruptly up onto a ridge which broke off
at the edge of the river bottom. Along the summit of this they showed again, plainly, heading
north; then as the ravine swung to the west they scrambled across it and began to zigzag, working
off to the east where Black Butte loomed up above the maze of brushy ridges like a guiding
sentinel. At first Hardy only smiled at the circuitous and aimless trail which he was following,
expecting to encounter the judge at every turn; but as the tracks led steadily on he suddenly
put spurs to his horse and plunged recklessly up and down the sides of the brushy hogbacks
in a desperate pursuit, for the sun was sinking low. The trail grew fresher and fresher now;
dark spots where drops of sweat had fallen showed in the dry sand of the washes; and at last,
half an hour before sundown, Hardy caught sight of his wandering employer, zealously ascending
a particularly rocky butte.

"Hello there, Judge!" he called, and then, as Judge Ware whirled about, he inquired, with well-feigned
surprise: "Where'd you drop down from?"

This was to let the old gentleman down easy--lost people having a way of waxing indignant at
their rescuers--and the judge was not slow to take advantage of it.

"Why, howdy do, Rufus!" he exclaimed, sinking down upon a rock. "I was just taking a little
short cut to camp. My, my, but this is a rough country. Out looking for cattle?"

"Well--yes," responded Hardy. "I was taking a little ride. But say, it's about my supper time.
You better give up that short-cut idea and come along home with me."

"We-ell," said the judge, reluctantly descending the butte, "I guess I will. How far is it?"

"About two miles, by trail."

"Two miles!" exclaimed Judge Ware, aghast. "Why, it's just over that little hill, there. Why
don't you take a short cut?"

"The trail is the shortest cut I know," replied Hardy, concealing a smile. "That's the way
the cattle go, and they seem to know their business. How does the country look to you?"

But the old judge was not to be led aside by persiflage--he was interested in the matter of trails.

"Cattle trails!" he exclaimed. "Do you mean to say that you do all your travelling on these
crooked cow paths? Why, it is a matter of scientific observation that even on the open prairie
a cow path loses nearly a quarter of its headway by constant winding in and out, merely to
avoid frail bushes and infinitesimal stones. Now if you and Jeff would spend a little of your
leisure in cutting trails, as they do in forestry, you would more than save yourselves the
time and labor involved, I'm sure."

"Yes?" said Hardy coldly. There was a subtle tone of fault-finding in his employer's voice
which already augured ill for their debate on the sheep question, and his nerves responded
instinctively to the jab. Fate had not been so kind to him that day, that he was prepared to
take very much from any man, and so he remained quiet and let the judge go the whole length.

"Why, yes, if you would stay about the ranch a little closer instead of going off on these
armed forays against sheep--now just for example, how much would it cost to clear a passable
trail over that ridge to the ranch?"

He pointed at the hill which in his misguided enthusiasm he had been mounting, and Hardy's
eyes glittered wickedly as he launched his barbed jest.

"About a billion dollars, I guess," he answered, after mature consideration.

"A billion dollars!" repeated the judge. "A billion dollars! Now here, Rufus," he cried, choking
with exasperation, "I am in earnest about this matter! I don't altogether approve of the way
you and Jeff have been conducting my affairs down here, anyway, and I intend to take a hand
myself, if you don't mind. I may not know as much as you about the minor details of the cattle
business, but I have been looking into forestry quite extensively, and I fail to see anything
unreasonable in my suggestion of a trail. How far is it, now, over that hill to the ranch?"

"About twenty-five thousand miles," replied Hardy blandly.

"Twenty-five thousand! Why--"

"At least, so I am informed," explained Hardy. "Geographers agree, I believe, that that is
the approximate distance around the world. The ranch is over here, you know."

He pointed with one small, sinewy hand in a direction diametrically opposite to the one his
boss had indicated, and struck out down a cow trail. It was a harsh blow to the old judge,
and rankled in his bosom for some time; but after making sure that his superintendent was correct
he followed meekly behind him into camp. On the way, as an afterthought, he decided not to
put down his foot in the matter of the sheep until he was quite sure of the material facts.

They found Creede in the last throes of agony as he blundered through the motions of cooking
supper. Half an hour of house-cleaning had done more to disarrange his kitchen than the services
of two charming assistants could possibly repair. His Dutch oven was dropped into the wood
box; his bread pan had been used to soak dirty dishes in; the water bucket was empty, and they
had thrown his grease swab into the fire. As for the dish-rag, after long and faithful service
it had been ruthlessly destroyed, and he had to make another one out of a flour sack. Add to
this a hunger which had endured since early morning and a series of rapid-fire questions, and
you have the true recipe for bad bread, at least.

Kitty Bonnair had taken a course in sanitation and domestic science in her college days, since
which time the world had been full of microbes and every unpleasant bacillus, of which she
discoursed at some length. But Jefferson Creede held steadily to his fixed ideas, and in the
end he turned out some baking-powder biscuits that would have won honors in a cooking school.
There was nothing else to cook, his kettle of beans having been unceremoniously dumped because
the pot was black; but Kitty had the table spotlessly clean, there was an assortment of potted
meats and picnic knicknacks in the middle of it, and Lucy had faithfully scoured the dishes;
so supper was served with frills.

If the ladies had taken hold a little strong in the first spasms of house-cleaning, Jeff and
Rufus were far too polite to mention it; and while the dishes were being washed they quietly
gathered up their belongings, and moved them into the storeroom. Their beds being already spread
beneath the ramada, it was not difficult to persuade the girls to accept Hardy's room, which
for a man's, was clean, and the judge fell heir to Jeff's well-littered den. All being quickly
arranged and the beds made, Creede threw an armful of ironwood upon the fire and they sat down
to watch it burn.

Three hours before, Hidden Water had been the hangout of two sheep-harrying barbarians, bushy-headed
and short of speech; now it was as bright and cheerful as any home and the barbarians were
changed to lovers. Yet, as they basked in the warmth of the fireside there was one absent from
his accustomed place--a creature so fierce and shy that his wild spirit could never become
reconciled to the change. At the first sound of women's voices little Tommy had dashed through
his cat-hole and fled to the bowlder pile at the foot of the cliff, from whose dank recesses
he peered forth with blank and staring eyes.

But now, as the strange voices grew quiet and night settled down over the valley, he crept
forth and skulked back to the house, sniffing about the barred windows, peeking in through
his hole in the door; and at last, drawing well away into the darkness, he raised his voice
in an appealing cry for Jeff.

As the first awful, raucous outburst broke the outer silence Kitty Bonnair jumped, and Lucy
and her father turned pale.

"What's that?" cried Kitty, in a hushed voice, "a mountain lion?"

"Not yet," answered Creede enigmatically. "He will be though, if he grows. Aw, say, that's
just my cat. Here, pussy, pussy, pussy! D'ye hear that, now? Sure, he knows me! Wait a minute
and I'll try an' ketch 'im."

He returned a few minutes later, with Tommy held firmly against his breast, blacker, wilder,
and scrawnier than ever, but purring and working his claws.

"How's this for a mountain lion?" said Creede, stopping just inside the door and soothing down
his pet. "D'ye see that hook?" he inquired, holding up the end of Tommy's crooked tail and
laughing at Kitty's dismay. "He uses that to climb cliffs with. That's right--he's a new kind
of cat. Sure, they used to be lots of 'em around here, but the coyotes got all the rest. Tom
is the only one left. Want to pet him? Well--whoa, pussy,--come up careful, then; he's never--ouch!"

At the first whisk of skirts, Tommy's yellow eyes turned green and he sank every available
hook and claw into his master's arm; but when Kitty reached out a hand he exploded in a storm
of spits and hisses and dashed out through the door.

"Well, look at that, now," said Creede, grinning and rubbing his arm. "D'ye know what's the
matter with him? You're the first woman he ever saw in his life. W'y, sure! They ain't no women
around here. I got him off a cowman over on the Verde. He had a whole litter of 'em--used to
pinch Tom's tail to make him fight--so when I come away I jest quietly slipped Mr. Tommy into
my shaps."

"Oh, the poor little thing," said Kitty; and then she added, puckering up her lips, "but I
don't like cats."

"Oh, I do!" exclaimed Lucy Ware quickly, as Creede's face changed, and for a moment the big
cowboy stood looking at them gravely.

"That's good," he said, smiling approvingly at Lucy; and then, turning to Kitty Bonnair, he
said: "You want to learn, then."

But Kitty was not amenable to the suggestion.

"No!" she cried, stamping her foot. "I don't! They're such stealthy, treacherous creatures--and
they never have any affection for people."

"Ump-um!" denied Creede, shaking his head slowly. "You don't know cats--jest think you do,
maybe. W'y, Tommy was the only friend I had here for two years. D'ye think he could fool me
all that time? Rufe here will tell you how he follows after me for miles--and cryin', too--when
the coyotes might git 'im anytime. Two makes, the Cosmos Engineering Company's 'Jupiter' and 'Lucifer,'
and the A.B.C. 'Wasp II' and 'Dragon Fly 1A' require special mention
for their light weight and reliability on trials.

The Cosmos 'Jupiter' was--for it is no longer being made--a 450 horse-power
nine-cylinder radial engine, air-cooled, with the cylinders set in
one single row; it was made both geared to reduce the propeller revolutions
relatively to the crankshaft revolutions, and ungeared; the normal
power of the geared type was 450 horse-power, and the total weight
of the engine, including carburettors, magnetos, etc., was only 757
lbs.; the engine speed was 1,850 revolutions per minute, and the propeller
revolutions were reduced by the gearing to 1,200.

Fitted to a 'Bristol Badger' aeroplane, the total weight was 2,800
lbs., including pilot, passenger, two machine-guns, and full military
load; at 7,000 feet the registered speed, with corrections for density,
was 137 miles per hour; in climbing, the first 2,000 feet was accomplished
in 1 minute 4 seconds; 4,000 feet was reached in 2 minutes 10 seconds;
6,000 feet was reached in 3 minutes 33 seconds, and 7,000 feet in
4 minutes 15 seconds.

It was intended to modify the plane design and fit a new propeller,
in order to attain even better results, but, if trials were made with
these modifications, the results are not obtainable.

The Cosmos 'Lucifer' was a three-cylinder radial type engine of 100
horse-power, inverted Y design, made on the simplest possible principles
with a view to quantity production and extreme reliability.

The rated 100 horse-power was attained at 1,600 revolutions per minute, and the cylinder dimensions
were 5.75 bore by 6.25 inches stroke.

The cylinders were of aluminium and steel mixture, with aluminium heads; overhead valves,
operated by push rods on the front side of the cylinders, were fitted,
and a simple reducing gear ran them at half engine speed.

The crank case was a circular aluminium casting, the engine being attached to the fuselage of
the aeroplane by a circular flange situated at the back of the case; propeller shaft and crankshaft
were integral. Dual ignition was provided, the generator and distributors
being driven off the back end of the engine and the distributors being
easily accessible.

Lubrication was by means of two pumps, one scavenging and one suction,
oil being fed under pressure from the crankshaft.

A single carburettor fed all three cylinders, the branch pipe from the carburettor to the
circular ring being provided with an exhaust heater. The total weight of the engine, 'all on,'
was 280 lbs.

The A.B.C. 'Wasp II,' made by Walton Motors, Limited, is a seven-cylinder
radial, air-cooled engine, the cylinders having a bore of 4.75 inches
and stroke 6.25 inches.

The normal brake horse-power at 1,650 revolutions is 160, and the
maximum 200 at a speed of 1,850 revolutions per minute.

Lubrication is by means of two rotary pumps, one feeding through
the hollow crankshaft to the crank pin, giving centrifugal feed to
big end and thence splash oiling, and one feeding to the nose of the
engine, dropping on to the cams and forming a permanent sump for the
gears on the bottom of the engine nose.

Two carburettors are fitted, and two two-spark magnetos, running at one and three-quarters
engine speed. The total weight of this engine is 350 lbs., or 1.75 lbs. per horse-power. Oil
consumption at 1,850 revolutions is.03 pints per horse-power per
hour, and petrol consumption is.56 pints per horsepower per hour.

The engine thus shows as very economical in consumption, as well
as very light in weight.

The A.B.C. 'Dragon Fly 1A 'is a nine-cylinder radial engine having
one overhead inlet and two overhead exhaust valves per cylinder.

The cylinder dimensions are 5.5 inches bore by 6.5 inches stroke,
and the normal rate of speed, 1,650 revolutions per minute, gives
340 horse-power.

The oiling is by means of two pumps, the system being practically
identical with that of the 'Wasp II.' Oil consumption is.021 pints
per brake horse-power per hour, and petrol consumption.56 pints--the
same as that of the 'Wasp II.' The weight of the complete engine,
including propeller boss, is 600 lbs., or 1,765 lbs. per horse-power.

These A.B.C. radials have proved highly satisfactory on tests, and their extreme simplicity of
design and reliability commend them as engineering products and at the same time demonstrate
the value, for aero work, of the air-cooled radial design--when this latter is accompanied by sound
workmanship. These and the Cosmos engines represent the minimum of weight per horse-power yet
attained, together with a practicable degree of reliability, in radial and probably any aero engine
design.

APPENDIX A

GENERAL MENSIER'S REPORT ON THE TRIALS OF CLEMENT ADER'S AVION.

Paris, October 21, 1897.

Report on the trials of M. Clement Ader's aviation apparatus.

M. Ader having notified the Minister of War by letter, July 21, 1897, that the Apparatus of Aviation
which he had agreed to build under the conditions set forth in the convention of July 24th, 1894,
was ready, and therefore requesting that trials be undertaken before
a Committee appointed for this purpose as per the decision of August
4th, the Committee was appointed as follows:--

Division General Mensier,
Chairman; Division General Delambre, Inspector General of the Permanent
Works of Coast Defence, Member of the Technical Committee of the Engineering
Corps; Colonel Laussedat, Director of the Conservatoire des Arts et
Metiers; Sarrau, Member of the Institute, Professor of Mechanical
Engineering at the Polytechnic School; Leaute, Member of the Institute,
Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the Polytechnique School.

Colonel Laussedat gave notice at once that his health and work as Director of the Conservatoire des
Arts et Metiers did not permit him to be a member of the Committee; the Minister therefore accepted
his resignation on September 24th, and decided not to replace him.

Later on, however, on the request of the Chairman of the Committee,
the Minister appointed a new member General Grillon, commanding the
Engineer Corps of the Military Government of Paris.

To carry on the trials which were to take place at the camp of Satory, the Minister ordered the Governor
of the Military Forces of Paris to requisition from the Engineer Corps, on the request of the
Chairman of the Committee, the men necessary to prepare the grounds at Satory.

After an inspection made on the 16th an aerodrome was chosen.

M. Ader's idea was to have it of circular shape with a width of 40 metres and an average diameter
of 450 metres.

The preliminary work, laying out the grounds, interior and exterior circumference, etc., was finished
at the end of August; the work of smoothing off the grounds began September 1st with forty-five
men and two rollers, and was finished on the day of the first tests, October 12th.

The first meeting of the Committee was held August 18th in M. Ader's
workshop; the object being to demonstrate the machine to the Committee
and give all the information possible on the tests that were to be
held.

After a careful examination and after having heard all the explanations by the inventor which were
deemed useful and necessary, the Committee decided that the apparatus seemed to be built with a
perfect understanding of the purpose to be fulfilled as far as one
could judge from a study of the apparatus at rest; they therefore
authorised M. Ader to take the machine apart and carry it to the camp
at Satory so as to proceed with the trials.

By letter of August 19th the Chairman made report to the Minister of the findings of the Committee.

The
work on the grounds having taken longer than was anticipated, the
Chairman took advantage of this delay to call the Committee together
for a second meeting, during which M. Ader was to run the two propulsive
screws situated at the forward end of the apparatus.

The meeting was held October 2nd. It gave the Committee an opportunity to appreciate the motive
power in all its details; firebox, boiler, engine, under perfect
control, absolute condensation, automatic fuel and feed of the liquid
to be vaporised, automatic lubrication and scavenging; everything,
in a word, seemed well designed and executed.

The weights in comparison with the power of the engine realised a considerable advance over anything
made to date, since the two engines weighed together realised 42 kg., the firebox and boiler
60 kg., the condenser 15 kg., or a total of 117 kg. for approximately 40 horse-power or a little
less than 3 kg. per horse-power.

One of the members summed up the general opinion by saying: 'Whatever may be the result from
an aviation point of view, a result which could not be foreseen for
the moment, it was nevertheless proven that from a mechanical point
of view M. Ader's apparatus was of the greatest interest and real
ingeniosity.

He expressed a hope that in any case the machine would not be lost to science.'

The second experiment in the workshop was made in the presence of the Chairman, the purpose
being to demonstrate that the wings, having a spread of 17 metres, were sufficiently strong to
support the weight of the apparatus.

With this object in view, 14 sliding supports were placed under each one of these, representing
imperfectly the manner in which the wings would support the machine in the air; by gradually
raising the supports with the slides, the wheels on which the machine rested were lifted from
the ground. It was evident at that time that the members composing the skeleton of the wings
supported the apparatus, and it was quite evident that when the wings were supported by the air
on every point of their surface, the stress would be better equalised
than when resting on a few supports, and therefore the resistance
to breakage would be considerably greater.

After this last test, the work on the ground being practically finished, the machine was transported
to Satory, assembled and again made ready for trial.

At first M. Ader was to manoeuvre the machine on the ground at a moderate speed, then increase this
until it was possible to judge whether there was a tendency for the machine to rise; and it was
only after M. Ader had acquired sufficient practice that a meeting of the Committee was to be
called to be present at the first part of the trials; namely, volutions of the apparatus on the
ground.

The first test took place on Tuesday, October 12th, in the presence of the Chairman of the Committee.
It had rained a good deal during the night and the clay track would have offered considerable resistance
to the rolling of the machine; furthermore, a moderate wind was blowing from the south-west,
too strong during the early part of the afternoon to allow of any trials.

Toward sunset, however, the wind having weakened, M. Ader decided to make his first trial; the machine
was taken out of its hangar, the wings were mounted and steam raised. M. Ader in his seat
had, on each side of him, one man to the right and one to the left, whose duty was to rectify
the direction of the apparatus in the event that the action of the rear wheel as a rudder would
not be sufficient to hold the machine in a straight course.

At 5.25 p.m. the machine was started, at first slowly and then at an increased speed; after 250
or 300 metres, the two men who were being dragged by the apparatus were exhausted and forced
to fall flat on the ground in order to allow the wings to pass over
them, and the trip around the track was completed, a total of 1,400
metres, without incident, at a fair speed, which could be estimated
to be from 300 to 400 metres per minute.

Notwithstanding M. Ader's inexperience, this being the first time that he had run his apparatus,
he followed approximately the chalk line which marked the centre
of the track and he stopped at the exact point from which he started.

The marks of the wheels on the ground, which was rather soft, did not show up very much, and it was clear
that a part of the weight of the apparatus had been supported by the wings, though the speed was
only about one-third of what the machine could do had M. Ader used all its motive power; he
was running at a pressure of from 3 to 4 atmospheres, when he could
have used 10 to 12.

This first trial, so fortunately accomplished, was of great importance;
it was the first time that a comparatively heavy vehicle (nearly 400
kg., including the weight of the operator, fuel, and water) had been
set in motion by a tractive apparatus, using the air solely as a propelling
medium.

The favourable report turned in by the Committee after the meeting
of October 2nd was found justified by the results demonstrated on
the grounds, and the first problem of aviation, namely, the creation
of efficient motive power, could be considered as solved, since the
propulsion of the apparatus in the air would be a great deal easier
than the traction on the ground, provided that the second part of
the problem, the sustaining of the machine in the air, would be realised.

The

next day, Wednesday the 13th, no further trials were made on account of the rain and wind.

On Thursday the 14th the Chairman requested that General Grillon,
who had just been appointed a member of the Committee, accompany him
so as to have a second witness.

The weather was fine, but a fairly strong, gusty wind was blowing from the south. M. Ader explained
to the two members of the Committee the danger of these gusts, since at two points of the circumference
the wind would strike him sideways. The wind was blowing in the direction A B, the apparatus starting
from C, and running in the direction shown by the arrow.

The first dangerous spot would be at B. The apparatus had been kept in readiness in the event of
the wind dying down.

Toward sunset the wind seemed to die down, as it had done on the evening of the 12th. M. Ader
hesitated, which, unfortunately, further events only justified, but decided to make a new trial.

At
the start, which took place at 5.15 p.m., the apparatus, having the wind in the rear, seemed to
run at a fairly regular speed; it was, nevertheless, easy to note from the marks of the wheels
on the ground that the rear part of the apparatus had been lifted and that the rear wheel, being
the rudder, had not been in constant contact with the ground.

When the machine came to the neighbourhood of B, the two members
of the Committee saw the machine swerve suddenly out of the track
in a semicircle, lean over to the right and finally stop.

They immediately proceeded to the point where the accident had taken place and endeavoured to
find an explanation for the same.

The Chairman finally decided as follows:

M. Ader was the victim of a gust of wind which he had feared as he explained before starting out;
feeling himself thrown out of his course, he tried to use the rudder energetically, but at that
time the rear wheel was not in contact with the ground, and therefore did not perform its function;
the canvas rudder, which had as its purpose the manoeuvring of the
machine in the air, did not have sufficient action on the ground.

It would have been possible without any doubt to react by using the propellers at unequal speed,
but M. Ader, being still inexperienced, had not thought of this. Furthermore, he was thrown
out of his course so quickly that he decided, in order to avoid a more serious accident, to
stop both engines. This sudden stop produced the half-circle already described and the fall
of the machine on its side.

The damage to the machine was serious; consisting at first sight of the rupture of both propellers,
the rear left wheel and the bending of the left wing tip.

It will only be possible to determine after the machine is taken
apart whether the engine, and more particularly the organs of transmission,
have been put out of line.

Whatever the damage may be, though comparatively easy to repair, it will take a certain amount
of time, and taking into consideration the time of year it is evident
that the tests will have to be adjourned for the present.

As has been said in the above report, the tests, though prematurely
interrupted, have shown results of great importance, and though the
final results are hard to foresee, it would seem advisable to continue
the trials.

By waiting for the return of spring there will be plenty of time
to finish the tests and it will not be necessary to rush matters,
which was a partial cause of the accident.

The Chairman of the Committee personally has but one hope, and that is that a decision be
reached accordingly.

Division General,

Chairman of the Committee,

Mensier.

Boulogne-sur-Seine, October 21st, 1897.

Annex to the Report of October 21st.

General Grillon, who was present at the trials of the 14th, and who saw the report relative
to what happened during that day, made the following observations in writing, which are reproduced
herewith in quotation marks.

The Chairman of the Committee does not agree with General Grillon and he answers these observations
paragraph by paragraph.

1. 'If the rear wheel (there is only one of these) left but intermittent tracks on the ground, does
that prove that the machine has a tendency to rise when running at a certain speed?'

Answer.--This does not prove anything in any way, and I was very careful not to mention this
in my report, this point being exactly what was needed and that was not demonstrated during
the two tests made on the grounds.

'Does not this unequal pressure of the two pair of wheels on the ground show that the centre
of gravity of the apparatus is placed too far forward and that under the impulse of the propellers
the machine has a tendency to tilt forward, due to the resistance
of the air?'

Answer.--The tendency of the apparatus to rise from
the rear when it was running with the wind seemed to be brought about
by the effects of the wind on the huge wings, having a spread of 17
metres, and I believe that when the machine would have faced the wind
the front wheels would have been lifted.

During the trials of October 12th, when a complete circuit of the track was accomplished without
incidents, as I and Lieut. Binet witnessed, there was practically no wind. I was therefore unable
to verify whether during this circuit the two front wheels or the rear wheel were in constant
contact with the ground, because when the trial was over it was dark (it was 5.30) and the next
day it was impossible to see anything because it had rained during the night and during Wednesday
morning. But what would prove that the rear wheel was in contact with the ground at all times is
the fact that M. Ader, though inexperienced, did not swerve from the circular track, which
would prove that he steered pretty well with his rear wheel--this he could not have done if
he had been in the air.

In the tests of the 12th, the speed was at least as great as on the 14th.

2. 'It would seem to me that if M. Ader thought that his rear wheels were off the ground he
should have used his canvas rudder in order to regain his proper course; this was the best
way of causing the machine to rotate, since it would have given an angular motion to the front
axle.'

Answer.--I state in my report that the canvas rudder whose object was the manoeuvre of the apparatus
in the air could have no effect on the apparatus on the ground, and to convince oneself of
this point it is only necessary to consider the small surface of
this canvas rudder compared with the mass to be handled on the ground,
a weight of approximately 400 kg. According to my idea, and as I have
stated in my report, M. Ader should have steered by increasing the
speed on one of his propellers and slowing down the other.

He admitted afterward that this remark was well founded, but that he did not have time to
think of it owing to the suddenness of the accident.

3. 'When the apparatus fell on its side it was under the sole influence of the wind, since M.
Ader had stopped the machine. Have we not a result here which will always be the same when
the machine comes to the ground, since the engines will always have to be stopped or slowed
down when coming to the ground? Here seems to be a bad defect of the apparatus under trial.'

Answer.--I
believe that the apparatus fell on its side after coming to a stop, not on account of the wind,
but because the semicircle described was on rough ground and one
of the wheels had collapsed.

Mensier.

October 27th, 1897.

APPENDIX B

Specification and Claims of Wright Patent, No. 821393. Filed March 23rd, 1903. Issued May 22nd,
1906. Expires May 22nd, 1923.
To all whom it may concern.

Be it known that we, Orville Wright
and Wilbur Wright, citizens of the United States, residing in the
city of Dayton, county of Montgomery, and State of Ohio, have invented
certain new and useful Improvements in Flying Machines, of which the
following is a specification. Higher and higher mounted the path; and then, at the foot of a smooth ledge
which rose like a bulwark across the gorge, it ended suddenly by the side of a cattle-tracked pool.

"This is the wall to my garden," said Hardy, pointing to the huge granite dyke, "beyond which
only the elect may pass." He paused, and glanced over at her quizzically. "The path was not
made for ladies, I am afraid," he added, pointing to a series of foot holes which ran up the
face of the ledge. "Do you think you can climb it?"

Lucy Ware studied his face for a moment; then, turning to the Indian stairway, she measured
it with a practised eye.

"You go up first," she suggested, and when he had scaled the slippery height and turned he
found her close behind, following carefully in his steps.

"Well, you are a climber!" he cried admiringly. "Here, give me your hand." And when he had
helped her up he still held it--or perhaps she clung to his.

Before them lay a little glade, shut in by painted rocks, upon whose black sides were engraved
many curious pictures, the mystic symbols of the Indians; and as they stood gazing at it an
eagle with pointed wings wheeled slowly above them, gazing with clear eyes down into the sunlit
vale. From her round nest in the crotch of a sycamore a great horned owl plunged out at their
approach and glided noiselessly away; and in the stillness the zooning of bees among the rocks
came to their ears like distant music. Beneath their feet the grass grew long and matted, shot
here and there with the blue and gold of flowers, like the rich meadows of the East; and clustering
along the hillsides, great bunches of grama grass waved their plumes proudly, the last remnant
of all that world of feed which had clothed the land like a garment before the days of the
sheep. For here, at least, there came no nibbling wethers, nor starving cattle; and the mountain
sheep which had browsed there in the old days were now hiding on the topmost crags of the Superstitions
to escape the rifles of the destroyers. All the world without was laid waste and trampled by
hurrying feet, but the garden of Hidden Water was still kept inviolate, a secret shrine consecrated
to Nature and Nature's God.

As she stood in the presence of all its beauty a mist came into Lucy's eyes and she turned away.

"Oh, Rufus," she cried, "why don't you live up here always instead of wasting your life in
that awful struggle with the sheep? You could--why, you could do anything up here!"

"Yes," assented Hardy, "it is a beautiful spot--I often come up here when I am weary with it
all--but a man must do a man's work, you know; and my work is with the sheep. When I first
came to Hidden Water I knew nothing of the sheep. I thought the little lambs were pretty; the
ewes were mothers, the herders human beings. I tried to be friends with them, to keep the peace
and abide by the law; but now that I've come to know them I agree with Jeff, who has been fighting
them for twenty years. There is something about the smell of sheep which robs men of their
humanity; they become greedy and avaricious; the more they make the more they want. Of all
the sheepmen that I know there isn't one who would go around me out of friendship or pity--and
I have done favors for them all. But they're no friends of mine now," he added ominously. "I
have to respect my friends, and I can't respect a man who is all hog. There's no pretence on
either side now, though--they're trying to sheep us out and we are trying to fight them off,
and if it ever comes to a show-down--well--"

He paused, and his eyes glowed with a strange light.

"You know I haven't very much to live for, Miss Lucy," he said earnestly, "but if I had all
that God could give me I'd stand by Jeff against the sheep. It's all right to be a poet or
an artist, a lover of truth and beauty, and all that, but if a man won't stand up for his friends
when they're in trouble he's a kind of closet philosopher that shrinks from all the realities
of life--a poor, puny creature, at the best."

He stood up very straight as he poured out this torrent of words, gazing at her intently, but
with his eyes set, as if he beheld some vision. Yet whether it was of himself and Jeff, fighting
their hopeless battle against the sheep, or of his life as it might have been if Kitty had
been as gentle with him as this woman by his side, there was no telling. His old habit of reticence
fell back upon him as suddenly as it had been cast aside, and he led the way up the little
stream in silence. As he walked, the ardor of his passion cooled, and he began to point out
things with his eloquent hands--the minnows, wheeling around in the middle of a glassy pool;
a striped bullfrog, squatting within the spray of a waterfall; huge combs of honey, hanging
from shelving caverns along the cliff where the wild bees had stored their plunder for years.
At last, as they stood before a drooping elder whose creamy blossoms swayed beneath the weight
of bees, he halted and motioned to a shady seat against the cañon wall.

"There are gardens in every desert," he said, as she sank down upon the grassy bank, "but this
is ours."

They sat for a while, gazing contentedly at the clusters of elder blossoms which hung above
them, filling the air with a rich fragrance which was spiced by the tang of sage. A ruby-throated
humming-bird flashed suddenly past them and was gone; a red-shafted woodpecker, still more
gorgeous in his scarlet plumage, descended in uneven flights from the sahuaros that clung against
the cliff and, fastening upon a hollow tree, set up a mysterious rapping.

"He is hunting for grubs," explained Hardy. "Does that inspire you?"

"Why, no," answered Lucy, puzzled.

"The Mexicans call him pajaro corazon--páh-hah-ro cor-ah-sóne," continued the poet. "Does that
appeal to your soul?"

"Why, no. What does it mean--woodpecker?"

Hardy smiled. "No," he said, "a woodpecker with them is called carpintero--carpenter, you understand--because
he hammers on trees; but my friend up on the stump yonder is Pajaro Corazon--bird of the heart.
I have a poem dedicated to him." Then, as if to excuse himself from the reading, he hastened
on: "Of course, no true poet would commit such a breach--he would write a sonnet to his lady's
eyebrow, a poem in memory of a broken dream, or some sad lament for Love, which has died simultaneously
with his own blasted hopes. But a sense of my own unimportance has saved me--or the world,
at any rate--from such laments. Pajaro Corazon and Chupa Rosa, a little humming-bird who lives
in that elder tree, have been my only friends and companions in the muse, until you came. I
wouldn't abuse Chupa Rosa's confidence by reading my poem to her. Her lover has turned out
a worthless fellow and left her--that was him you saw flying past just now, going up the cañon
to sport around with the other hummers--but here is my poem to Pajaro Corazon."

He drew forth his bundle of papers and in a shamefaced way handed one of them to Lucy. It was
a slip of yellow note paper, checked along the margin with groups of rhyming words and scansion
marks, and in the middle this single verse.

               "Pajaro Corazon!  Bird of the Heart!
         Some knight of honor in those bygone days
         Of dreams and gold and quests through desert lands,
         Seeing thy blood-red heart flash in the rays
         Of setting sun--which lured him far from Spain--
         Lifted his face and, reading there a sign
         From his dear lady, crossed himself and spake
         Then first, the name which still is thine."

Lucy folded the paper and gazed across at him rapturously.

"Oh, Rufus," she cried, "why didn't you send it to me?"

"Is it good?" asked Hardy, forgetting his pose; and when she nodded solemnly he said:

"There is another verse--look on the other side."

Lucy turned the paper over quickly and read again:

                 "Pajaro Corazon!  Bird of the Heart!
           Some Padre, wayworn, stooping towards his grave,
           Whom God by devious ways had sent so far,
           So far from Spain--still pressing on to save
           The souls He loved, now, raising up his eyes
           And seeing on thy breast the bleeding heart
           Of Jesus, cast his robes aside and spake
           Thy name--and set that place apart."

As she followed the lines Hardy watched her face with eyes that grew strangely soft and gentle.
It was Lucy Ware of all the world who understood him. Others laughed, or pitied, or overdid
it, or remained unmoved, but Lucy with her trusting blue eyes and broad poet's brow--a brow
which always made him think of Mrs. Browning who was a poet indeed, she always read his heart,
in her he could safely trust. And now, when those dear eyes filled up with tears he could have
taken her hand, yes, he could have kissed her--if he had not been afraid.

"Rufus," she said at last, "you are a poet." And then she dried her eyes and smiled.

"Let me read some more," she pleaded; but Hardy held the bundle resolutely away.

"No," he said gently, "it is enough to have pleased you once. You know poetry is like music;
it is an expression of thoughts which are more than thoughts. They come up out of the great
sea of our inner soul like the breath of flowers from a hidden garden, like the sound of breakers
from the ocean cliffs; but not every one can scent their fragrance, and some ears are too dull
to hear music in the rush of waters. And when one has caught the music of another's song then
it is best to stop before--before some discord comes. Lucy," he began, as his soul within him
rose up and clamored for it knew not what, "Lucy--"

He paused, and the woman hung upon his lips to catch the words.

"Yes?" she said, but the thought had suddenly left him. It was a great longing--that he knew--a
great desire, unsensed because unknown--but deep, deep.

"Yes--Rufus?" she breathed, leaning over; but the light had gone out of his eyes and he gazed
at her strangely.

"It is nothing," he murmured, "nothing. I--I have forgotten what I was going to say." He sighed,
and looked moodily at his feet. "The thoughts of a would-be poet," he mused, cynically. "How
valuable they are--how the world must long for them--when he even forgets them himself! I guess
I'd better keep still and let you talk a while," he ended, absently. But Lucy Ware sat gazing
before her in silence.

"Isn't it time we returned?" she asked, after a while. "You know I have a great deal to do."

"Oh, that's all right," said Hardy, easily, "I'll help you. What do you want to do--clean house?"

Lucy could have cried at her hero's sudden lapse--from Parnassus to the scullery, from love
to the commonplaces of living; but she had schooled herself to bear with him, since patience
is a woman's part. Yet her honest blue eyes were not adapted to concealment and, furtively
taking note of her distress, Hardy fell into the role of a penitent.

"Is my garden such a poor place," he inquired gravely, "that you must leave it the moment we
have come? You have not even seen Chupa Rosa."

"Well, show me Chupa Rosa--and then we will go."

She spoke the words reluctantly, rising slowly to her feet; and Hardy knew that in some hidden
way he had hurt her, yet in what regard he could not tell. A vague uneasiness came over him
and he tried awkwardly to make amends for his fault, but good intentions never yet crossed
a river or healed a breach.

"Here is her nest," he said, "almost above our seat. Look, Lucy, it is made out of willow down
and spider webs, bound round and round the twig. Don't you want to see the eggs? Look!" He
bent the limb until the dainty white treasures, half buried in the fluffy down, were revealed--but
still she did not smile.

"Oh, stop, Rufus!" she cried, "what will the mother-bird think? She might be frightened at
us and leave her nest. Come, let's hurry away before she sees us!"

She turned and walked quickly down the valley, never pausing to look back, even when Rufus
stopped to pluck a flower from among the rocks.

"Here," he said, after he had helped her down the Indian stairway; and when she held up her
hand, passively, he dropped a forget-me-not into it.

"Oh!" she cried, carried away for a moment, "do they grow down here?"

"Yes," he said, soberly, "even here. And they--sometimes you find them where you wouldn't expect--in
rough places, you know, and among the stones. I--I hope you will keep it," he said, simply.
And Lucy divined what was in his heart, better perhaps than he himself; but when at last she
was alone she buried her face in the pillow, and for a long time the house was very still.

CHAPTER XIII

A SNOW-SCENE

There was a big fire out under the mesquite that night and a band of cowboys, in all the bravery
of spurs, shaps, and pistols, romped around it in a stage-struck exuberance of spirits. The
night was hardly cold enough to call for fringed leather chaparejos, and their guns should
have been left in their blankets; nor are long-shanked Texas spurs quite the proper thing about
camp, having a dirty way of catching and tripping their wearers; but the rodéo outfit felt
that it was on dress parade and was trying its best to look the cowboy part. Bill Lightfoot
even had a red silk handkerchief draped about his neck, with the slack in front, like a German
napkin; and his cartridge belt was slung so low that it threatened every moment to drop his
huge Colt's revolver into the dirt--but who could say a word?

The news of Judge Ware's visit had passed through the Four Peaks country like the rumor of
an Indian uprising and every man rode into Hidden Water with an eye out for calico, some with
a foolish grin, some downcast and reserved, some swaggering in the natural pride of the lady's
man. But a becoming modesty had kept Lucy Ware indoors, and Kitty had limited herself to a
furtive survey of the scene from behind what was left of Sallie Winship's lace curtains. With
the subtle wisdom of a rodéo boss Jefferson Creede had excused himself to the ladies at the
first sound of jangling horse-bells, and now he kept resolutely away from the house, busying
himself with the manifold duties of his position. To the leading questions of Bill Lightfoot
and the "fly bunch" which followed his lead he turned a deaf ear or replied in unsatisfying
monosyllables; and at last, as the fire lit up the trees and flickered upon their guns and
silver-mounted trappings and no fair maids sallied forth to admire them, the overwrought emotions
of the cowboys sought expression in song.

              "Oh my little girl she lives in the town,"

chanted Lightfoot, and the fly bunch, catching the contagion, joined promptly in on the refrain:

        "A toodle link, a toodle link, a too--oo-dle a day!"

At this sudden and suggestive outbreak Jeff Creede surveyed Bill Lightfoot coldly and puffed
on his cigarette. Bill was always trying to make trouble.

         "And every time I see 'er, she asts me f'r a gown,"

carolled the leading cowboy; and the bunch, not to seem faint-hearted, chimed in again:

            "Reladin to reladin, and reladin to relate!"

Now they were verging toward the sensational part of the ballad, the place where a real gentleman
would quit, but Lightfoot only tossed his head defiantly.

"O-Oh--" he began, and then he stopped with his mouth open. The rodéo boss had suddenly risen
to an upright position and fixed him with his eye.

"I like to see you boys enjoyin' yourselves," he observed, quietly, "but please don't discuss
politics or religion while them ladies is over at the house. You better switch off onto 'My
Bonnie Lies over the Ocean,' Bill." And Bill switched.

"What's the matter?" he demanded aggrieved, "ain't anybody but you got any rights and privileges
around here? You go sportin' around and havin' a good time all day, but as soon as one of us
punchers opens his mouth you want to jump down his throat. What do we know about ladies--I
ain't seen none!"

The discussion of the moral code which followed was becoming acrimonious and personal to a
degree when a peal of girlish laughter echoed from the ranch house and the cowboys beheld Judge
Ware and Hardy, accompanied by Miss Lucy and Kitty Bonnair, coming towards their fire. A less
tactful man might have taken advantage of the hush to utter a final word of warning to his
rebellious subjects, but Creede knew Kitty Bonnair and the human heart too well. As the party
came into camp he rose quietly and introduced the judge and the ladies to every man present,
without deviation and without exception, and then, having offered Miss Ware his cracker box,
he moved over a man or two and sat down.

In the bulk of his mighty frame, the rugged power of his countenance, and the unconscious authority
of his words he was easily master of them all; but though he had the voice of Mars and a head
like Olympian Zeus he must needs abase his proud spirit to the demands of the occasion, for
the jealousy of mortal man is a proverb. Where the punchers that he hired for thirty dollars
a month were decked out in shaps and handkerchiefs he sat in his shirt-sleeves and overalls,
with only his high-heeled boots and the enormous black sombrero which he always wore, to mark
him for their king. And the first merry question which Miss Kitty asked he allowed to pass
unnoticed, until Bill Lightfoot--to save the credit of the bunch--answered it himself.

"Yes, ma'am," he replied politely. "That was a genuwine cowboy song we was singin'--we sing
'em to keep the cattle awake at night."

"Oh, how interesting!" exclaimed Kitty, leaning forward in her eagerness. "But why do you try
to keep them awake? I should think they would be so tired, after travelling all day."

"Yes, ma'am," responded Bill, twisting his silk handkerchief nervously, "but if they go to
sleep and anything wakes 'em up quick they stompede--so we ride through 'em and sing songs."

"Just think of that, Lucy!" cried Miss Kitty enthusiastically. "And it was such a pretty tune,
too! Won't you sing it again, Mr. Lightfoot? I'd just love to hear it!"

Here was a facer for Mr. Lightfoot, and Jefferson Creede, to whom all eyes were turned in the
crisis, smiled maliciously and let him sweat.

"Bill ain't in very good voice to-night," he observed at last, as the suspense became unbearable,
"and we're kinder bashful about singin' to company, anyway. But if you want to hear somethin'
good, you want to git Bill goin' about Coloraydo. Sure, Mr. Lightfoot is our best story-teller;
and he's had some mighty excitin' times up there in them parts, hain't you, Bill?"

Bill cast a baleful glance at his rival and thrust out his chin insolently. His Coloraydo experiences
were a matter of jest with Jeff Creede, but with the ladies it might be different. His courage
rose before the flattering solicitude of Kitty Bonnair and he resolved then and there to fool
Mr. Creede or know the reason why.

"Well," he replied, stoutly, "they may look kinder tame alongside of your Arizona lies, but--"

"Oh, Mr. Lightfoot, do tell me all about it!" broke in Kitty, with an alluring smile. "Colorado
is an awfully wild country, isn't it? And did you ever have any adventures with bears?"

"Bears!" exclaimed Bill contemptuously. "Bears! Huh, we don't take no more account of ordinary
bears up in Coloraydo than they do of coons down here. But them big silver-tips--ump-um--excuse
me!" He paused and swaggered a little on the precarious support of his cracker box. "And yet,
Miss Bunnair," he said, lowering his voice to a confidential key, "I slept a whole night with
one of them big fellers and never turned a hair. I could've killed him the next day, too, but
I was so grateful to him I spared his life."

This was the regular "come-on" for Lightfoot's snow-storm story, and Creede showed his white
teeth scornfully as Bill leaned back and began the yarn.

"You see, Miss Bunnair," began the Colorado cowboy, rolling his eyes about the circle to quell
any tendency to give him away, "Coloraydo is an altogether different country from this here.
The mountains is mighty steep and brushy, with snow on the peaks, and the cactus ain't more
'n a inch high out on the perairie. But they's plenty of feed and water--you betcher life I
wisht I was back there now instead of fightin' sheep down here! The only thing aginst that
country up there is the blizzards. Them storms is very destructive to life. Yes, ma'am. They's
never any notice given but suddenly the wind will begin to blow and the cattle will begin to
drift, and then about the time your horse is give out and your ears frozen it'll begin to snow!

"Well, this time I'm tellin' about I was up on the Canadian River west of the Medicine Bow
Mountains and she came on to snow--and snow, I thought it would bury me alive! I was lost in
a big park--a kind of plain or perairie among the mountains. Yes'm, they have'm there--big
level places--and it was thirty miles across this here level perairie. The wind was blowin'
something awful and the snow just piled up on my hat like somebody was shovellin' it off a
roof, but I kept strugglin' on and tryin' to git to the other side, or maybe find some sheltered
place, until it was like walkin' in your sleep. And that light fluffy snow jest closed in over
me until I was covered up ten feet deep. Of course my horse had give out long ago, and I was
jest beginnin' to despair when I come across one of them big piles of rocks they have up there,
scattered around promiscus-like on the face of nature; and I begin crawlin' in and crawlin'
in, hopin' to find some cave or somethin', and jest as I was despairin' my feet fell into a
kind of trail, kinder smooth and worn, but old, you know, and stomped hard under the snow.
Well, I follers along this path with my feet until it come to a hole in the rocks; and when
I come to that hole I went right in, fer I was desprit; and I crawled in and crawled in until
I come to a big nest of leaves, and then I begin to burrow down into them leaves. And as soon
as I had made a hole I pulled them leaves over me and fell to sleep, I was that exhausted.

"But after a while I had some awful bad dreams, and when I woke up I felt somethin' kickin'
under me. Yes 'm, that's right; I felt somethin' kinder movin' around and squirmin', and when
I begin to investergate I found I was layin' down right square on top of a tremenjous big grizzly
bear! Well, you fellers can laugh, but I was, all the same. What do you know about it, you
woolies, punchin' cows down here in the rocks and cactus?

"How's that, Miss Bunnair? W'y sure, he was hibernatin'! They all hibernate up in them cold
countries. Well, the funny part of this was that Old Brin had gone to sleep suckin' his off
fore foot, jest like a little baby, and when I had piled in on top of him I had knocked his
paw out of his mouth and he was tryin' to git it back. But he was all quilled up with himself
under them leaves, and his claws was so long he couldn't git that foot back into his mouth
nohow. He snooped and grabbed and fumbled, and every minute he was gittin' madder and madder,
a-suckin' and slobberin' like a calf tryin' to draw milk out of the hired man's thumb, and
a-gruntin' and groanin' somethin' awful.

"Well, I see my finish in about a minute if he ever got good an' woke up, so I resolved to
do somethin' desprit. I jest naturally grabbed onto that foot and twisted it around and stuck
it into his mouth myself! Afraid? Ump-um, not me--the only thing I was afraid of was that he'd
git my hand and go to suckin' it by mistake. But when I steered his paw around in front of
him he jest grabbed onto that big black pad on the bottom of his foot like it was m'lasses
candy, and went off to sleep again as peaceful as a kitten."

The man from Coloraydo ended his tale abruptly, with an air of suspense, and Kitty Bonnair
took the cue.

"What did I do then?" demanded Lightfoot, with a reminiscent smile. "Well, it was a ground-hog
case with me--if I moved I'd freeze to death and if I knocked his paw out'n his mouth again
he'd mash my face in with it--so I jest snuggled down against him, tucked my head under his
chin, and went to sleep, holdin' that paw in his mouth with both hands."

"Oh, Mr. Lightfoot," exclaimed Kitty, "how could you? Why, that's the most remarkable experience
I ever heard of! Lucy, I'm going to put that story in my book when I get home, and--but what
are you laughing at, Mr. Creede?"

"Who? Me?" inquired Jeff, who had been rocking about as if helpless with laughter. "W'y, I
ain't laughin'!"

"Yes, you are too!" accused Miss Kitty. "And I want you to tell me what it is. Don't you think
Mr. Lightfoot's story is true?"

"True?" echoed Creede, soberly. "W'y, sure it's true. I ain't never been up in those parts;
but if Bill says so, that settles it. I never knew a feller from Coloraydo yet that could tell
a lie. No, I was jest laughin' to think of that old bear suckin' his paw that way."

He added this last with such an air of subterfuge and evasion that Kitty was not deceived for
a moment.

"No, you're not, Mr. Creede," she cried, "you're just making fun of me--so there!"

She stamped her foot and pouted prettily, and the big cowboy's face took on a look of great
concern.

"Oh, no, ma'am," he protested, "but since it's gone so far I reckon I'll have to come through
now in order to square myself. Of course I never had no real adventures, you know,--nothin'
that you would care to write down or put in a book, like Bill's,--but jest hearin' him tell
that story of gittin' snowed in reminded me of a little experience I had up north here in Coconino
County. You know Arizona ain't all sand and cactus--not by no means. Them San Francisco Mountains
up above Flag are sure snow-crested and covered with tall timber and it gits so cold up there
in the winter-time that it breaks rocks. No, that's straight! Them prospectors up there when
they run short of powder jest drill a line of holes in a rock and when one of them awful cold
snaps comes on they run out and fill the holes up with hot water out of the tea-kittle. Well,
sir, when that water freezes, which it does in about a minute, it jest naturally busts them
rocks wide open--but that ain't what I started to tell you about."

He paused and contemplated his hearers with impressive dignity.

"Cold ain't nothin'," he continued gravely, "after you git used to it; but once in a while,
ladies, she snows up there. And when I say 'snows' I don't refer to such phenominer as Bill
was tellin' about up in Coloraydo, but the real genuwine Arizona article--the kind that gits
started and can't stop, no more 'n a cloudburst. Well, one time I was knockin' around up there
in Coconino when I ought to've been at home, and I come to a big plain or perairie that was
seventy miles across, and I got lost on that big plain, right in the dead of winter. They was
an awful cold wind blowin' at the time, but I could see the mountains on the other side and
so I struck out for 'em. But jest as I got in the middle of that great plain or perairie, she
come on to snow. At first she come straight down, kinder soft and fluffy; then she began to
beat in from the sides, and the flakes began to git bigger and bigger, until I felt like the
Chinaman that walked down Main Street when they had that snow-storm in Tucson. Yes, sir, it
was jest like havin' every old whiskey bum in town soakin' you with snow-balls--and all the
kids thrown in.

"My horse he began to puff and blow and the snow began to bank up higher and higher in front
of us and on top of us until, bymeby, he couldn't stand no more, and he jest laid down and
died. Well, of course that put me afoot and I was almost despairin'. The snow was stacked up
on top of me about ten feet deep and I was desprit, but I kept surgin' right ahead, punchin'
a hole through that fluffy stuff, until she was twenty foot deep. But I wasn't afraid none--ump-um,
not me--I jest kept a-crawlin' and a-crawlin', hopin' to find some rocks or shelter, until
she stacked up on top of me thirty foot deep. Thirty foot--and slumped down on top o' me until
I felt like a horny-toad under a haystack. Well, I was gittin' powerful weak and puny, but
jest as I was despairin' I come across a big rock, right out there in the middle of that great
plain or perairie. I tried to crawl around that old rock but the snow was pushin' down so heavy
on top o' me I couldn't do nothin', and so when she was fif-ty-two foot deep by actual measurement
I jest give out an' laid down to die."

He paused and fixed a speculative eye on Bill Lightfoot.

"I reckon that would be considered pretty deep up in Coloraydo," he suggested, and then he
began to roll a cigarette. Sitting in rigid postures before the fire the punchers surveyed
his face with slow and suspicious glances; and for once Kitty Bonnair was silent, watching
his deliberate motions with a troubled frown. Balanced rakishly upon his cracker box Bill Lightfoot
regarded his rival with a sneering smile, a retort trembling on his lips, but Creede only leaned
forward and picked a smoking brand from the fire--he was waiting for the "come-on."

Now to ask the expected question at the end of such a story was to take a big chance. Having
been bitten a time or two all around, the rodéo hands were wary of Jeff Creede and his barbed
jests; the visitors, being ignorant, were still gaping expectantly; it was up to Bill Lightfoot
to spring the mine. For a moment he hesitated, and then his red-hot impetuosity, which had
often got him into trouble before, carried him away.

"W'y, sure it would be deep for Coloraydo," he answered, guardedly.

Jefferson Creede glanced up at him, smoking luxuriously, holding the cigarette to his lips
with his hand as if concealing a smile.

"Aw, rats," snapped out Lightfoot at last, "why don't you finish up and quit? What happened then?"

"Then?" drawled Creede, with a slow smile. "W'y, nothin', Bill--I died!"

"Ah-hah-hah!" yelled the punchers, throwing up handfuls of dirt in the extravagance of their
delight, and before Bill could realize the enormity of the sell one of his own partisans rose
up and kicked the cracker box out from under him in token of utter defeat. For an hour after
their precipitate retreat the visitors could hear the whoops and gibes of the cowboys, the
loud-mouthed and indignant retorts of Lightfoot, and the soothing remonstrances of Jefferson
Creede--and from the house Kitty the irrepressible, added to their merriment a shriek of silvery
laughter. But after it was all over and he had won, the round-up boss swore soberly at himself
and sighed, for he discerned on the morrow's horizon the Indian signs of trouble.

CHAPTER XIV

FOREBODINGS

To the Eastern eye, blinded by local color, the Four Peaks country looked like a large and
pleasantly variegated cactus garden, sparsely populated with rollicking, fun-loving cowboys
who wore their interesting six-shooters solely to keep their balance in the saddle. The new
grass stood untrampled beneath the bushes on Bronco Mesa, there were buds and flowers everywhere,
and the wind was as sweet and untainted as if it drew out of Eden. But somewhere, somewhere
in that great wilderness of peaks which lay to the south and through which only the dogged
sheepmen could fight their way, stealthily hidden, yet watching, lay Jasper Swope and his sheep.
And not only Jasper with his pet man-killing Chihuahuano and all those low-browed compadres
whom he called by circumlocution "brothers," but Jim, sore with his defeat, and many others--and
every man armed.

After the first rain they had disappeared from the desert absolutely, their tracks pointing
toward the east. The drought had hit them hard, and the cold of Winter; yet the ewes had lambed
in the springtime, and as if by magic the tender grass shot up to feed their little ones. Surely,
God was good to the sheep. They were ranging far, now that the shearing was over, but though
they fed to the topmost peaks of the Superstitions, driving the crooked-horned mountain sheep
from their pastures, their destiny lay to the north, in the cool valleys of the Sierra Blancas;
and there in the end they would go, though they left havoc in their wake. Once before the sheep
had vanished in this same way, mysteriously; and at last, travelling circuitous ways and dealing
misery to many Tonto cowmen, they had poured over the very summit of the Four Peaks and down
upon Bronco Mesa. And now, though they were hidden, every man on the round-up felt their presence
and knew that the upper range was in jeopardy.

After amusing the ladies with inconsequential tales, the rodéo outfit therefore rose up and
was gone before the light, raking the exposed lowland for its toll of half-fed steers; and
even Rufus Hardy, the parlor-broke friend and lover, slipped away before any of them were stirring
and rode far up along the river. What a river it was now, this unbridled Salagua which had
been their moat and rampart for so many years! Its waters flowed thin and impotent over the
rapids, lying in clear pools against the base of the black cliffs, and the current that had
uprooted trees like feathers was turned aside by a snag. Where before the sheep had hung upon
its flank hoping at last to swim at Hidden Water, the old ewes now strayed along its sandy
bed, browsing upon the willows. From the towering black buttes that walled in Hell's Hip Pocket
to the Rio Verde it was passable for a spring lamb, and though the thin grass stood up fresh
and green on the mesas the river showed nothing but drought. Drought and the sheep, those were
the twin evils of the Four Peaks country; they lowered the price of cattle and set men to riding
the range restlessly. For the drought is a visitation of God, to be accepted and endured, but
sheep may be turned back.

As he rode rapidly along the river trail, halting on each ridge to search the landscape for
sheep, Hardy's conscience smote him for the single day he had spent in camp, dallying within
sight of Kitty or talking with Lucy Ware. One such day, if the sheepmen were prepared, and
Bronco Mesa would be a desert. Threats, violence, strategy, would be of no avail, once the
evil was done; the sheep must be turned back at the river or they would swarm in upon the whole
upper range. One man could turn them there, for it was the dead line; but once across they
would scatter like quail before a hawk, crouching and hiding in the gulches, refusing to move,
yet creeping with brutish stubbornness toward the north and leaving a clean swath behind. There
were four passes that cut their way down from the southern mountains to the banks of the river,
old trails of Apaches and wild game, and to quiet his mind Hardy looked for tracks at every
crossing before he turned Chapuli's head toward camp.

The smoke was drifting from the chimney when, late in the afternoon, he rode past the door
and saw Lucy Ware inside, struggling with an iron kettle before the fireplace. Poor Lucy, she
had undertaken a hard problem, for there is as much difference between camp cooking and home
cooking as there is between a Dutch oven and a steel range, and a cooking-school graduate has
to forget a whole lot before she can catch the knack of the open fire. For the second time
that day Rufus Hardy's conscience, so lately exercised over his neglect of the sheep, rose
up and rebuked him. Throwing Chapuli into the corral he kicked off his spurs and shaps and
gave Lucy her first lesson in frontier cookery; taught her by the force of his example how
to waste her wood and save her back; and at the end of the short demonstration he sat down
without ceremony, and fell to eating.

"Excuse me," he said, "if I seem to be greedy, but I had my breakfast before sun-up. Where's
your father, and Kitty?"

"Oh, they had the Mexican boy catch their horses for them and have ridden up the valley to
watch for the cattle. I stayed behind to make my first water color, and then--I thought you
would be coming back soon, so I tried to cook supper instead. I'm a pretty good housekeeper--at
home," she said apologetically.

Hardy watched her as she experimented painstakingly with the fire, scooping out shovelfuls
of coal from beneath the glowing logs and planting her pots and kettles upon them with a hooked
stick, according to instructions.

"You look like a picture of one of our sainted Puritan ancestors," he observed, at last, "and
that's just exactly the way they cooked, too--over an open fire. How does it feel to be Priscilla?"

"Well, if Priscilla's hands looked like mine," exclaimed Lucy despairingly, "John Alden must
have been madly in love with her. How do you keep yours clean?"

"That's a secret," replied Hardy, "but I'll tell you. I never touch the outside of a pot--and
I scour them with sandsoap. But I wish you'd stop cooking, Lucy; it makes me feel conscience-stricken.
You are my guests, remember, even if I do go off and neglect you for a whole day; and when
you go back to Berkeley I want you to have something more interesting than housekeeping to
talk about. Didn't I see two ladies' saddles out in the wagon?"

Miss Lucy's eyes lighted up with pleasure as, anticipating his drift, she nodded her head.

"Well then," said Hardy, with finality, "if you'll get up early in the morning, I'll catch
you a little pony that I gentled myself, and we can ride up the river together. How does that
strike you?"

"Fine!" exclaimed Lucy, with sudden enthusiasm.

"Oh, Rufus," she cried impulsively, "if you only knew how weak and helpless a thing it is to
be a woman--and how glad we are to be noticed! Your horses were in the barn; you were not far
away."

"Why didn't you telephone me?"

"If I hadn't cared more for you than I do for my job and the Big Idea
thrown in I could have settled it that way.

But, Grant, I do."

"I believe you. But why this sudden worry over me? I was merely spending the evening at a neighbor's."

"Yes--at
Transley's. Transley was in town, and Mrs. Transley is--not responsible--where you are concerned."

"Linder!"

"I
saw it all that night at dinner there. Some things are plain to everyone--except those most involved.
Now it's not my job to say to you what's right and wrong, but the way it looks to me is this:
what's the use of setting up a new code of morality about money which concerns, after all, only
some of us, if you're going to knock down those things which concern all of us?"

Grant regarded his foreman for some time without answering. "I appreciate your frankness, Linder,"
he said at length. "Your friendship, which I can never question, gives you that privilege. Man to
man, I'm going to be equally frank with you. To begin with, I suppose you will admit that Y.D.'s
daughter is a strong character, a woman quite capable of directing her own affairs?"

"The stronger the engine the bigger the smash if there's a wreck."

"It's not a case of wrecking; it's a case of trying to save something out of the wreck. Convention,
Linder, is a torture-monger; it binds men and women to the stake of propriety and bids them
smile while it snuffs out all the soul that's in them. We have pitted ourselves against convention
in economic affairs; shall we not--"

"No! It was pure unselfishness which led you into the Big Idea. That isn't what's leading you
now."

"Well, let me put it another way. Transley is a clever man of affairs. He knows how to accomplish
his ends.

He applied the methods--somewhat modified for the occasion--of a landshark in winning his
wife.

He makes a great appearance of unselfishness, but in reality he is
selfish to the core.

He lavishes money on her to satisfy his own vanity, but as for her finer nature, the real Zen, her
soul if you like--he doesn't even know she has one.

He obtained possession by false pretences. Which is the more moral thing--to leave him in possession,
or to throw him out? Didn't you yourself hear him say that men who are worth their salt take
what they want?"

"Since when did you let him set YOUR standards?"

"That's hardly fair."

"I think it is.

I think, too, that you are arguing against your own convictions. Well, I've had my say. I
deliberately came out to-day without Murdoch so that I might have it.

You would be quite justified in firing me for what I've done. But now I'm through, and no
matter what may happen, remember, Linder will never have suspected anything."

"That's like you, old chap. We'll drop it at that, but I must explain that Zen is going to town
to-night to meet Transley, and is leaving the boy with me. It is an event in my young life,
and I have house-cleaned for it appropriately. Come inside and admire my handiwork."

Linder admired as he was directed, and then the two men fell into a discussion of business
matters. Eventually Grant cooked supper, and just as they had finished Mrs. Transley drove up
in her motor.

"Here we are!" she cried, cheerily. "Glad to see you, Mr. Linder. Wilson has his teddy-bear and
his knife and his pyjamas, and is a little put out, I think, that
I wouldn't let him bring the pig."

"I shall try and make up the deficiency," said Grant, smiling broadly,
as the boy climbed to his shoulder.

"Won't you come in? Linder, among his other accomplishments learned
in France, is an excellent chaperon."

"Thank you, no; I must get along. I shall call early in the morning, so that you will not be delayed
on Wilson's account."

"No need of that; he can ride to the field with me on Prince. He is a great help with the plowing."

"I'm
sure." She stepped up to Grant and drew the boy's face down to hers. "Good-bye, dear; be a good
boy," she whispered, and Wilson waved kisses to her as the motor sped down the road.

Linder took his departure soon after, and Grant was surprised to find himself almost embarrassed
in the presence of his little guest. The embarrassment, however, was all on his side. Wilson was
greatly interested in the strange things in the house, and investigated them with the romantic
thoroughness of his years. Grant placed a collection of war trophies that had no more fight in
them at the child's disposal, and he played about until it was time to go to bed.

Where to start on the bedtime preparations was a puzzle, but Wilson himself came to Grant's
aid with explicit instructions about buttons and pins. Grant fervently hoped the boy would be
able to reverse the process in the morning, otherwise--

Suddenly, with a little dexterous movement, the child divested himself
of all his clothing, and rushed into a far corner.

"You have to catch me now," he shouted in high glee. "One, two--"

Evidently it was a game, and Grant entered into the spirit of it,
finally running Wilson to earth on the farthest corner of the kitchen
table.

To adjust the pyjamas was, as Grant confessed, a bigger job than harnessing a four-horse team,
but at length it was completed.

"You must hear my prayer, Uncle Man-on-the-Hill," said the boy. "You have to sit down in a chair."

Grant
sat down and with a strange mixture of emotions drew the little chap between his knees as he
listened to the long-forgotten prattle. He felt his fingers running through Wilson's hair as other
fingers, now long, long turned to dust, had once run through his....

At the third line the boy stopped. "You have to tell me now," he prompted.

"But I can't, Willie; I have forgotten."

"Huh, you don't know much," the child commented, and glibly quoted the remaining lines. "And
God bless Daddy and Mamma and teddy-bear and Uncle Man-on-the-Hill and the pig. Amen," he concluded,
accompanying the last word with a jump which landed him fairly in Grant's lap. His little
arms went up about his friend's neck, and his little soft cheek rested against a tanned and
weather-beaten one.

Slowly Grant's arms closed about the warm, lithe body and pressed it to his in a new passion, strange
and holy. Then he led him to the whim-room, turned down the white sheets in which no form had
ever lain and placed the boy between them, snuggled his teddy down by his side and set his
knife properly in view upon the dresser.

And then he leaned down again and kissed the little face, and whispered, "Good night, little
boy; God keep you safe to-night, and always." And suddenly Grant realized that he had been
praying....

He withdrew softly, and only partly closed the door; then he chose a seat where he could see the little
figure lying peacefully on the white bed. The last shafts of the setting sun were falling in amber
wedges across the room. He picked up a book, thinking to read, but he could not keep his attention
on the page; he found his mind wandering back into the long-forgotten
chambers of its beginning, conjuring up from the faint recollections
of infancy visions of the mother he had hardly known.... After a while
he tip-toed to the whim-room door and found that Wilson, with his
arms firmly clasped about his teddy-bear, was deep in the sleep of
childhood.

"The dear little chap," he murmured. "I must watch by him to-night. It would be unspeakable if
anything should happen him while he is under my care."

He felt a sense of warmth, almost a smothering sensation, and raised his hand to his forehead.
It came down covered with perspiration.

"It's amazingly close," he said, and walked to one of the French windows opening to the west. The
sun had gone down, and a brooding darkness lay over all the valley,
but far up in the sky he could trace the outline of a cloud.

Above, the stars shone with an unwonted brightness, but below all was a bank of blue-black
darkness. The air was intensely still; in the silence he could hear the wash of the river. Grant
reflected that never before had he heard the wash of the river at that distance.

"Looks like a storm," he commented, casually, and suddenly felt something
tighten about his heart.

The storms of the foothill country, which occasionally sweep out of the mountains and down
the valleys on the shortest notice, had no terror for him; he had sat on horseback under an
oilskin slicker through the worst of them; but to-night! Even as he watched, the distant glare
of lightning threw the heaving proportions of the thundercloud into sharp relief.

He turned to his chair, but found himself pacing the living-room with an altogether inexplicable
nervousness. He had held the line many a bad night at the Front while Death spat out of the darkness
on every hand; he had smoked in the faces of his men to cover his own fear and to shame them
out of theirs; he had run the whole gamut of the emotion of the trenches,
but tonight something more awesome than any engine of man was gathering
its forces in the deep valleys.

He shook himself to throw off the morbidness that was settling upon him; he laughed, and the
echo came back haunting from the silent corners of the house.

Then he lit a lamp and set it, burning low, in the whim-room, and
noted that the boy slept on, all unconcerned.

"Damn Linder, anyway!" he exclaimed presently.

"I believe he shook me up more than I realized.

He charged me with insincerity; me, who have always made sincerity my special virtue.... Well,
there may be something in it."

A faint, indistinct growling, as of the grinding of mighty rocks, came down from the distances.

"The
storm will be nothing," he assured himself. "A gust of wind; a spatter of rain; perhaps a dash
of hail; then, of a sudden, a sky so calm and peaceful one would
wonder how it ever could have been disturbed."

Even as he spoke the house shivered in every timber as the gale struck it and went whining
by.

He rushed to the whim-room, but found the boy still sleeping soundly. "I must stay up," he
reasoned with himself; "I must be on hand in case he should be frightened."

Suddenly it occurred to Grant that, quite apart from his love for
Wilson, if anything should happen the child in his house a very difficult
situation would be created.

Transley would demand explanations--explanations which would be hard to make. Why was Wilson
there at all? Why was he not at home with Sarah?

Sarah away from home! Why had Zen kept that a secret?... How long had this thing been going
on, anyway? Grant feared neither Transley nor any other man, and yet there was something akin
to fear in his heart as he thought of these possibilities. He would be held accountable--doubly
accountable--if anything happened the child. Even though it were something quite beyond his control;
lightning, for example--

The gale subsided as quickly as it had come, and the sudden silence which followed was even
more awesome. It lasted only for a moment; a flash of lightning lit up every corner of the house,
bursting like white fire from every wall and ceiling. Grant rushed to the whim-room and was
standing over the child when the crash of thunder came upon them. The boy stirred gently, smiled,
and settled back to his sleep.

Grant drew the blinds in the whim-room, and went out to draw them in the living-room, but the sight
across the valley was of a majesty so terrific that it held him fascinated. The play of the lightning
was incessant, and with every flash the little lakes shot back their white reflection, and
distant farm window-panes seemed heliographing to each other through the night. As yet there
was no rain, but a dense wall of cloud pressed down from the west, and the farther hills were
hidden even in the brightest flashes.

Turning from the windows, Grant left the blinds open. "Only cowardice would close them," he muttered
to himself, "and surely, in addition to the other qualities Linder
has attributed to me, I am not a coward.

If it were not for Willie I could stand and enjoy it."

Presently rain began to fall; a few scattered drops at first, then thicker, harder, until the
roof and windows rattled and shook with their force.

The wind, which had gone down so suddenly, sprang up again, buffeting
the house as it rushed by with the storm.

Grant stood in the whim-room, in the dim light of the lamp turned low, and watched the steady breathing
of his little guest with as much anxiety as if some dread disease threatened him. For the
first time in his life there came into Grant's consciousness some sense of the price which
parents pay in the rearing of little children.

He thought of all the hours of sickness, of all the childish hurts and dangers, and suddenly he
found himself thinking of his father with a tenderness which was
strange and new to him.

Doubtless under even that stern veneer of business interest had beat a heart which, many a
time, had tightened in the grip of fear for young Dennison.

As the night wore on the storm, instead of spending itself quickly as Grant had expected, continued
unabated, but his nervous tension gradually relaxed, and when at length Wilson was awakened
by an exceptionally loud clap of thunder he took the boy in his arms and soothed his little fears
as a mother might have done.

They sat for a long while in a big chair in the living-room, and exchanged such confidences as
a man may with a child of five. After the lad had dropped back into sleep Grant still sat with
him in his arms, thinking....

And what he thought was this: He was a long while framing the exact thought; he tried to beat
it back in a dozen ways, but it circled around him, gradually closed in upon him and forced its
acceptance. "Linder called me a fool, and he was right. He might have called me a coward, and
again he would have been right. Linder was right."

Some way it seemed easy to reach that conclusion while this little sleeping form lay in his arms.
Perhaps it had quickened into life that ennobling spirit of parenthood
which is all sacrifice and love and self-renunciation.

The ends which seemed so all-desirable a few hours ago now seemed sordid and mean and unimportant.
Reaching out for some means of self-justification Grant turned to the Big Idea; that was his;
that was big and generous and noble. But after all, was it his? The idea had come in upon him
from some outside source--as perhaps all ideas do; struck him like a bullet; swept him along. He
was merely the agency employed in putting it into effect.

It had cost him nothing. He was doing that for society. Now was the time to do something that
would cost; to lay his hand upon the prize and then relinquish it--for the sake of Wilson Transley!

"And
by God I'll do it!" he exclaimed, springing to his feet.

He carried the child back to his bed, and then turned again to watch the storm through the windows.
It seemed to be subsiding; the lightning, although still almost continuous, was not so near.
The air was cooling off and the rain was falling more steadily, without the gusts and splatters which
marked the storm in its early stages. And as he looked out over the black valley, lighted again
and again by the glare of heaven's artillery, Grant became conscious of a deep, mysterious sense
of peace. It was as though his soul, like the elements about him, caught in a paroxysm of elemental
passion, had been swept clean and pure in the fire of its own upheaval.

"What little incidents turn our lives!" he thought. "That boy; in some strange way he has been
the means of bringing me to see things as they are--which not even Linder could do. The mind
has to be fertilized for the thought, or it can't think it. He brought the necessary influence
to bear. It was like the night at Murdoch's house, the night when
the Big Idea was born.

Surely I owe that to Murdoch, and his wife, and Phyllis Bruce."

The name of Phyllis Bruce came to him with almost a shock. He had been so occupied with his farm
and with Zen that he had thought but little of her of late. As he turned the matter over in his
mind now he felt that he had used Phyllis rather shabbily. He recalled having told Murdoch to
send for her, but that was purely a business transaction.

Yet he felt that he had never entirely forgotten her, and he was surprised to find how tenderly
the memory of her welled up within him. Zen's vision had been clearer than his; she had recognized
in Phyllis Bruce a party to his life's drama. "The second choice
may be really the first," she had said.

Grant lit a cigar and sat down to smoke and think. The matter of Phyllis needed prompt settlement.
It afforded a means to burn his bridges behind him, and Grant felt that it would be just as well
to cut off all possibility of retreat. Fortunately the situation was one that could be explained--to
Phyllis.

He had come out West again to be sure of himself; he was sure now; would she be his wife? He
had never thought that line out to a conclusion before, but now it
proved a subject very delightful to contemplate.

He had told himself, back in those days in the East, that it would not be fair to marry Phyllis Bruce
while his heart was another's. He had believed that then; now he knew the real reason was that
he had allowed himself to hope, against all reason, that Zen Transley might yet be his. He had
harbored an unworthy desire, and called it a virtue. Well--the die was cast. He had definitely
given Zen up. He would tell Phyllis everything.... That is, everything she needed to know.

It would be best to settle it at once--the sooner the better. He went to his desk and took out
a telegraph blank. He addressed it to Phyllis, pondered a minute in a great hush in the storm,
and wrote,

"I am sure now. May I come? Dennison."

This done he turned to the telephone, hurrying as one who fears for the duration of his good
resolutions.

It was a chance if the line was not out of business, but he lifted
the receiver and listened to the thump of his heart as he waited.

Presently came a voice as calm and still as though it spoke from another world, "Number?"

He gave the number of Linder's rooms in town; it was likely Linder
had remained in town, but it was a question whether the telephone
bell would waken him. He had recollections of Linder as a sound sleeper.
But even as this possibility entered his mind he heard Linder's phlegmatic
voice in his ear.

"Oh, Linder! I'm so glad I got you. Rush this message
to Phyllis Bruce.... Linder?... Linder!"

There was no answer. Nothing
but a hollow, empty sound on the wire, as though it led merely into
the universe in general. He tried to call the operator, but without
success. The wire was down.

He turned from it with a sense of acute
impatience. Was this an omen of obstacles to bar him now from Phyllis
Bruce? He had a wild thought of saddling a horse and riding to town,
but at that moment the storm came down afresh. Besides, there was
the boy.

Suddenly came a quick knock at the door; the handle turned,
and a drenched, hatless figure, with disheveled, wet hair, and white,
drawn face burst in upon him. It was Zen Transley.

CHAPTER XXII

"Zen!"

"How
is he--how is Wilson?" she demanded, breathlessly.

"Sound as a bell,"
he answered, alarmed by her manner. The self-assured Zen was far from
self-assurance now. "Come, see, he is asleep."

He led her into the
whim-room and turned up the lamp. The lad was sleeping soundly, his
teddy-bear clasped in his arms, his little pink and white face serene
under the magic skies of slumberland. Grant expected that Zen would
throw herself upon the child in her agitation, but she did not. She
drew her fingers gently across his brow, then, turning to Grant,

"Rather
an unceremonious way to break into your house," she said, with a little
laugh. "I hope you will pardon me.... I was uneasy about Wilson."

"But
tell me--how--where did you come from?"

"From town. Let me stand
in your kitchen, or somewhere."

"You're wet through. I can't offer
you much change."

"Not as wet as when you first met me, Dennison,"
she said, with a smile. "I have a good waterproof, but my hat blew
off. It's somewhere on the road. I couldn't see through the windshield,
so I put my head out, and away it went."

"The hat?"

Then both laughed,
and an atmosphere that had been tense began to settle back to normal.
Grant led her out to the living-room, removed her coat, and started
a fire.

"So you drove out over those roads?" he said, when the smoke
began to curl up around the logs. "You had your courage."

"It wasn't
courage, Dennison; it was terror. Fear sometimes makes one wonderfully
brave. After I saw Frank off I went to the hotel. I had a room on
the west side, and instead of going to bed I sat by the window looking
out at the storm and at the wet streets. I could see the flashes of
lightning striking down as though they were aimed at definite objects,
and I began to think of Wilson, and of you. You see, it was the first
night I had ever spent away from him, and I began to think....

"After
a while I could bear it no longer, and I rushed down and out to the
garage. There was just one young man on night duty, and I'm sure he
thought me crazy. When he couldn't dissuade me he wanted to send a
driver with me. You know I couldn't have that."

She was looking squarely
at him, her face strangely calm and emotionless. Grant nodded that
he followed her reasoning.

"So here I am," she continued. "No doubt
you think me silly, too. You are not a mother."

"I think I understand,"
he answered, tenderly. "I think I do." Bill Johnson's
hounds were the first to feel the madness. They left before sun-up, heading for the wooded
heights of the Juate, and led him a weary chase. At the last moment Creede abandoned the unprofitable
working of The Rolls and ordered the rodéo up onto Bronco Mesa; and Kitty Bonnair, taking advantage
of his preoccupation, quietly gave him the slip at the end of their long eastern detour, and
turned her pinto's head toward the river.

As for Kitty, her will was the wind's will, which changes with the times and seasons but is
accountable to no universal law. Never in her life had she met a man who could quarrel like
Rufus Hardy. Beneath her eye he was as clay in the hands of the potter; every glance spoke
love, and for her alone. And yet it was something more than a smouldering resentment which
made him avoid her, riding out before the dawn; more than the tremulous bashfulness which had
stayed his hand when at times he might have taken hers. There was something deep, hidden, mysterious,
lurking in those fawnlike eyes, and it made him insurgent against her will. It was a secret,
hidden from all the world, which he must yield to her. And then she would forgive him for all
the unhappiness he had caused her and teach him what a thing it is for a woman to love and
be misunderstood. But first--first she must see him alone; she must burst upon him suddenly,
taking his heart by storm as she had on that first day, and leave the rest to fate. So she
lingered to gather some flowers which nodded among the rocks, the shy and dainty forget-me-nots
which they had picked together at home; and when Creede was over the first ridge she struck
out boldly up a side cañon, tucking the miniature bouquet into the shadows of her hair.

The southern flank of Bronco Mesa breaks off sharply above the Salagua, rising slowly by slopes
and terraced benches to the heights, and giving way before the river in a succession of broken
ridges. Along these summits run winding trails, led high to escape the rougher ground. Urged
on by the slashings of her quirt, Pinto galloped recklessly through this maze of cow paths
until as if by magic the great valley lay before them. There in its deep cañon was the river
and the river trail--and a man, mounted upon a sorrel horse, savagely intent upon his way.
For a minute Kitty studied him curiously as he hustled along, favoring his horse up the hills
but swinging to the stirrup as he dodged bushes across the flats; then she flung out her hand
impulsively, and called his name. In a flash he was up in his saddle, looking. Chapuli tossed
his head and in the act caught a glimpse of the other horse--then they both stood rigid, gazing
in astonishment at the living statue against the sky. At sight of that witching figure, beckoning
him from the mountain top, Hardy's heart leaped within him and stopped. Once more the little
hand was thrown out against the sky and a merry voice floated down to him from the sun-touched
heights.

"Hello, Rufus!" it called teasingly, and still he sat gazing up at her. All the untamed passions
of his being surged up and choked his voice--he could not answer. His head turned and he gazed
furtively over his shoulder to the east, where his duty lay. Then of his own accord Chapuli
stepped from the trail and began to pick his way soberly up the hill.

From the high summit of the butte all the world lay spread out like a panorama,--the slopes
and cañons of Bronco Mesa, picketed with giant sahuaros; the silvery course of the river flowing
below; the unpeopled peaks and cliffs of the Superstitions; and a faint haze-like zephyr, floating
upon the eastern horizon. And there at last the eyes of Rufus Hardy and Kitty Bonnair met,
questioning each other, and the world below them took on a soft, dreamy veil of beauty.

"Why, how did you come here?" he asked, looking down upon her wonderingly. "Were you lost?"

And Kitty smiled wistfully as she answered:

"Yes--till I found you."

"Oh!" said Hardy, and he studied her face warily, as if doubtful of her intent.

"But how could you be lost," he asked again, "and travel so far? This is a rough country, and
you got here before I did."

He swung down from his horse and stood beside her, but Kitty only laughed mischievously and
shook her head--at which, by some lover's magic, the dainty forget-me-nots fell from her hair
in a shower of snowy blossoms.

"I was lost," she reiterated, smiling into his eyes, and in her gaze Hardy could read--"without
you."

For a moment the stern sorrow of the night withheld him. His eyes narrowed, and he opened his
lips to speak. Then, bowing his head, he knelt and gathered up the flowers.

"Yes," he said gently, "I understand. I--I have been lost, too."

They smiled and sat down together in the shadow of a great rock, gazing out over the peaks
and pinnacles of the mountains which wall in Hidden Water and talking placidly of the old days--until
at last, when the spell of the past was on him, Kitty fell silent, waiting for him to speak
his heart.

But instantly the spell of her laughter was broken an uneasy thought came upon Hardy, and he
glanced up at the soaring sun.

"Jeff will be worried about you," he said at last. "He will think you are lost and give up
the rodéo to hunt for you. We must not stay here so long."

He turned his head instinctively as he spoke, and Kitty knew he was thinking of the sheep.

"Cattle and sheep--cattle and sheep," she repeated slowly. "Is there nothing else that counts,
Rufus, in all this broad land? Must friendship, love, companionship, all go down before cattle
and sheep? I never knew before what a poor creature a woman was until I came to Arizona."

She glanced at him from beneath her drooping lashes, and saw his jaws set tense.

"And yet only yesterday," he said, with a sombre smile, "you had twenty men risking their lives
to give you some snake-tails for playthings."

"But my old friend Rufus was not among them," rejoined Kitty quietly; and once more she watched
the venom working in his blood.

"No," he replied, "he refuses to compete with Bill Lightfoot at any price."

"Oh, Rufus," cried Kitty, turning upon him angrily, "aren't you ashamed? I want you to stop
being jealous of all my friends. It is the meanest and most contemptible thing a man can do.
I--I won't stand it!"

He glanced at her again with the same set look of disapproval still upon his face.

"Kitty," he said, "if you knew what lives some of those men lead--the thoughts they think,
the language they speak--you--you would not--" He stopped, for the sudden tears were in her
eyes. Kitty was crying.

"Oh, Rufus," she sobbed, "if--if you only knew! Who else could I go with--how--how else--Oh,
I cannot bear to be scolded and--I only did it to make you jealous!" She bowed her head against
her knees and Hardy gazed at her in awe, shame and compassion sweeping over him as he realized
what she had done.

"Kitty--dear," he stammered, striving to unlock the twisted fingers, "I--I didn't understand.
Look, here are your flowers and--I love you, Kitty, if I am a brute." He took one hand and
held it, stroking the little fingers which he had so often longed to caress. But with a sudden
wilfulness she turned her face away.

"Don't you love me, Kitty?" he pleaded. "Couldn't you, if I should try to be good and kind?
I--I don't understand women--I know I have hurt you--but I loved you all the time. Can't you
forgive me, Kitty?"

But Kitty only shook her head. "The man I love must be my master," she said, in a far-away
voice, not looking at him. "He must value me above all the world."

"But, Kitty," protested Hardy, "I do--"

"No," said Kitty, "you do not love me."

There was a lash to the words that cut him--a scorn half-spoken, half-expressed by the slant
of her eye. As he hesitated he felt the hot blood burn at his brow.

"Rufus," she cried, turning upon him quickly, "do you love me? Then take me in your arms and
kiss me!" She spoke the words fiercely, almost as a command, and Hardy started back as if he
had been shot.

"Take me in your arms and kiss me!" she repeated evenly, a flash of scorn in her eyes. But
the man who had said he loved her faltered and looked away.

"Kitty," he said gently, "you know I love you. But--"

"But what?" she demanded sharply.

"I--I have never--"

"Well," said Kitty briefly, "it's all over--you don't have to! I just wanted to show you--"
She paused, and her lip curled as she gazed at him from a distance. "Look at my horse," she
exclaimed suddenly, pointing to where Pinto was pawing and jerking at his bridle rein. When
Hardy leapt up to free his foot she frowned again, for that is not the way of lovers.

He came back slowly, leading the horse, his face very pale, his eyes set.

"You were right," he said. "Shall we go?"

There was no apology in his voice, no appeal. It had grown suddenly firm and resonant, and
he fixed her with his great honest eyes steadfastly. Something in the man seemed to rise up
suddenly and rebuke her--nay, to declare her unworthy of him. The thought of those two years--two
years without a word--came upon Kitty and left her sober, filled with misgivings for the future.
She cast about for some excuse, some reason for delay, and still those masterful eyes were
fixed upon her--sad, wistful, yet steadfast; and like a child she obeyed them.

It was a long ride to camp, long for both of them. When he had turned her horse into the corral
Hardy wheeled and rode off up the cañon, where the hold-up herd was bellowing and there was
a man's work to do. There was wild riding that day, such as Judge Ware and Lucy had never seen
before, and more than one outlaw, loping for the hills, was roped and thrown, and then lashed
back to his place in the herd. The sensitive spirit of Chapuli responded like a twin being
to the sudden madness of his master, and the lagging rodéo hands were galvanized into action
by his impetuous ardor. And at the end, when the roping and branding were over, Hardy rode
down to the pasture for a fresh mount, his eyes still burning with a feverish light and his
lips close-drawn and silent.

The outfit was huddled about the fire eating greedily after the long day, when Creede, furtively
watching his partner, saw his eyes fixed curiously upon some object in the outer darkness.
He followed the glance and beheld a hound--gaunt, lame, beseeching--limping about among the
mesquite trees which lined the edge of the flat.

"There's one of Bill's dogs," he remarked sociably, speaking to the crowd in general. "Must've
got sore-footed and come back. Here, Rock! Here, Rye! Here, Ring!" he called, trying the most
likely names. "Here, puppy--come on, boy!" And he scraped a plate in that inviting way which
is supposed to suggest feed to a dog. But Hardy rose up quietly from his place and went out
to the dog. A moment later he called to Jeff and, after a hurried conference, the two of them
brought the wanderer up to the fire.

"Hey!" called Bill Lightfoot, "that ain't one of Bill's pack--that's old Turco, his home dog."

"Don't you think I know Bill's dogs yet?" inquired Creede scathingly. "Now if you'll jest kindly
keep your face shet a minute, I'll see what's the matter with this leg."

He clamped Turco between his knees and picked up his fore leg, while the old dog whined and
licked his hands anxiously. There was a stain of blood from the shoulder down, and above it,
cut neatly through the muscles, a gaping wound.

"That was a thirty-thirty," said Creede grimly, and every man looked up. Thirty-thirty was
a sinister number on the range--it was the calibre of a sheep-herder's carbine.

"Aw, go on," scoffed Bill Lightfoot, rushing over to examine the wound. "Who could have shot
him--away over in Hell's Hip Pocket?"

"Um--that's it," observed Creede significantly. "What you goin' to do, Rufe?"

"I'm going over there," answered Hardy, throwing the saddle on his horse. He looked over his
shoulder as he heaved on the cinch. "That's where that dust was," he said, and as the outfit
stood gaping he swung up and was off into the darkness.

"Hey, take my gun!" yelled Jeff, but the clatter of hoofs never faltered--he was going it blind
and unarmed. Late that night another horseman on a flea-bitten gray dashed madly after him
over the Pocket trail. It was Old Bill Johnson, crazed with apprehension; and behind him straggled
his hounds, worn from their long chase after the lion, but following dutifully on their master's
scent. The rest of the outfit rode over in the morning--the punchers with their pistols thrust
into the legs of their shaps; Creede black and staring with anger; the judge asking a thousand
unanswered questions and protesting against any resort to violence; the women tagging along
helplessly, simply because they could not be left alone. And there, pouring forth from the
mouth of Hell's Hip Pocket, came the sheep, a solid phalanx, urged on by plunging herders and
spreading out over the broad mesa like an invading army. Upon the peaks and ridges round about
stood groups of men, like skirmishers--camp rustlers with their packs and burros; herders,
whose sheep had already passed through--every man with his gun in his hand.

To the ears of the herders it was music, like the thunder of stamps to a miner or the rumble
of a waterfall to a lonely fisher; the old, unlistened music of their calling, above which
the clamor of the world must fight its way. But to the cowmen it was like all hell broken loose,
a confusion, a madness, a babel which roused every passion in their being and filled them with
a lust to kill.

Without looking to the right or to the left, Jefferson Creede fixed his eyes upon one man in
that riot of workers and rode for him as a corral hand marks down a steer. It was Jasper Swope,
hustling the last of a herd through the narrow defile, and as his Chihuahuanos caught sight
of the burly figure bearing down upon the padron they abandoned their work to help him. From
the hill above, Jim Swope, his face set like iron for the conflict, rode in to back up his
brother; and from far down the cañon Rufus Hardy came spurring like the wind to take his place
by Creede.

In the elemental clangor of the sheep they faced each other, Creede towering on his horse,
his face furious with rage; Swope gray with the dust of his driving but undaunted by the assault.

"Stop where you are!" shouted Swope, holding out a warning hand as the cowman showed no sign
of halting. But Creede came straight on, never flinching, until he had almost ridden him down.

"You low-lived, sheep-eatin' hound," he hissed, piling in the wickedest of his range epithets,
"you and me have had it comin' fer quite a while, and now I've got you. I've never yet seen
a sheepman that would fight in the open, but you've got to or take that!" He leaned over suddenly
and slapped him with his open hand, laughing recklessly at the Mexicans as they brandished
their guns and shouted.

"Quite se, cabrones," he jeered, sorting out the worst of his fighting Spanish for their benefit,
"you are all gutter pups--you are afraid to shoot!"

"Here," rasped out Jim Swope, spurring his horse in between them, "what are you fellers tryin'
to do? Git out of here, umbre--go on now! Never mind, Jasp, I'll do the talkin'. You go on
away, will ye! Now what's the matter with you, Mr. Creede, and what can I do for you?"

Jasper Swope had whirled back from the blow as a rattler throws his coils. His gray eyes gleamed
and he showed all his broken teeth as he spat back hate and defiance at Creede; but Jim was
his elder brother and had bested him more than once since the days of their boyish quarrels.
Slowly and grudgingly he made way, backing sullenly off with his Mexicans; and Jim stood alone,
opposing his cold resolution to the white-hot wrath of Creede.

"You can turn back them sheep and git off my range!" yelled Creede. "Turn 'em back, I say,
or I'll leave my mark on some of you!"

"How can I turn 'em back?" argued Swope, throwing out his hands. "They's ninety thousand more
behind me, and all headin' through this pass."

"You know very well that this is a put-up job," retorted Creede hotly. "You sheepmen have been
crawlin' around on your bellies for a month to get a chanst to sheep us out, and now you say
you can't help yourself! You're the crookedest, lyingest sheep-puller in the bunch, Jim Swope.
You'd rob a graveyard and show up for prayers the next mornin'. I can lick you, you big Mormon-faced
stiff, with one hand tied behind me, and what's more--"

"Here now--here no-ow--" protested Swope, holding out his hand for peace, "they ain't no call
for no such talk. Mebbe you can lick me, and mebbe you can't, but it won't do you any good
to try. My sheep is here, and here they'll stay, until I git good and ready to move 'em. This
is a free range and a free country, and the man ain't born that can make me stop."

He paused, and fixed his keen eyes upon Creede, searching him to the heart; and before that
cold, remorseless gaze the fighting frenzy in his brain died away. Meanwhile Hardy had come
up from where he had been turning back sheep, and as he rode in Jeff instinctively made way
for him.

"No," replied Hardy, fastening his stern eyes upon the iron visage of the sheepman, "not if
the lives of a thousand cattle and the last possessions of a dozen men lay in your way. You
and your legal rights! It is men like you who make the law worse than nothing and turn honest
cowmen into criminals. If there is anything in it you will lie to the assessor or rob a poor
man's cabin with the best of them, but when it comes to your legal right to sheep us out you
are all for law and order. Sure, you will uphold the statutes with your life! Look at those
renegade Mexicans, every man armed by you with a rifle and a revolver! Is that the way to come
onto another man's range? If you are going to sheep us out, you can try it on; but for God's
sake cut it out about your sacred rights!"

He rose up in his saddle, haranguing the assembly as he spoke, and once more Jim Swope felt
his cause being weakened by the attacks of this vehement little cowman.

"Well, what kin I do about it?" he cried, throwing out his hands in virtuous appeal. "My sheep
has got to eat, hain't they?"

"Sure," assented Hardy, "and so have our cattle. But I tell you what you can do--you can go
out through that pass yonder!"

He pointed at the cañon down which the sheep had come in the Fall, the great middle fork which
led up over the Four Peaks; but the sheepman's only reply was a snarl of refusal.

"Not if I know myself," he muttered spitefully. "How'd do, Judge!" He fixed his eyes eagerly
upon Judge Ware, who was hastening to join in the struggle. "You're just the man I want to
see," he continued, advancing briskly to meet him, "and I want to ask you, here and now before
these witnesses, do you claim any right to the exclusive use of this land?"

"Why, certainly not, certainly not," answered the judge warmly, "but at the same time I do
claim an equity which rises from prior and undisputed possession, and which has always and
ought now to protect my range from any outside invasion."

"Very likely, very likely," remarked Swope dryly. "And now, Judge, I want to ask you another
question before these witnesses. Did you or did you not authorize your superintendent and foreman
to threaten and intimidate my men and me, with the idea of driving us off this public land?"

"I did not," replied the judge, his mind suddenly filled with visions of criminal proceedings.
"On the contrary, I have repeatedly warned them against any such action."

"At the same time," echoed Swope, quick to follow up his advantage, "these men, who are your
agents and employees, have systematically moved my herders off this range by armed violence,
and your foreman has just now struck my brother, besides threatening to kill some of us if
we don't turn back. I want to tell you right now, Mr. Ware, that I have consulted the best
lawyers in this Territory as to my rights on public lands, and you will be held personally
responsible for any acts of violence on the part of your employees. Now I want to ask you one
more question: Do you deny my right to pass through this range on my way to the Sierra Blancas?
You don't? Well then, call off these men!"

He paused and jerked his thumb toward Creede and Hardy, grinning evilly, and as he spoke Creede
crowded forward, his brow black as a thunder cloud.

"I don't take orders from nobody," he cried vehemently, "not now, and never will. I've got
a few hundred head of cows on this range myself and I intend to protect 'em if I have to kill
somebody. You'll have to git another foreman, Judge,--I've quit."

He shot a glance of pitying contempt at the man who had so stupidly marred their fortunes,
then he turned and fixed his burning eyes upon his archenemy.

"Jim," he said, speaking quietly at last, "my father had ten thousand head of cattle on this
range before you sheepmen came--and that's all I've got left. If you think you can sheep me
out, go to it!"

He turned his horse's head toward Hidden Water, never looking back at the sheep; and the cowmen
fell in behind him, glad of an excuse to retreat. What were a bunch of cowboys, armed with
six-shooters, to half a hundred sheepmen armed with repeating rifles and automatic revolvers?
No, it was better to let the sheep come, let them spread out and scatter, and then jump the
herders at night, if it came to that. But what, reasoned the cautious ones, were a few hundred
head of cows anyhow, in a losing fight against the law itself? What was a petty revenge upon
some low-browed Mexican to the years of imprisonment in Yuma which might follow? There were
some among that little band of cowmen who yelled for action, others who were disgusted enough
to quit, and others yet who said nothing, riding by themselves or exchanging furtive glances
with Creede. The Clark boys, Ben Reavis, and Juan Ortega--these were the men whom the rodéo
boss knew he could trust, and none of them spoke a word.

Worn and haggard from his night's riding, Rufus Hardy rode along with Judge Ware and the ladies,
explaining the situation to them. The sheep had come in from the far east, crossing where sheep
had never crossed before, at the junction of Hell's Hip Pocket Creek and the drought-shrunk
Salagua. They had poured into the Pocket in solid columns, sheeping it to the rocks, and had
taken the pass before either he or Bill Johnson could get to it. All through the night the
sheepmen had been crowding their flocks through the defile until there were already twenty
or thirty thousand on Bronco Mesa, with fifty thousand to follow. Bill Johnson had shot his
way through the jam and disappeared into the Pocket, but he could do nothing now--his little
valley was ruined. There would not be a spear of grass left for his cattle, and his burros
had already come out with the pack animals of the sheepmen. No one knew what had happened when
he reached his home, but the Mexican herders seemed to be badly scared, and Johnson had probably
tried to drive them out of the valley.

All this Hardy explained in a perfectly matter-of-fact way, free from apprehension or excitement;
he listened in respectful silence to Judge Ware's protests against violence and threats of
instant departure; and even humored Kitty's curiosity by admitting that Mr. Johnson, who was
apparently out of his head when he shot the sheep, had probably taken a shot or two at the
herders, as well. But Lucy Ware was not deceived by his repose; she saw the cold light in his
eyes, the careful avoidance of any allusion to his own actions, and the studied concealment
of his future intent. But even then she was not prepared when, after supper, her father came
into the ranch house and told her that Mr. Hardy had just resigned.

"I can't imagine why he should leave me at this time," exclaimed the judge, mopping the sweat
from his brow, and groaning with vexation, "but a man who will desert his own father in the
way he has done is capable of anything, I suppose. Just because he doesn't approve of my policies
in regard to these sheep he coolly says he won't embarrass me further by staying in my employ!
I declare, Lucy, I'm afraid I'm going to lose everything I have down here if both he and Creede
desert me. Don't you think you could persuade Rufus to stay? Go out and see him and tell him
I will consent to anything--except this unlawful harrying of the sheep."

The old judge, still perspiring with excitement, sank wearily down into a chair and Lucy came
over and sat upon his knee.

"Father," she said, "do you remember that you once told me you would give me this ranch if
I wanted it? Well, I want it now, and perhaps if you give it to me Rufus will consent to stay."

"But, daughter--" protested the judge, and then he sat quiet, pondering upon the matter.

"Perhaps you are right," he said at last. "But tell me one thing--there is nothing between
you and Rufus, is there?"

He turned her face so that he could look into her honest eyes, but Lucy twisted her head away,
blushing.

"No," she said faintly. "He--he is in love with Kitty."

"With Kitty!" cried Judge Ware, outraged at the idea. "Why, he--but never mind, never mind,
darling. I am glad at least that it is not with you. We must be going home soon now, anyway,
and that will break off this--er--But I don't remember having seen them together much!"

"No," said Lucy demurely, "he has been very discreet. But you haven't answered my question,
father. Will you give me the ranch if I get Rufus to stay? Oh, you're a dear! Now you just
leave everything in my hands and see what a good business woman I am!"

She skipped lightly out the door and hurried over to where Hardy and Jefferson Creede were
sitting under a tree, talking gravely together. They stopped as she approached and Hardy looked
up a little sullenly from where he sat. Then he rose, and took off his hat.

"May I have a few words with you on a matter of business, Rufus?" she asked, with her friendliest
smile. "No, don't go, Mr. Creede; you are interested in this, too. In fact," she added mysteriously,
"I need your assistance."

A slow smile crept into the rough cowboy's eyes as he sat watching her.

"What can I do for you?" he inquired guardedly.

"Well," answered Lucy, "the situation is like this--and I'm not trying to rope you in on anything,
as you say, so you needn't look suspicious. My father has become so discouraged with the way
things are going that he has given the entire Dos S Ranch to me--if I can manage it. Now I
know that you both have quit because you don't approve of my father's orders about the sheep.
I don't know what your plans are but I want to get a new superintendent, and that's where I
need your assistance, Mr. Creede."

She paused long enough to bestow a confiding smile upon the rodéo boss, and then hurried on
to explain her position.

"Of course you understand how it is with father. He has been a judge, and it wouldn't do for
a man in his position to break the laws. But I want you two men to tell me before you go just
what you think I ought to do to save my cattle, and you can say whatever you please. Mr. Creede,
if you were a woman and owned the Dos S outfit, what would you do about the sheep?"

For a minute Creede sat silent, surveying the little lady from beneath his shaggy hair.

"Well," he said judicially, "I think I'd do one of two things: I'd either marry some nice kind
man whose judgment I could trust, and turn the job over to him,"--he glanced sideways at Hardy
as he spoke,--"or I'd hire some real mean, plug-ugly feller to wade in and clean 'em out. Failin'
in that, I think I'd turn the whole outfit over to Rufe here and go away and fergit about it."

He added these last words with a frank directness which left no doubt as to his own convictions
in the matter, and Lucy turned an inquiring eye upon Hardy. He was busily engaged in pounding
a hole in the ground with a rock, and Lucy noted for the first time a trace of silver in his
hair. The setting sun cast deep shadows in the set lines of his face and when he finally looked
up his eyes were bloodshot and haggard.

"There's no use in talking to me about that job," he said morosely. "I've got tired of taking
orders from a man that doesn't know what he's talking about, and I want to use my own judgment
for a while. We won't let anything happen to your cattle, Miss Lucy, and I thank you very much,
but I'm afraid I can't do it."

He stopped, and bowed his head, hammering moodily away at his hole in the rocky ground.

"Excuse me a minute, Miss Ware," said Creede, rising to his feet as the silence became oppressive.
"Come over here, Rufe, I want to talk with you."

They stood with their heads together, Jeff tapping the little man on the chest with every word,
and still there was the same dogged resistance. "Well, come on and let's find out," protested
Creede at last, impatiently dragging him back.

"Miss Ware," he said politely, "what do you expect of this here supe? I might want that job
myself, later on," he observed importantly.

Lucy smiled at the bare-faced fraud and hastened to abet it.

"I expect him to look after my cattle," she responded promptly, "and to protect my best interests
according to his own judgment. The only thing I insist upon is that he leave his gun at home."

"I'm sorry," said Creede briefly. "And I needed the job, too," he added lugubriously. "How
about your foreman?" he inquired, as if snatching at a straw. "Same thing, eh? Well, I'll go
you--next month."

He laughed, shrugged his shoulders, and crowded his big black sombrero down over his eyes until
it gave him a comical air of despair.

"Luck's gone," he remarked, reaching parenthetically for a cigarette paper. "See you later."
And, with a last roguish twinkle at Miss Lucy, he slouched off toward the fire.

His luck indeed had gone, but somewhere in that giant carcass which harbored the vindictive
hate of an Apache, and the restless energy of a Texano, there still lingered the exuberant
joyousness of a boy, the indomitable spirit of the pioneer, resigned to any fate so long as
there is a laugh in it. As he drifted into the crowd Lucy's heart went out to him; he was so
big and strong and manly in this, the final eclipse of his waning fortunes.

"Mr. Creede is a noble kind of a man, isn't he?" she said, turning to where Hardy was still
standing. "Won't you sit down, Rufus, and let's talk this over for a minute. But before you
decide anything, I want you to get a good night's sleep. You are a free man now, you know,
and if there's any worrying to be done it's my funeral--isn't it?"

If he heard her at all Hardy made no response to the jest. He stood before her, swaying dizzily
as he groped about for his hat, which had fallen from his hand. Then at last a faint smile
broke through the drawn lines in his face.

"That's right," he said, sinking down at her side, and as he settled back against the tree
his eyes closed instantly, like a child whose bedtime has come. "I'm--I'm so dead tired I can't
talk straight, Lucy--to say nothing of think. But--I'll take care of you. We aren't sheeped
out yet. Only--only I can't--I forget what I'm going to say." His head fell forward as he spoke,
his hands hung heavy, and he slipped slowly to the ground, fast asleep.

After two days and nights of turmoil and passion his troubles were ended, suddenly; and as
she raised him up Lucy Ware bent down quickly under cover of the dusk and kissed his rumpled hair.

CHAPTER XVI

THE DEPARTURE

The gentle hand of sleep, which held Hardy in a grip that was akin to death, blotting out the
past and dispelling all remembrance of his sorrows, failed utterly to abate the fighting spirit
of Jefferson Creede or sap the Spartan grimness of his purpose. Worn by the destroying anger
of the previous day, thwarted and apparently defeated, he rose up at the first glow of dawn
and set about his preparations with an unemotional directness which augured ill for Jasper
Swope. Before the sun was an hour high he had the town herd on the trail for Bender, entrusted
to the care of Bill Lightfoot and several others of whom he wanted to be rid. The camp was
dismantled, the packs were loaded upon the spare horses, and the outfit was ready to start
for Carrizo Creek before breakfast was more than finished in the ranch house. After a final
survey to make sure that nothing had been overlooked in the scuffle, the rodéo boss waved his
hand to the leaders; then, as the train strung out up the cañon, he rode over to the house
to say good-bye. The last farewell is a formality often dispensed with in the Far West; but
in this case the boss had business to attend to, and--well, he had something to say to Kitty
Bonnair, too.

Very quietly, in order not to awaken his partner--whom he had picked up like a tired baby and
stored away in the darkened bunk-room the evening before--Creede opened the door of the living-room,
greeted his lady-love with a cheerful grin, and beckoned Miss Lucy outside by a backward jerk
of the head.

"Sorry to disturb you, Miss Ware," he said, "but we're movin' camp this mornin' and before
I go I want to tell you about them cattle I'm just sendin' to town. If I didn't have other
business on hand I'd go down with you gladly and sell 'em for you, but when you git to Bender
you go to Chris Johansen, the cattle buyer, and give him this list. You won't savvy what it
is but Chris will, and you tell him that if he don't give you the best market price for them
cows he'll have to--lick--me! This is a dry year and feeders ain't much nohow, but I don't
want to see no friend of mine robbed. Well, so-long, Miss Ware. Hope you have a good trip."

He gripped her hand awkwardly, picked up his bridle lash, and thrust one boot thoughtfully
into the stirrup. Then, as if suddenly cognizant of a neglected duty, he snapped his foot out
and threw the lash back on the ground.

"I'll say good-bye to the judge," he drawled, "so's to show they ain't no hard feelin'. Your
old man don't exactly fit in these parts," he observed apologetically, "but he means well,
I reckon. You can tell 'im some time that I was kind of excited when I quit."

His farewell was a sober and dignified affair, after the courtly school of the South--no allusions
to the past, no references to the future, merely a gentlemanly expression of regret that his
guest's visit should have been so suddenly terminated. But when he turned to Miss Kitty his
masterful eyes began to glow and waver and he shifted his feet uneasily.

"Kin I speak with you a minute outside?" he said at last; and Kitty, still eager to read the
heart of Man, the Unfinished, followed after him, laughing as he stooped to pass his high hat
through the door.

"Come on out by the corral," he urged, confidently leading the way. When they were concealed
by the corner of the fence he stopped and dropped his bridle rein.

"Well, we've had a pretty good time together down here, hain't we?" he observed, twisting the
fringe of his shaps and smiling at her from beneath his forelock. "I ain't got but a minute--and
there's some rough work ahead, I reckon--but I jest wanted to--well, I wanted to give you this."
He dove down into his overalls' pocket and brought up a nugget, worn smooth by long milling
around between his spare change and his jackknife.

"That's a chunk of gold I found over by Red Butte one time," he said, handing it over. "Thought
you might want to keep it for me, you know. But say--" He crowded his hands into his pockets
and canted his head to one side, ogling her roguishly.

Kitty had never observed just such conduct before, and she was curious.

"Why--what?" she inquired, tossing back her hair tantalizingly.

"Don't I git nothin' to remember you by, little girl?" he demanded, his voice vibrant with
passion. "We've been pretty good friends, you know. In fact--well, say, don't I git jest one kiss?"

He drew her gently into his arms as he spoke, waited a fraction of a second for her to resist,
and then kissed her, suddenly and with masterful violence.

"One more," he pleaded insistently. "No? All right then," he said, swinging gracefully up on
his horse as she pushed him away. "I'll always remember that one, anyhow!"

He leaned forward and Bat Wings shot away up the cañon like a charger that sniffs the combat,
thundering out across the parada grounds, swinging beneath the giant mesquite, and plunging
down the bank that led to the creek. And all the time his rider sat with one hand on the cantle,
his white teeth flashing back a wistful smile.

Taken by surprise Kitty Bonnair stood staring blankly after him, rubbing her cheek which burned
hot where he had kissed her. She would always remember that kiss too, and all too late she
remembered to become indignant. But, no one being about, she laughed low to herself and hurried
back to the house, her eyes downcast and pensive. She had known many men and lovers in her
time, but never a one like Jeff Creede.

There was a sound of hasty packing in the Dos S ranch house that morning, and the wagon drove
noisily up to the door. Rafael carried out the steamer trunks and luggage, the snake-skins,
the smoky opals, the Indian baskets, the braided quirts, and all the scattered plunder that
the cowboys had given Kitty and that she could not bear to leave behind. He saddled up their
horses, clattering recklessly into the bunk-house where Hardy was sleeping in order to get
his blankets, and still, unmindful of noise or preparation, or the friends who must say good-bye,
he lay sprawled on the rough blankets, dead with sleep.

Rafael kicked off the brake and started on his weary journey around Red Butte to Moreno's,
which would take him the rest of the day; Judge Ware, possessed to get out of the country before
he became particeps criminis to some lawless outrage, paced restlessly up and down the ramada,
waiting for the girls to get ready; and Kitty and Lucy, glancing guiltily at each other, fidgeted
around in their rooms waiting for Rufus to wake up.

"I'm ready," said Lucy at last, putting the final touches to the room which he had given up
to her. "Are you, Kitty?"

Their eyes met in an uneasy stare, each wishing the other would speak.

"Yes," said Kitty, "but--shall we go without saying good-bye?"

"What in the world are you girls waiting for?" demanded the judge, thrusting his head impatiently
in at the door. "I declare, I begin to think there is something in these jokes about Adam waiting
for Eve to get her hat on straight. Now please come at once or we won't get to Moreno's in
time for supper."

"But, father," protested Lucy, "Kitty and I do not wish to leave without saying good-bye to
Rufus. Would you mind--"

"No, no!" exclaimed Judge Ware irritably, "if he chooses to sleep all day--"

"But, father!" burst out Lucy, almost tearfully, "he was so tired--he fell asleep as soon as
he sat down, and I never did get him to consent to be my superintendent! Don't you see--"

"Well, write him a note then," directed the judge brusquely, "and leave it on his desk. Now,
Lucy dear, really I'm getting so nervous I'm hardly accountable. Please hurry. And, Kitty,
please hurry, too!"

Like two souls haled from the world without a word of explanation or confession, Kitty and
Lucy both sat down under duress to pen a last appeal to the little man who, despite his stern
disregard, somehow held a place in their hearts. Kitty could have wept with vexation at the
thought of not seeing him again--and after she had brought her mind to forgive him, too! She
wrote blindly, she knew not what, whether it was accusation or entreaty, and sealed the envelope
with a bang of her tiny fist--and even then he did not awaken. Lucy wrote carefully, wrestling
to turn the implacable one from his purpose and yet feeling that he would have his will. She
sealed her note and put it upon his desk hesitatingly; then, as Kitty turned away, she dropped
her handkerchief beside it. It was a time-worn strategy, such as only the innocent and guileless
think of in their hour of adversity. When she ran back to recover it Lucy drew a dainty book
from her bosom--Mrs. Browning's "Sonnets from the Portuguese"--and placed it across her note
as if to save it from the wind, and between two leaves she slipped the forget-me-nots which
he had given her at Hidden Water.

As the thud of horses' hoofs died away silence settled down upon the Dos S ranch house, the
sombre silence of the desert, unbroken by the murmur of women's voices or the echo of merry
laughter, and the sleeping man stirred uneasily on his bed. An hour passed, and then from the
ramada there came a sound of wailing. Hardy rose up on his bed suddenly, startled. The memory
of the past came to him vaguely, like fragments of an eerie dream; then the world came right
and he found himself in the bunk-house, alone--and Tommy outside, crying as if for the dead.
Leaping up from his blankets Hardy opened the door and called him in--hoarse, black, distorted,
yet overflowing with love and affection. Poor little Tommy! He took him in his arms to comfort
him, and bedded him down on the pillow. But when he stepped outside he found that his world
too was vacant--the house deserted, the corrals empty, the rodéo camp a smouldering fireplace,
surrounded by a wilderness of tin cans.

As the slow grief of the forsaken came upon him he turned and went to his room, where the atmosphere
of womankind still lingered to suggest the dear hands that were gone, and suddenly his eyes
leaped to the letters left upon the table. It was Kitty's which he opened first, perhaps because
it was nearest; but the torrent of inconsequential words confused him by their unreason and
he turned to Lucy's, reading it over thoughtfully.

  "DEAR RUFUS:

  "We have waited a long time for you to wake up, and now father
  says we must go. You were so tired last night that I doubt if you
  heard a word I said, although I thought I was making a great
  impression in my new role as a business woman. I asked father to
  give me the ranch, not because I wanted to own it but to save you
  from your madness. The cattle are all mine now and I leave them in
  your care. Whatever you do I will consent to, if you will leave
  your guns at home. Is that too much for a friend to ask? I know
  that Mr. Creede is your friend too, and I admire your devotion to
  his cause, but I think you can do just as much for him and more by
  not risking your life in a battle against the sheep. They are so
  many, Rufus, and they have their rights, too. Father is confident
  that the Forest Reserve will be declared next Winter and then the
  sheep will be debarred forever. Can't you give over the fight for
  my sake? And I will pay you any price--I will do anything you ask;
  but if you should be killed or kill some other man, I could never
  be happy again, though I gained the whole world. Dear Rufus,
  please--but I leave it for you to decide--"

The note ended abruptly, it was not even signed, and Hardy could imagine the agitation in which
it was written. Dear little Lucy, always thinking of others, always considerate, always honest
and reasonable. If only Kitty--But no--in her own right as Queen of Love and of his heart,
she was above all criticism and blame. It was a madness, deeper than his anger against the
sheep, mightier than his fiercest resentment--he could not help it; he loved her. Changeable,
capricious, untamed, she held him by her faults where virtues would hardly have sufficed in
another. He had tried, and failed; so long as she was in the world he must love her. But what
a life! He cast the letter from him and his heart turned to Jeff and the big fight, the battle
that they had planned to wage together. In the rush and struggle of that combat he could forget
the pangs which tortured him; he could have his revenge on life, which had treated him so shabbily!
And yet--and yet--could he desert a friend like Lucy--Lucy who would give her life to make
him happier, who had always by every act tried to make him forget his sorrows?

For a long time he sat with his head bowed, thinking. Then he rose up and took down his long-barrelled
Colt's, fingered it lovingly, and thrust it, scabbard and all, into the depths of his war bag.

As he rode down the hill into the camp that afternoon Creede came out to meet him, and when
his eyes fell upon the empty belt, he smiled knowingly.

"Well, you woke up, did you?" he inquired, laying one hand carelessly on the bulge in Hardy's
right shap, where modest cowboys sometimes secrete their guns. "Um-huh!" he grunted, slapping
the left shap to make sure. "I suspected as much. Well, I congratulate you, supe--if my girl
had asked me I reckon I'd've give up my gun too. But she gimme a kiss, anyway," he added, tossing
his head triumphantly.

"Who did?" demanded Hardy, coming suddenly out of his dream.

"Why, Kitty, sure," returned Creede artlessly; and then, noting the look of incredulity on
his partner's face, he slapped him on the leg and laughed consumedly.

"Oh, you're not the only pebble on the beach," he cried. "Ump-um--there are others! Say, it's
hell to be in love, ain't it?"

He looked up at Hardy, the laughter still in his cheeks, but for once there was no answering
smile. The large gray eyes were far away and distant, fixed vacantly upon the dust cloud where
the sheep gathered in the east. Then, as if dismissing some haunting vision from his mind,
the little man shook himself and drew away.

"That's right," he said solemnly, "it is."

CHAPTER XVII

CHICO AND GRANDE

Between the mouth of Hell's Hip Pocket and the cow camp at Carrizo Creek there lie three high
ridges and three broad valleys, all running north and south from the Peaks to Bronco Mesa--the
heart of the upper range; and there in compact bands the invaders held their sheep. From the
lower levels they strayed out gradually over the rocky mesa; above they clambered up toward
the wooded peaks; but at night the sheepmen worked back to the three ridges and camped close
together for defence. After many years of struggle they had at last obtained their legal rights--their
sheep were up to the ears in grama, eating out the heart of the cow country--but Jeff Creede
was just over the hill, and the Mexicans were afraid. For years now the huge form of "Grande"
had loomed before them whenever they entered that forbidden range, and they had always given
way before him. And now he had the little man Chico with him, the son of a soldier, so it was
said, and a gentleman of categoría; he always carried a pistol and his eyes were stern and
hard. What would not Chico and Grande do to them, now that they were like bees robbed of their
long-hoarded honey, who have nothing left but their stings?

So the word passed around amongst the herders and camp rustlers, and Jim and Jasp rode from
one camp to the other, cursing and exhorting and holding them to their work. The hour of victory
had come, but their triumph was poisoned by a haunting fear for their sheep. One hundred thousand
sheep--five hundred thousand dollars' worth--the accumulation of a lifetime--and all in the
hands of these cowardly Mexicans, not half of whom would fight! For the day or two that they
held together they were safe, but when they spread out--and spread they must, to reach the
western pass--then the cowmen could rush them at night like lions that raid a corral, scattering
one band after the other, and the coyotes would do the rest! That was the joint in the armor
of the sheepmen, and it robbed them of their sleep.

Evening came, and the fires of the camp rustlers on the ridges lit up the dust cloud that hung
in the east. The hateful bray of the sheep was hushed, at last, and the shrill yell of the
coyotes rose from every hilltop, bidding farewell to the sun; for as vultures and unnumbered
birds of prey hovered in the wake of barbarian armies, casting their dread shadows upon the
living and glutting upon the dead, so the coyotes follow tirelessly after the sheep, gorging
upon chance carcasses and pulling down the strays. As the wild, gibbering chorus rose and quavered
back from the cliffs the cowmen at Carrizo glanced up from their supper and swore, and in the
general preoccupation Hardy put down his plate and slipped away to the corral. He was sitting
on the fence listening to the mad yelping of the coyotes and watching the shadows gather among
the peaks, when Creede strolled over and joined him. There were times when he could read Hardy
like a book, but at others the little man's thoughts were hidden, and he brooded by himself.
On such occasions, after a sufficient interval, Jeff esteemed it his duty to break in upon
these unprofitable ruminations and bring him back to the light. So he clambered up on the top
log and joined in the contemplation of nature.

"Hear them dam' coyotes," he observed sociably. "They'd cry that way if they'd had a chicken
dinner, all around. I bet ye every one of 'em has got wool in his teeth, right now. Never you
mind, birdie," he continued, apostrophizing a peculiarly shrill-voiced howler, "I'll give you
a bellyful of mutton pretty soon, if it's the last act. What you going to do now, Rufe?"

"Well," answered Hardy, "I think I'll try and earn my salary by moving a few sheep. And of
course we want to gather every beef critter we can now, while they're fat. The sheep seem to
be hugging the mountain pretty close. What's the matter with working the Pocket Butte to-morrow
and while the boys are riding we'll warn all the stragglers down there to keep up against the
hills; then as soon as we get 'em located we'll jump in some day and move 'em!"

"Huh?" inquired Creede, shoving back his hat and staring. "Did I hear you say 'move 'em'? Well--er--I
thought you left your gun at home," he suggested guardedly.

"That's right," admitted Hardy, "but don't you let that worry you any. I told you I'd help
move those sheep, and I'll do it! We don't need guns, anyhow. Why, I'd just as soon tackle
a rattlesnake bare-handed as go after Jasp Swope with my six-shooter. That's just what he's
looking for, boy, with all those thirty-thirties behind him, and he'll have plenty of witnesses
there to swear us into Yuma, too. I tell you, Jeff, I've been thinking this over, and I believe
my boss is right."

"Sure," said Creede, showing his teeth in the twilight.

"Say, let up on that, will you?" exclaimed Hardy irritably. "I'm talking business. Now you
let me tell you something." He paused, and fixed his eye on the dust cloud, intently. "I've
moved that many sheep twice," he said, throwing out his hand, "and I left my gun at home."

"That's right," conceded Creede.

"Well now, I'll tell you what I'll do," continued Hardy. "If you'll leave your gun at home
too and stay with me on this I'll undertake to shoot the last sheep out through West Pass inside
of a week. And the only chance we take is of getting shot at or arrested for assault and battery.
The Territorial Prison end of this gun business never did appeal me, anyway."

"No--nor me either! But what's the scheme?"

The big cowboy leaned forward eagerly, his eyes flashing as he half guessed the plan.

"We ride out together," said Hardy, his voice far away, as if he saw it in his mind's eye,
"unarmed--and we notify every sheep-herder we see to move. If Jasp Swope or any of his men
kill us while we're unarmed it'll be cold-blooded murder, and there'll be witnesses to prove
it. And if the sheep don't move, we'll move 'em! What kind of a crime is that, anyway--to drive
sheep off the public range? There isn't an officer of the law within sixty miles, anyhow; and
if anybody pulls a gun on us we can slug him in self-defence."

"Sure," agreed Creede, "but suppose one of them big-headed Chihuahua Mexicans should happen
to shoot you?"

"Well then, I'd be dead," said Hardy soberly. "But wouldn't you rather be dead than shut up
in that hell-hole down at Yuma?"

"Yes!" cried Creede, holding out his hands as if taking an oath. "I would, by God!"

"Well, come on then!" said Hardy, and they shook hands on it like brothers.

When the rodéo outfit was gathered together in the morning Jefferson Creede deliberately unstrapped
his cartridge belt and threw his pistol back onto his bed. Then he winked at his partner as
if, rightly understood, the action was in the nature of a joke, and led the way to Pocket Butte.

"You fellows rake the ridges to Bullpit Valley," he said, briefly assigning every man to his
post. "Rufe 'n me'll hold 'em up for you about four o'clock, but don't rush the funeral--we're
goin' to move a few sheep first."

He smiled mysteriously as he spoke, staving off their pointed queries with equivocal answers.

"See you later," he observed, turning his horse into a sheep trail, and with that the outfit
was forced to be content.

The offending sheep were found feeding along the eastern slope of a long ridge that led down
from the upper ground, and the herders were camped on the summit. There were four men gathered
about the fire and as the cowboys approached three of them picked up their carbines and sat
off to one side, fingering the locks nervously. The appearance of Jeff Creede spelled trouble
to all sheepmen and there were few camps on Bronco Mesa which did not contain a herder who
had been unceremoniously moved by him. But this time the fire-eating cowman rode grandly into
camp without any awe-inspiring demonstrations whatever.

"Are those your sheep?" he inquired, pointing to the grazing herd.

"Sí señor," responded the boss herder humbly.

"Very well," said Creede, "move 'em, and move 'em quick. I give you three days to get through
that pass." He stretched a heavily muscled arm very straight toward the notch in the western
hills and turned abruptly away. Hardy swung soberly in behind him and the frightened Chihuahuanos
were beginning to breathe again after their excitement when suddenly Jeff stopped his horse.

"Say," he said, turning to the boss, "what you carryin' that cow's horn for?"

At this pointed inquiry the boss herder flinched and looked downcast, toying uneasily with
the primitive instrument at his side.

"To blow," he answered evasively.

"Well, go ahead and blow it, then," suggested Creede amiably. "No--go on! I don't care what
happens. Aw here, let me have it a minute!"

He grabbed the horn away impatiently, wiped the mouthpiece with his sleeve, drew a long breath,
and blew. A deep bass roar answered to his effort, a bellow such as the skin-clad hunters of
antiquity sent forth when they wound the horn for their hounds, and the hills and valleys of
Carrizo and the upper mesa echoed to the blast.

"Say, that's great!" exclaimed the big cowboy, good-naturedly resisting the appeals of the
herder. "I used to have one like that when I was a boy. Oh, I'm a blower, all right--listen
to this, now!" He puffed out his chest, screwed his lips into the horn, and blew again, loud
and long.

"How's that for high?" he inquired, glancing roguishly at his partner. "And I could keep it
up all day," he added, handing the horn back, "only I've got business elsewhere."

"Oyez, amigo," he said, bending his brow suddenly upon the Mexican herder, "remember, now--in
three days!" He continued the sentence by a comprehensive sweep of the hand from that spot
out through the western pass, favored each of the three Chihuahuanos with an abhorrent scowl,
and rode slowly away down the hogback.

"Notice anything funny over on that ridge?" he asked, jerking his head casually toward the
east. "That's Swope and Co.--the Sheepmen's Protective Association--coming over to rescue companero."
A line of rapidly moving specks proved the truth of his observation, and Creede's shoulders
shook with laughter as he noted their killing pace.

"I tumbled to the idee the minute I set eyes on that cow's horn," he said. "It's like this.
Every boss herder has a horn; if he gits into trouble he blows it and all hands come a-runnin'
to shoot holes in Mr. Cowman--think I'll make one myself."

He halted behind a rock and scrutinized the approaching horsemen over the top.

"That's Jasp, in front," he observed impersonally. "I wouldn't mind ownin' that black mule
of his'n, neither. We'll jest wait until they dip down into the cañon and then double in back
of him, and scare up them hombres over at the mouth of Hell's Hip Pocket. We want to git 'em
started out of that. I believe you're right, though, Rufe--we can run this bunch out without
firin' a shot."

That evening after the day's riding Creede sat down on his heels by the fire and heated the
end of an iron rod. In his other hand he held a horn, knocked from the bleaching skeleton of
a steer that had died by the water, and to its end where the tip had been sawed off he applied
the red-hot iron, burning a hole through to the hollow centre. 

"Why did you come to us," she said, "if you must go so soon?" That household no longer exists
in London. Some of the members of the Doctor's family have departed to the other world, others
are scattered in places unknown to me. But it will always live in my memory.

One winter's day, as I was passing through a street in Tunbridge Wells,
I saw a man standing on the road side.

His bare toes were showing through his gaping boots, his breast was partly uncovered. He said
nothing to me, perhaps because begging was forbidden, but he looked up at my face just for a
moment. The coin I gave him was perhaps more valuable than he expected, for, after I had gone
on a bit, he came after me and said: "Sir, you have given me a gold
piece by mistake," with which he offered to return it to me.

I might not have particularly remembered this, but for a similar
thing which happened on another occasion.

When I first reached the Torquay railway station a porter took my luggage to the cab outside.
After searching my purse for small change in vain, I gave him half-a-crown as the cab started.
After a while he came running after us, shouting to the cabman to stop. I thought to myself
that finding me to be such an innocent he had hit upon some excuse for demanding more. As the cab
stopped he said: "You must have mistaken a half-crown piece for a penny, Sir!"

I cannot say that I have never been cheated while in England, but not in any way which it would
be fair to hold in remembrance.

What grew chiefly upon me, rather, was the conviction that only those who are trustworthy
know how to trust.

I was an unknown foreigner, and could have easily evaded payment
with impunity, yet no London shopkeeper ever mistrusted me.

During the whole period of my stay in England I was mixed up in a farcical comedy which I had to
play out from start to finish.

I happened to get acquainted with the widow of some departed high Anglo-Indian official. She was
good enough to call me by the pet-name Ruby.

Some Indian friend of hers had composed a doleful poem in English in memory of her husband. It
is needless to expatiate on its poetic merit or felicity of diction. As my ill-luck would have
it, the composer had indicated that the dirge was to be chanted to the mode Behaga. So the widow
one day entreated me to sing it to her thus. Like the silly innocent that I was, I weakly acceded.
There was unfortunately no one there but I who could realise the atrociously ludicrous way in
which the Behaga mode combined with those absurd verses. The widow seemed intensely touched
to hear the Indian's lament for her husband sung to its native melody. I thought that there
the matter ended, but that was not to be.

I frequently met the widowed lady at different social gatherings, and when after dinner we joined
the ladies in the drawing room, she would ask me to sing that Behaga. Everyone else would
anticipate some extraordinary specimen of Indian music and would add their entreaties to hers.
Then from her pocket would come forth printed copies of that fateful composition, and my ears
begin to redden and tingle. And at last, with bowed head and quavering voice I would have
to make a beginning--but too keenly conscious that to none else in the room but me was this performance
sufficiently heartrending. At the end, amidst much suppressed tittering, there would come a
chorus of "Thank you very much!" "How interesting!"

And in spite of its being winter I would perspire all over. Who would have predicted at my birth
or at his death what a severe blow to me would be the demise of this estimable Anglo-Indian!

Then,
for a time, while I was living with Dr. Scott and attending lectures at the University College,
I lost touch with the widow. She was in a suburban locality some distance away from London, and I frequently
got letters from her inviting me there. But my dread of that dirge kept me from accepting these
invitations. At length I got a pressing telegram from her. I was on my way to college when this
telegram reached me and my stay in England was then about to come to its close. I thought to
myself I ought to see the widow once more before my departure, and
so yielded to her importunity.

Instead of coming home from college I went straight to the railway station. It was a horrible
day, bitterly cold, snowing and foggy.

The station I was bound for was the terminus of the line.

So I felt quite easy in mind and did not think it worth while to inquire about the time of
arrival.

All the station platforms were coming on the right hand side, and in the right hand corner seat
I had ensconced myself reading a book. It had already become so dark that nothing was visible
outside. One by one the other passengers got down at their destinations. We reached and left
the station just before the last one. Then the train stopped again, but there was nobody to
be seen, nor any lights or platform.

The mere passenger has no means of divining why trains should sometimes stop at the wrong
times and places, so, giving up the attempt, I went on with my reading.

Then the train began to move backwards. There seems to be no accounting for railway eccentricity,
thought I as I once more returned to my book. But when we came right back to the previous station,
I could remain indifferent no longer. "When are we getting to ----" I inquired at the station.
"You are just coming from there," was the reply. "Where are we going now, then?" I asked, thoroughly
flurried. "To London." I thereupon understood that this was a shuttle train. On inquiring
about the next train to ---- I was informed that there were no more trains that night. And in
reply to my next question I gathered that there was no inn within five miles.

I had left home after breakfast at ten in the morning, and had had
nothing since.

When abstinence is the only choice, an ascetic frame of mind comes easy. I buttoned up my thick
overcoat to the neck and seating myself under a platform lamp went on with my reading. The book
I had with me was Spencer's Data of Ethics, then recently published. I consoled myself with the
thought that I might never get another such opportunity of concentrating
my whole attention on such a subject.

After a short time a porter came and informed me that a special was
running and would be in in half an hour.

I felt so cheered up by the news that I could not go on any longer
with the Data of Ethics.

Where I was due at seven I arrived at length at nine. "What is this,
Ruby?" asked my hostess.

"Whatever have you been doing with yourself?" I was unable to take much pride in the account
of my wonderful adventures which I gave her. Dinner was over; nevertheless, as my misfortune
was hardly my fault, I did not expect condign punishment, especially
as the dispenser was a woman.

But all that the widow of the high Anglo-Indian official said to
me was: "Come along, Ruby, have a cup of tea."

I never was a tea-drinker, but in the hope that it might be of some
assistance in allaying my consuming hunger I managed to swallow a
cup of strong decoction with a couple of dry biscuits.

When I at length reached the drawing room I found a gathering of
elderly ladies and among them one pretty young American who was engaged
to a nephew of my hostess and seemed busy going through the usual
premarital love passages.

"Let's have some dancing," said my hostess. I was neither in the mood nor bodily condition for
that exercise.

But it is the docile who achieve the most impossible things in this world; so, though the dance
was primarily got up for the benefit of the engaged couple, I had to dance with the ladies
of considerably advanced age, with only the tea and biscuits between myself and starvation.

But
my sorrows did not end here. "Where are you putting up for the night?" asked my hostess. This
was a question for which I was not prepared. While I stared at her, speechless, she explained that
as the local inn would close at midnight I had better betake myself thither without further delay.
Hospitality, however, was not entirely wanting for I had not to find the inn unaided, a servant
showing me the way there with a lantern.

At first I thought this might prove a blessing in disguise, and at once proceeded to make inquiries
for food: flesh, fish or vegetable, hot or cold, anything! I was told that drinks I could have
in any variety but nothing to eat. Then I looked to slumber for forgetfulness, but there seemed
to be no room even in her world-embracing lap.

The sand-stone floor of the bed-room was icy cold, an old bedstead and worn-out wash-stand
being its only furniture.

In the morning the Anglo-Indian widow sent for me to breakfast. I found a cold repast spread out,
evidently the remnants of last night's dinner. A small portion of this, lukewarm or cold, offered
to me last night could not have hurt anyone, while my dancing might then have been less like the
agonised wrigglings of a landed carp.

After breakfast my hostess informed me that the lady for whose delectation I had been invited to
sing was ill in bed, and that I would have to serenade her from her bed-room door. I was made
to stand up on the staircase landing. Pointing to a closed door the widow said: "That's where
she is." And I gave voice to that Behaga dirge facing the mysterious unknown on the other side.
Of what happened to the invalid as the result I have yet received no news.

After my return to London I had to expiate in bed the consequences of my fatuous complaisance. Dr.
Scott's girls implored me, on my conscience, not to take this as a sample of English hospitality.
It was the effect of India's salt, they protested.

(26) Loken Palit

While I was attending lectures on English literature at the University
College, Loken Palit was my class fellow.

He was about 4 years younger than I. At the age I am writing these reminiscences a difference
of 4 years is not perceptible. But it is difficult for friendship to bridge the gulf between
17 and 13. Lacking the weight of years the boy is always anxious to keep up the dignity of seniority.
But this did not raise any barrier in my mind in the case of the boy Loken, for I could not
feel that he was in any way my junior.

Boy and girl students sat together in the College library for study. This was the place for
our tete-a-tete.

Had we been fairly quiet about it none need have complained, but my young friend was so surcharged with
high spirits that at the least provocation they would burst forth as laughter. In all countries
girls have a perverse degree of application to their studies, and I feel repentant as I recall
the multitude of reproachful blue eyes which vainly showered disapprobation on our unrestrained
merriment. But in those days I felt not the slightest sympathy with the distress of disturbed
studiousness. By the grace of Providence I have never had a headache in my life, nor a moment
of compunction for interrupted school studies.

With our laughter as an almost unbroken accompaniment we managed also to do a bit of literary discussion,
and, though Loken's reading of Bengali literature was less extensive
than mine, he made up for that by the keenness of his intellect.

Among the subjects we discussed was Bengali orthography.

The way it arose was this. One of the Scott girls wanted me to teach her Bengali. When taking
her through the alphabet I expressed my pride that Bengali spelling has a conscience, and does
not delight in overstepping rules at every step. I made clear to her how laughable would have
been the waywardness of English spelling but for the tragic compulsion we were under to cram it for our
examinations. But my pride had a fall. It transpired that Bengali spelling was quite as impatient
of bondage, but that habit had blinded me to its transgressions.

Then I began to search for the laws regulating its lawlessness. I was quite surprised at the wonderful
assistance which Loken proved to be in this matter.

After Loken had got into the Indian Civil Service, and returned home,
the work, which had in the University College library had its source
in rippling merriment, flowed on in a widening stream.

Loken's boisterous delight in literature was as the wind in the sails of my literary adventure.
And when at the height of my youth I was driving the tandem of prose
and poetry at a furious rate, Loken's unstinted appreciation kept
my energies from flagging for a moment.

Many an extraordinary prose or poetical flight have I taken in his bungalow in the moffussil.
On many an occasion did our literary and musical gatherings assemble
under the auspices of the evening star to disperse, as did the lamplights
at the breezes of dawn, under the morning star.

Of the many lotus flowers at Saraswati's[43] feet the blossom of friendship
must be her favorite.

I have not come across much of golden pollen in her lotus bank, but
have nothing to complain of as regards the profusion of the sweet
savour of good-fellowship.

(27) The Broken Heart

While in England I began another poem, which I went on with during
my journey home, and finished after my return.

This was published under the name of Bhagna Hriday, The Broken Heart. At the time I thought
it very good. There was nothing strange in the writer's thinking so; but it did not fail to gain
the appreciation of the readers of the time as well. I remember how, after it came out, the
chief minister of the late Raja of Tipperah called on me solely to deliver the message that
the Raja admired the poem and entertained high hopes of the writer's future literary career.

About this poem of my eighteenth year let me set down here what I wrote in a letter when I
was thirty:

When I began to write the Bhagna Hriday I was eighteen--neither in my childhood nor my youth.
This borderland age is not illumined with the direct rays of Truth;--its reflection is seen
here and there, and the rest is shadow. And like twilight shades its imaginings are long-drawn
and vague, making the real world seem like a world of phantasy. The curious part of it is that
not only was I eighteen, but everyone around me seemed to be eighteen likewise; and we all flitted
about in the same baseless, substanceless world of imagination, where even the most intense
joys and sorrows seemed like the joys and sorrows of dreamland.

There being nothing real to weigh them against, the trivial did duty for the great.

This period of my life, from the age of fifteen or sixteen to twenty-two or twenty-three, was
one of utter disorderliness.

When, in the early ages of the Earth, land and water had not yet distinctly separated, huge misshapen
amphibious creatures walked the trunk-less forests growing on the
oozing silt.

Thus do the passions of the dim ages of the immature mind, as disproportionate and curiously shaped,
haunt the unending shades of its trackless, nameless wildernesses. They know not themselves,
nor the aim of their wanderings; and, because they do not, they are ever apt to imitate something
else.

So, at this age of unmeaning activity, when my undeveloped powers, unaware of and unequal to
their object, were jostling each other for an outlet, each sought to assert superiority through
exaggeration.

When milk-teeth are trying to push their way through, they work the infant into a fever. All
this agitation finds no justification till the teeth are out and have begun assisting in the absorption
of food. In the same way do our early passions torment the mind, like a malady, till they realise
their true relationship with the outer world.

The lessons I learnt from my experiences at that stage are to be found in every moral text-book,
but are not therefore to be despised. That which keeps our appetites confined within us, and checks
their free access to the outside, poisons our life. Such is selfishness which refuses to give
free play to our desires, and prevents them from reaching their real goal, and that is why
it is always accompanied by festering untruths and extravagances. When our desires find unlimited
freedom in good work they shake off their diseased condition and
come back to their own nature;--that is their true end, there also
is the joy of their being.

The condition of my immature mind which I have described was fostered both by the example and precept
of the time, and I am not sure that the effects of these are not lingering on to the present
day. Glancing back at the period of which I tell, it strikes me that we had gained more of stimulation
than of nourishment out of English Literature. Our literary gods then were Shakespeare, Milton and
Byron; and the quality in their work which stirred us most was strength of passion. In the
social life of Englishmen passionate outbursts are kept severely in check, for which very reason,
perhaps, they so dominate their literature, making its characteristic to be the working out of
extravagantly vehement feelings to an inevitable conflagration. At least this uncontrolled excitement
was what we learnt to look on as the quintessence of English literature.

In the impetuous declamation of English poetry by Akshay Chowdhury,
our initiator into English literature, there was the wildness of intoxication.

The frenzy of Romeo's and Juliet's love, the fury of King Lear's impotent lamentation, the all-consuming
fire of Othello's jealousy, these were the things that roused us
to enthusiastic admiration.

Our restricted social life, our narrower field of activity, was hedged in with such monotonous uniformity
that tempestuous feelings found no entrance;--all was as calm and quiet as could be. So our
hearts naturally craved the life-bringing shock of the passionate emotion in English literature.
Ours was not the æsthetic enjoyment of literary art, but the jubilant
welcome by stagnation of a turbulent wave, even though it should stir
up to the surface the slime of the bottom.

Shakespeare's contemporary literature represents the war-dance of the day when the Renascence
came to Europe in all the violence of its reaction against the severe
curbing and cramping of the hearts of men.

The examination of good and evil, beauty and ugliness, was not the
main object,--man then seemed consumed with the anxiety to break through
all barriers to the inmost sanctuary of his being, there to discover
the ultimate image of his own violent desire.

That is why in this literature we find such poignant, such exuberant,
such unbridled expression.

The spirit of this bacchanalian revelry of Europe found entrance into our demurely well-behaved
social world, woke us up, and made us lively.

We were dazzled by the glow of unfettered life which fell upon our custom-smothered heart, pining
for an opportunity to disclose itself.

There was another such day in English literature when the slow-measure
of Pope's common time gave place to the dance-rhythm of the French
revolution.

This had Byron for its poet. And the impetuosity of his passion also moved our veiled heart-bride
in the seclusion of her corner.

In this wise did the excitement of the pursuit of English literature
come to sway the heart of the youth of our time, and at mine the waves
of this excitement kept beating from every side.

The first awakening is the time for the play of energy, not its repression.

And

yet our case was so different from that of Europe.

There the excitability and impatience of bondage was a reflection from its history into its
literature. Its expression was consistent with its feeling. The roaring of the storm was heard
because a storm was really raging. The breeze therefrom that ruffled our little world sounded
in reality but little above a murmur. Therein it failed to satisfy our minds, so that our attempts
to imitate the blast of a hurricane led us easily into exaggeration,--a tendency which still
persists and may not prove easy of cure.

And for this, the fact that in English literature the reticence of true art has not yet appeared,
is responsible. Human emotion is only one of the ingredients of literature and not its end,--which
is the beauty of perfect fulness consisting in simplicity and restraint.

This is a proposition which English literature does not yet fully admit.

Our minds from infancy to old age are being moulded by this English
literature alone.

But other literatures of Europe, both classical and modern, of which the art-form shows the
well-nourished development due to a systematic cultivation of self-control,
are not subjects of our study; and so, as it seems to me, we are yet
unable to arrive at a correct perception of the true aim and method
of literary work.

Akshay Babu, who had made the passion in English literature living to us, was himself a votary of
the emotional life. The importance of realising truth in the fulness
of its perfection seemed less apparent to him than that of feeling
it in the heart.

He had no intellectual respect for religion, but songs of Shy[=a]m[=a], the dark Mother, would bring
tears to his eyes. He felt no call to search for ultimate reality; whatever moved his heart served
him for the time as the truth, even obvious coarseness not proving a deterrent.

Atheism was the dominant note of the English prose writings then in vogue,--Bentham, Mill and
Comte being favourite authors. Theirs was the reasoning in terms of which our youths argued.
The age of Mill constitutes a natural epoch in English History. It represents a healthy reaction
of the body politic; these destructive forces having been brought in, temporarily, to rid
it of accumulated thought-rubbish.

In our country we received these in the letter, but never sought
to make practical use of them, employing them only as a stimulant
to incite ourselves to moral revolt.

Atheism was thus for us a mere intoxication.

For these reasons educated men then fell mainly into two classes. One class would be always thrusting
themselves forward with unprovoked argumentation to cut to pieces
all belief in God.

Like the hunter whose hands itch, no sooner he spies a living creature
on the top or at the foot of a tree, to kill it, whenever these came
to learn of a harmless belief lurking anywhere in fancied security,
they felt stirred up to sally forth and demolish it.

We had for a short time a tutor of whom this was a pet diversion. Though I was a mere boy, even
I could not escape his onslaughts. Not that his attainments were of any account, or that his
opinions were the result of any enthusiastic search for the truth, being mostly gathered from others'
lips. But though I fought him with all my strength, unequally matched
in age as we were, I suffered many a bitter defeat. Sometimes I felt
so mortified I almost wanted to cry.

The other class consisted not
of believers, but religious epicureans, who found comfort and solace
in gathering together, and steeping themselves in pleasing sights,
sounds and scents galore, under the garb of religious ceremonial;
they luxuriated in the paraphernalia of worship. In neither of these
classes was doubt or denial the outcome of the travail of their quest.

Though
these religious aberrations pained me, I cannot say I was not at all
influenced by them. With the intellectual impudence of budding youth
this revolt also found a place. The religious services which were
held in our family I would have nothing to do with, I had not accepted
them for my own. I was busy blowing up a raging flame with the bellows
of my emotions. It was only the worship of fire, the giving of oblations
to increase its flame--with no other aim. And because my endeavour
had no end in view it was measureless, always reaching beyond any
assigned limit.

As with religion, so with my emotions, I felt no
need for any underlying truth, my excitement being an end in itself.
I call to mind some lines of a poet of that time:

My heart is mine
I have sold it to none, Be it tattered and torn and worn away, My
heart is mine!

From the standpoint of truth the heart need not worry
itself so; for nothing compels it to wear itself to tatters. In truth
sorrow is not desirable, but taken apart its pungency may appear savoury.
This savour our poets often made much of; leaving out the god in whose
worship they were indulging. This childishness our country has not
yet succeeded in getting rid of. So even to-day, when we fail to see
the truth of religion, we seek in its observance an artistic gratification.
So, also, much of our patriotism is not service of the mother-land,
but the luxury of bringing ourselves into a desirable attitude of
mind toward the country.

"Hyar!" he shouted, shaking his fist angrily, "don't you shoot my dog, you--or I'll be the
death of ye!"

"Oh, I don't know," responded Creede, bristling back at him. "Keep the blame pup away, then--and
keep that other dog away, too, or my cat'll eat 'im up! Well, I notice you took the occasion
to come down and sheep me out," he observed, as Swope pulled up before the door.

"I did not," retorted the sheepman promptly, but grinning nevertheless at the damage, "but
I see some other feller has though, and saved me the trouble." He ran his eye approvingly over
the devastated homestead; and then, rising in his stirrups, he plunged suddenly into his set
speech.

"I've took a lot off'n you, Jeff Creede," he shouted, swinging his arms wildly, "but I've got
a bellyful of this night work! And I come down to tell you that next time you shoot up one
of my camps there'll be trouble!"

"I never shot up your old camp," growled Creede, "nor any other camp. I'm dam' glad to hear
that somebody else did though," he added vindictively, "and I hope to God he fixed you good
and proper. Now what can I do for you, Mr. Swope?" he inquired, thrusting out his chin. "I
suppose you must be hurryin' on, of course."

"No!" cried Swope, slapping his saddle horn vehemently. "I come down here to git some satisfaction
out of you! My sheep has been killed and my men has been intimidated on this here public range,
and I want to tell you right now, Mr. Creede, that this funny business has got to stop!"

"Well, don't choke!" said the cowman, fingering his gun coldly. "Go ahead and stop it, why
don't you?"

He paused, a set smile on his lips, and for a moment their eyes met in the baleful glare which
rival wolves, the leaders of their packs, confer upon each other. Then Hardy stepped out into
the open, holding up his hand for peace.

"You are mistaken, Mr. Swope," he said quietly. "Jeff hasn't shot up any camps--he hasn't even
packed a gun for the last three days."

"Oh, he hain't, hey?" sneered the sheepman, showing his jagged teeth. "He seems to have one now."

"You betcher neck I have," cried Creede, flaring up at the implication, "and if you're lookin'
for trouble, Jasp Swope, you can open up any time."

"W'y what's the matter with you?" protested Swope righteously. "You must have somethin' on
your mind, the way you act."

Then without waiting for a reply to this innuendo he turned his attention to Hardy.

"He hain't shot up any camps," he repeated, "ner packed a gun for three days, hey? Now here's
where I prove you a liar, Mr. Smarty. I seen him with my own eyes take six shots at one of
my herders this very mornin'--and you was there!"

He punctuated his speech by successive downward jabs of his grimy forefinger as if he were
stabbing his adversary to the heart, and Hardy turned faint and sick with chagrin. Never had
he hated a man as he hated this great, overbearing brute before him--this man-beast, with his
hairy chest and freckled hands that clutched at him like an ape's. Something hidden, a demon
primordial and violent, rose up in him against this crude barbarian with his bristling beard
and gloating pig eyes, and he forgot everything but his own rage at being trapped.

"You lie!" he cried passionately; and then in his anger he added a word which he had never
used, a word which goes deep under the skin and makes men fight.

For a moment the sheepman sat staring, astounded by his vehemence; but before he could move
the sudden silence was split by the yelp of a dog--a wild, gibbering yelp that made them jump
and bristle like hounds that are assailed from behind--and, mingling stridently with it, was
the harsh snarl of a cat. There was a swift scramble in the dust by the door, an oath from
the sheepman, and the yellow dog dashed away again, with Tommy at his heels.

Creede was the first man to regain his nerve and, seeing his pet triumphant, he let out a whoop
of derisive laughter.

"Ah-hah-hah!" he hollered, pointing with his pistol hand, "look at that, will ye--look at 'im--yee-pah--go
after 'im, Tommy--we'll show the--"

The fighting blood of the sheepman sided in as quickly with his dog.

"I'll kill that dam' cat!" he yelled, swinging down from his saddle, "if you don't let up!
Hey, Nip! Sick 'im!" He turned and motioned to his other dog, which had been standing dumbly
by, and instantly he joined in the chase. "Sick 'em, boy, sick 'em!" he bellowed, urging him
on, and before Creede could get his face straight the long, rangy brindle had dashed up from
behind and seized Tommy by the back.

"Git out o' that!" thundered the cowman; and then, without waiting on words, he threw his gun
down on the dog and fired.

"Here--none of that, now!" shouted Swope, whipping out his own pistol, and as he leapt forward
he held it out before him like a sabre, pointed straight for the cowman's ribs. His intentions
may have been of the best, but Hardy did not wait to see. The brindle dog let out a surprised
yelp and dropped. Before Creede could turn to meet his enemy his partner leapt in between them
and with a swift blow from the shoulder, struck the sheepman to the ground.

It was a fearful blow, such as men deal in anger without measuring their strength or the cost,
and it landed on his jaw. Creede had seen men slugged before, in saloon rows and the rough
fights that take place around a town, but never had he seen a single blow suffice--the man's
head go back, his knees weaken, and his whole body collapse as if he had been shot. If he had
been felled like a bull in the shambles that goes down in spite of his great strength, Jasper
Swope could not have been more completely stunned. He lay sprawling, his legs turned under
him, and the hand that grasped the six-shooter relaxed slowly and tumbled it into the dust.

For a minute the two partners stood staring at each other, the one still planted firmly on
his feet like a boxer, the other with his smoking pistol in his hand.

"By Joe, boy," said Creede slowly, "you was just in time that trip." He stepped forward and
laid the fallen man out on his back, passing his gun up to Hardy as he did so.

"I wonder if you killed him," he muttered, feeling Jasp's bull neck; and then, as Hardy ran
for some water, he remembered Tommy. But there was no Tommy--only a little heap of fur lying
very still out in the open.

"My God!" he cried, and leaving the man he ran out and knelt down beside it.

"Pussy!" he whispered, feeling hopelessly for his heart; and then, gathering the forlorn little
wisp of fur in his arms, he hurried into the house without a word.

He was still in hiding when Jasper Swope came to and sat up, his hair drenched with water and
matted with dirt. Staring doubtfully at the set face of Hardy he staggered to his feet; then
the memory of the fight came back to him and he glared at him with a drunkard's insolence.

"Where's my gun?" he demanded, suddenly clapping his hand upon the empty holster.

"I'll take care of that for you," answered Hardy pointedly. "Now you pile onto that mule of
yours and pull your freight, will you?" He led the black mule up close and boosted its master
into the saddle, but Swope was not content.

"Where's that dastard, Jeff Creede?" he demanded. "Well, I wanter see him, that's all. And
say, Mr. Smart Alec, I want that gun, too, see?"

"Well, you won't get it," said Hardy.

"I will that," declared Swope, "'nd I'll git you, too, Willie, before I git through with you.
I've had enough of this monkey business. Now gimme that gun, I tell ye, or I'll come back with
more of 'em and take it!"

He raised his voice to a roar, muffled to a beast-like hoarseness by his swollen jaws, and
the ramada reverberated like a cavern as he bellowed out his challenge. Then the door was snatched
violently open and Jefferson Creede stepped forth, looking black as hell itself. In one hand
he held the sheepman's pistol and in the other his own.

"Here!" he said, and striding forward he thrust Swope's gun into his hand. "It's loaded, too,"
he added. "Now, you--if you've got any shootin' to do, go to it!"

He stepped back quickly and stood ready, his masterful eyes bent upon his enemy in a scowl
of unquenchable hate. Once before they had faced each other, waiting for that mysterious psychic
prompting without which neither man nor beast can begin a fight, and Jim had stepped in between--but
Hardy stood aside without a word. It was a show-down and, bulldog fighter though he was, Jasper
Swope weakened. The anger of his enemy overcame his hostile spirit without a blow, and he turned
his pistol away.

"That's all I wanted," he said, shoving the gun sullenly into its holster. "They's two of you,
and--"

"And you're afraid," put in Creede promptly. He stood gazing at the downcast sheepman, his
lip curling contemptuously.

"I've never seen a sheepman yet," he said, "that would fight. You've listened to that blat
until it's a part of ye; you've run with them Mexicans until you're kin to 'em; you're a coward,
Jasp Swope, and I always knowed it." He paused again, his eyes glowing with the hatred that
had overmastered his being. "My God," he said, "if I could only git you to fight to-day I'd
give everything I've got left!"

The sheepman's gaze was becoming furtive as he watched them. He glanced sidewise, edging away
from the door; then, pricking his mule with his spurs, he galloped madly away, ducking his
head at every jump as if he feared a shot.

"Look at the cowardly dastard!" sneered Creede bitterly. "D'ye know what he would do if that
was me? He'd shoot me in the back. Ah, God A'mighty, and that dog of his got Tommy before I
could pull a gun! Rufe, I could kill every sheepman in the Four Peaks for this--every dam'
one of 'em--and the first dog that comes in sight of this ranch will stop a thirty-thirty."
He stopped and turned away, cursing and muttering to himself.

"God A'mighty," he moaned, "I can't keep nothin'!" And stumbling back into the house he slammed
the door behind him.

A gloom settled down over the place, a gloom that lasted for days. The cowboys came back from
driving the town herd and, going up on the mesa, they gathered a few head more. Then the heat
set in before its time and the work stopped short. For the steer that is roped and busted in
the hot weather dies suddenly at the water; the flies buzz about the ears of the new-marked
calves and poison them, and the mother cows grow gaunt and thin from overheating. Not until
the long Summer had passed could the riding continue; the steers must be left to feed down
the sheeped-out range; the little calves must run for sleepers until the fall rodéo. Sheep
and the drought had come together, and the round-up was a failure. Likewise the cowmen were broke.

As they gathered about the fire on that last night it was a silent company--the rodéo boss
the gloomiest of them all. Not since the death of Tommy had his eyes twinkled with the old
mischief; he had no bets to offer, no news to volunteer; a dull, sombre abstraction lay upon
him like a pall. Only when Bill Lightfoot spoke did he look up, and then with a set sneer,
growing daily more saturnine. The world was dark to Creede and Bill's fresh remarks jarred
on him--but Bill himself was happy. He was of the kind that runs by opposites, taking their
troubles with hilarity under the impression that they are philosophers. His pretext for this
present happiness was a professed interview with Kitty Bonnair on the evening that the town
herd pulled into Moreno's. What had happened at this interview was a secret, of course, but
it made Bill happy; and the more morose and ugly Jeff became about it the more it pleased Lightfoot
to be gay. He sat on a box that night and sang risqué ditties, his enormous Colt's revolver
dangling bravely at his hip; and at last, casting his weather eye upon Creede, he began a certain
song.

            "Oh, my little girl, she lives in the town--"

And then he stopped.

"Bill," said the rodéo boss feelingly, "you make me tired."

"Lay down an' you'll git rested, then," suggested Lightfoot.

         "A toodle link, a toodle link, a too-oodle a day."

"I'll lay you down in a minute, if you don't shut up," remarked Creede, throwing away his cigarette.

"The hell you say," commented Lightfoot airily.

         "And last time I seen her she ast me to come down."

At this raw bit of improvisation the boss rose slowly to his feet and stalked away from temptation.

       "And if anybody sees her you'll know her by this sign,"

chanted the cowboy, switching to an out-and-out bad one; and then, swaying his body on his
cracker box, he plunged unctuously into the chorus.

              "She's got a dark and rolling eye, boys;
              She's got a dark and rolling eye."

He stopped there and leapt to his feet anxiously. The mighty bulk of the rodéo boss came plunging
back at him through the darkness; his bruising fist shot out and the frontier troubadour went
sprawling among the pack saddles.

It was the first time Creede had ever struck one of his own kind,--men with guns were considered
dangerous,--but this time he laid on unmercifully.

"You've had that comin' to you for quite a while, Bill Lightfoot," he said, striking Bill's
ineffectual gun aside, "and more too. Now maybe you'll keep shut about 'your girl'!"

He turned on his heel after administering this rebuke and went to the house, leaving his enemy
prostrate in the dirt.

"The big, hulkin' brute," blubbered Lightfoot, sitting up and aggrievedly feeling of his front
teeth, "jumpin' on a little feller like me--an' he never give me no warnin', neither. You jest
wait, I'll--"

"Aw, shut up!" growled Old Man Reavis, whose soul had long been harrowed by Lightfoot's festive
ways. "He give you plenty of warnin', if you'd only listen. Some people have to swallow a few
front teeth before they kin learn anythin'."

"Well, what call did he have to jump on me like that?" protested Lightfoot. "I wasn't doin'
nothin'."

"No, nothin' but singin' bawdy songs about his girl," sneered Reavis sarcastically.

"His girl, rats!" retorted the cowboy, vainglorious even in defeat, "she's my girl, if she's
anybody's!"

"Well, about your girl then, you dirty brute!" snarled the old man, suddenly assuming a high
moral plane for his utter annihilation. "You're a disgrace to the outfit, Bill Lightfoot,"
he added, with conviction. "I'm ashamed of ye."

"That's right," chimed in the Clark boys, whose sensibilities had likewise been harassed; and
with all the world against him Bill Lightfoot retired in a huff to his blankets. So the rodéo
ended as it had begun, in disaster, bickering, and bad blood, and no man rightly knew from
whence their misfortune came. Perhaps the planets in their spheres had cast a malign influence
upon them, or maybe the bell mare had cast a shoe. Anyhow they had started off the wrong foot
and, whatever the cause, the times were certainly not auspicious for matters of importance,
love-making, or the bringing together of the estranged. Let whatsoever high-priced astrologer
cast his horoscope for good, Saturn was swinging low above the earth and dealing especial misery
to the Four Peaks; and on top of it all the word came that old Bill Johnson, after shooting
up the sheep camps, had gone crazy and taken to the hills.

For a week, Creede and Hardy dawdled about the place, patching up the gates and fences and
cursing the very name of sheep. A spirit of unrest hovered over the place, a brooding silence
which spoke only of Tommy and those who were gone, and the two partners eyed each other furtively,
each deep in his own thoughts. At last when he could stand it no longer Creede went over to
the corner, and dug up his money.

"I'm goin' to town," he said briefly.

"All right," responded Hardy; and then, after meditating a while, he added: "I'll send down
some letters by you."

Late that evening, after he had written a long letter to Lucy and a short one to his father,
he sat at the desk where he had found their letters, and his thoughts turned back to Kitty.
There lay the little book which had held their letters, just as he had thrust it aside. He
picked it up, idly, and glanced at the title-page: "Sonnets from the Portuguese." How dim and
far away it all seemed now, this world of the poets in which he had once lived and dreamed,
where sweetness and beauty were enshrined as twin goddesses of light, and gentleness brooded
over all her children. What a world that had been, with its graceful, smiling women, its refinements
of thought and speech, its aspirations and sympathies--and Kitty! He opened the book slowly,
wondering from whence it had come, and from the deckled leaves a pressed forget-me-not fell
into his hand. That was all--there was no mark, no word, no sign but this, and as he gazed
his numbed mind groped through the past for a forget-me-not. Ah yes, he remembered! But how
far away it seemed now, the bright morning when he had met his love on the mountain peak and
the flowers had fallen from her hair--and what an inferno of strife and turmoil had followed since!

The spell of the words laid hold upon as he read and he turned page after page, following the
cycle of that other woman's love--a love which waited for years to be claimed by the master
hand, never faltering to the end. Then impulsively he reached for a fair sheet of paper to
begin a letter to Kitty, a letter which should breathe the old gentleness and love, yet "for
love's sake only." But while he sat dreaming, thinking with what words to begin, his partner
lounged in, and Hardy put aside his pen and waited, while the big man hung around and fidgeted.

"Well, I'll be in town to-morrer," he said, drearily.

"Aha," assented Hardy.

"What ye got there?" inquired Creede, after a long silence. He picked up the book, griming
the dainty pages as he turned them with his rough fingers, glancing at the headings.

"Um-huh," he grunted, "'Sonnets from the Portegees,' eh? I never thought them Dagos could write--what
I've seen of 'em was mostly drivin' fish-wagons or swampin' around some slaughterhouse. How
does she go, now," he continued, as his schooling came back to him, "see if I can make sense
out of it." He bent down and mumbled over the first sonnet, spelling out the long words doubtfully.

"Well say, what's he drivin' at, anyway?" demanded the rugged cowboy. "Is that Dago talk, or
is he jest mixed in his mind? Perfectly clear, eh? Well, maybe so, but I fail to see it. Wish
I could git aholt of some good po'try." He paused, waiting for Hardy to respond.

"Say," he said, at last, "do me a favor, will ye, Rufe?"

The tone of his voice, now soft and diffident, startled Hardy out of his dream.

"Why sure, Jeff," he said, "if I can."

"No, no 'ifs' and 'ands' about it!" persisted Creede. "A lucky feller like you with everythin'
comin' his way ought to be able to say 'Yes' once in a while without hangin' a pull-back on it."

"Huh," grunted Hardy suspiciously, "you better tell me first what you want."

"Well, I want you to write me a letter," blurted out Creede. "I can keep a tally book and order
up the grub from Bender; but, durn the luck, when it comes to makin' love on paper I'd rather
wrastle a bear. Course you know who it is, and you savvy how them things is done. Throw in
a little po'try, will you, and--and--say, Rufe, for God's sake, help me out on this!"

He laid one hand appealingly upon his partner's shoulder, but the little man squirmed out from
under it impatiently.

"Who is it?" he asked doggedly. "Sallie Winship?"

"Aw, say," protested Creede, "don't throw it into a feller like that--Sal went back on me years
ago. You know who I mean--Kitty Bonnair."

"Kitty Bonnair!" Hardy had known it, but he had tried to keep her name unspoken. Battle as
he would he could not endure to hear it, even from Jeff.

"What do you want to tell Miss Bonnair?" he inquired, schooling his voice to a cold quietness.

"Tell her?" echoed Creede ecstatically. "W'y, tell her I'm lonely as hell now she's gone--tell
her--well, there's where I bog down, but I'd trade my best horse for another kiss like that
one she give me, and throw in the saddle for pelon. Now, say, Rufe, don't leave me in a hole
like this. You've made your winnin', and here's your nice long letter to Miss Lucy. My hands
are as stiff as a burnt rawhide and I can't think out them nice things to say; but I love Kitty
jest as much as you love Miss Lucy--mebbe more--and--and I wanter tell her so!"

He ended abjectly, gazing with pleading eyes at the stubborn face of his partner whose lips
were drawn tight.

"We--every man has to--no, I can't do it, Jeff," he stammered, choking. "I'd--I'd help you
if I could, Jeff--but she'd know my style. Yes, that's it. If I'd write the letter she'd know
it was from me--women are quick that way. I'm sorry, but that's the way it is--every man has
to fight out his own battle, in love."

He paused and fumbled with his papers.

"Here's a good pen," he said, "and--and here's the paper." He shoved out the fair sheet upon
which he had intended to write and rose up dumbly from the table.

"I'm going to bed," he said, and slipped quietly out of the room. As he lay in his blankets
he could see the gleam of light from the barred window and hear Jeff scraping his boots uneasily
on the floor. True indeed, his hands were like burnt rawhide from gripping at ropes and irons,
his clothes were greasy and his boots smelled of the corral, and yet--she had given him a kiss!
He tried to picture it in his mind: Kitty smiling--or startled, perhaps--Jeff masterful, triumphant,
laughing. Ah God, it was the same kiss she had offered him, and he had run away!

In the morning, there was a division between them, a barrier which could not be overcome. Creede
lingered by the door a minute, awkwardly, and then rode away. Hardy scraped up the greasy dishes
and washed them moodily. Then the great silence settled down upon Hidden Water and he sat alone
in the shadow of the ramada, gazing away at the barren hills.

CHAPTER XIX

THE BIG DRUNK

The sun rose clear for the hundredth time over the shoulder of the Four Peaks; it mounted higher,
glowing with a great light, and the smooth round tops of the bowlders shone like half-buried
skulls along the creek-bed; it swung gloriously up to its zenith and the earth palpitated with
a panting heat. Summer had come, and the long days when the lizards crawl deep into their crevices
and the cattle follow the scanty shade of the box cañons or gather in standing-places where
the wind draws over the ridges and mitigates the flies. In the pasture at Hidden Water the
horses stood head and tail together, side by side, each thrashing the flies from the other's
face and dozing until hunger or thirst aroused them or perversity took them away. Against the
cool face of the cliff the buzzards moped and stretched their dirty wings in squalid discomfort;
the trim little sparrow-hawks gave over their hunting; and all the world lay tense and still.
Only at the ranch house where Hardy kept a perfunctory watch was there any sign of motion or life.

For two weeks now he had been alone, ever since Jeff went down to Bender, and with the solitary's
dread of surprise he stepped out into the ramada regularly, scanning the western trail with
eyes grown weary of the earth's emptiness.

At last as the sun sank low, throwing its fiery glare in his eyes, he saw the familiar figure
against the sky--Creede, broad and bulky and topped by his enormous hat, and old Bat Wings,
as raw-boned and ornery as ever. Never until that moment had Hardy realized how much his life
was dependent upon this big, warm-hearted barbarian who clung to his native range as instinctively
as a beef and yet possessed human attributes that would win him friends anywhere in the world.
Often in that long two weeks he had reproached himself for abandoning Jeff in his love-making.
What could be said for a love which made a man so pitiless? Was it worthy of any return? Was
it, after all, a thing to be held so jealously to his heart, gnawing out his vitals and robbing
him of his humanity? These and many other questions Hardy had had time to ask himself in his
fortnight of introspection and as he stood by the doorway waiting he resolved to make amends.
From a petty creature wrapped up in his own problems and prepossessions he would make himself
over into a man worthy of the name of friend. Yet the consciousness of his fault lay heavy
upon him and as Creede rode in he stood silent, waiting for him to speak. But Jeff for his
part came on grimly, and there was a sombre glow in his eyes which told more than words.

"Hello, sport," he said, smiling wantonly, "could you take a pore feller in over night?"

"Sure thing, I can," responded Hardy gayly. "Where've you been all the time?"

And Creede chanted:

                          "Down to Bender,
                          On a bender,
                          Oh, I'm a spender,
                          You bet yer life!

"And I'm broke, too," he added, sotto voce, dropping off his horse and sinking into a chair.

"Well, you don't need to let that worry you," said Hardy. "I've got plenty. Here!" He went
down into his pocket and tossed a gold piece to him, but Creede dodged it listlessly.

"Nope," he said, "money's nothin' to me."

"What's the matter?" asked Hardy anxiously. "Are you sick?"

"Yes," answered Creede, nodding his head wearily, "sick and tired of it all." He paused and
regarded his partner solemnly. "I'm a miserable failure, Rufe," he said. "I ain't got nothin'
and I ain't worth nothin'. I never done nothin'--and I ain't got a friend in the world."

He stopped and gazed at the barren land despondently, waiting to see if his partner would offer
any protests.

"Rufe," he said, at last, his voice tremulous with reproach, "if you'd only helped me out a
little on that letter--if you'd only told me a few things--well, she might have let me down
easy, and I could've took it. As it was, she soaked me."

Then it was that Hardy realized the burden under which his partner was laboring, the grief
that clutched at his heart, the fire that burned in his brain, and he could have wept, now
that it was too late.

"Jeff," he said honestly, "it don't do any good now, but I'm sorry. I'm more than sorry--I'm
ashamed. But that don't do you any good either, does it?"

He stepped over and laid his hand affectionately upon his partner's shoulder, but Creede hunched
it off impatiently.

"No," he said, slowly and deliberately, "not a dam' bit." There was no bitterness in his words,
only an acknowledgment of the truth. "They was only one thing for me to do after I received
that letter," he continued, "and I done it. I went on a hell-roarin' drunk. That's right. I
filled up on that forty-rod whiskey until I was crazy drunk, an' then I picked out the biggest
man in town and fought him to a whisper."

He sighed and glanced at his swollen knuckles, which still showed the marks of combat.

"That feller was a jim-dandy scrapper," he said, smiling magnanimously, "but I downed 'im,
all right. I couldn't quite lick the whole town, but I tried; and I certainly gave 'em a run
for their money, while it lasted. If Bender don't date time from Jeff Creede's big drunk I
miss my guess a mile. And you know, after I got over bein' fightin' drunk, I got cryin' drunk--but
I never did get drunk enough to tell my troubles, thank God! The fellers think I'm sore over
bein' sheeped out. Well, after I'd punished enough booze to start an Injun uprisin', and played
the faro bank for my wad, I went to sleep; and when I woke up it seemed a lo-ong time ago and
I could look back and see jest how foolish I'd been. I could see how she'd jollied me up and
got me comin', playin' me off against Bill Lightfoot; and then I could see how she'd tantalized
me, like that mouse the cat had when you was down in Bender; and then I could see where I had
got the big-head bad, thinkin' I was the only one--and all the time she was laughin' at me!
Oh, it's nothin' now--I kin laugh at it myself in a month; but I'm so dam' 'shamed I could
cry." He lopped down in his chair, a great hulk of a man, and shook his head gloomily.

"They ain't but one girl I ever knowed," he said solemnly, "that wasn't stringin' me, and that
was Sallie Winship. Sal liked me, dam'd if she didn't. She cried when she went away, but the
old lady wouldn't stand for no bow-legged cowpuncher--and so I git euchred, every time."

For lack of some higher consolation Hardy cooked up a big supper for his low-spirited partner,
and after he had done the honors at the feast the irrepressible good health of the cowboy rose
up and conquered his grief in spite of him. He began by telling the story of his orgy, which
apparently had left Bender a wreck. The futile rage of Black Tex, the despair of the town marshal,
the fight with the Big Man, the arrest by the entire posse comitatus, the good offices of Mr.
Einstein in furnishing bail, the crying and sleeping jags--all were set forth with a vividness
which left nothing to the imagination, and at the end the big man was comforted. When it was
all over and his memory came down to date he suddenly recalled a package of letters that were
tied up in his coat, which was still on the back of his saddle. He produced them forthwith
and, like a hungry boy who sees others eat, sat down to watch Rufe read. No letters ever came
for him--and when one did come it was bad. The first in the pack was from Lucy Ware and as
Hardy read it his face softened, even while he knew that Creede was watching.

"Say, she's all right, ain't she?" observed Jeff, when his partner looked up.

"That's right," said Hardy, "and she says to take you on again as foreman and pay you for every
day you didn't carry your gun."

"No!" cried Creede, and then he laughed quietly to himself. "Does that include them days I
was prizin' up hell down in Bender? Oh, it does, eh? Well, you can tell your boss that I'll
make that up to her before the Summer's over."

He leaned back and stretched his powerful arms as if preparing for some mighty labor. "We're
goin' to have a drought this Summer," he said impressively, "that will have the fish packin'
water in canteens. Yes, sir, the chaser is goin' to cost more than the whiskey before long;
and they's goin' to be some dead cows along the river. Do you know what Pablo Moreno is doin'?
He's cuttin' brush already to feed his cattle. That old man is a wise hombre, all right, when
it comes to weather. He's been hollerin' 'Año seco, año seco,' for the last year, and now,
by Joe, we've got it! They ain't hardly enough water in the river to make a splash, and here
it's the first of June. We've been kinder wropt up in fightin' sheep and sech and hain't noticed
how dry it's gittin'; but that old feller has been sittin' on top of his hill watchin' the
clouds, and smellin' of the wind, and measurin' the river, and countin' his cows until he's
a weather sharp. I was a-ridin' up the river this afternoon when I see the old man cuttin'
down a palo verde tree, and about forty head of cattle lingerin' around to eat the top off
as soon as she hit the ground; and he says to me, kinder solemn and fatherly:

"'Jeff,' he says, 'cut trees for your cattle--this is an año seco."

"'Yes, I've heard that before,' says I. 'But my cows is learnin' to climb.'"

"'Stawano,' he says, throwin' out his hands like I was a hopeless proposition. But all the
same I think I'll go out to-morrow and cut down one of them palo verdes like he show'd me--one
of these kind with little leaves and short thorns--jest for an expeeriment. If the cattle eat
it, w'y maybe I'll cut another, but I don't want to be goin' round stuffin' my cows full of
twigs for nothin'. Let 'em rustle for their feed, same as I do. But honest to God, Rufe, some
of them little runty cows that hang around the river can't hardly cast a shadder, they're that
ganted, and calves seems to be gittin' kinder scarce, too. But here--git busy, now--here's
a letter you overlooked."

He pawed over the pile purposefully and thrust a pale blue envelope before Hardy--a letter
from Kitty Bonnair. And his eyes took on a cold, fighting glint as he observed the fatal handwriting.

"By God," he cried, "I hain't figured out yet what struck me! I never spoke a rough word to
that girl in my life, and she certainly gimme a nice kiss when she went away. But jest as soon
as I write her a love letter, w'y she--she--W'y hell, Rufe, I wouldn't talk that way to a sheep-herder
if he didn't know no better. Now you jest read that"--he fumbled in his pocket and slammed
a crumpled letter down before his partner--"and tell me if I'm wrong! No, I want you to do
it. Well, I'll read it to you, then!"

He ripped open the worn envelope, squared his elbows across the table, and opened the scented
inclosure defiantly, but before he could read it Hardy reached out suddenly and covered it
with his hand.

"Please don't, Jeff," he said, his face pale and drawn. "It was all my fault--I should have
told you--but please don't read it to me. I--I can't stand it."

"Oh, I don't know," retorted Creede coldly. "I reckon you can stand it if I can. Now suppose
you wrote a real nice letter--the best you knowed how--to your girl, and she handed you somethin'
like this: 'My dear Mr. Creede, yore amazin' letter--' Here, what ye doin'?"

"I won't listen to it!" cried Hardy, snatching the letter away, "it's--"

"Now lookee here, Rufe Hardy," began Creede, rising up angrily from his chair, "I want to tell
you right now that you've got to read that letter or lick me--and I doubt if you can do that,
the way I happen to be feelin'. You got me into this in the first place and now, by God, you'll
see it out! Now you read that letter and tell me if I'm wrong!"

He reared up his head as he spoke and Hardy saw the same fierce gleam in his eyes that came
when he harried the sheep; but there was something beside that moved his heart to pity. It
was the lurking sadness of a man deep hurt, who fights the whole world in his anguish; the
protest of a soul in torment, demanding, like Job, that some one shall justify his torture.

"All right, Jeff," he said, "I will read it--only--only don't crowd me for an answer."

He spread the letter before him on the table and saw in a kind of haze the angry zigzag characters
that galloped across the page, the words whose meaning he did not as yet catch, so swiftly
did his thoughts rise up at sight of them. Years ago Kitty had written him a letter and he
had read it at that same table. It had been a cruel letter, but unconsidered, like the tantrum
of a child. Yes, he had almost forgotten it, but now like a sudden nightmare the old horror
clutched at his heart. He steadied himself, and the words began to take form before him. Surely
she would be gentle with Jeff, he was so big and kind. Then he read on, slowly, grasping at
the meaning, and once more his eyes grew big with horror at her words. He finished, and bowed
his head upon the table, while the barren room whirled before him.

From his place across the table the big cowboy looked down upon him, grim and masterful, yet
wondering at his silence.

"Well, am I wrong?" he demanded, but the little man made no answer.

Upon the table before Hardy there lay another letter, written in that same woman's hand, a
letter to him, and the writing was smooth and fair. Jeff had brought it to him, tied behind
his saddle, and he stood before him now, waiting.

"Am I wrong?" he said again, but Hardy did not answer in words. Holding the crumpled letter
behind him he took up his own fair missive--such a one as he would have died for in years gone
by--and laid it on the fire, and when the tiny flame leaped up he dropped the other on it and
watched them burn together.

"Well, how about it?" inquired Creede, awed by the long silence, but the little man only bowed
his head.

"Who am I, to judge?" he said.

CHAPTER XX

THE DROUGHT

For a year the shadowy clouds had flitted past Hidden Water, drifting like flocks of snowy
birds to their resting-place against the Peaks, and as the wind raged and the darkness gathered
the cattle had raised their heads and bellowed, sniffing the wet air. In Summer the thunder-heads
had mounted to high heaven and spread from east to west; the heat lightning had played along
the horizon at night, restless and incessant; the sky had turned black and the south wind had
rushed up, laden with the smell of distant showers. At last the rain had fallen, graciously,
bringing up grass and browse, and flowers for those who sought them. But all the time the water
lay in black pools along the shrunken river, trickling among the rocks and eddying around huge
snags of driftwood, clear, limpid, sparkling, yet always less and less.

Where the winter floods had scoured the lowlands clear, a fuzz of baby trees sprang up, growing
to a rank prosperity and dying suddenly beneath the sun. Along the river's edge little shreds
of watercress took root and threw out sprouts and blossoms; the clean water brought forth snaky
eel-grass and scum which fed a multitude of fishes; in the shadows of deep rocks the great
bony-tails and Colorado River salmon lay in contented shoals, like hogs in wallows, but all
the time the water grew less and less. At every shower the Indian wheat sprang up on the mesas,
the myriad grass-seeds germinated and struggled forth, sucking the last moisture from the earth
to endow it with more seeds. In springtime the deep-rooted mesquites and palo verdes threw
out the golden halo of their flowers until the cañons were aflame; the soggy sahuaros drank
a little at each sparse downpour and defied the drought; all the world of desert plants flaunted
their pigmented green against the barren sky as if in grim contempt; but the little streams
ran weaker and weaker, creeping along under the sand to escape the pitiless sun.

As Creede and Hardy rode out from Hidden Water, the earth lay dead beneath their horses' feet--stark
and naked, stripped to the rocks by the sheep. Even on Bronco Mesa the ground was shorn of
its covering; the cloven hoofs of the sheep had passed over it like a scalping knife, tearing
off the last sun-blasted fringe of grass. In open spaces where they had not found their way
the gaunt cattle still curled their hungry tongues beneath the bushes and fetched out spears
of grass, or licked the scanty Indian wheat from the earth itself.

With lips as tough and leathery as their indurated faces, the hardiest of them worked their
way into bunches of stick-cactus and chollas, breaking down the guard of seemingly impenetrable
spines and munching on the juicy stalks; while along the ridges long-necked cows bobbed for
the high browse which the sheep had been unable to reach.

The famine was upon them; their hips stood out bony and unsightly above their swollen stomachs
as they racked across the benches, and their eyes were wild and haggard. But to the eye of
Creede, educated by long experience, they were still strong and whole. The weaklings were those
that hung about the water, foot-sore from their long journeyings to the distant hills and too
weary to return. At the spring-hole at Carrizo they found them gathered, the runts and roughs
of the range; old cows with importunate calves bunting at their flaccid udders; young heifers,
unused to rustling for two; orehannas with no mothers to guide them to the feed; rough steers
that had been "busted" and half-crippled by some reckless cowboy--all the unfortunate and incapable
ones, standing dead-eyed and hopeless or limping stiffly about.

A buzzard rose lazily from a carcass as they approached, and they paused to note the brand.
Then Creede shook his head bodingly and rode into the bunch by the spring. At a single glance
the rodéo boss recognized each one of them and knew from whence he came. He jumped his horse
at a wild steer and started him toward the ridges; the cows with calves he rounded up more
gently, turning them into the upper trail; the orehannas, poor helpless orphans that they were,
followed hopefully, leaving one haggard-eyed old stag behind.

Creede looked the retreating band over critically and shook his head again.

"Don't like it," he observed, briefly; and then, unlocking the ponderous padlock that protected
their cabin from hungry sheepmen, he went in and fetched out the axe. "Guess I'll cut a tree
for that old stiff," he said.

From his stand by the long troughs where all the mountain cattle watered in Summer, the disconsolate
old stag watched the felling of the tree curiously; then after an interval of dreary contemplation,
he racked his hide-bound skeleton over to the place and began to browse. Presently the rocks
began to clatter on the upper trail, and an old cow that had been peering over the brow of
the hill came back to get her share. Even her little calf, whose life had been cast in thorny
ways, tried his new teeth on the tender ends and found them good. The orehannas drifted in
one after the other, and other cows with calves, and soon there was a little circle about the
tree-top, munching at the soft, brittle twigs.

"Well, that settles it," said Creede. "One of us stays here and cuts brush, and the other works
around Hidden Water. This ain't the first drought I've been through, not by no means, and I've
learned this much: the Alamo can be dry as a bone and Carrizo, too, but they's always water
here and at the home ranch. Sooner or later every cow on the range will be goin' to one place
or the other to drink, and if we give 'em a little bait of brush each time it keeps 'em from
gittin' too weak. As long as a cow will rustle she's all right, but the minute she's too weak
to travel she gits to be a water-bum--hangs around the spring and drinks until she starves
to death. But if you feed 'em a little every day they'll drift back to the ridges at night
and pick up a little more. I'm sorry for them lily-white hands of yourn, pardner, but which
place would you like to work at?"

"Hidden Water," replied Hardy, promptly, "and I bet I can cut as many trees as you can."

"I'll go you, for a fiver," exclaimed Creede, emulously. "Next time Rafael comes in tell him
to bring me up some more grub and baled hay, and I'm fixed. And say, when you write to the
boss you can tell her I've traded my gun for an axe!"

As Hardy turned back towards home he swung in a great circle and rode down the dry bed of the
Alamo, where water-worn bowlders and ricks of mountain drift lay strewn for miles to mark the
vanished stream. What a power it had been in its might, floating sycamores and ironwoods as
if they were reeds, lapping high against the granite walls, moving the very rocks in its bed
until they ground together! But now the sand lay dry and powdery, the willows and water-moodies
were dead to the roots, and even the ancient cottonwoods from which it derived its name were
dying inch by inch. A hundred years they had stood there, defying storm and cloudburst, but
at last the drought was sucking away their life. On the mesa the waxy greasewood was still
verdant, the gorged sahuaros stood like great tanks, skin-tight with bitter juice, and all
the desert trees were tipped with green; but the children of the river were dying for a drink.

A string of cattle coming in from The Rolls stopped and stared at the solitary horseman, head
up against the sky; then as he rode on they fell in behind him, travelling the deep-worn trail
that led to Hidden Water. At the cleft-gate of the pass, still following the hard-stamped trail,
Hardy turned aside from his course and entered, curious to see his garden again before it succumbed
to the drought. There before him stood the sycamores, as green and flourishing as ever; the
eagle soared out from his cliff; the bees zooned in their caves; and beyond the massive dyke
that barred the way the tops of the elders waved the last of their creamy blossoms. In the
deep pool the fish still darted about, and the waterfall that fed it was not diminished. The
tinkle of its music seemed even louder, and as Hardy looked below he saw that a little stream
led way from the pool, flowing in the trench where the cattle came to drink. It was a miracle,
springing from the bosom of the earth from whence the waters come. When all the world outside
lay dead and bare, Hidden Water flowed more freely, and its garden lived on untouched.

Never had Hardy seen it more peaceful, and as he climbed the Indian steps and stood beneath
the elder, where Chupa Rosa had built her tiny nest his heart leapt suddenly as he remembered
Lucy. Here they had sat together in the first gladness of her coming, reading his forgotten
verse and watching the eagle's flight; only for that one time, and then the fight with the
sheep had separated them. He reached up and plucked a spray of elder blossoms to send her for
a keep-sake--and then like a blow he remembered the forget-me-not! From that same garden he
had fetched her a forget-me-not for repentance, and then forgotten her for Kitty. Who but Lucy
could have left the little book of poems, or treasured a flower so long to give it back at
parting? And yet in his madness he had forgotten her!

He searched wistfully among the rocks for another forget-me-not, but the hot breath of the
drought had killed them. As he climbed slowly down the stone steps he mused upon some poem
to take the place of the flowers that were dead, but the spirit of the drought was everywhere.
The very rocks themselves, burnt black by centuries of sun, were painted with Indian prayers
for rain. A thousand times he had seen the sign, hammered into the blasted rocks--the helix,
that mystic symbol of the ancients, a circle, ever widening, never ending,--and wondered at
the fate of the vanished people who had prayed to the Sun for rain.

The fragments of their sacrificial ollas lay strewn among the bowlders, but the worshippers
were dead; and now a stranger prayed to his own God for rain. As he sat at his desk that night
writing to Lucy about the drought, the memory of those Indian signs came upon him suddenly
and, seizing a fresh sheet of paper, he began to write. At the second stanza he paused, planned
out his rhymes and hurried on again, but just as his poem seemed finished, he halted at the
last line. Wrestle as he would he could not finish it--the rhymes were against him--it would
not come right. Ah, that is what sets the artist apart from all the under-world of dreamers--his
genius endures to the end; but the near-poet struggles like a bee limed in his own honey. What
a confession of failure it was to send away--a poem unfinished, or finished wrong! And yet--the
unfinished poem was like him. How often in the past had he left things unsaid, or said them
wrong. Perhaps Lucy would understand the better and prize it for its faults. At last, just
as it was, he sent it off, and so it came to her hand.

                           A PRAYER FOR RAIN

        Upon this blasted rock, O Sun, behold
          Our humble prayer for rain--and here below
        A tribute from the thirsty stream, that rolled
          Bank-full in flood, but now is sunk so low
        Our old men, tottering, yet may stride acrost
        And babes run pattering where the wild waves tossed.

        The grass is dead upon the stem, O Sun!
          The lizards pant with heat--they starve for flies--
        And they for grass--and grass for rain! Yea, none
          Of all that breathe may face these brazen skies
        And live, O Sun, without the touch of rain.
        Behold, thy children lift their hands--in vain!

        Drink up the water from this olla's brim
          And take the precious corn here set beside--
        Then summon thy dark clouds, and from the rim
          Of thy black shield strike him who hath defied
        Thy power! Appease thy wrath, Great Sun--but give
        Ah, give the touch of rain to those that live!

As it had been a thousand years before, so it was that day at Hidden Water. The earth was dead,
it gave forth nothing; the sky was clean and hard, without a cloud to soften its asperity.
Another month and the cattle would die; two months and the water would fail; then in the last
agonies of starvation and thirst the dissolution would come--the Four Peaks would be a desert.
Old Don Pablo was right, the world was drying up. Chihuahua and Sonora were parched; all Arizona
lay stricken with the drought; in California the cattle were dying on the ranges, and in Texas
and New Mexico the same. God, what a thing--to see the great earth that had supported its children
for ages slowly dying for water, its deserts first, and then its rivers, and then the pine-topped
mountains that gave the rivers birth! Yet what was there for a man to do but take care of his
own and wait? The rest was in the hands of God.

On the first morning that Hardy took his axe and went down to the river he found a single bunch
of gaunted cattle standing in the shade of the big mesquites that grew against Lookout Point--a
runty cow with her two-year-old and yearling, and a wobbly calf with a cactus joint stuck across
his nose. His mother's face showed that she, too, had been among the chollas; there was cactus
in her knees and long spines bristling from her jaws, but she could stand it, while it was
a matter of life and death to the calf. Every time he came near his mother she backed away,
and whenever he began to nudge for milk she kicked out wildly. So Hardy roped him and twitched
the joint away with a stick; then he pulled out the thorns one by one and went about his work.

Selecting a fine-leaved palo verde that grew against the point, he cleared a way into its trunk
and felled it down the hill. He cut a second and a third, and when he looked back he saw that
his labor was appreciated; the runty cow was biting eagerly at the first tree-top, and the
wobbly calf was restored to his own. As the sound of the axe continued, a band of tame cattle
came stringing down the sandy riverbed, and before the morning was over there were ten or twenty
derelicts and water-bums feeding along the hillside. In the afternoon he cut more trees along
the trail to Hidden Water, and the next day when he went to work he found a little band of
weaklings there, lingering expectantly in the shadow of the cañon wall. As the days went by
more and more of them gathered about the water, the lame, the sick, the crippled, the discouraged,
waiting for more trees to be felled. Then as the feed on the distant ridges grew thinner and
the number of cut trees increased, a great band of them hung about the vicinity of the ranch
house constantly--the herds from Hidden Water and the river, merged into one--waiting to follow
him to the hills.

For a mile up and down the cañon of the Alamo, the palo verde stumps dotted the hillside, each
with its top below it, stripped to the bark and bared of every twig. As the breathless heat
of July came on, Hardy was up before dawn, hewing and felling, and each day the long line of
cattle grew. They trampled at his heels like an army, gaunt, emaciated; mothers mooing for
their calves that lay dead along the gulches; mountain bulls and outlaws, tamed by gnawing
hunger and weakness, and the awful stroke of the heat. And every day other bands of outlaws,
driven at last from their native hills, drifted in to swell the herd. For a month Hardy had
not seen a human face, nor had he spoken to any living creature except Chapuli or some poor
cow that lay dying by the water. When he was not cutting trees on the farther ridges, he was
riding along the river, helping up those that had fallen or dragging away the dead.

Worn and foot-sore, with their noses stuck full of cactus joints, their tongues swollen from
the envenomed thorns, their stomachs afire from thirst and the burden of bitter stalks, the
wild cattle from the ridges would stagger down to the river and drink until their flanks bulged
out and their bellies hung heavy with water. Then, overcome with fatigue and heat, they would
sink down in the shade and lie dreaming; their limbs would stiffen and cramp beneath them until
they could not move; and there they would lie helpless, writhing their scrawny necks as they
struggled to get their feet under them. To these every day came Hardy with his rawhide reata.
Those that he could not scare up he pulled up; if any had died he dragged the bodies away from
the water; and as soon as the recent arrivals had drunk he turned them away, starting them
on their long journey to the high ridges where the sheep had not taken the browse.

Ah, those sheep! How many times in the fever of heat and work and weariness had Hardy cursed
them, his tongue seeking unbidden the wickedest words of the range; how many times had he cursed
Jim Swope, and Jasper Swope, the Mexicans, and all who had rushed in to help accomplish their
ruin. And as the sun beat down and no clouds came into the sky he cursed himself, blindly,
for all that had come to pass. One man--only one--at the mouth of Hell's Hip Pocket, and the
sheep might have been turned back; but he himself had seen the dust-cloud and let it pass--and
for that the cattle died. The sheep were far away, feeding peacefully in mountain valleys where
the pines roared in the wind and the nights were cool and pleasant; but if the rain came and
young grass sprang up on Bronco Mesa they would come again, and take it in spite of them. Yes,
even if the drought was broken and the cattle won back their strength, that great army would
come down from the north once more and sheep them down to the rocks! But one thing Hardy promised
himself--forgetting that it was the bootless oath of old Bill Johnson, who was crazy now and
hiding in the hills--he would kill the first sheep that set foot on Bronco Mesa, and the next,
as long as he could shoot; and Jasp Swope might answer as he would.

Yet, why think of sheep and schemes of belated vengeance?--the grass was gone; the browse was
cleaned; even the palo verde trees were growing scarce. Day by day he must tramp farther and
farther along the ridge, and all that patient, trusting army behind, waiting for him to find
more trees! Already the weakest were left behind and stood along the trails, eying him mournfully;
yet work as he would he could not feed the rest. There was no fine-drawn distinction now--every
palo verde on the hillside fell before his axe, whether it was fine-leaved and short-thorned,
or rough and spiny; and the cattle ate them all. Mesquite and cat-claw and ironwood, tough
as woven wire and barbed at every joint, these were all that were left except cactus and the
armored sahuaros. In desperation he piled brush beneath clumps of fuzzy chollas, the thorniest
cactus that grows, and burned off the resinous spines; but the silky bundles of stickers still
lurked beneath the ashes, and the cattle that ate them died in agony.

Once more Hardy took his ax and went out in search of palo verdes, high or low, young or old.
There was a gnarled trunk, curling up against a rocky butte and protected by two spiny sahuaros
that stood before it like armed guards, and he climbed up the rock to reach it. Chopping away
the first sahuaro he paused to watch it fall. As it broke open like a giant melon on the jagged
rocks below, the cattle crowded about it eagerly, sniffing at the shattered parts--and then
the hardiest of them began suddenly to eat!

On the outside the wiry spines stood in rows like two-inch knife blades; but now the juicy
heart, laid open by the fall, was exposed, and the cattle munched it greedily. A sudden hope
came to Hardy as he watched them feed, and, climbing higher, he felled two more of the desert
giants, dropping them from their foothold against the butte far down into the rocky cañon.
As they struck and burst, and the sickly aroma filled the air, the starved cattle, bitten with
a new appetite, rushed forward in hordes to eat out their bitter hearts. At last, when the
battle had seemed all but over, he had found a new food,--one that even Pablo Moreno had overlooked,--each
plant a ton of bitter pulp and juice. The coarse and wiry spines, whose edges would turn an
axe, were conquered in a moment by the fall from the precipitous cliffs. And the mesa was covered
with them, like a forest of towering pin-cushions, as far as the eye could see! A great gladness
came over Hardy as he saw the starved cattle eat, and as soon as he had felled a score or more
he galloped up to Carrizo to tell the news to Jeff.

The mesa was deserted of every living creature. There was not a snake track in the dust or
a raven in the sky, but as he topped the brow of the hill and looked down into the cañon, Hardy
saw a great herd of cattle, and Creede in the midst of them still hacking away at the thorny
palo verdes. At the clatter of hoofs, the big man looked up from his work, wiping the sweat
and grime from his brow, and his face was hard and drawn from working beyond his strength.

"Hello!" he called. "How's things down your way--water holdin' out? Well, you're in luck, then;
I've had to dig the spring out twice, and you can see how many cows I'm feedin'. But say,"
he continued, "d'ye think it's as hot as this down in hell? Well, if I thought for a minute
it'd be as dry I'd take a big drink and join the church, you can bet money on that. What's
the matter--have you got enough?"

"I've got enough of cutting palo verdes," replied Hardy, "but you just lend me that axe for
a minute and I'll show you something." He stepped to the nearest sahuaro and with a few strokes
felled it down the hill, and when Creede saw how the cattle crowded around the broken trunk
he threw down his hat and swore.

"Well--damn--me," he said, "for a pin-head! Here I've been cuttin' these ornery palo verdes
until my hands are like a Gila monster's back, and now look at them cows eat giant cactus!
There's no use talkin', Rufe, the feller that wears the number five hat and the number forty
jumper ain't worth hell-room when you're around--here, gimme that axe!" He seized it in his
thorn-scarred hands and whirled into the surrounding giants like a fury; then when he had a
dozen fat sahuaros laid open among the rocks he came back and sat down panting in the scanty
shade of an ironwood.

"I'm sore on myself," he said. "But that's the way it is! If I'd had the brains of a rabbit
I'd've stopped Jasp Swope last Spring--then I wouldn't need to be cuttin' brush here all Summer
like a Mexican wood-chopper. That's where we fell down--lettin' them sheep in--and now we've
got to sweat for it. But lemme tell you, boy," he cried, raising a mighty fist, "if I can keep
jest one cow alive until Fall I'm goin' to meet Mr. Swope on the edge of my range and shoot
'im full of holes! Nothin' else will do, somebody has got to be killed before this monkey business
will stop! I've been makin' faces and skinnin' my teeth at that dastard long enough now, and
I'm goin' to make him fight if I have to put high-life on 'im!"

He stopped and looked out over the hillside where the heat quivered in rainbows from the rocks,
and the naked palo verdes, stripped of their bark, bleached like skeletons beside their jagged
stumps.

"Say, Rufe," he began, abruptly, "I'm goin' crazy."

He shook his head slowly and sighed. "I always thought I was," he continued, "but old Bill
Johnson blew in on me the other day--he's crazy, you know--and when I see him I knowed it!
W'y, pardner, Bill is the most reas-on-able son-of-a-gun you can imagine. You can talk to him
by the hour, and outside of bein' a little techy he's all right; but the minute you mention
sheep to him his eye turns glassy and he's off. Well, that's me, too, and has been for years,
only not quite so bad; but then, Bill is plumb sheeped out and I ain't--quite!"

He laughed mirthlessly and filled a cigarette.

"You know," he said, squinting his eyes down shrewdly, "that old feller ain't so durned crazy
yet. He wanted some ammunition to shoot up sheep-camps with, but bein' a little touched, as
you might say, he thought I might hold out on 'im, so he goes at me like this: 'Jeff,' he says,
'I've took to huntin' lions for the bounty now--me and the hounds--and I want to git some thirty-thirtys.'
But after I'd give him all I could spare he goes on to explain how the sheep, not satisfied
with eatin' 'im out of house and home, had gone and tolled all the lions away after 'em--so,
of course, he'll have to foller along, too. You catch that, I reckon."

Creede drooped his eyes significantly and smoked.

"If it hadn't been for old Bill Johnson," he said, "we wouldn't have a live cow on our range
to-day, we'd've been sheeped down that close. When he'd got his ammunition and all the bacon
and coffee I could spare he sat down and told me how he worked it to move all them sheep last
Spring. After he'd made his first big play and see he couldn't save the Pocket he went after
them sheepmen systematically for his revenge. That thirty-thirty of his will shoot nigh onto
two miles if you hold it right, and every time he sees a sheep-camp smoke he Injuned up onto
some high peak and took pot-shots at it. At the distance he was you couldn't hear the report--and,
of course, you couldn't see smokeless powder. He says the way them Mexican herders took to
the rocks was a caution; and when the fireworks was over they didn't wait for orders, jest
rounded up their sheep and hiked!

"And I tell you, pardner," said the big cowman impressively, "after thinkin' this matter over
in the hot sun I've jest about decided to go crazy myself. Yes, sir, the next time I hear a
sheep-blat on Bronco Mesa I'm goin' to tear my shirt gittin' to the high ground with a thirty-thirty;
and if any one should inquire you can tell 'em that your pore friend's mind was deranged by
cuttin' too many palo verdes." He smiled, but there was a sinister glint in his eyes; and as
he rode home that night Hardy saw in the half-jesting words a portent of the never-ending struggle
that would spring up if God ever sent the rain.

On the day after the visit to Carrizo a change came over the sky; a haze that softened the
edges of the hills rose up along the horizon, and the dry wind died away. As Hardy climbed
along the rocky bluffs felling the giant sahuaros down into the ravines for his cattle, the
sweat poured from his face in a stream. A sultry heaviness hung over the land, and at night
as he lay beneath the ramada he saw the lightning, hundreds of miles away, twinkling and playing
along the northern horizon. It was a sign--the promise of summer rain!

In the morning a soft wind came stealing in from the west; a white cloud came up out of nothing
and hovered against the breast of the Peaks; and the summer heat grew terrible. At noon the
cloud turned black and mounted up, its fluffy summit gleaming in the light of the ardent sun;
the wind whirled across the barren mesa, sweeping great clouds of dust before it, and the air
grew damp and cool; then, as evening came on the clouds vanished suddenly and the wind died
down to a calm. For a week the spectacle was repeated--then, at last, as if weary, the storm-wind
refused to blow; the thunder-caps no longer piled up against the Peaks; only the haze endured,
and the silent, suffocating heat.

Day after day dragged by, and without thought or hope Hardy plodded on, felling sahuaros into
the cañons, his brain whirling in the fever of the great heat. Then one day as the sun rose
higher a gigantic mass of thunder-clouds leapt up in the north, covering half the sky. The
next morning they rose again, brilliant, metallic, radiating heat like a cone of fire. The
heavens were crowned with sudden splendor, the gorgeous pageantry of summer clouds that rise
rank upon rank, basking like newborn cherubim in the glorious light of the sun, climbing higher
and higher until they reached the zenith.

A moist breeze sprang up and rushed into the storm's black heart, feeding it with vapors from
the Gulf; then in the south, the home of the rain, another great cloud arose, piling in fluffy
billows against the grim cliffs of the Superstitions and riding against the flying cohorts
that reared their snowy heads in the north. The wind fell and all nature lay hushed and expectant,
waiting for the rain. The cattle would not feed; the bearded ravens sat voiceless against the
cliffs; the gaunt trees and shrubs seemed to hold up their arms--for the rain that did not
come. For after all its pomp and mummery, its black mantle that covered all the sky and the
bravery of its trailing skirts, the Storm, that rode in upon the wind like a king, slunk away
at last like a beaten craven. Its black front melted suddenly, and its draggled banners, trailing
across the western sky, vanished utterly in the kindling fires of sunset.

As he lay beneath the starlit sky that night, Hardy saw a vision of the end, as it would come.
He saw the cañons stripped clean of their high-standing sahuaros, the spring at Carrizo dry,
the river stinking with the bodies of the dead--even Hidden Water quenched at last by the drought.
Then a heavy sleep came upon him as he lay sprawling in the pitiless heat and he dreamed--dreamed
of gaunt steers and lowing cows, and skeletons, strewn along the washes; of labor, never ending,
and sweat, dripping from his face. He woke suddenly with the horror still upon him and gazed
up at the sky, searching vainly for the stars. The night was close and black, there was a stir
among the dead leaves as if a snake writhed past, and the wind breathed mysteriously through
the bare trees; then a confused drumming came to his ears, something warm and wet splashed
against his face, and into his outstretched hand God sent a drop of rain.

CHAPTER XXI

THE FLOOD

The rain came to Hidden Water in great drops, warmed by the sultry air. At the first flurry
the dust rose up like smoke, and the earth hissed; then as the storm burst in tropic fury the
ground was struck flat, the dust-holes caught the rush of water and held it in sudden puddles
that merged into pools and rivulets and glided swiftly away. Like a famine-stricken creature,
the parched earth could not drink; its bone-dry dust set like cement beneath the too generous
flood and refused to take it in--and still the rain came down in sluicing torrents that never
stayed or slackened. The cracked dirt of the ramada roof dissolved and fell away, and the stick
frame leaked like a sieve. The rain wind, howling and rumbling through the framework, hurled
the water to the very door where Hardy stood, and as it touched his face, a wild, animal exultation
overcame him and he dashed out into the midst of it. God, it was good to feel the splash of
rain again, to lean against the wind, and to smell the wet and mud! He wandered about through
it recklessly, now bringing in his saddle and bedding, now going out to talk with his horse,
at last simply standing with his hands outstretched while his whole being gloried in the storm.

As the night wore on and the swash of water became constant, Hardy lay in his blankets listening
to the infinite harmonies that lurk in the echoes of rain, listening and laughing when, out
of the rumble of the storm, there rose the deeper thunder of running waters. Already the rocky
slides were shedding the downpour; the draws and gulches were leading it into the creek. But
above their gurgling murmur there came a hoarser roar that shook the ground, reverberating
through the damp air like the diapason of some mighty storm-piece. At daybreak he hurried up
the cañon to find its source, plunging along through the rain until, on the edge of the bluff
that looked out up the Alamo, he halted, astounded at the spectacle. From its cleft gate Hidden
Water, once so quiet and peaceful, was now vomiting forth mud, rocks, and foaming waters in
one mad torrent; it overleapt the creek, piling up its debris in a solid dam that stretched
from bank to bank, while from its lower side a great sluiceway of yellow water spilled down
into the broad bed of the Alamo.

Above the dam, where the cañon boxed in between perpendicular walls, there lay a great lagoon,
a lake that rose minute by minute as if seeking to override its dam, yet held back by the torrent
of sand and water that Hidden Water threw across its path. For an hour they fought each other,
the Alamo striving vainly to claim its ancient bed, Hidden Water piling higher its hurtling
barrier; then a louder roar reverberated through the valley and a great wall of dancing water
swept down the cañon and surged into the placid lake. On its breast it bore brush and sticks,
and trees that waved their trunks in the air like the arms of some devouring monster as they
swooped down upon the dam. At last the belated waters from above had come, the outpourings
of a hundred mountain creeks that had belched forth into the Alamo like summer cloudbursts.
The forefront of the mighty storm-crest lapped over the presumptuous barrier in one hissing,
high-flung waterfall; then with a final roar the dam went out and, as the bowlders groaned
and rumbled beneath the flood, the Alamo overleapt them and thundered on.

A sudden sea of yellow water spread out over the lower valley, trees bent and crashed beneath
the weight of drift, the pasture fence ducked under and was gone. Still irked by its narrow
bed the Alamo swung away from the rock-bound bench where the ranch house stood and, uprooting
everything before it, ploughed a new channel to the river. As it swirled past, Hardy beheld
a tangled wreckage of cottonwoods and sycamores, their tops killed by the drought, hurried
away on this overplus of waters; the bare limbs of palo verdes, felled by his own axe; and
sun-dried skeletons of cattle, light as cork, dancing and bobbing as they drifted past the ranch.

The drought was broken, and as the rain poured down it washed away all token of the past. Henceforward
there would be no sign to move the uneasy spirit; no ghastly relic, hinting that God had once
forgotten them; only the water-scarred gulches and cañons, and the ricks of driftwood, piled
high along the valleys in memory of the flood. All day the rain sluiced down, and the Alamo
went wild in its might, throwing a huge dam across the broad bed of the river itself. But when
at last in the dead of night the storm-crest of the Salagua burst forth, raging from its long
jostling against chasm walls, a boom like a thunder of cannon echoed from all the high cliffs
by Hidden Water; and the warring waters, bellowing and tumbling in their titanic fury, joined
together in a long, mad race to the sea.

So ended the great flood; and in the morning the sun rose up clean and smiling, making a diamond
of every dew-drop. Then once more the cattle gathered about the house, waiting to be fed, and
Hardy went out as before to cut sahuaros. On the second day the creek went down and the cattle
from the other bank came across, lowing for their share. But on the third day, when the sprouts
began to show on the twining stick-cactus, the great herd that had dogged his steps for months
left the bitter sahuaros and scattered across the mesa like children on a picnic, nipping eagerly
at every shoot.

In a week the flowers were up and every bush was radiant with new growth. The grass crept out
in level places, and the flats in the valley turned green, but the broad expanse of Bronco
Mesa still lay half-barren from paucity of seeds. Where the earth had been torn up and trampled
by the sheep the flood had seized upon both soil and seed and carried them away, leaving nothing
but gravel and broken rocks; the sheep-trails had turned to trenches, the washes to gulches,
the gulches to ravines; the whole mesa was criss-crossed with tiny gullies where the water
had hurried away--but every tree and bush was in its glory, clothed from top to bottom in flaunting
green. Within a week the cattle were back on their old ranges, all that were left from famine
and drought. Some there were that died in the midst of plenty, too weak to regain their strength;
others fell sick from overeating and lost their hard-earned lives; mothers remembered calves
that were lost and bellowed mournfully among the hills. But as rain followed rain and the grass
matured a great peace settled down upon the land; the cows grew round-bellied and sleepy-eyed,
the bulls began to roar along the ridges, and the Four Peaks cattlemen rode forth from their
mountain valleys to see how their neighbors had fared.

They were a hard-looking bunch of men when they gathered at the Dos S Ranch to plan for the
fall rodéo. Heat and the long drought had lined their faces deep, their hands were worn and
crabbed from months of cutting brush, and upon them all was the sense of bitter defeat. There
would be no branding in the pens that Fall--the spring calves were all dead; nor was there
any use in gathering beef steers that were sure to run short weight; there was nothing to do,
in fact, but count up their losses and organize against the sheep. It had been a hard Summer,
but it had taught them that they must stand together or they were lost. There was no one now
who talked of waiting for Forest Reserves, or of diplomacy and peace--every man was for war,
and war from the jump--and Jefferson Creede took the lead.

"Fellers," he said, after each man had had his say, "there's only one way to stop them sheep,
and that is to stop the first band. Never mind the man--dam' a herder, you can buy one for
twenty dollars a month--git the sheep! Now suppose we stompede the first bunch that comes on
our range and scatter 'em to hell--that's fif-teen thousand dol-lars gone! God A'mighty, boys,
think of losin' that much real money when you're on the make like Jim Swope! W'y, Jim would
go crazy, he'd throw a fit--and, more than that, fellers," he added, sinking his voice to a
confidential whisper, "he'd go round.

"Well, now, what ye goin' to do?" he continued, a crafty gleam coming into his eye. "Are we
goin' to foller some cow's tail around until they jump us again? Are we goin' to leave Rufe
here, to patrol a hundred miles of range lone-handed? Not on your life--not me! We're goin'
to ride this range by day's works, fellers, and the first bunch of sheep we find we're goin'
to scatter 'em like shootin' stars--and if any man sees Jasp Swope I'll jest ask him to let
me know. Is it a go? All right--and I'll tell you how we'll do.

"There's only three places that the sheep can get in on us: along the Alamo, over the Juate,
or around between the Peaks. Well, the whole caboodle of us will camp up on the Alamo somewhere,
and we'll jest naturally ride them three ridges night and day. I'm goin' to ask one of you
fellers to ride away up north and foller them sheepmen down, so they can't come a circumbendibus
on us again. I'm goin' to give 'em fair warnin' to keep off of our upper range, and then the
first wool-pullin' sheep-herder that sneaks in on Bronco Mesa is goin' to git the scare of
his life--and the coyotes is goin' to git his sheep.

"That's the only way to stop 'em! The beautiful cottage where we were sojourning was situated
about three thousand feet above the level of the sea, and half way up the great prong of the
Blue Mountains, known by the name of the Liguanea range, which rises behind, and overhangs the
city of Kingston.

The road to it, after you have ridden about five miles over the hot plain of Liguanea, brings
you to Hope estate, where an anatomy of an old watchman greeted me with the negro's constant
solicitation--"Massa, me beg you for one fee--penny." This youth was, as authentic records
show, one hundred and forty years old only.--The Hope is situated in the very gorge of the
pass, wherein you have to travel nine miles farther, through most magnificent scenery; at one time
struggling among the hot stones of the all but dry river--course; at others, winding along
the breezy cliffs, on mule--paths not twelve inches wide, with a perpendicular wall of rock rising
five hundred feet above you on one side, while a dark gulf, a thousand
feet deep, yawned on the other, from the bottom of which arose the
hoarse murmur of the foliage--screened brook.

Noble trees spread their boughs overhead, and the most beautiful
shrubs and bushes grew and blossomed close at hand, and all was moist,
and cool, and fresh, until you turned the bare pinnacle of some limestone--rock,
naked as the summit of the Andes, where the hot sun, even through
the thin attenuated air of that altitude, would suddenly blaze on
you so fiercely, that your eyes were blinded and your face blistered,
as if you had been suddenly transported within the influence of a
sirocco.

Well, now, since you know the road, let us take a walk after breakfast. It shall be a beautiful
clear day--not a speck or cloud in the heavens. Mary is with me.

"Well, Tom," says she, "you were very sentimental last evening."

"Sentimental! I was deucedly sick, let me tell you--a wineglassful of cold catchup is rather
trying even to a lover's stomach, Mary.

Murder, I never was so sick, even in my first cruise in the old Breeze! Bah! Do you know I
did not think of you for an hour afterwards?--not until that bumper of brandy stayed my calamity.
But come, when shall we be married, Maria? Oh! have done with your blushing and botheration
tomorrow or next day? It would not be quite the thing this evening, would it?"

"Tom, you are crazy. Time enough, surely, when we all meet in England."

"And when may that be?" said I, drawing her arm closer through mine. "No, no--tomorrow I will
call on the admiral; and as you are all going to England in the fleet at any rate, I will
ask his leave to give you a passage."

All of which, as I said before, being parish news, we shall drop a veil over it--so a small touch
at the scenery again.

Immediately under foot rose several lower ranges of mountains those nearest us, covered with the
laurel--looking coffee--bushes, interspersed with negro villages hanging amongst the fruit--trees
like clusters of birds nests on the hillside, with a bright green
patch of plantain suckers here and there, and a white painted overseer's
house peeping from out the wood, and herds of cattle in the Guinea--grass
pieces.

Beyond these, stretched out the lovely plain of Liguanea, covered with luxuriant cane--pieces,
and groups of negro houses, and Guinea--grass pastures of even a deeper green than that of
the canes; and small towns of sugar--works rose every here and there, with their threads of white
smoke floating up into the clear sky, while, as the plain receded, the cultivation disappeared,
and it gradually became sterile, hot, and sandy, until the Long Mountain hove its back like
a whale from out the sea--like level of the plain; while to the right
of it appeared the city of Kingston, like a model, with its parade,
or place d'armes, in the centre, from which its long lines of hot
sandy streets stretched out at right angles, with the military post
of Up park camp, situated about a mile and a half to the northward
and eastward of the town.

Through a tolerably good glass, the church spire looked like a needle, the trees about the houses
like bushes, the tall cocoa--nut trees like harebells; a slow crawling black speck here and
there denoted a carriage moving along, while waggons, with their teams of eighteen and twenty
oxen, looked like so many centipedes. At the camp, the two regiments drawn out on parade, with
two nine--pounders on each flank, and their attendant gunners, looked like a red sparkling line,
with two black spots at each end, surrounded by small black dots. Presently the red line wavered,
and finally broke up, as the regiments wheeled into open column, when the whole fifteen hundred
men crawled past three little scarlet spots, denoting the general and his staff. When they began
to manoeuvre, each company looked like a single piece in a game at chess; and as they fired
by companies, the little tiny puffs of smoke floated up like wreaths of wool, suddenly surmounting
and overlaying the red lines, while the light companies breaking
away into skirmishers, seemed, for all the world, like two red bricks
suddenly cast down, and shattered on the ground, whereby the fragments
were scattered all over the green fields, and under the noble trees,
the biggest of which looked like small cabbages.

At length the line was again formed, and the inspection being over, it broke up once more,
and the minute red fragments presently vanished altogether like a nest of ants, the guns, looking
like so many barleycorns, under the long lines of barracks, that looked no bigger than houses in
a child's toy. As for the other arm, we of the navy had no reason to glorify ourselves. For,
while the review proceeded on shore, a strange man--of--war hove in sight in the offing, looming
like a mussel--shell, although she was a forty--four--gun frigate, and ran down before the
wind, close to the Palisadoes, or natural tongue of land, which juts out like a bow from Rock
Fort, to the eastward of Kingston, and hoops in the harbour, and then lengthens out, trending
about five miles due west, where it widens out into a sandy flat, on which the town and forts
of Port Royal are situated. She was saluting the admiral when I first saw her. A red spark and a small
puff on the starboard side--a puff, but no spark, on the larboard, which was the side farthest from
us, but no report from either reached our ears; and presently down
came the little red flag, and up went the St George's ensign, white,
with a red cross, while the sails of the gallant craft seemed about
the size of those of a little schoolboy's plaything.

After a short interval, the flag ship, a seventy four, lying at Port Royal, returned the salute.
She, again, appeared somewhat loftier; she might have been an oyster--shell; while the squadron
of four frigates, two sloops of war, and several brigs and schooners, looked like ants in the wake
of a beetle. As for the dear little Wave, I can compare her to nothing but a musquitto, and the
large 500--ton West Indiamen lying off Kingston, five miles nearer, were but as small cock--boats
to the eye. In the offing the sea appeared like ice, for the waves were not seen at all, and
the swell could only be marked by the difference in the reflection of the sun's rays as it
rose and fell, while a hot haze hung over the whole, making every
thing indistinct, so that the water blended into sky, without the
line of demarcation being visible.

But even as we looked forth on this most glorious scene, a small black cloud rose to windward. At
this time we were both sitting on the grass on a most beautiful bank, beneath an orange--tree--the
ominous appearance increased in size--the sea breeze was suddenly stifled--the swelling sails
of the frigate that had first saluted, fell, and, as she rolled, flattened in against the masts
the rustling of the green leaves overhead ceased.

The cloud rolled onward from the east, and spread out, and out, as it sailed in from seaward,
and on, and on, until it gradually covered the whole scene from our view, (shipping, and harbour,
and town, and camp, and sugar estates,) boiling and rolling in black eddies under our feet.
Anon the thunder began to grumble, and the zigzag lightning to fork out from one dark mass
into another, while all, where we sat, was bright and smiling under
the unclouded noon--day sun.

This continued for half an hour, when at length the sombre appearance of the clouds below us
brightened into a sea of white fleecy vapour like wool, which gradually broke away into detached
masses, discovering another layer of still thinner vapour underneath,
which again parted, disclosing through the interstices a fresh gauze--like
veil of transparent mist, through which the lower ranges of hills,
and the sugar estates, and the town and shipping, were once more dimly
visible; but this in turn vanished, and the clouds, attracted by the
hills, floated away, and hung around them in festoons, and gradually
rose and rose until presently we were enveloped in mist, and Mary
spoke.

"Tom, there will be thunder here what shall we do?"

"Poo, never mind. Mary, you have a conductor on the house."

"True," said she; "but the servants, when the post that supported it was blown down t'other day,
very judiciously unlinked the rods, and now, since I remember me,
they are, to use your phrase, 'stowed away' below the house;" and
so they were, sure enough.

However, we had no more thunder, and soon the only indications of the spent storm were the
red discoloured appearance of the margin of the harbour, from the rush of muddy water off the
land, and the chocolate colour of the previously snow--white sandy roads, that now twisted through
the plain like black snakes, and a fleecy dolphin--shaped cloud here
and there stretching out, and floating horizontally in the blue sky,
as if it had been hooked to the precipitous mountain tops above us.

Next day it was agreed that we should all return to Kingston, and the day after that, we proceeded
to Mr Bangs's Pen, on the Spanish Town road, as a sort of halfway
house, or stepping stone to his beautiful residence in St Thomas in
the Vale, where we were all invited to spend a fortnight.

Our friend himself was on the other side of the island, but he was to join us in the valley, and we
found our comforts carefully attended to; and as the day after we had set up our tent at the Pen was
to be one of rest to my aunt, I took the opportunity of paying my respects to the admiral,
who was then careening at his mountain retreat in the vicinity with his family. Accordingly, I took
horse, and rode along the margin of the great lagoon, on the Spanish Town road, through tremendous
defiles; and after being driven into a watchman's hut by the rain, I reached the house, and
was most graciously received by Sir Samuel Semaphore and his lady, and their lovely daughters. Oh, the
most splendid women that ever were built! The youngest is now, I believe, the prime ornament
of the Scottish Peerage; and I never can forget the pleasure I so frequently experienced in
those days in the society of this delightful family. The same evening I returned to the Pen. On
my way I fell in with three officers in white jackets, and broad--brimmed
straw hats, wading up to the waist amongst the reeds of the lagoon,
with guns held high above their heads.

They were shooting ducks, it seemed; and their negro servants were heard ploutering and shouting
amidst the thickets of the crackling reeds, while their dogs were swimming all about them.

"Hillo!" shouted the nearest--"Cringle, my lad--whither bound? how is Sir Samuel and Lady Semaphore,
eh? Capital sport, ten brace of teal there"--and the spokesman threw
two beautiful birds ashore to me.

This wise man of the bulrushes was no less a personage than Sir Jeremy Mayo, the commander of the
forces, one of the bravest fellows in the army, and respected and beloved by all who ever knew
him, but a regular dare devil of an Irishman, who, not satisfied with his chance of yellow fever
on shore, had thus chosen to hunt for it with his staff, in the Caymanas Lagoon.

Next morning, we set out in earnest on our travels for St Thomas in the Vale, in two of our friend
Bang's gigs, and my aunt's ketureen, laden with her black maiden and a lot of bandboxes, while
two mounted servants brought up the rear, and my old friend Jupiter, who had descended, not
from the clouds, but from the excellent Mr Fyall, who was by this
time gathered to his fathers, to Massa Aaron, rode a musket shot ahead
of the convoy to clear away, or give notice of any impediments, of
wagons or carts, or droves of cattle, that might be meeting us.

After driving five miles or so, we reached the seat of government, Spanish Town. Here we stopped
at the Speaker's house--by the way, one of the handsomest and most agreeable men I ever saw--intending
to proceed in the afternoon to our destination.

But the rain in the forenoon fell so heavily, that we had to delay our journey until next morning;
and that afternoon I spent in attending the debates in the House. of Assembly, where every thing
was conducted with much greater decorum than I ever saw maintained in the House of Commons,
and no great daring in the assertion either. The Hall itself, fitted with polished mahogany
benches, was handsome and well aired, and between it and the grand court, as it is called, occupying
the other end of the building, which was then sitting, there is a large cool saloon, generally
in term time well filled with wigless lawyers and their clients. The House of Assembly (this
saloon and the court--house forming one side of the square) is situated over against the Government
House; while another side is occupied by a very handsome temple, covering in a statue erected
to Lord Rodney, the saviour of the Island, as he is always called, from having crushed the
fleet of Count de Grasse.

At length, at grey--dawn the next day, as the report of the morning gun came booming along the level
plain from Port Royal, we weighed and finally started on our cruise. As we drove up towards
St Thomas in the Vale, from Spanish Town, along the hot sandy road, the plain gradually roughened
into small rocky eminences, covered with patches of bushes here and there, with luxuriant Guinea--grass
growing in the clefts; the road then sank between abrupt little hills the Guinea corn fields began to disappear,
the grass became greener, the trees rose higher, the air felt fresher
and cooler, and proceeding still farther, the hills on either side
swelled into mountains, and became rocky and precipitous, and drew
together, as it were, until they appeared to impend over us.

We had now arrived at the gorge of the pass, leading into the valley, through which flowed a most
beautiful limpid clear blue stream, along the margin of which the road wound, while the tree--clothed
precipices rose five hundred feet perpendicularly on each brink. Presently we crossed a wooden
bridge, supported by a stone pier in the centre, when Jupiter pricked a--head to give notice
of the approach of waggons, that our cavalcade might haul up, out
of danger, into some nook in the rock, to allow the lumbersome teams
to pass.

"What is that?"--I was driving my dearie in the leading gig--"is that
a pistol shot?"

It was the crack of the long whip carried by the negro waggoner, reverberated from hill to hill,
and from cliff to cliff; and presently the father of gods came thundering
down the steep acclivity we were ascending.

"Massa, draw up into dat corner; draw up."

I did as I was desired, and presently the shrill whistle of the negro waggoners, and the increasing
sharpness of the reports of their loud whips, the handles of which were as long as fishing--rods,
and their wild exclamations to their cattle, to whom they addressed themselves by name, as
if they had been reasonable creatures, gave notice of the near approach of a train of no fewer
than seven waggons, each with three drivers, eighteen oxen, three hogsheads of sugar, and
two puncheons of rum.

Come, thought I--if the negroes are overworked, it is more than the bullocks are, at all events.
They passed us with abundance of yelling and cracking, and as soon as the coast was clear, we
again pursued our way up the ravine, than which nothing could be more beautiful or magnificent.
On our right hand now rose, almost perpendicularly, the everlasting rocks, to a height of
a thousand feet, covered with the richest foliage that imagination
can picture, while here and there a sharp steeple--like pinnacle of
grey--stone, overgrown with lichens, shot up, and out from the face
of them, into the blue sky, mixing with the tall forest trees that
overhung the road, festooned with ivy and withes of different kinds,
like the rigging of a ship, round which the tendrils of many a beautiful
wild--flower crept twining up, while all was fresh with the sparkling
dew that showered down on us, with every breath of wind, like rain.

On our left foamed the roaring river, and on the other brink the opposite bank rose equally precipitously,
clothed also with superb trees, that spread their blending boughs over the chasm, until they
wove themselves together with those that grew on the side we were on, qualifying the noonday
fierceness of a Jamaica sun into a green cool twilight, while the long misty reaches of the
blue river, with white foaming rapids here and there, and the cattle wading in them, lengthened
out beneath in the distance. Oh! the very look of it refreshed one unspeakably.

Presently a group of half--a--dozen country Buccras--overseers, or
coffee--planters, most likely, or possibly larger fish than either--hove
in sight, all in their blue--white jean trowsers, and long Hessian
boots pulled up over them, and new blue square--cut, bright--buttoned
coatees, and thread--bare silk broad--brimmed hats.

They dashed past us on goodish nags, followed at a distance of three
hundred yards by a covey of negro--servants, mounted on mules, in
white Osnaburg trowsers, with a shirt or frock over them, no stockings,
each with one spur, and the stirrup--iron held firmly between the
great and second toes, while a snow--white sheep's fleece covered
their massas portmanteaus, strapped on to the mail pillion behind.

We drove on for about seven miles, after entering the pass, the whole scenery of which was
by far the finest thing I had ever seen, the precipices on each side
becoming more and more rugged and abrupt as we advanced, until all
at once we emerged from the chasm on the parish of St Thomas in the
Vale, which opened on us like a magical illusion, in all its green
luxuriance and freshness.

But by this time we were deucedly tired, and Massa Aaron's mansion,
situated on its little airy hill above a sea of canes, which rose
and fell before the passing breeze like the waves of the ocean, was
the most consolatory object in the view; and thither we drove is fast
as our wearied horses could carry us, and found every thing most carefully
prepared for our reception.

Having dressed, we had a glorious dinner, lots of good wine; and, the happiest of the happy,
I tumbled into bed, dreaming of leading a division of line--of--battle
ships into action, and of Mary, and of our eldest son being my first
lieutenant.

"Massa"--quoth Jupiter--"you take cup of coffee, dis marning, massa?"

"Thank you--certainly."

It was by this time grey dawn. My window had been left open the evening before, when it was hot
and sultry enough, but it was now cold and damp, and a wetting mist boiled in through the open
sash, like rolling wreaths of white smoke.

"What is that--where are we in the North Sea, or on the top of Mont Blanc? Why, clouds may be
all in your way, Massa Jupiter, but."

"Cloud!" rejoined the Deity--"him no more den marning fag, massa; always hab him over de Vale
in de morning, until de sun melt him. And where is you?--why, you is in Massa Aaron house, here
in St Thomas in de Vale--and Miss."

"Miss"--said I--"what Miss?"

"Oh, for you Miss," rejoined Jupiter with a grin, "Miss Mary up and dress already, and de horses
are at de door; him wait for you to ride wid him before breakfast, massa, and to see de clearing
of de fag."

"Ride before breakfast!--see the clearing of the fog!" grumbled I.
"Romantic it may be, but consumedly inconvenient."

However, my knighthood was at stake; so up I got, drank my coffee, dressed, and adjourned to the
piazza, where my adorable was all ready rigged with riding--habit
and whip; straightway we mounted, she into her side saddle with her
riding--habit, and who knows how many petticoats beneath her, while
I, Pilgarlic, embarked in thin jean trowsers upon a cold, damp, indeed
wet, saddle, that made me shiver again.

But I was understood to be in love; ergo, I was expected to be agreeable. However, a damp
saddle and a thin pair of trowsers allays one's ardour a good deal too. But if any one had seen
the impervious fog in which we sat--why, you could not see a tree three yards from you--a cabbage
looked like a laurel bush, and Sneezer became a dromedary, and the negroes passing the little
gate to their work were absolute Titans.

Boom, a long reverberating noise thundered in the distance, and amongst the hills, gradually dying
away in a hollow rumble.

"The admiral tumbling down the hatchway, Tom--the morning gun fired at Port Royal," said Mary;
and so it was.

The fire--flies were still glancing amongst the leaves of the beautiful
orange--trees in front of the house; but we could see no farther,
the whole view being shrouded under the thick watery veil which rolled
and boiled about us, sometimes thick, and sometimes thinner; hovering
between a mist and small rain, and wetting ones hair, and face, and
clothes, most completely.

We descended from the eminence on which the house stood, rode along the level at the foot of
it, and, after a canter of a couple of miles, we began to ascend
a bridle--path, through the Guinea--grass pastures, which rose rank
and soaking wet, as high as one's saddlebow, drenching me to the skin,
in the few patches where I was not wet before.

All this while the fog continued as thick as ever; at length we suddenly rose above it--rode out
of it, as it were.
 Every tree
and plant on that broad range was barbed and fanged against assault; every creature that could
not flee was armed for its own defence; it was a land of war, where the strongest always won.
What need was there for words? Juan Alvarez was dead, shot from some distant peak while rounding
up his sheep--and his sheep, too, were dead.

They buried the boss herder under a pile of rocks on Lookout Point and planted a cross above
him, not for its Christian significance, nor yet because Juan was a good Catholic, but for
the Mexicans to look at in the Spring, when the sheep should come to cross. Jim Swope attended
to this himself, after the coroner had given over the body, and for a parting word he cursed
Jeff Creede.

Then for a day the world took notice of their struggle--the great outside world that had left
them to fight it out. Three thousand head of sheep had been killed; mutton enough to feed a
great city for a day had been destroyed--and all in a quarrel over public land. The word crept
back to Washington, stripped to the bare facts--three thousand sheep and their herder killed
by cattlemen on the proposed Salagua Reserve--and once more the question rose, Why was not
that Salagua Reserve proclaimed? No one answered. There was another sheep and cattle war going
on up in Wyoming, and the same question was being asked about other proposed reserves. But
when Congress convened in December the facts began to sift out: there was a combination of
railroad and lumber interests, big cattlemen, sheepmen, and "land-grabbers" that was "against
any interference on the part of the Federal Government," and "opposed to any change of existing
laws and customs as to the grazing of live stock upon the public domain." This anomalous organization
was fighting, and for years had been fighting, the policy of the administration to create forest
reserves and protect the public land; and, by alliances with other anti-administration forces
in the East, had the President and his forester at their mercy. There would be no forestry
legislation that Winter--so the newspapers said. But that made no difference to the Four Peaks
country.

Only faint echoes of the battle at Washington reached the cowmen's ears, and they no longer
gave them any heed. For years they had been tolled along by false hopes; they had talked eagerly
of Forest Rangers to draw two-mile circles around their poor ranches and protect them from
the sheep; they had longed to lease the range, to pay grazing fees, anything for protection.
But now they had struck the first blow for themselves, and behold, on the instant the sheep
went round, the grass crept back onto the scarred mesa, the cattle grew fat on the range! Juan
Alvarez, to be sure, was dead; but their hands were clean, let the sheepmen say what they would.
What were a few sheep carcasses up on the high mesa? They only matched the cattle that had
died off during the drought. When they met a sheep-herder now he gave them the trail.

Tucked away in a far corner of the Territory, without money, friends, or influence, there was
nothing for it but to fight. All nature seemed conspiring to encourage them in their adventure--the
Winter came on early, with heavy rains; the grass took root again among the barren rocks and
when, in a belated rodéo, they gathered their beef steers, they received the highest selling
price in years. All over Arizona, and in California, New Mexico, and Texas, the great drought
had depleted the ranges; the world's supply of beef had been cut down; feeders were scarce
in the alfalfa fields of Moroni; fat cattle were called for from Kansas City to Los Angeles;
and suddenly the despised cowmen of the Four Peaks saw before them the great vision which always
hangs at the end of the rainbow in Arizona--a pot of gold, if the sheep went around. And what
would make the sheep go around? Nothing but a thirty-thirty.

The price of mutton had gone up too, adding a third to the fortune of every sheepman; the ewes
were lambing on the desert, bringing forth a hundred per cent or better, with twins--and every
lamb must eat! To the hundred thousand sheep that had invaded Bronco Mesa there was added fifty
thousand more, and they must all eat. It was this that the sheepmen had foreseen when they
sent Juan Alvarez around to raid the upper range--not that they needed the feed then, but they
would need it in the Spring, and need it bad. So they had tried to break the way and, failing,
had sworn to come in arms. It was a fight for the grass, nothing less, and there was no law
to stop it.

As the news of the trouble filtered out and crept into obscure corners of the daily press,
Hardy received a long hortatory letter from Judge Ware; and, before he could answer it, another.
To these he answered briefly that the situation could only be relieved by some form of Federal
control; that, personally, his sympathies were with the cattlemen, but, in case the judge was
dissatisfied with his services--But Judge Ware had learned wisdom from a past experience and
at this point he turned the correspondence over to Lucy. Then in a sudden fit of exasperation
he packed his grip and hastened across the continent to Washington, to ascertain for himself
why the Salagua Forest Reserve was not proclaimed. As for Lucy, her letters were as carefully
considered as ever--she wrote of everything except the sheep and Kitty Bonnair. Not since she
went away had she mentioned Kitty, nor had Hardy ever inquired about her. In idle moments he
sometimes wondered what had been in that unread letter which he had burned with Creede's, but
he never wrote in answer, and his heart seemed still and dead. For years the thought of Kitty
Bonnair had haunted him, rising up in the long silence of the desert; in the rush and hurry
of the round-up the vision of her supple form, the laughter of her eyes, the succession of
her moods, had danced before his eyes in changing pictures, summoned up from the cherished
past; but now his mind was filled with other things. Somewhere in the struggle against sheep
and the drought he had lost her, as a man loses a keep-sake which he has carried so long against
his heart that its absence is as unnoticed as its presence, and he never knows himself the
poorer. After the drought had come the sheep, the stampede, fierce quarrels with the Swopes,
threats and counter-threats--and then the preparations for war. The memory of the past faded
away and another thought now haunted his mind, though he never spoke it--when the time came,
would he fight, or would he stay with Lucy and let Jeff go out alone? It was a question never
answered, but every day he rode out without his gun, and Creede took that for a sign.

As the Rio Salagua, swollen with winter rains, rose up like a writhing yellow serpent and cast
itself athwart the land, it drew a line from east to west which neither sheep nor cattle could
cross, and the cowmen who had lingered about Hidden Water rode gayly back to their distant
ranches, leaving the peaceful Dos S where Sallie Winship had hung her cherished lace curtains
and Kitty Bonnair and Lucy Ware had made a home, almost a total wreck. Sheep, drought, and
flood had passed over it in six months' time; the pasture fence was down, the corrals were
half dismantled, and the bunk-room looked like a deserted grading camp. For a week Creede and
Hardy cleaned up and rebuilt, but every day, in spite of his partner's efforts to divert his
mind, Jeff grew more restless and uneasy. Then one lonely evening he went over to the corner
where his money was buried and began to dig.

"What--the--hell--is the matter with this place?" he exclaimed, looking up from his work as
if he expected the roof to drop. "Ever since Tommy died it gits on my nerves, bad." He rooted
out his tomato can and stuffed a roll of bills carelessly into his overalls pocket. "Got any
mail to go out?" he inquired, coming back to the fire, and Hardy understood without more words
that Jeff was going on another drunk.

"Why, yes," he said, "I might write a letter to the boss. But how're you going to get across
the river--she's running high now."

"Oh, I'll git across the river, all right," grumbled Creede. "Born to be hung and ye can't
git drowned, as they say. Well, give the boss my best." He paused, frowning gloomily into the
fire. "Say," he said, his voice breaking a little, "d'ye ever hear anything from Miss Bonnair?"

For a moment Hardy was silent. Then, reading what was in his partner's heart, he answered gently:

"Not a word, Jeff."

The big cowboy sighed and grinned cynically.

"That was a mighty bad case I had," he observed philosophically. "But d'ye know what was the
matter with me? Well, I never tumbled to it till afterward, but it was jest because she was
like Sallie--talked like her and rode like her, straddle, that way. But I wanter tell you,
boy," he added mournfully, "Sal had a heart."

He sank once more into sombre contemplation, grumbling as he nursed his wounds, and at last
Hardy asked him a leading question about Sallie Winship.

"Did I ever hear from 'er?" repeated Creede, rousing up from his reverie. "No, and it ain't
no use to try. I wrote to her three times, but I never got no answer--I reckon the old lady
held 'em out on her. She wouldn't stand for no bow-legged cowpuncher--and ye can't blame her
none, the way old man Winship used to make her cook for them rodéo hands--but Sallie would've
answered them letters if she'd got 'em."

"But where were they living in St. Louis?" persisted Hardy. "Maybe you got the wrong address."

"Nope, I got it straight--Saint Louie, Mo., jest the way you see it in these money-order catalogues."

"But didn't you give any street and number?" cried Hardy, aghast. "Why, for Heaven's sake,
Jeff, there are half a million people in St. Louis--she'd never get it in the world."

"No?" inquired Creede apathetically. "Well, it don't make no difference, then. I don't amount
to a dam', anyhow--and this is no place for a woman--but, by God, Rufe, I do git awful lonely
when I see you writin' them letters to the boss. If I only had somebody that cared for me I'd
prize up hell to make good. I'd do anything in God's world--turn back them sheep or give up
my six-shooter, jest as she said; but, nope, they's no such luck for Jeff Creede--he couldn't
make a-winnin' with a squaw."

"Jeff," said Hardy quietly, "how much would you give to get a letter from Sallie?"

"What d'ye mean?" demanded Creede, looking up quickly. Then, seeing the twinkle in his partner's
eye, he made a grab for his money. "My whole wad," he cried, throwing down the roll. "What's
the deal?"

"All right," answered Hardy, deliberately counting out the bills, "there's the ante--a hundred
dollars. The rest I hold back for that trip to St. Louis. This hundred goes to the Rinkerton
Detective Agency, St. Louis, Missouri, along with a real nice letter that I'll help you write;
and the minute they deliver that letter into the hands of Miss Sallie Winship, formerly of
Hidden Water, Arizona, and return an answer, there's another hundred coming to 'em. Is it a go?"

"Pardner," said Creede, rising up solemnly from his place, "I want to shake with you on that."

The next morning, with a package of letters in the crown of his black hat, Jefferson Creede
swam Bat Wings across the swift current of the Salagua, hanging onto his tail from behind,
and without even stopping to pour the water out of his boots struck into the long trail for Bender.

One week passed, and then another, and at last he came back, wet and dripping from his tussle
with the river, and cursing the very name of detectives.

"W'y, shucks!" he grumbled. "I bummed around in town there for two weeks, hatin' myself and
makin' faces at a passel of ornery sheepmen, and what do I git for my trouble? 'Dear Mister
Creede, your letter of umpty-ump received. We have detailed Detective Moriarty on this case
and will report later. Yours truly!' That's all--keep the change--we make a livin' off of suckers--and
they's one born every minute. To hell with these detectives! Well, I never received nothin'
more and finally I jumped at a poor little bandy-legged sheep-herder, a cross between a gorilla
and a Digger Injun--scared him to death. But I pulled my freight quick before we had any international
complications. Don't mention Mr. Allan Q. Rinkerton to me, boy, or I'll throw a fit. Say,"
he said, changing the subject abruptly, "how many hundred thousand sheep d'ye think I saw,
comin' up from Bender? Well, sir, they was sheep as far as the eye could see--millions of 'em--and
they've got that plain et down to the original sand and cactus, already. W'y, boy, if we let
them sheepmen in on us this Spring we'll look like a watermelon patch after a nigger picnic;
we'll be cleaned like Pablo Moreno; they won't be pickin's for a billy goat! And Jim 'n' Jasp
have been ribbin' their herders on scandalous. This little bandy-legged son-of-a-goat that
I jumped at down in Bender actually had the nerve to say that I killed Juan Alvarez myself.
Think of that, will ye, and me twenty miles away at the time! But I reckon if you took Jasp
to pieces you'd find out he was mad over them three thousand wethers--value six dollars per--that
I stompeded. The dastard! D'ye see how he keeps away from me? Well, I'm goin' to call the rodéo
right away and work that whole upper range, and when the river goes down you'll find Jeff Creede
right there with the goods if Jasp is lookin' for trouble. Read them letters, boy, and tell
me if I'm goin' to have the old judge on my hands, too."

According to the letters, he was; and the boss was also looking forward with pleasure to her
visit in the Spring.

"Well, wouldn't that jar you," commented Creede, and then he laughed slyly. "Cheer up," he
said, "it might be worse--they's nothin' said about Kitty Bonnair."

Sure enough--not a word about Kitty, and the year before Lucy had spoken about her in every
letter! There was something mysterious about it, and sinister; they both felt it.

And when at last the wagon came in, bearing only Judge Ware and Lucy, somehow even Jeff's sore
heart was touched by a sense of loss. But while others might dissemble, Bill Lightfoot's impulsive
nature made no concealment of its chiefest thought.

"Where's Miss Bunnair?" he demanded, as soon as Lucy Ware was free, and there was a sudden
lull in the conversation roundabout as the cowboys listened for the answer.

"I'm sorry," said Miss Ware, politely evasive, "but she wasn't able to come with me."

"She'll be down bimeby, though, won't she?" persisted Lightfoot; and when Lucy finally answered
with a vague "Perhaps" he turned to the assembled cowboys with a triumphant grin. "Um, now,
what'd I tell you!" he said; and one and all they scowled and stabbed him with their eyes.

The rodéo camp was already established beneath the big mesquite, and while three or four careless
cowmen held the day herd over against the mesa the rest of the outfit was busy raking The Rolls.
It was all very different from what Judge Ware and Lucy had anticipated. There was no sign
of excitement in their midst, no ostentatious display of arms or posting of patrols, and what
surprised the judge most of all was that in their friendly gatherings around the fire there
was no one, save Hardy, who would argue against the sheep.

The judge had been on to Washington and was possessed of all the material facts, but nobody
was interested any more in the Salagua Forest Reserve; he had consulted with the Chief Forester
and even with the President himself, laying before them the imminence of the danger, and they
had assured him that everything possible would be done to relieve the situation. Did it not,
then, he demanded, behoove the law-abiding residents of prospective forest reserves to coöperate
with such an enlightened administration, even at the risk of some temporary personal loss?
And with one voice the Four Peaks cowmen agreed that it did. There was something eerie about
it--the old judge was dazed by their acquiescence.

Of all the cowmen at Hidden Water, Rufus Hardy was the only man who would discuss the matter
at length. A change had come over him now; he was very thin and quiet, with set lines along
his jaw, but instead of riding nervously up and down the river as he had the year before he
lingered idly about the ranch, keeping tally at the branding and entertaining his guests. No
matter how pedantic or polemical the old judge became, Hardy was willing to listen to him;
and Lucy, hovering in the background, would often smile to hear them argue, the judge laying
down the law and equity of the matter and Rufus meeting him like an expert swordsman with parry
and thrust. Day by day, his prejudice wearing away from lack of any real opposition, Judge
Ware became more and more pleased with his daughter's superintendent; but Lucy herself was
troubled. There was a look in his eyes that she had never seen before, a set and haggard stare
that came when he sat alone, and his head was always turned aside, as if he were listening.
The sheep came trooping in from the south, marching in long lines to the river's edge, and
still he sat quiet, just inside the door, listening.

"Tell me, Rufus," she said, one day when her father was inspecting the upper range with Creede,
"what is it that made you so sad? Is it--Kitty?"

For a minute he gazed at her, a faint smile on his lips.

"No," he said, at last, "it is not Kitty." And then he lapsed back into silence, his head turned
as before.

The wind breathed through the corredor, bringing with it a distant, plaintive bleating--the
sheep, waiting beyond the turbid river to cross.

"I have forgotten about Kitty," he said absently. "For me there is nothing in the world but
sheep. Can't you hear them bleating down there?" he cried, throwing out his hands. "Can't you
smell them? Ah, Lucy, if you knew sheep as I do! I never hear a sheep now that I don't think
of that day last year when they came pouring out of Hell's Hip Pocket with a noise like the
end of the world. If I had been there to stop them they might never have taken the range--but
after that, all through the hot summer when the cattle were dying for feed, every time the
wind came up and roared in my ears I would hear sheep--baaa, baaa--and now I hear them again."

He paused and looked up at her intently.

"Do you know what that noise means to me?" he demanded, almost roughly. "It means little calves
dying around the water hole; mothers lowing for their little ones that they have left to starve;
it means long lines of cows following me out over the mesa for brush, and all the trees cut
down. Ah, Lucy, how can your father talk of waiting when it means as much as that?"

"But last year was a drought," protested Lucy pitifully. "Will it be as bad this year?"

"Every bit! Did you notice that plain between Bender and the river? It will be like that in
a week if we let them cross the river."

"Oh," cried Lucy, "then you--do you mean to turn them back?"

"The river is very high," answered Hardy sombrely. "They cannot cross." And then as a quail
strikes up leaves and dust to hide her nest, he launched forth quickly upon a story of the flood.

The Salagua was long in flood that Spring. Day after day, while the sheep wandered uneasily
along its banks rearing up to strip the last remnants of browse from the tips of willows and
burro bushes, it rolled ponderously forth from its black-walled gorge and flowed past the crossing,
deep and strong, sucking evenly into the turbid whirlpool that waited for its prey. At the
first approach of the invaders the unconsidered zeal of Judge Ware overcame him; he was for
peace, reason, the saner judgment that comes from wider views and a riper mind, and, fired
by the hope of peaceful truce, he rode furtively along the river waving a white handkerchief
whenever he saw a sheep-herder, and motioning him to cross. But however anxious he was for
an interview the desires of the sheepmen did not lean in that direction, and they only stared
at him stolidly or pretended not to see.

Thwarted in his efforts for peace the judge returned to camp deep in thought. The sheep were
at his very door and nothing had been done to stay them; a deadly apathy seemed to have settled
down upon the cowmen; after all their threats there were no preparations for defence; the river
was not even patrolled; and yet if quick action was not taken the upper range might be irreparably
ruined before the reserve was proclaimed. Not that he would countenance violence, but a judicious
show of resistance, for instance, might easily delay the crossing until the President could
act, or even so daunt the invaders that they would go around. It was not strictly legal, of
course, but the judge could see no harm in suggesting it, and as soon as the cowmen were gathered
about their fire that evening he went out and sat down by Creede, who lay sprawled on his back,
his head pillowed on his hands, smoking.

"Well, Jefferson," he began, feeling his way cautiously, "I see that the sheep have come down
to the river--they will be making a crossing soon, I suppose?"

Creede sucked studiously upon his cigarette, and shifted it to a corner of his mouth.

"W'y yes, Judge," he said, "I reckon they will."

"Well--er--do you think they intend to invade our upper range this year?"

"Sure thing," responded Creede, resuming his smoke, "that's what they come up here for. You
want to take a last long look at this grass." 

16. In a flying machine, the combination, with two superposed and connected aeroplanes, of an
arm extending rearward from each aeroplane, said arms being parallel
and free to swing upward at their rear ends, and a vertical rudder
pivotally mounted in the rear ends of said arms, substantially as
described.

17. A flying machine comprising two superposed aeroplanes, normally flat but flexible, upright
standards connecting the margins of said aeroplanes, said standards being connected to said
aeroplanes by universal joints, diagonal stay-wires connecting the opposite ends of the adjacent
standards, a rope extending along the front edge of the lower aeroplane, passing through guides
at the front corners thereof, and having its ends secured to the rear corners of the upper aeroplane,
and a rope extending along the rear edge of the lower aeroplane, passing through guides at
the rear corners thereof, and having its ends secured to the front corners of the upper aeroplane,
substantially as described.

18.

ORVILLE WRIGHT.

WILBUR WRIGHT.

Witnesses:

Chas. E. Taylor.

E. Earle Forrer.
APPENDIX C

Proclamation published by the French Government on balloon
ascents, 1783.

NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC! PARIS, 27TH AUGUST, 1783.

On
the Ascent of balloons or globes in the air. The one in question has
been raised in Paris this day, 27th August, 1783, at 5 p.m., in the
Champ de Mars.

A Discovery has been made, which the Government deems
it right to make known, so that alarm be not occasioned to the people.

On
calculating the different weights of hot air, hydrogen gas, and common
air, it has been found that a balloon filled with either of the two
former will rise toward heaven till it is in equilibrium with the
surrounding air, which may not happen until it has attained a great
height.

The first experiment was made at Annonay, in Vivarais, MM.
Montgolfier, the inventors; a globe formed of canvas and paper, 105
feet in circumference, filled with heated air, reached an uncalculated
height. Maybe you could use your pull to
kinder hurry things up a little--do a little telegraphin', or somethin' like that."

"I'll do it!" cried the judge, taking the bait like a fish, "I'll do it at once! I want your
best horse, Jeff, and a guide. I'll wire the chief forester from Bender!"

"Keno!" said Creede sententiously, "and give my regards to Teddy."

As the old judge disappeared over the western rim the next morning the rodéo boss smiled grimly
behind his hand, and glanced significantly at Hardy. Then, with the outfit behind him, he rode
slowly up the cañon, leaving his partner to his steady job as "family man"--entertaining the boss.

For two days the sheepmen watched the river eagerly, waiting for a drop; then suddenly, as
the snow water ran by and a cool day checked the distant streams, it fell, and the swift pageant
of the crossing began. At sun-up a boss herder rode boldly out into the current and swam it
with his horse; brawny Mexicans leapt into the thicket of palo verdes that grew against the
cliff and cut branches to build a chute; Jasper Swope in his high sombrero and mounted on his
black mule galloped down from the hidden camp and urged his men along. Still the same ominous
silence hung about the shore where Juan Alvarez lay buried beneath the cross. There was no
watcher on Lookout Point, no horsemen lurking in the distance; only the lowing of the day herd,
far up the cañon, and the lapping of muddy waters. Across the river the low malpai cliffs rose
up like ramparts against them and Black Butte frowned down upon them like a watch tower, but
of the men who might be there watching there was no sign.

The sheepman studied upon the situation for a while; then he sent a messenger flying back to
camp and soon a hardy band of wethers came down, led by an advance guard of goats, and their
plaintive bleating echoed in a confused chorus from the high cliffs as they entered the wings
of the chute. Already the camp rustlers had driven them out on the slanting rock and encircled
the first cut with their canvas wagon cover, when Jasper Swope held up his hand for them to
stop. At the last moment and for no cause he hesitated, touched by some premonition, or suspicious
of the silent shore. One after another the herders clambered back and squatted idly against
the cool cliff, smoking and dangling their polished carbines; the sheep, left standing upon
the rock, huddled together and stood motionless; the goats leapt nimbly up on adjacent bowlders
and gazed across the river intently; then, throwing up his hand again, the sheepman spurred
his black mule recklessly into the water, waving his big hat as he motioned for the sheep to cross.

As the long hours of that portentous morning wore on, palpitating to the clamor of the sheep,
a great quiet settled upon Hidden Water. Sitting just within the door Hardy watched Lucy as
she went about her work, but his eyes were wandering and haggard and he glanced from time to
time at the Black Butte that stood like a sentinel against the crossing. In the intervals of
conversation the bleating of the sheep rose suddenly from down by the river, and ceased; he
talked on, feverishly, never stopping for an answer, and Lucy looked at him strangely, as if
wondering at his preoccupation. Again the deep tremolo rose up, echoing from the cliffs, and
Hardy paused in the midst of a story to listen. He was still staring out the doorway when Lucy
Ware came over and laid her hand on his shoulder.

"Rufus," she said, "what is it you are always listening for? Day after day I see you watching
here by the door, and when I talk you listen for something else. Tell me--is it--are you watching
for Kitty?"

"Kitty?" repeated Hardy, his eyes still intent. "Why no; why should I be watching for her?"

At his answer, spoken so impassively, she drew away quickly, but he caught her hand and stopped
her.

"Ah no," he said, "if I could only listen for something else it would be better--but all I
hear is sheep. I'm like old Bill Johnson; I can still shoot straight and find my way in the
mountains, but every time I hear a sheep blat I change. Poor old Bill, he's over across the
river there now; the boys have heard his hounds baying up in the high cliffs for a week. "But I
must tell you," she resumed, "Frank leaves on a business trip to-morrow night. He will be gone
for some time, and I shall motor into town to see him off. I am wondering about Wilson," she
hurried on, as though not daring to weigh her words; "Sarah will be away--I am letting her
have a little holiday--and I can't take Wilson into town with me
because it will be so late."

Then, with a burst of confession she spoke more deliberately. "That isn't exactly the reason,
Dennison; Frank doesn't know I have let Sarah go, and I--I can't explain."

Her face shone pink and warm in the glow of the firelight, and as the significance of her words
sank in upon him Grant marvelled at that wizardry of the gods which could bring such homage to
the foot of man.

A tenderness such as he had never known suffused him; her very presence was holy.

"Bring the boy over and let him spend the night with me.

We are great chums and we shall get along splendidly."

CHAPTER XXI

Grant spent his Sunday forenoon in an exhaustive house-cleaning
campaign.

Bachelor life on the farm is not conducive to domestic delicacy, and although Grant had never
abandoned the fundamentals he had allowed his interpretation of essential cleanliness to become
somewhat liberal. The result was that the day of rest usually confronted him with a considerable
array of unwashed pots and pans and other culinary utensils.

To-day, while the tawny autumn hills seemed to fairly heave and sigh with contentment under a splendor
of opalescent sunshine, he scoured the contents of his kitchen until they shone; washed the
floor; shook the rugs from the living-room and swept the corners, even behind the gramophone;
cleared the ashes from the hearth and generally set his house in order, for was not she to call
upon him that evening on her way to town, and was not little Wilson--he
of the high adventures with teddy-bear and knife and pig--to spend
the night with him?

When he was able to view his handiwork with a feeling that even feminine
eyes would find nothing to offend, Grant did an unwonted thing.

He unlocked the whim-room and opened the windows that the fresh air might play through the silent
chamber.

To the west the mountains looked down in sombre placidity as they had looked down every bright
autumn morning since the dawn of time, their shoulders bathed in purple mist and their snow-crowned
summits shining in the sun. For a long time Grant stood drinking in the scene; the fertile valley
lying with its square farms like a checker-board of the gods, with its round little lakes beating
back the white sunshine like coins from the currency of the Creator; the ruddy copper-colored patches
of ripe wheat, and drowsy herds motionless upon the receding hills;
the blue-green ribbon of river with its yellow fringes of cottonwood
and bluffs of forbidding spruce, and behind and over all the silent,
majestic mountains.

It was a sight to make the soul of man rise up and say, "I know I stand on the heights of the
Eternal!" Then as his eyes followed the course of the river Grant picked out a column of thin
blue smoke, and knew that Zen was cooking her Sunday dinner.

The thought turned him to his dusting of the whim-room, and afterwards
to his own kitchen.

When he had lunched and dressed he took a stroll over the hills,
thinking a great deal, but finding no answer.

On his return he descried the familiar figure of Linder in a semi-recumbent
position on the porch, and Linder's well-worn car in the yard.

"How goes it, Linder?" he said, cheerily, as he came up. "Is the Big Idea going to fructify?"

"The Big Idea seems to be all right. You planned it well."

"Thanks. But is it going to be self-supporting--I mean in the matter
of motive power. Would it run if you and I and Murdoch were wiped
out?"

"Everything must have a head."

"Democracy must find its own
head--must grow it out of the materials supplied. If it doesn't do
that it's a failure, and the Big Idea will end in being the Big Fizzle.


"My God!" whispered Hardy, following his flight with startled eyes, and as the rout of cowboys
flashed up over the top of Lookout Point and were gone he bowed his head in silence.

"Lucy," he said, at last, "my mind has been far away. I--I have not seen what was before me,
and I shall always be the loser. But look--I have two friends in all the world, you and Jeff,
and you are the dearer by far. But you could see as Jeff went by that he was mad. What he will
do at the river I can only guess; he is crazy, and a crazy man will do anything. But if I am
with him I can hold him back--will you let me go?" He held out his hands and as Lucy took them
she saw for the first time in his shy eyes--love. For a moment she gazed at him wistfully,
but her heart never faltered. Whatever his will might be she would never oppose it, now that
she had his love.

"Yes, Rufus," she said, "you may go, but remember--me."

CHAPTER XXIII

THE LAST CROSSING

The rush and thunder of cow ponies as they hammered over the trail and plunged down through
the rocks and trees had hardly lost its echoes in the cliffs when, with a flash of color and
a dainty pattering of hoofs, Chapuli came flying over the top of Lookout Point and dashed up
the river after them. The cowmen had left their horses in the deep ravine at the end of the
malpai bluffs and were already crouched behind the rampart of the rim rocks as close as Indian
fighters, each by some loophole in the blackened malpai, with a rifle in his hand. As Hardy
crept in from behind, Jeff Creede motioned him to a place at his side greeting him at the same
time with a broad grin.

"Hello, sport," he said, "couldn't keep out of it, eh? Well, we need ye, all right. Here, you
can hold straighter than I can; take my gun and shoot rainbows around the leaders when they
start to come across."

"Not much," answered Hardy, waving the gun away, "I just came down to keep you out of trouble."

"Ye-es!" jeered Creede, "first thing I know you'll be down there fightin' 'em back with rocks.
But say," he continued, "d'ye notice anything funny up on that cliff? Listen, now!"

Hardy turned his head, and soon above the clamor of the sheep he made out the faint "Owwp!
Owwwp!" of hounds.

"It's Bill Johnson, isn't it?" he said, and Creede nodded significantly.

"God help them pore sheepmen," he observed, "if Bill has got his thirty-thirty. Listen to 'em
sing, will ye! Ain't they happy, though? And they don't give a dam' for us--ump-um--they're
comin' across anyway. Well, that's what keeps hell crowded--let 'er go!"

There was a glitter of carbines against the opposite cliffs where the spare herders had taken
to cover, but out on the rocky point where the chute led into the river a gang of Mexicans
and two Americans were leading their wagon cover around a fresh cut of goats and sheep. On
the sand bar far below the stragglers from the first cut, turned back in the initial rush,
were wandering aimlessly about or plodding back to the herd, but the sheepmen with bullheaded
persistence were preparing to try again. Chief among them towered the boss, Jasper Swope, wet
to the waist from swimming across the river; and as he motioned to the herders to go ahead
he ran back and mounted his mule again. With a barbaric shout the Mexicans surged forward on
the tarpaulin, sweeping their cut to the very edge; then, as the goats set their feet and held
back, a swarthy herder leapt into the midst and tumbled them, sheep and goats alike, into the
water. Like plummets they went down into the slow-moving depths, some headfirst, some falling
awkwardly on their backs or slipping like beavers on a slide; there was a prolonged and mighty
splash and then, one by one the heads bobbed up and floated away until, led by the high-horned
goats, they struck out for the opposite shore. Below, yelling and throwing stones to frighten
them, a line of Mexicans danced up and down along the rocky shore, and to keep them from drifting
into the whirlpool Jasper Swope plunged boldly into the water on his mule.

Sink or swim, the sheep were in the water, and for a minute there was a tense silence along
the river; then, as the goats lined out, a rifle shot echoed from the cliffs and a white column
of water rose up before the leader. He shook his head, hesitated and looked back, and once
more the water splashed in his face, while the deep ploomp of the bullet answered to the shot.
Fighting away from the sudden stroke the goat lost his headway and, drifting, fouled those
below him; a sudden confusion fell upon the orderly ranks of the invaders and, like a flock
of geese whose leader is killed, they jostled against one another, some intent on the farther
shore and some struggling to turn back. Instantly a chorus of savage shouts rose up from along
the river, the shrill yells of the cowboys mingling with the whooping and whistling of the
sheepmen, until at last, overcome by the hostile clamor, the timid sheep turned back toward
the main herd, drawing with them the goats. For a minute Jasper Swope fought against them,
waving his hat and shouting; then, rather than see them drift too far and be drawn into the
clutch of the whirlpool, he whipped his mule about and led them back to the shore.

A second time, calling out all his men to help, the boss sheepman tried to cross the goats
alone, intending to hold them on the shore for a lure; but just as they were well lined out
the same careful marksman behind the malpai threw water in their faces and turned them back.
But this time Jasper Swope did not lead the retreat. Slapping his black mule over the ears
with his hat he held straight for the opposite shore, cursing and brandishing his gun.

"You dam', cowardly passel of tail-twisters!" he cried, shaking his fist at the bluffs, "why
don't you come out into the open like men?"

But a grim silence was his only answer.

"Hey, you bold bad man from Bitter Creek, Texas!" he shouted, riding closer to the beach. "Why
don't you come down and fight me like a man?" His big voice was trembling with excitement and
he held his pistol balanced in the air as if awaiting an attack, but Jefferson Creede did not
answer him.

"I'll fight you, man to man, you big blowhard!" thundered Swope, "and there goes my pistol
to prove it!" He rose in his stirrups as he spoke and hurled it away from him, throwing his
cartridge belt after it. "Now," he yelled, "you've been sayin' what you'd do; come out of your
hole, Jeff Creede, I want ye!"

"Well, you won't git me, then," answered Creede, his voice coming cold and impassive from over
the rim. "I'll fight you some other time."

"Ahrr!" taunted Swope, "hear the coward talk! Here I stand, unarmed, and he's afraid to come
out! But if there's a man amongst you, send him down, and if he licks me I'll go around."

"You'll go around anyhow, you Mormon-faced wool-puller!" replied the cowman promptly, "and
we're here to see to it, so you might as well chase yourself."

"No, I like this side," said the sheepman, pretending to admire the scenery. "I'll jest stay
here a while, and then I'll cross in spite of ye. If I can't cross here," he continued, "I'll
wait for the river to fall and cross down below--and then I'll sheep you to the rocks, you
low-lived, skulkin' murderers! It's a wonder some of you don't shoot me the way you did Juan
Alvarez, down there." He waved his hand toward the point where the wooden cross rose against
the sky, but no one answered the taunt.

"Murderers, I said!" he shouted, rising up in his saddle. "I call you murderers before God
A'mighty and there ain't a man denies it! Oh, my Mexicans can see that cross--they're lookin'
at it now--and when the river goes down they'll come in on you, if it's only to break even
for Juan."

He settled back in his saddle and gazed doubtfully at the bluff, and then at the opposite shore.
Nature had placed him at a disadvantage, for the river was wide and deep and his sheep were
easy to turn, yet there was still a chance.

"Say," he began, moderating his voice to a more conciliatory key, "I'll tell you what I'll
do. There's no use shooting each other over this. Send down your best man--if he licks me I
go around; if I lick him I come across. Is it a go?"

There was a short silence and then an argument broke out along the bluff, a rapid fire of exhortation
and protest, some urging Creede to take him up, others clamoring for peace.

"No!" shouted Jefferson Creede, raising his voice angrily above the uproar. "I won't do it!
I wouldn't trust a sheepman as far as I could throw a bull by the tail! You'd sell your black
soul for two bits, Jasp Swope," he observed, peering warily over the top of the rock, "and
you'd shoot a man in the back, too!"

"But look at me!" cried Swope, dropping off his mule, "I'm stripped to my shirt; there goes
my gun into the water--and I'm on your side of the river! You're a coward, Jeff Creede, and
I always knowed it!"

"But my head ain't touched," commented Creede dryly. "I've got you stopped anyhow. What kind
of a dam' fool would I be to fight over it?"

"I'll fight ye for nothin', then!" bellowed the sheepman. "I'll--" He stopped abruptly and
a great quiet fell upon both shores. From the mouth of the hidden ravine a man had suddenly
stepped into the open, unarmed, and now he was coming out across the sands to meet him. It
was Rufus Hardy, dwarfed like David before Goliath in the presence of the burly sheepman, but
striding over the hard-packed sand with the lithe swiftness of a panther.

"I'll fight you," he said, raising his hand in challenge, but Swope's answer was drowned in
a wild yell from Creede.

"Come back here, Rufe, you durn' fool!" he called. "Come back, I tell ye! Don't you know better
than to trust a sheepman?"

"Never mind, now," answered Hardy, turning austerely to the bluff. "I guess I can take care
of myself."

He swung about and advanced to the stretch of level sand where Swope was standing. "What guarantee
do I get," he demanded sharply, "that if I lick you in a fair fight the sheep will go around?"

"You--lick--me!" repeated the sheepman, showing his jagged teeth in a sardonic grin. "Well,
I'll tell ye, Willie; if you hit me with that lily-white hand of yourn, and I find it out the
same day, I'll promise to stay off'n your range for a year."

"All right," replied Hardy, suddenly throwing away his hat. "You noticed it when I hit you
before, didn't you?" he inquired, edging quickly in on his opponent and beginning an amazing
bout of shadow boxing. "Well, come on, then!" He laughed as Swope struck out at him, and continued
his hectoring banter. "As I remember it your head hit the ground before your heels!"

Then in a whirlwind of blows and feints they came together. It was the old story of science
against brute strength. Jasper Swope was a rough-and-tumble fighter of note; he was quick,
too, in spite of his weight, and his blows were like the strokes of a sledge; but Hardy did
not attempt to stand up against him. For the first few minutes it was more of a chase than
a fight, and in that the sheepman was at his worst, cumbered by his wet clothes and the water
in his shoes. Time and again he rushed in upon his crouching opponent, who always seemed in
the act of delivering a blow and yet at the moment only sidestepped and danced away. The hard
wet sand was ploughed and trampled with their tracks, the records of a dozen useless plunges,
when suddenly instead of dodging Hardy stepped quickly forward, his "lily-white hand" shot
out, and Jasper Swope's head went back with a jerk.

"You son-of-a-goat!" he yelled, as the blood ran down his face, and lowering his head he bored
in upon Hardy furiously. Once more Hardy sidestepped, but the moment his enemy turned he flew
at him like a tiger, raining blows upon his bloody face in lightning succession.

"Huh!" grunted the sheepman, coughing like a wood-chopper as he struck back through the storm,
and the chance blow found its mark. For a moment Hardy staggered, clutching at his chest; but
as Swope sprang forward to finish his work he ducked and slipped aside, stumbling like a man
about to drop.

A shrill yell went up from the farther shore as Hardy stood swaying in his tracks, and a fierce
shout of warning from the bluff; but Jasper Swope was implacable. Brushing the blood from his
eyes he stepped deliberately forward and aimed a blow that would have felled an ox, straight
at his enemy's head. It missed; the drooping head snapped down like Judy before Punch and rose
up again, truculently; then before the sheepman could regain his balance Hardy threw his whole
strength into a fierce uppercut that laid Swope sprawling on his back.

A howl of triumph and derision rose up from the rim of the bluff as the burly sheepman went
down, but it changed to a sudden shout of warning as he scrambled back to his feet again. My people
have been miners for generations, and I myself became a miner at the age of twelve. I have worked
since then in the mine at every phase of coal getting until about
five years ago, when my fellow workers made me their checkweigher.

I say this that those who read my book may know that the things of which I write are the things
of which I have firsthand knowledge.

JAMES C. WELSH. DOUGLAS WATER, LANARK.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

I. THE THONG OF POVERTY

II. A TURN OF THE SCREW

III. THE BLOCK

IV. A YOUNG REBEL

V. BLACK JOCK'S THREAT

VI. THE COMING OF A PROPHET

VII. ON THE PIT-HEAD

VIII. THE MANTLE OF MANHOOD

IX. THE ACCIDENT

X. HEROES OF THE UNDERWORLD

XI. THE STRIKE

XII. THE RIVALS

XIII. THE RED HOSE RACE

XIV. THE
AWAKENING

XV. PETER MAKES A DECISION

XVI. A STIR IN LOWWOOD

XVII.
MYSIE RUNS AWAY

XVIII. MAG ROBERTSON'S FRENZY

XIX. BLACK JOCK'S
END

XX. THE CONFERENCE

XXI. THE MEETING WITH MYSIE

XXII. MYSIE'S
RETURN

XXIII. HOME

XXIV. A CALL FOR HELP

XXV. A FIGHT WITH DEATH

CHAPTER
I

THE THONG OF POVERTY

"Is it not about time you came to your bed,
lassie?"

"Ay, I'll no' be very long now, Geordie. If I had this heel
turned, I'll soon finish the sock, and that will be a pair the day.
Is the pain in your back worse the nicht, that you are so restless?"
and the clicking of the needles ceased as the woman asked the question.

"Oh,
I'm no' so bad at all," came the answer. "My back's maybe a wee bit
sore; but a body gets tired lying always in the yin position. Forby,
the day aye seems long when you are out, and I dinna like to think
of you out working all day, and then sitting down to knit at nicht.
It must be very tiring for you, Nellie."

"Oh, I'm no' that tired,"
she replied with a show of cheerfulness, as she turned another wire
in the sock, and set the balls of wool dancing on the floor with the
speed at which she worked. "I've had a real good day to-day, and I'm
feeling that I could just sit for a lang while the nicht, if only
the paraffin oil wadna' go down so quick. But the longer I sit, it
burns the more, and it's getting gey dear to buy now-a-days."

"Ay,"
said the weary voice of the man. "If it's no' clegs it's midges. Folk
have always something to contend against. But don't be long till you
stop. It's almost twelve o'clock, and you ought to be in your bed."

"Oh,
I'll no' be very long, Geordie," was the bravely cheerful answer.
"Just you try and gang to sleep and I'll soon finish up. I'll have
to try and get up early in the morning, for I have to go to Mrs. Rundell
and wash. She always gi'es me twa shillings, and that's a good day's
pay. The only thing I grudge is being away all day, leaving you and
the bairns, for I ken they're no' very easy to put up with. They're
steerin' weans, and are no' easy on a body who is ill."

"Ay, they're
a steerin' lot, lassie," he answered tenderly.

Swimming weakly with the current Hardy made a last ineffectual effort to gain the bank; then
fixing his eyes upon his partner he resigned himself to the drag of the whirlpool, staking
his life on a single throw of the rope. Once the plaited rawhide was wetted it would twist
and bind in the honda and before Creede could beat it straight and coil it his partner would
be far out in the centre of the vortex. Planting his feet firmly on the rock the big cowboy
lashed the kinks out of his reata and coiled it carefully; then as the first broad swirl seized
its plaything and swung him slowly around Creede let out a big loop and began to swing it about
his head, his teeth showing in a tense grin as he fixed his eyes upon the mark. At each turn
his wrist flexed and his back swayed with a willowy suppleness but except for that he was like
a herculean statue planted upon the point.

The maelstrom heaved and rocked as it swung its victim nearer and like a thing with life seemed
suddenly to hurry him past; then as Hardy cried out and held up a hand for help the rope cut
through the air like a knife and the loop shot far out across the boiling water. It was a long
throw, fifty feet from the rock, and the last coil had left his tense fingers before the noose
fell, but it splashed a circle clean and true about the uplifted hand. For a moment the cowboy
waited, watching; then as the heavy rope sank behind his partner's shoulders he took in his
slack with a jerk. The noose tightened beneath Hardy's arms and held him against the insistent
tug of the river; and while the whirlpool roared and foamed against his body Creede hauled
him forth roughly, until, stooping down, he gathered him into his arms like a child.

"My God, boy," he said, "you're takin' big chances, for a family man--but say, what did I tell
you about sheepmen?"

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Mexicans were still firing random shots along the river when Creede lifted his partner
up on Bat Wings and carried him back to Hidden Water. Long before they reached the house they
could see Lucy standing in the doorway, and Hardy held himself painfully erect in the saddle,
with Creede steadying him from behind; but when Bat Wings halted before the ramada Jeff broke
rudely in on the play acting by taking the little man in his arms and depositing him on a bed.

"Fell into the river," he said, turning with a reassuring smile to Lucy, "but he ain't hurt
none--only kinder weak, you know. I reckon a little hot tea would help some, bein' as we're
out of whiskey, and while you're brewin' it I'll git these wet clothes off. Yes'm, we're havin'
a little trouble, but that's only them locoed Mexicans shootin' off their spare ammunition."
He dragged up a cot as he spoke and was hurriedly arranging a bed when Lucy interposed.

"Oh, but don't leave him out here!" she protested, "put him back in his own room, where I can
take care of him."

"All right," said Creede, and picking him up from his bare cot beneath the ramada he carried
Hardy into the little room where he had lived before Lucy Ware came. "I guess your troubles
are over for a while, pardner," he remarked, as he tucked him into the clean white bed, and
then with a wise look at Lucy he slipped discreetly out the door.

As she entered with the tea Hardy was lying very limp and white against the pillow, but after
the hot drink he opened his big gray eyes and looked up at her sombrely.

"Sit down," he said, speaking with elaborate exactness, "I want to tell you something." He
reached out and took her hand, and as he talked he clung to it appealingly. "Lucy," he began,
"I didn't forget about you when I went down there, but--well, when Jasper Swope came out and
challenged us my hair began to bristle like a dog's--and the next thing I knew I was fighting.
He said if I licked him he'd go round--but you can't trust these sheepmen. When he saw he was
whipped he tried to shoot me, and I had to jump into the river. Oh, I'm all right now, but--listen,
Lucy!" He drew her down to him, insistently. "Can't you forgive me, this time?" he whispered,
and when she nodded he closed his heavy eyes and fell asleep.

When he awoke in the morning there was nothing to show for his fierce fight with Swope or his
battle with the river--nothing but a great weariness and a wistful look in his eyes. But all
day while the boys rode back and forth from the river he lay in bed, looking dreamily out through
the barred window or following Lucy with furtive glances as she flitted in and out. Whenever
she came near he smiled, and often the soft light crept into his eyes, but when by chance he
touched her hand or she brushed back his hair a great quiet settled upon him and he turned
his face away.

It was Creede who first took notice of his preoccupation and after a series of unsatisfactory
visits he beckoned Lucy outside the door with a solemn jerk of the head.

"Say," he said, "that boy's got something on his mind--I can tell by them big eyes of his.
Any idee what it is?" 

In a flying machine, a normally flat aeroplane having lateral marginal
portions capable of movement to different positions above or below
the normal plane of the body of the aeroplane, such movement being
about an axis transverse to the line of flight, whereby said lateral
marginal portions may be moved to different angles relatively to the
normal plane of the body of the aeroplane, so as to present to the
atmosphere different angles of incidence, and means for so moving
said lateral marginal portions, substantially as described.

2.

3.

4.

5. In a flying machine, an aeroplane having substantially the form of a normally flat rectangle
elongated transversely to the line of flight, in combination which means for imparting to the
lateral margins of said aeroplane a movement about an axis lying in the body of the aeroplane
perpendicular to said lateral margins, and thereby moving said lateral
margins into different angular relations to the normal plane of the
body of the aeroplane, substantially as described.

6.

7.

8.

9. In a flying machine, an aeroplane normally flat and elongated transversely
to the line of flight, in combination with means for imparting to
said aeroplane a helicoidal warp around an axis transverse to the
line of flight and extending centrally along the body aeroplane in
the direction of the elongation aeroplane, substantially as described.

10.

11.

12.
In a flying machine, the combination, with an aeroplane, of a normally
flat and substantially horizontal flexible rudder, and means for curving
said rudder rearwardly and upwardly or rearwardly and downwardly with
respect to its normal plane, substantially as described.

13.

14.
A flying machine comprising superposed connected aeroplanes means
for moving the opposite lateral portions of said aeroplanes to different
angles to the normal planes thereof, a vertical rudder, means for
moving said vertical rudder toward that side of the machine presenting
the smaller angle of incidence and the least resistance to the atmosphere,
and a horizontal rudder provided with means for presenting its upper
or under surface to the resistance of the atmosphere, substantially
as described. Her mutinous heart
went out to him at every breath, now that he lay there so still; at a word she could kneel
at his side and own that she had always loved him; but his mind was far away and he took no
thought of her weakness. He was silent--and she must be a woman to the end, a voiceless suppliant,
a slave that waits, unbidden, a chip on the tide that carries it to some safe haven or hurries
it out to sea.

With downcast eyes she turned back into the house, going about her work with the quiet of a
lover who listens for some call, and as she passed to and fro she felt his gaze upon her. At
last she looked up and when she met his glance she went in and stood beside his bed.

"What is it you want, Rufus?" she asked, and his face lit up suddenly as he answered with his
eloquent eyes, but he could not speak the word.

"Who am I?" he murmured, musingly, "to ask for all the world?" But he held close to the little
hands and as he felt their yielding his breath came hard and he gazed up at her with infinite
tenderness.

"Dear Lucy," he said, "you do not know me. I am a coward--it was born in me--I cannot help
it. Not with men!" he cried, his eyes lighting up. "Ah, no; my father was a soldier, and I
can fight--but--"

He paused and his vehemence died away suddenly. "Lucy," he began again, still clinging to her
hands for courage, "you have never laughed at me--you have always been gentle and patient--I
will tell you something. You know how I ran away from Kitty, and how when she came down here
I avoided her. I was afraid, Lucy, and yet--well, it is all over now." He sighed and turned
restlessly on his pillow. "One day I met her up the river and she--she called me a coward.
Not by the word--but I knew. That was the day before the sheep came in through Hell's Hip Pocket,
and even Jeff doesn't know of the fights I had that night. I went out yesterday and fought
Jasper Swope with my bare hands to wipe the shame away--but it's no use, I'm a coward yet."
He groaned and turned his face to the wall but Lucy only sighed and brushed back his hair.
For a minute he lay there, tense and still; then as her hand soothed him he turned and his
voice became suddenly soft and caressing, as she had always liked it best.

"Don't laugh at me for it, Lucy," he said, "I love you--but I'm afraid." He caught her hands
again, gazing up wistfully into her eyes, and when she smiled through her tears he drew her nearer.

"Lucy," he whispered, "you will understand me. I have never kissed any one since my mother
died--could--could you kiss me first?"

"Ah, yes, Rufus," she answered, and as their lips met he held her gently in his arms.

CHAPTER XXIV

THE END OF IT ALL

There is a mocking-bird at Hidden Water that sings the songs of all the birds and whistles
for the dog. His nest is in a great cluster of mistletoe in the mesquite tree behind the house
and every morning he polishes his long curved bill against the ramada roof, preens out his
glossy feathers, and does honor to the sun. For two years, off and on, Hardy had heard him,
mimicking orioles and larks and sparrows and whistling shrilly for the dog, but now for the
first time his heart answered to the wild joy of the bird lover. The world had taken on light
and color over night, and the breeze, sifting in through the barred window, was sweet with
the fragrance of untrampled flowers.

April had come, and the grass; the air was untainted; there was no braying by the river--the
sheep had gone. It had been bought at the price of blood, but at last there was peace. Anglicè,
that "there is no error in the record." This was in the nature of a demurrer,[6] and referred
the whole record--and, be it observed, nothing but THE RECORD--to the judgment of the House of
Lords, as constituting the High Court of Parliament. It is a cardinal maxim, that upon a writ
of error the court cannot travel out of the record; they can take judicial notice of nothing
but what appears upon the face of the record, sent up to them for the purpose of being "inspected,"
to see if there be any error therein.

The judges of England were summoned to advise[7] the House of Lords: from the Queen's Bench,
Justices Patteson, Williams, and Coleridge, (Lord Denman, the Chief-Justice, sitting in judgment
as a peer;) from the Common Pleas, Chief-Justice Tindal, and Justices Coltman and Maule; from
the Exchequer, Barons Parke, Alderson, and Gurney.

Lord Chief-Baron Pollock did not attend, having advised the Crown
in early stages of the case, as Attorney-General: Mr Justice Erskine
was ill; and the remaining three common law judges, Justices Wightman,
Rolfe, and Cresswell, were required to preside in the respective courts
at Nisi Prius.

With these necessary exceptions, the whole judicial force--so to speak--of England assisted
in the deliberations of the House of Lords. The "law" peers who constantly attended, were the
Lord Chancellor, Lords Brougham, Cottenham, and Campbell. It has been remarked as singular, that
Lord Langdale (the Master of the Rolls) did not attend in his place
on so important an occasion, and take his share in the responsibility
of the decision.

 Has anything dreadful
happened? Please tell me quick, before she comes. I--I won't know what to say." He twisted
about and fixed an eye on the doorway, but Lucy held out a restraining hand.

"It has been a great secret," she said, "and you must promise not to tell, but Kitty has been
writing a play."

"A play!" exclaimed Hardy, astounded, "why--what in the world is it about?"

"About Arizona, of course," cried Lucy. "Don't you remember how eager she was to hear you men
talk? And she collected all those spurs and quirts for stage properties! Why, she wrote books
and books full of notes and cowboy words while she was down here and she's been buried in manuscript
for months. When she heard that you were having the round-up early this year she was perfectly
frantic to come, but they were right in the midst of writing it and she just couldn't get away."

"They?" repeated Hardy, mystified. "Why who--"

"Oh, I forgot," said Lucy, biting her lip. Then in a lower voice she added: "She has been collaborating
with Tupper Browne."

"Tupper Browne! Why, what does he know about Arizona?" cried Hardy indignantly, and then, as
Lucy looked away, he stopped short.

"Oh!" he said, and then there was a long silence. "Well, Tupper's a good fellow," he remarked
philosophically. "But Lucy," he said, starting up nervously as the sound of horses' feet came
up from the creek bed, "you'll--you'll do all the talking, won't you?"

"Talking!" repeated Lucy, pausing in her flight. "Why, yes," she called back, laughing. "Isn't
that always the woman's part?" And then she fell upon Kitty's neck and kissed her. Hardy came
forward with less assurance, but his embarrassment was reduced to a minimum by Judge Ware who,
as soon as the first greetings were over, brought forward the mild-mannered gentleman in khaki
and introduced him.

"Mr. Shafer," he said, "this is my superintendent, Mr. Hardy. Mr. Shafer represents the United
States Forestry Service," he added significantly.

"Ah, then you must bring us good news!" cried Hardy, holding out his hand eagerly.

"Yes," answered the official modestly, but his speech ended with that word.

"I am convinced," began Judge Ware, suddenly quelling all conversation by the earnestness of
his demeanor. "I am convinced that in setting aside the Salagua watershed as a National Forest
Reserve, our President has added to the record of his good deeds an act of such consummate
statesmanship that it will be remembered long after his detractors are forgotten. But for him,
millions of acres of public land now set aside as reserves would still be open to the devastation
of unrestricted grazing, or have passed irrevocably into the power of this infamous land ring
which has been fighting on the floor of Congress to deprive the American people of their rights.
But after both houses had passed a bill depriving the executive of his power to proclaim Forest
Reserves--holding back the appropriations for the Forestry Service as a threat--he baffled
them by a feigned acquiescence. In exchange for the appropriations, he agreed to sign the act--and
then, after securing the appropriations, he availed himself of the power still vested in him
to set aside this reserve and many other reserves for our children and our children's children--and
then, gentlemen, true to his word, he signed the bill!"

Judge Ware shook hands warmly with Mr. Shafer at the end of this speech and wished him all
success in protecting the people's domain. It was a great day for the judge, and as soon as
Creede and the other cowmen came in with the day's gather of cattle he hastened out to tell
them the news. 

Whenever I got any loop-hole to evade the vigilance of my warders and could contrive to reach the
golabari I felt I had a holiday indeed.

There was yet another place in our house which I have even yet not
succeeded in finding out.

A little girl playmate of my own age called this the "King's palace."[6] "I have just been there,"
she would sometimes tell me. But somehow the propitious moment never turned up when she could
take me along with her. That was a wonderful place, and its playthings were as wonderful as
the games that were played there.

It seemed to me it must be somewhere very near--perhaps in the first or second storey; the
only thing was one never seemed to be able to get there. How often
have I asked my companion, "Only tell me, is it really inside the
house or outside?"

"Well, not so's you'd notice it," replied the big cowboy enigmatically. "But say, Judge," he
continued, making a point at the old gentleman's linen duster, "excuse me, but that yaller
letter stickin' out of your pocket looks kinder familiar. It's for me, ain't it? Um, thanks;
this detective outfit back in St. Louie is tryin' to make me out a millionaire, or somethin'
like that, and I'm naturally interested." He tore the letter open, extracted a second epistle
from its depths and read it over gravely. "Well, boys," he observed, grinning cheerfully as
he tucked it away in his shaps, "my luck always did run in bunches--I'm rich!"

He strode briskly over to the corral, caught up a fresh horse and, riding back to the camp,
began to go through his war bag hurriedly. He was in the midst of a feverish packing, throwing
away socks and grabbing up shirts, when a gay laugh from the house attracted his attention.
He listened for a moment abstractedly; then he flew at his work once more, dumping everything
he had out on his bed and stuffing what he needed back into his war bag; but when there came
a second peal of laughter, he stopped and craned his neck.

"Well--I'll--be--dam'd!" he muttered, as he recognized the voice, and then he flew at his work
again, manhandling everything in sight. He was just roping his enormous bed, preparatory to
depositing it in the bunk-house, when Kitty Bonnair stepped out of the house and came toward
him, walking like a boy in her dainty riding suit. There was a great noise from the branding
pen and as she approached he seemed very intent upon his work, wrestling with his bundle as
if he were hog-tying a bull and using language none too choice the while, but Kitty waited
patiently until he looked up.

"Why, howdy do, Mr. Creede," she cried, smiling radiantly. "I got a new idea for my play just
from seeing you do that work."

The cowboy regarded her sombrely, took a nip or two with his rope's end, jerked the cords tight,
and sat down deliberately on the bundle.

"That's good," he said, wiping the sweat from his eyes. "How's tricks?" There was a shadow
of irony in his voice but Kitty passed it by.

"Fine and dandy," she answered. "How are you coming?"

"Oh, pretty good," he conceded, rising up and surveying the battlefield, "and I reckon I ain't
forgot nothin'," he added meaningly. He kicked his blanket roll, tied his war bag behind the
saddle, and hitched up his overalls regally. "Sorry I ain't goin' to see more of you," he observed,
slipping his six-shooter into his shaps, "but--"

"What, you aren't going?" cried Kitty, aghast. "Why, I came all the way down here to see you--I'm
writing a play, and you're the hero!"

"Ye-es!" jeered Creede, laughing crudely. "I'm Mary's little lamb that got snatched baldheaded
to make the baby laugh."

"You're nothing of the kind," retorted Kitty stoutly. "You're the hero in my play that's going
to be acted some day on the stage. You kill a Mexican, and win a beautiful girl in the last act!"

"That's good," commented Creede, smiling grimly, "but say, that Mex. will keep, won't he--because
I'm due back in St. Louie."

"Oh!" cried Kitty, clasping her hands in despair. "St. Louis! And won't I ever see you any more?"

"Well, you might," conceded the cowboy magnanimously, "if you wait around long enough."

"But I can't wait! I've got to finish my last act, and I came clear down here, just to hear
you talk. You can't imagine how interesting you are, after living up there in the city," she
added naively.

"No," grumbled Creede, picking up his bridle lash, "but say, I've got to be goin'!" He hooked
a boot negligently into the stirrup and looked back over his shoulder. "Anything else I can
do for you?" he inquired politely.

"Oh, you dear Jeff!" cried Kitty ecstatically, "yes! Do come back here and let me tell you!"
He kicked his foot reluctantly out of the stirrup and stalked back, huge and commanding as
ever, but with a puzzled look in his eye.

"Bend your head down, so I can whisper it," she coaxed, and brute-like he bowed at her bidding.
She whispered a moment eagerly, added a word, and pushed his head away. For a minute he stood
there, thinking ponderously; then very deliberately he pulled his six-shooter out of his shaps
and handed it over to her.

"All right," he said, "but say"--he beckoned her with an inexorable jerk of the head--"what
do I git, now?" He looked down upon her as he had on the morning they had parted, out behind
the corral, and the hot blood leaped into Kitty Bonnair's cheeks at the memory of that kiss.
For a moment she hesitated, twisting her trim boot into the ground, then she drew the coveted
pistol from her belt and handed it back. 

S.H.

Honour.--William the Third having insisted on Lord H----n's giving
him his honour not to fight a man who had given him a box on the ear,
his lordship was obliged seemingly to comply; but as soon us he was
out of the king's presence he fought the man.

The king was, at first, highly incensed at his breaking his word with him, and asked him how he
came to do so, when he had just given him his honour. "Sire," replied his lordship, "you were
in the wrong to take such a pledge, for at the time I gave it you, I had no honour to give." S.H.

Doll's
Eyes.--Insignificant as may appear this petty article of commerce, it is well known to keep in
employ several thousand hands, and goes to show the vast importance of trifles to a country of
decided commercialists. Mr. Osler, an intelligent manufacturer of Birmingham, gave the following
statement before the Committee of the House of Commons, in 1824. I copied the order, and on returning
to the Tavistock Hotel I found it amounted to upwards of five hundred
pounds.'"

SWAINE.

Eggs.--The duty paid on eggs imported at Ramsgate within the last
three months, exceeds the sum of 2,000l.--(Morning Herald.) The rate
of duty is, as stated in our last, 10d. on every 120 eggs.

The Druids and the Mistletoe--Pliny, in his Natural History, tells us, "The Druids held nothing
so sacred as the mistletoe of the oak, as this is very scarce and
rarely to be found, when any of it is discovered, they go with great
pomp and ceremony on a certain day to gather it.

When they have got everything in readiness under the oak, both for the sacrifice and the banquet,
which they make on this great festival, they begin by tying two white bulls to it by the horns,
then one of the Druids, clothed in white, mounts the tree, and with
a knife of gold, cuts the mistletoe, which is received in a white
sagum; this done, they proceed to their sacrifices and feastings."

 And then with a great laugh
he broke away and leapt triumphantly into the saddle.

"Whoop-eee!" he yelled. "Watch me fly!" And spreading his arms like a bird he thundered away
down the western trail.

There was a strange stillness about the old ranch house when Kitty came back to it and she
wondered vaguely where Lucy and Rufus were, but as she stepped inside the dirt ramada the quiet
seemed to lay its spell upon her and she halted by the doorway, waiting for a last glimpse
of Jeff as he went up over the western rim. The bawling of cattle and the shrill yells of the
cowboys no longer tempted her to the parada ground--she was lonely, and there was no one who
cared for her. Yet, somewhere within, she could hear the murmur of voices, and at last when
she could endure it no longer she turned and entered quickly. The big living-room where they
had so often sat together was vacant now, but Hardy's door was open, and as she looked in she
saw them standing together--Lucy with downcast eyes, and Rufus, holding both her hands. It
was all very innocent and lover-like, but when their lips met she turned and fled to her room. 

Sir Anthony Cooke lived at Gidea Hall, near Romford, in Essex, and had the honour of entertaining
Queen Elizabeth here, in the year 1568. Mary de Medicis, mother of Queen Henrietta Maria,
was also entertained in this mansion, the night before her arrival
in London.

"Bless you, my children," she said, smiling and holding out her hands, "I shall die an old
maid." And then she kissed them both.

