"Good morning," returned Lucy though it was not morning at all; "where do you come from?"

"Well, I'm from Paris last; but when I'm at home, I'm at Boston.  I am Leonidas Saunders, of
the great American Republic."

"Oh, then you are not real, after all?"

"Real!  I should hope I was a genuine article."

"Well, I was in hopes that you were real, only you say you come from a strange country, like
the rest of them, and yet you look just like an English boy."

"Of course I do! my grandfather came from England," said Leonidas; "we all speak English as
well, or better, than you do in the old country."

"I can't understand it!"  said Lucy; "did you come like other people, by the train, not like
the children in my dreams?"

And then Leonidas explained all about it to her: how his father had brought him last year to
Europe and had put him to school at Paris; but when the war broke out, and most of the stranger
scholars were taken away, no orders came about him, because his father was a merchant and was
away from home, so that no one ever knew whether the letters had reached him.

So Leonidas had gone on at school without many tasks to learn, to be sure, but not very comfortable:
it was so cold, and there was no wood to burn; and he disliked eating horses and cats and rats,
quite as much as Coralie did, though he was not in a part of the town where so many shells
from the cannons came in.

At last when Lucy's uncle and some other good gentlemen with the red cross on their sleeves,
obtained leave to enter Paris and take some relief to the poor, sick people in the hospitals,
the people Leonidas was with, told the gentleman that there was a little American left behind
in their house.

Mr. Seaman, which was Uncle Joe's name, went to see about him, and found that he had once known
his father.  So, after a great deal of trouble, it had been managed that the boy should be
allowed to leave the city.  He had been driven in a coach, he told Lucy, with some more Americans
and English, and with flags with stars and stripes or else Union Jacks all over it; and whenever
they came to a French sentry, or afterwards to a Prussian, they were stopped till he called
an officer who looked at their papers and let them go on.

Mr. Seaman had taken charge of Leonidas, and given him the best dinner he had eaten for a long
time, but as he was going to another city to other hospitals, he could not keep the boy with
him; so he had put him in charge of a friend who was going to London, to send him down to Mrs.
Bunker.

Fear of Lucy's rash was pretty well over now, and she was to go home in a day or two; so the
children were allowed to be together, and enjoyed it very much.  Lucy told about her dreams,
and Leonidas had a good deal to tell of what he had really seen on his travels.  They wished
very much that they could both see one of these wonderful dreams together, only--what should it be?

CHAPTER XVII.

THE DREAM OF ALL NATIONS.

What should it be?  She thought of Arabs with their tents and horses, and Leonidas told her
of Red Indians with their war-paint, and little Negroes dancing round the sugar-boiling, till
her head began quite to swim and her ears to buzz; and all the children she had seen seemed
to come round her, and join hands and dance.

Oh, such a din!  A little Highlander in his tartans stood on a barrel in the middle, making
his bagpipes squeal away; a Chinese with a bald head and long pigtail beat a gong, and capered
with a solemn face; a Norwegian herd-boy blew a monstrous bark cow-horn; an Indian juggler
twisted snakes round his neck to the sound of the tom-tom; and Lucy found herself and Leonidas
whirling round with a young Dutch planter between them, and an Indian with a crown of feathers
upon the other side of her.

"Oh!" she seemed to herself to cry, "what are you doing?  How do you all come here?"

"We are from all the nations who are friends, brethren," said the voices; "we all bring our
stores: the sugar, rice, cotton of the West; the silk and coffee and spices of the East; the
tea of China; the furs of the North: it is all exchanged from one to the other, and should
teach us to be all brethren, since we cannot thrive one without the other."

"It all comes to our country, because we are clever to work it up, and send it out to be used
in its own homes," said the Highlander; "it is English and Scotch machines that weave your
cottons, ay, and make your tools."

"No; it is America that beats you all," cried Leonidas; "what had you to do but to sit down
and starve, when we sent you no cotton?"

"If you send cotton, 'tis we that weave it," cried the Scot.

Lucy was almost afraid they would come to blows over which was the greatest and most skilful
country.  "It cannot be buying and selling that make nations love one another, and be peaceful,"
she thought. "Is it being learned and wise?"

"But the Prussian boys are studious and wise, and the French are clever and skilful, and yet
they have had that dreadful war: I wonder what it is that would make and keep all these countries
friends!"

And then there came an echo back to little Lucy: "For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And He shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke
many people; and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks;
nations shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they war any more."

Yes; the more they learn and keep the law of the Lord, the less there will be of those wars.
To heed the true law of the Lord will do more for peace and oneness than all the cleverness
in book-learning, or all the skilful manufactures in the world.