The barrister receives better treatment, but, of course, he is generally deemed to be a more
"genteel" person; yet, in considering stage barristers, one notices that they are drawn very
superficially, that their profession is accidental to the play, and little or nothing turns
on the influence of the career upon the man. Judges, like solicitors, are usually regarded
as comic.

Our stage has hardly inherited Molière traditions concerning the doctors; there were two important
plays, The Medicine Man and The Physician, in which members of the healing art are treated
seriously--though Dr Tregenna in the former was rather a caricature, and in The Doctor's Dilemma
we had a brilliantly painted group of medical men. When he returned to England in 1664 he established
intimate relations with Sir Robert Moray and with John Maitland, earl and afterwards first duke
of Lauderdale, both of whom at that time advocated a tolerant policy
towards the Scottish covenanters.

Burnet became a member of the Royal Society, of which Moray was the first president. On his father's
death he had been offered a living by a relative, Sir Alexander Burnet, and in 1663 the living
of Saltoun, East Lothian, had been kept open for him by one of his father's friends.
 The modern officer of the good type, the man with an honest, energetic interest
in his profession, is rarely presented.

What about the navy? There was The Flag-Lieutenant and also Captain Drew on Leave, the latter
a somewhat unpleasant picture, fortunately exhibiting no trace of the sailor's spirit or style
of thought. One cannot complain nowadays of a lack of parsons or Nonconformist ministers, though
it is irksome to see that the latter, as a rule, are presented in an odious light, by way,
probably, of a mean little revenge for the hostility of the Nonconformist to the theatre--a
hostility which could hardly surprise any dispassionate person who considers the present state
of the stage.

The architect, save in The Master Builder, is almost unknown; the engineer, unspecialised as
a rule, figures vaguely sometimes.

Perhaps one ought to write guardedly concerning the journalist. Still, at least, facts may
be stated. As a rule he appears as reporter or interviewer, and is treated comically. In The
Perfect Lover Mr Sutro handles him seriously, and that play contains an elaborate picture of
a weak-minded journalist as well as a wicked solicitor. Of the existence of thousands of men,
highly educated and many of them possessing brilliant degrees, connected with the enormous
newspaper interest of this country, the stage takes no cognizance. A dramatic critic occasionally
is exhibited--as a rule in connexion with the champagne-and-chicken theory.

The vast army devoted to science is almost ignored, though sometimes the inventor has a kind
of "innings": in The Middleman Mr Henry Arthur Jones made a striking figure of him. Financiers,
business men, merchants and the like have little justice done to them. To the dramatist the
fraudulent is the only interesting financier. He certainly is very fond of working on the Mercadet
basis. He commonly confounds the stockbroker with the bucket-shop keeper, and invariably assumes
that the company promoter is a thief. The merchant or manufacturer tends to replace the French
uncle from America, and his wealth rather than himself is employed by the playwright to get
his characters out of a mess.

The novelist or poet is a difficult person for stage treatment; the pictures of the dramatist
in the theatre are curiously unlifelike--as unlifelike as the theatrical managers on the stage.
There are reasons for this that need not be discussed. 

Every house annually receives a coating of whitewash, which, when it is new, produces a disagreeable
glare. The city is distinguished by its somewhat deceptive air of cleanliness, its quiet streets,
where no wheeled traffic passes, and its lavish use of white Italian marble. But the most characteristic
feature of Cadiz is the marine promenades, fringing the city all round between the ramparts
and the sea, especially that called the Alameda, on the eastern side, commanding a view of
the shipping in the bay and the ports on the opposite shore. They come and go without our knowing why or how; they neither eat nor drink, they
do not live in any particular place, and have no métier."

The "neither eat nor drink," of course, is quite inapplicable; we have far too much eating
and drinking on the stage. The low, comic meals of the Adelphi are replaced by similar or slightly
more "genteel" humours of comic eating in comedies. It may be that this phenomenon is due to
a belief that playgoers want to see something in the theatres far divorced from its ordinary
life, but this belief seems hardly consistent with certain notable tendencies towards realism.
Undoubtedly the public has not grown tired of plays dealing seriously with current human life;
it has had no opportunity of growing tired of them.

Since this was written the "Yellow Journalism" editor has twice appeared, once in the brilliant
comedy called What the Public Wants, by Mr Arnold Bennett, where Mr James Hearn represented
him superbly, and on the other occasion in Mr Fagan's clever work called The Earth, when Mr
M'Kinnel acted ably. Also we have had an engineer in The Building of Bridges and a doctor in
Fires of Fate.