In 1755 the Seven Years' Peace was coming to an end in Europe. The shadow of the Seven Years'
War was already falling darkly across the prospect in America. Though Wolfe did not leave for
the front till 1757, he was constantly receiving orders to be ready, first for one place and
then for another. So early as February 18, 1755, he wrote to his mother what he then thought
might be a farewell letter. It is full of the great war; but personal affairs of the deeper
kind were by no means forgotten. 'The success of our fleet in the beginning of the war is of
the utmost importance.' 'It will be sufficient comfort to you both to reflect that the Power
which has hitherto preserved me may, if it be His pleasure, continue to do so. If not, it is
but a few days more or less, and those who perish in their duty and the service of their country
die honourably.'

The end of this letter is in a lighter vein. But it is no less characteristic: it is all about
his dogs. 'You are to have Flurry instead of Romp. The two puppies I must desire you to keep
a little longer. I can't part with either of them, but must find good and secure quarters for
them as well as for my friend Caesar, who has great merit and much good humour. I have given
Sancho to Lord Howe, so that I am reduced to two spaniels and one pointer.' It is strange that
in the many books about dogs which mention the great men who have been fond of them --and most
great men are fond of dogs--not one says a word about Wolfe. Yet 'my friend Caesar, who has
great merit and much good humour,' deserves to be remembered with his kind master just as much,
in his way, as that other Caesar, the friend of Edward VII, who followed his master to the
grave among the kings and princes of a mourning world.

CHAPTER IV

THE SEVEN YEARS' WAR 1756-1763

Wolfe's Quebec campaign marked the supreme crisis of the greatest war the British Empire ever
waged: the war, indeed, that made the Empire. To get a good, clear view of anything so vast,
so complex, and so glorious, we must first look at the whole course of British history to see
how it was that France and England ever became such deadly rivals. It is quite wrong to suppose
that the French and British were always enemies, though they have often been called 'historic'
and 'hereditary' foes, as if they never could make friends at all. As a matter of fact, they
have had many more centuries of peace than of war; and ever since the battle of Waterloo, in
1815, they have been growing friendlier year by year. But this happy state of affairs is chiefly
because, as we now say, their 'vital interests no longer clash'; that is, they do not both
desire the same thing so keenly that they have to fight for it.

Their vital interests do not clash now. But they did clash twice in the course of their history.
The first time was when both governments wished to rule the same parts of the land of France.
The second time was when they both wished to rule the same parts of the oversea world. Each
time there was a long series of wars, which went on inevitably until one side had completely
driven its rival from the field.

The first long series of wars took place chiefly in the fourteenth century and is known to
history as the Hundred Years' War. England held, and was determined to hold, certain parts
of France. France was determined never to rest till she had won them for herself. Whatever
other things the two nations were supposed to be fighting about, this was always the one cause
of strife that never changed and never could change till one side or other had definitely triumphed.
France won. There were glorious English victories at Cressy and Agincourt. Edward III and Henry
V were two of the greatest soldiers of any age. But, though the English often won the battles,
the French won the war. The French had many more men, they fought near their own homes, and,
most important of all, the war was waged chiefly on land. The English had fewer men, they fought
far away from their homes, and their ships could not help them much in the middle of the land,
except by bringing over soldiers and food to the nearest coast. The end of it all was that
the English armies were worn out; and the French armies, always able to raise more and more
fresh men, drove them, step by step, out of the land completely.

The second long series of wars took place chiefly in the eighteenth century. These wars have
never been given one general name; but they should be called the Second Hundred Years' War,
because that is what they really were. They were very different from the wars that made up
the first Hundred Years' War, because this time the fight was for oversea dominions, not for
land in Europe. Of course navies had a good deal to do with the first Hundred Years' War and
armies with the second. But the navies were even more important in the second than the armies
in the first. The Second Hundred Years' War, the one in which Wolfe did such a mighty deed,
began with the fall of the Stuart kings of England in 1688 and went on till the battle of Waterloo
in 1815. But the beginning and end that meant most to the Empire were the naval battles of
La Hogue in 1692 and Trafalgar in 1805. Since Trafalgar the Empire has been able to keep what
it had won before, and to go on growing as well, because all its different parts are joined
together by the sea, and because the British Navy has been, from that day to this, stronger
than any other navy in the world.

How the French and British armies and navies fought on opposite sides, either alone or with
allies, all over the world, from time to time, for these hundred and twenty-seven years; how
all the eight wars with different names formed one long Second Hundred Years' War; and how
the British Navy was the principal force that won the whole of this war, made the Empire, and
gave Canada safety then, as it gives her safety now--all this is much too long a story to tell
here. But the gist of it may be told in a very few words, at least in so far as it concerns
the winning of Canada and the deeds of Wolfe.

The name 'Greater Britain' is often used to describe all the parts of the British Empire which
lie outside of the old mother country. This 'Greater Britain' is now so vast and well established
that we are apt to forget those other empires beyond the seas which, each in its own day, surpassed
the British Empire of the same period. There was a Greater Portugal, a Greater Spain, a Greater
Holland, and a Greater France. France and Holland still have large oversea possessions; and
a whole new-world continent still speaks the languages of Spain and Portugal. But none of them
has kept a growing empire oversea as their British rival has. What made the difference? The
two things that made all the difference in the world were freedom and sea-power. We cannot
stop to discuss freedom, because that is more the affair of statesmen; but, at the same time,
we must not forget that the side on which Wolfe fought was the side of freedom. The point for
us to notice here is that all the freedom and all the statesmen and all the soldiers put together
could never have made a Greater Britain, especially against all those other rivals, unless
Wolfe's side had also been the side of sea-power.

Now, sea-power means more than fighting power at sea; it means trading power as well. But a
nation cannot trade across the sea against its rivals if its own ships are captured and theirs
are not. And long before the Second Hundred Years' War with France the other sea-trading empires
had been gradually giving way, because in time of war their ships were always in greater danger
than those of the British were. After the English Navy had defeated the Spanish Armada in 1588
the Spaniards began, slowly but surely, to lose their chance of making a permanent Greater
Spain. After the great Dutch War, when Blake defeated Van Tromp in 1653, there was no further
chance of a permanent Greater Holland. And, even before the Dutch War and the Armada, the Portuguese,
who had once ruled the Indian Ocean and who had conquered Brazil, were themselves conquered
by Spain and shut out from all chance of establishing a Greater Portugal.

So the one supreme point to be decided by the Second Hundred Years' War lay between only two
rivals, France and Britain. Was there to be a Greater France or a Greater Britain across the
seas? The answer depended on the rival navies. Of course, it involved many other elements of
national and Imperial power on both sides. But no other elements of power could have possibly
prevailed against a hostile and triumphant navy.

Everything that went to make a Greater France or a Greater Britain had to cross the sea--men,
women, and children, horses and cattle, all the various appliances a civilized people must
take with them when they settle in a new country. Every time there was war there were battles
at sea, and these battles were nearly always won by the British. Every British victory at sea
made it harder for French trade, because every ship between France and Greater France ran more
risk o being taken, while every ship between Britain and Greater Britain stood a better chance
of getting safely through. This affected everything on both competing sides in America. British
business went on. French business almost stopped dead. Even the trade with the Indians living
a thousand miles inland was changed in favour of the British and against the French, as all
the guns and knives and beads and everything else that the white man offered to the Indian
in exchange for his furs had to come across the sea, which was just like an enemy's country
to every French ship, but just like her own to every British one. Thus the victors at sea grew
continually stronger in America, while the losers grew correspondingly weaker. When peace came,
the French only had time enough to build new ships and start their trade again before the next
war set them back once more; while the British had nearly all their old ships, all those they
had taken from the French, and many new ones.

But where did Wolfe come in? He came in at the most important time and place of all, and he
did the most important single deed of all. This brings us to the consideration of how the whole
of the Second Hundred Years' War was won, not by the British Navy alone, much less by the Army
alone, but by the united service of both, fighting like the two arms of one body, the Navy
being the right arm and the Army the left. The heart of this whole Second Hundred Years' War
was the Seven Years' War; the British part of the Seven Years' War was then called the 'Maritime
War'; and the heart of the 'Maritime War' was the winning of Canada, in which the decisive
blow was dealt by Wolfe.

We shall see presently how Navy and Army worked together as a united service in 'joint expeditions'
by sea and land, how Wolfe took part in two other joint expeditions before he commanded the
land force of the one at Quebec, and how the mighty empire-making statesman, William Pitt,
won the day for Britain and for Greater Britain, with Lord Anson at the head of the Navy to
help him, and Saunders in command at the front. It was thus that the age-long vexed question
of a Greater France or a Greater Britain in America was finally decided by the sword. The conquering
sword was that of the British Empire as a whole. But the hand that wielded it was Pitt; the
hilt was Anson, the blade was Saunders, and the point was Wolfe.

CHAPTER V

LOUISBOURG 1758

In 1755 Wolfe was already writing what he thought were farewell letters before going off to
the war. And that very year the war, though not formally declared till the next, actually did
break out in America, where a British army under Braddock, with Washington as his aide-de-camp,
was beaten in Ohio by the French and Indians. Next year the French, owing to the failure of
Admiral Byng and the British fleet to assist the garrison, were able to capture Minorca in
the Mediterranean; while their new general in Canada, Montcalm, Wolfe's great opponent, took
Oswego. The triumph of the French fleet at Minorca made the British people furious. Byng was
court-martialled, found guilty of failure to do his utmost to save Minorca, and condemned to
death. In spite of Pitt's efforts to save him, the sentence was carried out and he was shot
on the quarter-deck of his own flagship. Two other admirals, Hawke and Saunders, both of whom
were soon to see service with Wolfe, were then sent out as a 'cargo of courage' to retrieve
the British position at sea. By this time preparations were being hurried forward on every
hand. Fleets were fitting out. Armies were mustering. And, best of all, Pitt was just beginning
to make his influence felt.

In 1757, the third year of war, things still went badly for the British at the front. In America
Montcalm took Fort William Henry, and a British fleet and army failed to accomplish anything
against Louisbourg. In Europe another British fleet and army were fitted out to go on another
joint expedition, this time against Rochefort, a great seaport in the west of France. The senior
staff officer, next to the three generals in command, was Wolfe, now thirty years of age. The
admiral in charge of the fleet was Hawke, as famous a fighter as Wolfe himself. A little later,
when both these great men were known throughout the whole United Service, as well as among
the millions in Britain and in Greater Britain, their names were coupled in countless punning
toasts, and patriots from Canada to Calcutta would stand up to drink a health to 'the eye of
a Hawke and the heart of a Wolfe.' But Wolfe was not a general yet; and the three pottering
old men who were generals at Rochefort could not make up their minds to do anything but talk.
These generals had been ordered to take Rochefort by complete surprise. But after spending
five days in front of it, so that every Frenchman could see what they had come for, they decided
to countermand the attack and sail home.

Wolfe was a very angry and disgusted man. Yet, though this joint expedition was a disgraceful
failure, he had learned some useful lessons, which he was presently to turn to good account.
He saw, at least, what such expeditions should not attempt; and that a general should act boldly,
though wisely, with the fleet. More than this, he had himself made a plan which his generals
were too timid to carry out; and this plan was so good that Pitt, now in supreme control for
the next four years, made a note of it and marked him down for promotion and command.

Both came sooner than any one could have expected. Pitt was sick of fleets and armies that
did nothing but hold councils of war and then come back to say that the enemy could not be
safely attacked. He made up his mind to send out real fighters with the next joint expedition.
So in 1758 he appointed Wolfe as the junior of the three brigadier-generals under Amherst,
who was to join Admiral Boscawen--nicknamed 'Old Dreadnought'--in a great expedition meant
to take Louisbourg for good and all.

Louisbourg was the greatest fortress in America. It was in the extreme east of Canada, on the
island of Cape Breton, near the best fishing-grounds, and on the flank of the ship channel
into the St Lawrence. A fortress there, in which French fleets could shelter safely, was like
a shield for New France and a sword against New England. In 1745, just before the outbreak
of the Jacobite rebellion in Scotland, an army of New Englanders under Sir William Pepperrell,
with the assistance of Commodore Warren's fleet, had taken this fortress. But at the peace
of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748, when Wolfe had just come of age, it was given back to France.

Ten years later, when Wolfe went out to join the second army that was sent against it, the
situation was extremely critical. Both French and British strained every nerve, the one to
hold, the other to take, the greatest fortress in America. A French fleet sailed from Brest
in the spring and arrived safely. But it was not nearly strong enough to attempt a sea-fight
off Louisbourg, and three smaller fleets that were meant to join it were all smashed up off
the coast of France by the British, who thus knew, before beginning the siege, that Louisbourg
could hardly expect any help from outside. Hawke was one of the British smashers this year.
The next year he smashed up a much greater force in Quiberon Bay, and so made 'the eye of a
Hawke and the heart of a Wolfe' work together again, though they were thousands of miles apart
and one directed a fleet while the other inspired an army.

The fortress of Louisbourg was built beside a fine harbour with an entrance still further defended
by a fortified island. It was garrisoned by about four thousand four hundred soldiers. Some
of these were hired Germans, who cared nothing for the French; and the French-Canadian and
Indian irregulars were not of much use at a regular siege. The British admiral Boscawen had
a large fleet, and General Amherst an army twelve thousand strong. Taking everything into account,
by land and sea, the British united service at the siege was quite three times as strong as
the French united service. But the French ships, manned by three thousand sailors, were in
a good harbour, and they and the soldiers were defended by thick walls with many guns. Besides,
the whole defence was conducted by Drucour, as gallant a leader as ever drew sword.

Boscawen was chosen by Pitt for the same reason as Wolfe had been, because he was a fighter.
He earned his nickname of 'Old Dreadnought' from the answer he made one night in the English
Channel when the officer of the watch called him to say that two big French ships were bearing
down on his single British one. 'What are we to do, sir?' asked the officer. 'Do?' shouted
Boscawen, springing out of his berth, 'Do?--Why, damn 'em, fight 'em, of course!' And they
did. Amherst was the slow-and-sure kind of general; but he had the sense to know a good man
when he saw one, and to give Wolfe the chance of trying his own quick-and-sure way instead.

A portion of the British fleet under Vice-Admiral Sir Charles Hardy had been cruising off Louisbourg
for some time before Boscawen's squadron hove in sight on June 2. This squadron was followed
by more than twice its own number of ships carrying the army. All together, there were a hundred
and fifty-seven British vessels, besides Hardy's covering squadron. Of course, the men could
not be landed under the fire of the fortress. But two miles south of it, and running westward
from it for many miles more, was Gabarus Bay with an open beach. For several days the Atlantic
waves dashed against the shore so furiously that no boat could live through their breakers.
But on the eighth the three brigades of infantry made for three different points, [Footnote:
White Point, Flat Point, and Kennington Cove. See the accompanying Map of the siege.] respectively
two, three, and four miles from the fortress. The French sent out half the garrison to shoot
down the first boatloads that came in on the rollers. To cover the landing, some of Boscawen's
ships moved in as close as they could and threw shells inshore: but without dislodging the enemy.

