Master George, nothing loth to have lessons disturbed by any summons, ran round from the open
window through the open hall door, and his father followed more slowly to behold the marvel.

'You see, papa, I thought it never would get on, it was such a sickly little thing; but it
must be growing strong, or it could not put out a bud. How glad I shall be to see a daisy's
face again! I would give all the fragrance of the blue wild iris for one. But, papa, the laurel
cuttings are dead, I fear.'

They looked very like it, though Mr. Wynn would still give them a chance. He apprehended the
extreme dryness of the air might prove too much for the infant daisy also. But Linda would
see nothing except promise of prosperity as yet.

'Now, papa, when I am done with my melons, and you have finished Georgie's lessons, I want
you to walk down to Daisy Burn with me. I have something to say to Edith.'

'With pleasure, my dear. But I have always wondered why that name was given to that farm, except
on the principle of lucus a non.'

After the mid-day dinner they went. Meeting Andy on the road, trudging up from the 'Corner'
on some message, he informed them that the captain and his son had gone to a cradling-bee at
Benson's, an English settler a few miles off. 'But as to whether 'tis to make cradles they
want, or to rock 'em, meself doesn't rightly know.'

The fact being that a 'cradle,' in American farming, signifies a machine for cutting down corn
wholesale. It is a scythe, longer and wider than that used in mowing hay, combined with an
apparatus of 'standard,' 'snaith,' and 'fingers,' by means of which a single workman may level
two acres and a half of wheat or oats in one day.

'Captain Armytage is of a very sociable disposition,' remarked Mr. Wynn, after a few steps.
'A man fresh from the mess table and clubs must find the bush strangely unsuitable.' He was
thinking of certain petty occurrences at his own bee, which demonstrated the gallant officer's
weaknesses.

'Oh, papa, did you ever see anything like these vines? Grapes will be as plentiful as blackberries
are at home.' For along the concession line many trees were festooned with ripening clusters;
and deeper in the woods, beyond Linda's ken, and where only the birds and wild animals could
enjoy the feast, whole hundredweights hung in gleams of sunshine. Well might the Northmen,
lighting upon Canadian shores in one hot summer, many centuries before Cabot or Cartier, name
the country Vine-land; and the earliest French explorers up the St. Lawrence call a grape-laden
rock the Isle of Bacchus.

'But is it not a wonder, papa,' pressed the young lady, 'when the cold is so terrible in winter?
Do you remember all the endless trouble the gardener at Dunore had to save his vines from the
frost? And Robert says that great river the Ottawa is frozen up for five months every year,
yet here the grapes flourish in the open air.'

'I suppose we are pretty much in the latitude of the Garonne,' answered Mr. Wynn, casting about
for some cause. 'But, indeed, Linda, if your Canadian grape does not enlarge somewhat'--

'You unreasonable papa, to expect as fine fruit as in a hothouse or sunny French vineyard.
I really see no reason why we Canadians should not have regular vineyards some day, and you
would see how our little grapes must improve under cultivation. Perhaps we might make wine.
Now, you dear clever papa, just turn your attention to that, and earn for yourself the sobriquet
of national benefactor.'

Clinging to his arm as they walked, she chattered her best to amuse the sombre mind, so lately
uprooted from old habits and ways of life into a mode of existence more or less distasteful.
The birds aided her effort with a variety of foreign music. Woodpigeon, bobolink, bluebird,
oriole, cooed and trilled and warbled from the bush all around. The black squirrel, fat, sleek,
jolly with good living of summer fruits, scampered about the boughs with erect shaggy tail,
looking a very caricature upon care, as he stowed away hazel-nuts for the frosty future. Already
the trees had donned their autumn coats of many colours; and the beauteous maple-leaves, matchless
in outline as in hue, began to turn crimson and gold. The moody man yielded to the sweet influences
of nature in a degree, and acknowledged that even this exile land could be enjoyable.

Arriving at the snake fences of Armytage's farm, he said he would go down to the post at the
'Corner' for letters, and call in an hour for Linda on his return. She found Edith and Jay
working hard as usual. Their employment to-day was the very prosaic one of digging potatoes.
'What horrid occupation for a lady!' exclaims somebody. Yes; Miss Armytage would have much
preferred an afternoon spent in painting flowers, for which she had a talent. But there was
no help for such manual labour in this case. Don't you imagine her pride suffered before she
took part in field work? I think so, by the deep blush that suffused her face when she saw
the visitor coming along, though it was only Linda Wynn, who made some not very complimentary
reflections on the father and brother whose absence on an amusing expedition permitted this,--whose
general indolence compelled severe labour from the girls. They were misplaced men, certainly,
and had as much business in the bush, with their tastes and habits, and want of self-control,
as Zack Bunting would have had in an English drawing-room.

Linda had been thinking over a plan, which, when uttered, was proved to have also suggested
itself to her friend. Could not something be done in the way of a Sunday-school class for the
miserable ignorant children at the 'Corner'? Now the very rudiments of revealed religion were
unknown to them; and to spend an hour or two on the vacant Sabbath in trying to teach them
some of Heaven's lore, seemed as if it might be the germ of great good. Miss Armytage, naturally
not of Linda's buoyant disposition, foresaw abundance of difficulties,--the indifference or
opposition of parents, the total want of discipline or habits of thought among the young themselves.
Still, it was worth trying; if only a single childish soul should be illuminated with the light
of life to all eternity by this means, oh, how inestimably worth trying!

Mr. Wynn was seen coming up the clearing. 'I know papa has had a letter,' exclaimed Linda,
'and that it is a pleasant one, by his pleasant face. Confess now, Edith, isn't he the handsomest
man you ever saw?'

Her friend laughed at the daughterly enthusiasm, but could have answered in the affirmative,
as she looked at his stately grey-crowned figure and handsome features, lighted with a grave,
kind smile, as Linda took possession of his left arm--to be nearer his heart, she said. She
was not very long in coaxing from him the blue official letter which contained his appointment
to the magistracy of the district, about which he pretended not to be a bit pleased.

'And there's some other piece of nonsense in that,' said he, taking out a second blue envelope,
and addressed to Arthur Wynn, Esquire.

'"Adjutant-General's Office,"' read Linda, from the corner. 'His appointment to the militia,
I am sure. That good, powerful Mr. Holt!' Even at the name she coloured a little. 'He said
that he would try and have this done. And I am so glad you are taking your proper footing in
the colony, papa. Of course they should make you a magistrate. I should like to know who has
the dignified presence, or will uphold the majesty of the law, as well as you?'

'Magistracy and militia--very different in this mushroom society from what they are in the
old country,' said Mr. Wynn despairingly.

'Well, papa, I have ambition enough to prefer being chief fungus among the mushrooms, instead
of least among any other class. Don't you know how poverty is looked down upon at home? Here
we are valued for ourselves, not for our money. See how all the neighbourhood looks up to Mr.
Wynn of Cedar Creek. You are lord-lieutenant of the county, without his commission: these men
feel the influence of superior education and abilities and knowledge.'

'I verily believe, saucebox, that you think your father fit to be Governor-General; or, at
least, a triton among the minnows.'

'Papa, the fun is, you'll have to marry people now, whenever you're asked. It is part of a
magistrate's duty in out-of-the-way places, Mr. Holt says.'

'Then I am to consider my services bespoke by the young ladies present, eh?' said Mr. Wynn,
making a courtly inclination to Edith and Jay. 'With the greatest pleasure.'

CHAPTER XXXV.

THE PINK MIST.

Mr. Wynn became his magisterial functions well, though exercised after a primitive fashion,
without court-house or bench whence to issue his decisions, without clerk to record them, or
police force to back them, or any other customary paraphernalia of justice to render his office
imposing. To be sure, his fine presence was worth a great deal, and his sonorous voice. As
Linda predicted, he was obliged to perform clerical duty at times, in so far as to marry folk
who lived beyond reach of a clergyman, and had thrice published their intention in the most
public part of the township. The earliest of these transactions affianced one of Davidson's
lads to a braw sonsie lass, daughter of Benson, the Shropshire settler beyond the 'Corner.'
The bridegroom, a tall strapping young fellow of about twenty-three, had a nice cottage ready
for his wife, and a partially cleared farm of a hundred acres, on which he had been working
with this homestead in view for the last year and a half. The prudent Scotsman would portion
off his other sons in similar respectability as they came of age.

'And yer mither and I cam' here wi' an axe and a cradle,' he was wont to say, 'eh, Jeanie Davidson?'

He had good cause for gratulation at the wedding that day. His own indomitable industry and
energy had raised him from being a struggling weaver in Lanarkshire to be a prosperous landowner
in Canada West. He looked upon a flourishing family of sons and daughters round the festive
board in Benson's barn, every one of them a help to wealth instead of a diminution to it; strong,
intelligent lads, healthy and handy lasses. With scarce a care or a doubt, he could calculate
on their comfortable future.

'I tell you what, neighbour,' cried stout John Benson, from the head of the table, 'throw by
cold water for once, and pledge me in good whisky to the lucky day that brought us both to Canada.'

'Na, na,' quoth Davidson, shaking his grizzled head, 'I'll drink the toast wi' all my heart,
but it must be in gude water. These twenty year back I hae been a temperance man, and hae brought
up thae lads to the same fashion; for, coming to Canada, I kenned what ruined mony a puir fallow
might weel be the ruin o' me, an' I took a solemn vow that a drap o' drink suld never moisten
my lips mair. Sandy Davidson wouldna be gettin' John Benson's daughter in marriage the day,
if it werena for the cauld water.'

Captain Armytage, who never missed a merrymaking of any description within a circle of miles,
took on himself to reply to this teetotal oration.

It was all very well for Mr. Davidson to talk thus, but few constitutions could bear up against
the excessive labour of bush life without proportionate stimulants. For his own part, he would
sink under it, but for judicious reinforcement of cordials, ordered him by the first medical
man in Europe.

'I daur say,' replied Davidson, whose keen hard eye had been fixed on the speaker; 'I daur
say. Ye mak' nae faces at yer medicine, anyhow. It's weel that Zack's store is so handy to
Daisy Burn, only I'm thinkin' the last will go to the first, in the long run.'

'What do you mean, sir?' demanded the captain fierily.

'Naething,' responded Davidson coolly,--'naething save what e'er the words mean.'

'But we were a-goin' to drink to Canada, our adopted country,' put in Benson, willing to stifle
the incipient quarrel--'the finest country on the face of the earth, after Old England.'

His stentorian Shropshire lungs supplied a cheer of sufficient intensity, taken up by his guests.

'The country whar we needna fear factor, nor laird, nor rent-day,' shouted Davidson. 'We're
lairds an' factors here, an' our rent-day comes--never.'

'Whirroo!' exclaimed an Irishman, Pat O'Brien, who, having been evicted in his own country,
was particularly sensitive as to landlord and tenant-right. 'No more agints, nor gales o' rint,
nor nothin', ever to pay!'

'Not forgetting the tax-gatherer,' interposed portly Mr. Benson. 'None of us are partikler
sorry to part with him.'

Meanwhile the comely bride was sitting with her husband at one side of the table, thankful
for the diversion from herself as a topic of enthusiasm and mirth.

'Lads, you'd be a' at the loom, an' your sisters in the factories, only for Canada,' said Davidson,
now on his legs. 'An' I suld be lookin' for'ard to the poor-house as soon as my workin' days
were ower; an' Sandy couldna marry, except to live on porridge an' brose, wi' cauld kail o'
Sabbath. How wad ye relish that prospect, bonnie Susan?'

Bonnie Susan liked the prospect of the folds of her own silk dress best at that moment, to
judge by the determinately downward glance of her eyes.

By and by Davidson (for the subject was a favourite one with him) hit upon another of the Canadian
advantages as a poor man's land--that the larger a man's family, the wealthier was he. No need
to look on the little ones as superfluous mouths, which by dire necessity the labourer in mother
country is often forced to do; for each child will become an additional worker, therefore an
additional means of gain.

'An' if the folk at hame kenned this mair, dinna ye think the emigration wad be thrice what
it is, Mr. Robert? Dinna ye think they wad risk the sea an' the strangers, to make a safe future
for their bairns? Ay, surely. An' when I think o' the people treading one anither down over
the edges o' thae three little islands, while a country as big as Europe stands amaist empty
here'--

Mr. Davidson never stated the consequences of his thought; for just then came a universal call
to clear the tables, stow away the boards and tressels, and make room for dancing and small
plays. The hilarity may be imagined--the boisterous fun of general blindman's buff, ladies'
toilet, and all varieties of forfeits. Robert Wynn stole away in the beginning; he had come
for an hour, merely to gratify their good neighbour Davidson; but, pressing as was his own
farm-work, he found time to spend another hour at Daisy Burn, doing up some garden beds under
direction of Miss Edith. She had come to look on him as a very good friend; and he----well,
there was some indefinable charm of manner about the young lady. Those peculiarly set grey
eyes were so truthful and so gentle, that low musical voice so perfect in tone and inflection,
that Robert was pleased to look or listen, as the case might be. But chiefest reason of all--was
she not dear Linda's choicest friend and intimate? Did they not confide every secret of their
hearts to each other? Ah, sunbeam, Linda knew well that there was a depth of her friend's nature
into which she had never looked, and some reality of gloom there which she only guessed.

Perhaps it was about Edith's father or brother. That these gentlemen neglected their farm business,
and that therefore affairs could not prosper, was tolerably evident. Fertile as is Canadian
soil, some measure of toil is requisite to evolve its hidden treasures of agricultural wealth.
Except from a hired Irish labourer named Mickey Dunne, Daisy Burn farm did not get this requisite.
The young man Reginald now openly proclaimed his abhorrence of bush life. No degree of self-control
or arduous habits had prepared him for the hard work essential. Most of the autumn he had lounged
about the 'Corner,' except when his father was in Zack's bar, which was pretty often; or he
was at Cedar Creek on one pretext or other, whence he would go on fishing and shooting excursions
with Arthur.

Meanwhile, Robert's farming progressed well. His fall-wheat was all down by the proper period,
fifteenth of September; for it is found that the earlier the seed is sown, the stronger is
the plant by the critical time of its existence, and the better able to withstand frost and
rust. Complacently he looked over the broad brown space, variegated with charred stumps, which
occupied fully a twelfth of the cleared land; and stimulated by the pleasures of hope, he calculated
on thirty-five bushels an acre next summer as the probable yield. Davidson had raised forty
per acre in his first season at Daisy Burn, though he acknowledged that twenty-five was the
present average.

The garden stuff planted on Robert's spring-burn ground had flourished; more than two hundred
bushels per acre of potatoes were lodged in the root-house, and a quantity of very fine turnips
and carrots. Beans had not thriven: he learned that the climate is considered unfavourable
for them. The pumpkins planted between his rows of Indian corn had swelled and swelled, till
they lay huge golden balls on the ground, promising abundant dishes of 'squash' and sweet pie
through the winter.

'How is it that everything thrives with you, Wynn?' young Armytage said one afternoon that
he found the brothers busy slitting rails for the fencing of the aforesaid fall-wheat. 'I should
say the genius of good luck had a special care over Cedar Creek.'

'Well, nature has done three-fourths of it,' answered Robert, driving in a fresh wedge with
his beetle; 'for this soil reminds me of some poet's line--"Tickle the earth with a straw,
and forth laughs a yellow harvest." The other quarter of our success is just owing to hard
work, Armytage, as you may see.'

'I can't stand that,' said the young man, laughing: 'give me something to do at once;' and
he began to split rails also. Linda, coming from the house, found them thus employed--a highly
industrial trio.

'I recollect being promised wild plums to preserve,' said she, after looking on for a little.
'Suppose you get out the canoe, Bob, and we go over to that island where we saw such quantities
of them unripe? Now don't look so awfully wise over your wedges, but just consider how I am
to have fruit tarts for people, if the fruit is never gathered.'

Whether the motive was this telling argument, or that his work was almost finished owing to
the additional hand, Robert allowed the beetle to be taken from his fingers and laid aside.
'You imperious person! I suppose we must obey you.'

The day was one of those which only Canada in the whole world can furnish--a day of the 'pink
mist,' when the noon sun hangs central in a roseate cup of sky. The rich colour was deepest
all round the horizon, and paled with infinite shades towards the zenith, like a great blush
rose drooping over the earth. Twenty times that morning Linda went from the house to look at
it: her eyes could not be satiated with the beauty of the landscape and of the heavens above.

Then, what colours on the trees! As the canoe glided along through the enchanted repose of
the lake, what painted vistas of forest opened to the voyagers' sight! what glowing gold islets
against an azure background of distant waters and purple shores! what rainbows had fallen on
the woods, and steeped them in hues more gorgeous than the imagination of even a Turner could
conceive! Shades of lilac and violet deepening into indigo; scarlet flecked with gold and green;
the darkest claret and richest crimson in opposition: no tropical forest was ever dyed in greater
glory of blossom than this Canadian forest in glory of foliage.

'What can it be, Robert?' asked Linda, after drinking in the delight of colour in a long silent
gaze. 'Why have we never such magnificence upon our trees at home?'

'People say it is the sudden frost striking the sap; or that there is some peculiar power in
the sunbeams--actinic power, I believe 'tis called--to paint the leaves thus; but one thing
seems fatal to this supposition, that after a very dry summer the colouring is not near so
brilliant as it would be otherwise. I'm inclined to repose faith in the frost theory myself;
for I have noticed that after a scorching hot day and sharp night in August, the maples come
out in scarlet next morning.'

'Now, at home there would be some bald patches on the trees,' observed Arthur. 'The leaves
seem to fall wholesale here, after staying on till the last.'

'I have heard much of the Indian summer,' said Linda, 'but it far exceeds my expectation. An
artist would be thought mad who transferred such colouring to his canvas, as natural. Just
look at the brilliant gleam in the water all along under that bank, from the golden leafage
above it; and yonder the reflection is a vermilion stain. I never saw anything so lovely. I
hope it will last a long time, Bob.'

That was impossible to say; sometimes the Indian summer was for weeks, sometimes but for a
few days; Canadians had various opinions as to its arrival and duration: September, October,
or November might have portions of the dreamy hazy weather thus called. As to why the name
was given, nobody could tell; except it bore reference to an exploded idea that the haze characteristic
of the time of the year arose from the burning of the great grassy prairies far west by the
red men.

'What has become of your colony of Indians?' asked Armytage, 'those who lived near the cedar
swamp?'

'Oh, they left us in "the whortleberry moon," as they call August, and migrated to some region
where that fruit abounds, to gather and store it for winter use. They smoke the berries over
a slow fire, I am told, and when dry, pack them in the usual birch-bark makaks; and I've seen
them mixed with the dough of bread, and boiled with venison or porcupine, or whatever other
meat was going, as we would use whole pepper.'

'After the whortleberries, they were to go to the rice-grounds,' observed Arthur. 'Bob, suppose
we paddle over and try for ducks in the rice-beds, to the lee of that island.'

Here were some hundred yards of shallow water, filled with the tall graceful plant, named by
the Jesuits 'folle avoine,' and by the English 'wild rice.' The long drooping ears filled with
very large grains, black outside and white within, shook down their contents into the silt
at bottom with every movement which waved their seven-feet stems. Arthur knew it as a noted
haunt of wild duck, a cloud of which arose when he fired.

'It was here we met all the pigeons the other day,' said he. 'Those trees were more like the
inside of a feather-bed than anything else, so covered were they with fluttering masses of
birds; you couldn't see a bit of the foliage; and 'twas quite amusing to watch some of them
lighting on the rice, which wasn't strong enough to support them, and trying to pick out the
grains. As they could neither swim nor stand, they must have been thoroughly tantalized. Don't
you remember, Armytage?'

But their main business, the plums, must be attended to; the islet was found which was bordered
with festoons of them, hanging over the edge in the coves; and after due feasting on the delicious
aromatic fruit, they gathered some basketsful. When that was done, it was high time to paddle
homewards; the sun was gliding forth from the roseate vault over the western rim, and a silvery
haze rose from the waters, softly veiling the brilliant landscape.

'A great improvement to your charcoal forest, it must be owned,' said Robert, pointing Armytage
to where the sharp black tops of rampikes projected over the mist. The young man did not relish
allusions to that folly of his father's, and was silent.

'Oh, Bob, what a pretty islet!' exclaimed Linda, as they passed a rock crested with a few trees,
and almost carpeted by the brilliant red foliage of the pyrola, or winter green. 'The bushes
make quite a crimson wreath round the yellow poplars.'

'I think,' said Robert, with deliberation, 'it would be almost worth the voyage across the
Atlantic Ocean to see this single day of "the pink mist."'

CHAPTER XXXVI.

BELOW ZERO.

Indian summer was succeeded by the 'temps boucaneux,' when hoarfrost drooped noiselessly on
the night its silver powder on all the dazzling colouring, presenting nature robed in a delicate
white guise each morning, which the sun appropriated to himself as soon as he could get above
the vapours. Now were the vast waters of Canada passing from a fluid to a solid form, giving
out caloric in quantities, accompanied by these thin mists. Towards the close of November navigation
ceases on the Ottawa; the beginning of December sees the mighty river frozen over. Yet it lies
in the latitude of Bordeaux! All honour to the benevolent Gulf Stream which warms France and
England comfortably.

When Linda's fingers were particularly cold, she would puzzle Robert and her father with questions
as to why this should be so. Mr. Holt once told her that the prevailing wind came from the
north-west across a vast expanse of frozen continent and frozen ocean. Also that James's Bay,
the southern tongue of Hudson's, was apt to get choked with masses of ice drifted in from the
arctic seas, and which, being without a way of escape, just jammed together and radiated cold
in company on the surrounding lands.

This explanation was given and received within earshot of a splendid fire on one of those tremendous
January mornings when the temperature is perhaps twenty-five degrees below zero, when the very
smoke cannot disperse in the frozen atmosphere, and the breath of man and beast returns upon
them in snowy particles. Nobody cares to be out of doors, for the air cuts like a knife, and
one's garments stiffen like sheet-iron. Linda stands at the window of the little parlour--well
she understands now why the hearth was made almost as wide as one side of the room--and looks
out on the white world, and on the coppery sun struggling to enlighten the icy heavens, and
on that strange phenomenon, the ver glas, gleaming from every tree.

'Now, Mr. Holt, as you have been good enough to attempt an explanation of the cold, perhaps
you could tell me the cause of the ver glas? What makes that thin incrustation of ice over
the trunk and every twig which has been attracting my admiration these three days? It was as
if each tree was dressed in a tight-fitting suit of crystal when the sun succeeded in shining
a little yesterday.'

'I imagine that the cause was the slight thaw on Monday, and the freezing of the moisture that
then covered the bark and branches into a coat of ice. So I only attempt explanations, Miss Linda.'

'Oh, but it is not your fault if they are unsatisfactory, as I own that of the north-west winds
and James's Bay was to me; it is the fault of science. I'm afraid you'll not answer another
question which I have, since I am so ungrateful as not to accept everything you say with becoming
reverence.'

'Name your question.'

'Why is every fourth day milder than the others? Why may we reckon with almost certainty on
a degree of soft weather to-morrow?'

'Those are the tertian intervals, and nobody understands them.'

'Concise and candid, if it doesn't make me wiser; but I'm compensated for that in finding something
of which you are equally ignorant with myself, Mr. Holt.'

Remarks of a more superficial character were extorted by the severity of the weather from the
inmates of the kitchen. 

She called therefore at Manchester Square on the day before she started for Matching, and left
a card and a note.

This was on the 15th of August, when London was as empty as it ever is. The streets at the
West End were deserted. The houses were shut up. The very sweepers of the crossings seemed to
have gone out of town. The public offices were manned by one or two unfortunates each, who
consoled themselves by reading novels at their desks.

Half the cab-drivers had gone apparently to the seaside,--or to bed. The shops were still open,
but all the respectable shopkeepers were either in Switzerland or at their marine villas.
The travelling world had divided itself into Cookites and Hookites;--those
who escaped trouble under the auspices of Mr. Cook, and those who
boldly combated the extortions of foreign innkeepers and the anti-Anglican
tendencies of foreign railway officials "on their own hooks."

The Duchess of Omnium was nevertheless in town, and the Duke might still be seen going in
at the back entrance of the Treasury Chambers every day at eleven
o'clock.

Mr. Warburton thought it very hard, for he, too, could shoot grouse; but he would have perished
rather than have spoken a word.

The Duchess did not ask to see Mrs. Lopez, but left her card and a note. She had not liked,
she said, to leave town without calling, though she would not seek to be admitted. She hoped
that Mrs. Lopez was recovering her health, and trusted that on her
return to town she might be allowed to renew her acquaintance.

The note was very simple, and could not be taken as other than friendly. If she had been simply
Mrs. Palliser, and her husband had been a junior clerk in the Treasury,
such a visit would have been a courtesy; and it was not less so because
it was made by the Duchess of Omnium and by the wife of the Prime
Minister.

But yet among all the poor widow's acquaintances she was the only one who had ventured to
call since Lopez had destroyed himself. Mrs. Roby had been told not to come. Lady Eustace had been
sternly rejected.

Even old Mrs. Fletcher when she had been up in town had, after a very solemn meeting with Mr. Wharton,
contented herself with sending her love. It had come to pass that the idea of being immured was growing
to be natural to Emily herself. The longer that it was continued the more did it seem to be impossible
to her that she should break from her seclusion. But yet she was gratified by the note from
the Duchess.

"She means to be civil, papa."

"Oh yes;--but there are people whose civility I don't want."

"Certainly. I did not want the civility of that horrid Lady Eustace. But I can understand this.
She thinks that she did Ferdinand an injury."

"When you begin, my dear,--and I hope it will be soon,--to get back to the world, you will find
it more comfortable, I think, to find yourself among your own people."

"I don't want to go back," she said, sobbing bitterly.

"But I want you to go back. All who know you want you to go back. Only don't begin at that end."

"You don't suppose, papa, that I wish to go to the Duchess?"

"I wish you to go somewhere. It can't be good for you to remain here.

Indeed I shall think it wicked, or at any rate weak, if you continue to seclude yourself."

"Where
shall I go?" she said, imploringly.

"To Wharton. I certainly think you ought to go there first."

"If you would go, papa, and leave me here,--just this once. Next year I will go,--if they ask
me."

"When I may be dead, for aught that any of us know."

"Do not say that, papa. Of course any one may die."

"I certainly
shall not go without you. You may take that as certain. Is it likely
that I should leave you alone in August and September in this great
gloomy house? If you stay, I shall stay." Now this meant a great deal
more than it had meant in former years. Since Lopez had died Mr. Wharton
had not once dined at the Eldon. He came home regularly at six o'clock,
sat with his daughter an hour before dinner, and then remained with
her all the evening. It seemed as though he were determined to force
her out of her solitude by her natural consideration for him. She
would implore him to go to his club and have his rubber, but he would
never give way. No;--he didn't care for the Eldon, and disliked whist.
So he said. Till at last he spoke more plainly. "You are dull enough
here all day, and I will not leave you in the evenings." There was
a pertinacious tenderness in this which she had not expected from
the antecedents of his life. When, therefore, he told her that he
would not go into the country without her, she felt herself almost
constrained to yield.

And she would have yielded at once but for
one fear. How could she insure to herself that Arthur Fletcher should
not be there? Ponto
never came home in that way before. Could a tree have fallen on Reginald?' and Jay's small
hand shivered in Linda's at the thought. They hurried after the dog, over the spotless surface
of snow, into the charred forest, where now every trunk and bough of ebony seemed set in silver.
Thither Reginald had gone to chop at noon, in a little fit of industry. They were guided to
the spot by the sad whinings of faithful Ponto, who could not comprehend why his master was
lying on the ground, half against a tree, and what meant that large crimson stain deepening
in the pure snow.

A desperate axe-cut in his foot--this was the matter. Linda almost turned sick at the sight;
but Jay, compressing her white lips very firmly, to shut in a scream, kneeled down by her brother.

He had succeeded, with infinite effort, in drawing off his long leather boot, through which
the axe had penetrated, and had been trying to bind his neckcloth tightly above the ankle.
Jay helped him with all her little strength.

'Give me a stick,' said he hoarsely--'a strong stick;' Linda flew to find one. 'Something to
make a tourniquet;' and, not readily seeing any wood to answer the want, she used his axe,
stained as it was, to chop a branch from the single tree he had felled. She had never tried
her strength of arm in this way before; but now the axe felt quite light, from her excitement.
Before the stick could be ready, in her unpractised fingers, Jay cried out, 'Oh, Linda, he
is dying! he has fainted!'

Still, she had common sense to know that the first necessity was to stop the bleeding; so,
quieting the little sister by a word or two, she inserted the stick in the bandage above the
ankle, and turned it more than once, so as to tighten the ligament materially. Looking at the
pallid features, another thought struck her.

'Let us heap up snow round the wounded foot and leg; I'm sure the cold must be good for it;'
and, with the axe for their only shovel, the two girls gathered a pile of frozen snow, as a
cushion and covering to the limb--'Oh, if Edith were here! if Edith were here!' being Jay's
suppressed cry.

'Where is the labourer whom I saw working on the farm?'

'Gone away; discharged last week. Papa said he couldn't afford to pay him any longer. That's
why Reginald went out to chop to-day. Oh, Linda, I wish somebody came. He is lying so white
and still: are you sure he is not dead?'

His head was on the little sister's lap, and Linda chafed the temples with snow. Would the
sleigh-bells ever be heard? She longed for help of some sort. As to surgery, there was not
a practitioner within thirty miles. What could be done with such a bad hurt as this without
a surgeon?

A universal slight shudder, and a tremor of the eyelids, showed that consciousness was returning
to the wounded man. Almost at the same instant Ponto raised his head, and ran off through the
trees, whining. A man's footsteps were presently heard coming rapidly over the crisp snow.
It was Mr. Holt: and a mountain load of responsibility and dread was lifted from Linda's mind
at the sight of him. This was not the first time that she had felt in his presence the soothing
sense of confidence and restfulness.

He could not help praising them a little for what they had done with the primitive tourniquet
and the styptic agency of the snow. Beyond tightening the bandage by an additional twist or
two of the inserted stick, he could do nothing more for the patient till he was removed to
the house; but he began collateral help by cutting poles for a litter, and sent Jay and Linda
for straps of basswood bark to fasten them together. When the sleigh at last came up the avenue,
Mr. Wynn the elder helped him to carry young Armytage home, wherein Sam Holt's great physical
strength carefully bore two-thirds of the dead weight.

It seemed that he had been chopping up that fir for firewood, perhaps without giving much thought
to his work, when the axe, newly sharpened before he came out, caught in a crooked branch,
which diverted almost the whole force of the blow on his own foot. Well was it that Mr. Holt,
in his erratic education, had chosen to pry into the mysteries of surgery for one session,
and knew something of the art of putting together severed flesh and bone; although many a dreadful
axe wound is cured in the backwoods by settlers who never heard of a diploma, but nevertheless
heal with herbs and bandages, which would excite the scornful mirth of a clinical student.

Thus began a long season of illness and weakness for the young man, so recently in the rudest
health and strength. It was very new to his impetuous spirit, and very irksome, to lie all
day in the house, not daring to move the injured limb, and under the shadow of Zack Bunting's
cheerful prediction, that he guessed the young fellar might be a matter o' six or eight months
a-lyin' thar, afore such a big cut healed, ef he warn't lamed for life.

Reginald chafed and grumbled and sulked for many a day; but the fact could not be gainsaid;
those divided veins and tendons and nerves must take long to unite again; Mr. Holt found him
one morning in such an unquiet mood.

'Armytage,' said he, after the usual attentions to the wound, 'I suppose you consider this
axe-cut a great misfortune?'

'"Misfortune!"' and he rose on his elbow in one of the fifty positions he was wont, for very
restlessness, to assume. 'Misfortune! I should think I do: nothing much worse could have happened.
Look at the farm, without a hand on it, going to rack and ruin'--

Rather a highly coloured picture; and Reginald seemed to forget that, while his limbs were
whole, he had devoted them almost entirely to amusement. Mr. Holt heard him out patiently.

'I should not be surprised if it proved one of the best events of your life,' he observed;
'that is, if you will allow it to fulfil the object for which it was sent.'

'Oh, that's your doctrine of a particular providence,' said the other peevishly, lying back again.

'Yes; my doctrine of a particular providence, taught in every leaf of the Bible. Now, Armytage,
look back calmly over your past life, and forward, whither you were drifting, and see if the
very kindest thing that could be done for you by an all-wise and all-loving God was not to
bring you up suddenly, and lay you aside, and force you to think. Beware of trying to frustrate
His purpose.'

Mr. Holt went away immediately on saying that, for he had no desire to amuse Reginald with
an unprofitable controversy which might ensue, but rather to lodge the one truth in his mind,
if possible. Young Armytage thought him queer and methodistical; but he could not push out
of his memory that short conversation. Twenty times he resolved to think of something else,
and twenty times the dismissed idea came round again, and the calm forcible words visited him,
'Beware of trying to frustrate God's purpose.'

At last he called to his sister Edith, who was busy at some housework in the kitchen, across
a little passage.

'Come here; I want to ask you a question. Do you think that I am crippled as a punishment for
my misdeeds, idleness, etcetera?'

'Indeed, I do not,' she answered with surprise. 'What put such a thought into your head?'

'Holt said something like it. He thinks this axe-cut of mine is discipline--perhaps like the
breaking-in which a wild colt requires; and as you and he are of the same opinion in religious
matters, I was curious to know if you held this dogma also.'

She looked down for a moment. 'Not quite as you have represented it,' she said. 'But I do think
that when the Lord sends peculiar outward circumstances, He intends them to awake the soul
from indifference, and bring it to see the intense reality of invisible things. Oh, Reginald,'
she added, with a sudden impulse of earnestness, 'I wish you felt that your soul is the most
precious thing on earth.'

He was moved more than he would have cared to confess, by those tearful eyes and clasped hands;
he knew that she went away to pray for him, while about her daily business. More serious thoughts
than he had ever experienced were his that afternoon: Jay could not avoid remarking--in private--on
his unusual quietude. Next morning he found a Bible beside his bed, laid there by Edith, he
had no doubt; but for a long time she could not discover whether he ever looked into it.

When Mr. Holt left the country, he gave Robert Wynn charge of the patient mentally as well
as corporeally. He knew that Robert's own piety would grow more robust for giving a helping
hand to another.

Somehow, the Yankee storekeeper was very often hanging about Daisy Burn that winter. Captain
Armytage and he were great friends. That gallant officer was, in Zack's parlance, 'the Colonel,'
which brevet-rank I suppose was flattering, as it was never seriously disclaimed. He was king
of his company in the tavern bar at the 'Corner;' and few days passed on which he did not enjoy
that bad eminence, while compounding 'brandy-smash,' 'rum-salad,' 'whisky-skin,' or some other
of the various synonyms under which the demon of drink ruins people in Canada.

But where did the captain find cash for this? The fact is, he never paid in ready money; for
that was unknown to his pockets, and very rare in the district. He paid in sundry equivalents
of produce; and a nice little mortgage might be effected on his nice little farm of Daisy Burn
if needs be. Zack held his greedy grasping fingers over it; for the family were obliged to
go a good deal in debt for sundry necessities. Slave and scrape as Miss Armytage might, she
had no way of raising money for such things as tea and coffee. Once she attempted to make dandelion
roots, roasted and ground, do duty for the latter; but it was stigmatized as a failure, except
by loving little Jay. Then wages must be paid to the Irish labourer, whose services to chop
wood, etc., were now absolutely necessary. Meat was another item of expense. A large store
of potatoes was almost the sole provision upon which the household could reckon with certainty;
mismanagement and neglect had produced the usual result of short crops in the foregoing season,
and their wheat went chiefly to the store in barter.

'An' ef Zack ain't shavin' the capting, I guess I'm a Dutchman,' remarked a neighbouring settler
to Robert. 'I reckon a matter of two year'll shave him out o' Daisy Burn, clear and clean.'

But its owner had some brilliant scheme in the future for lifting him free of every embarrassment.
Rainbow tints illuminated all prospective pages of Captain Armytage's life.

'Edith, my dear,' he would say, if that young lady deprecated any fresh expenditure, or ventured
an advice concerning the farm,--'Edith, my dear, the main fault of your character is an extraordinary
want of the sanguine element, for the excess of which I have always been so remarkable. You
know I compare it to the life-buoy, which has held me up above the most tempestuous waves of
the sea of existence, eh! But you, my poor dear girl, have got a sad way of looking at things--a
gloomy temperament, I should call it perhaps, eh? which is totally opposite to my nature. Now,
as to this beast, which Mr. Bunting will let me have for twenty-eight dollars, a note of hand
at three months, he is kind enough to say, will do as well as cash. And then, Reginald, my
boy, we need drink café noir no longer, but can have the proper café au lait every morning.'

'I don't know who is to milk the cow, sir,' said his son, rather bluntly. 'Edith is overwhelmed
with work already.'

'Ah, poor dear! she is very indefatigable.' He looked at her patronizingly, while he wiped
his well-kept moustache in a handkerchief which she had washed. 'Indeed, Edith, I have sometimes
thought that such continual exertion as yours is unnecessary. You should think of us all, and
spare yourself, my child.'

'I do, papa,' she answered: whether that she thought of them all, or that she spared herself,
she did not explain. Her brother knew which it was.

'That is right, my child. It grieves me to see you condescending to menial offices, unsuitable
to your rank and position.'

She did not ask--as a less gentle nature would have asked--who else was to be the menial, if
not she?

'That is the worst of a bush life. If I had known how difficult it is to retain one's sphere
as a gentleman, I think I should not have exposed myself to the alternative of pecuniary loss
or debasing toil. Perhaps it would be well to walk down to the "Corner" now, and conclude that
bargain with our good friend the storekeeper, eh? Is there anything I can do for either of
you, eh? Don't hesitate to command me,' he added blandly. 'What! you want nothing? A very fortunate
pair--very fortunate, indeed, eh?' And Captain Armytage kissed hands out of the room.

'Edith,' said her brother, after a pause of some minutes, 'my father will be ruined by his
confidence in that man. Bunting can twine him round his finger. I am ashamed of it.'

She shook her head sadly. But there was no help for the fact that their father was in the toils
already; unless, indeed, the debt could be paid off, and the acquaintanceship severed. Hopeless!
for the tendencies of a life cannot be remodelled in a day, except by the power of divine grace.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

JACK-OF-ALL-TRADES.

Sleighing was good that year, till the middle of March. Before the season was past, Captain
Argent paid a flying visit on his way to the hunting grounds, as usual, and on his return found
something so pleasant in the household at Cedar Creek, that he remained many days.

They were all old acquaintances, to be sure, and had many subjects of interest in common. Mr.
Wynn the elder, who, perhaps, was imbued with a little of the true Briton's reverence for aristocracy,
was pleased to entertain his former neighbour, Lord Scutcheon's son, especially when that young
officer himself was endowed with such a frank, genial bearing as rendered him almost a universal
favourite.

Had there ever been more than mere pleasant acquaintanceship between him and Miss Wynn? Rightly
or wrongly, Sam Holt fancied it the case. He heard many allusions to former times and incidents,
not knowing that as children they had been playmates. The gallant captain's present admiration
was pretty plain; and the young lady was amused by it after the manner of her sex. Being very
downright himself, Mr. Holt had no idea how much admiration is required to fill the measure
of a proposal of marriage in a red-coat's resolve, or how much harmless coquetry lies dormant
in the sweetest woman.

The precipitate gentleman leaped to sundry conclusions, gathered himself and his fur robes
into his cutter, and left on the third day of Captain Argent's visit. In her secret heart,
I imagine that Linda knew why.

But an engrossing affair to her at this period was the concealment from their visitor of the
decidedly active part she took in household duties. Innocent Captain Argent was unaware that
the faultless hot bread at breakfast was wrought by her hands; that the omelets and ragoûts
at dinner owned her as cook; that the neatness of the little parlour was attributable to her
as its sole housemaid. The mighty maiden called Liberia had enough to do in other departments,
outdoor as well as indoor, besides being rather a ponderous person for a limited space.

And so, when Captain Argent one morning pushed open the parlour door long before he ought to
have left his apartment, he beheld a figure with short petticoats, wrapt in a grey blouse,
and having a hood of the same closely covering her hair, dusting away at the chairs and tables
and shelves, with right goodwill.

'Now, Georgie, you know that you can't sit here till I have quite finished,' said the figure,
without turning its head. 'Like a good boy, ask Libby to come and build up the fire: ask gently,
remember, or she'll not mind you.'

The noiseless manner of closing the door caused her first to doubt the identity of the person
spoken to, and a very vivid crimson dyed her cheeks, when, Liberia coming in, her blacksmith
arms laden with logs, she threw them down with resounding clatter, and said, 'Wal, ef that
ain't the nicest, soft speakin'est gentleman I ever see! He asked me as perlite for the wood,
as he couldn't be perliter ef I war Queen Victory herself.'

'How fortunate that I didn't turn round my head!' thought Linda, her first confusion over;
'for of all horridly unbecoming things, showing no hair about one's face is the worst.'

Whence it will be seen that Miss Wynn was not exempt from female vanity.

To the cat thus let out of the bag, Captain Argent made no further allusion than was involved
in a sudden fondness for the nursery tale of Cinderella. Every subject of conversation introduced
for the morning was tinged by that fairy legend, which tinged Linda's countenance also, rose-colour.
Mr. Wynn the elder was slightly mystified; for the topics of promotion by purchase in the army,
and the emigration of half-pay officers, seemed to have no leading reference to the above world-famed
story.

The dear old gentleman! he did the honours of his small wooden cottage at Cedar Creek as finely
as if it had been his own ancestral mansion of Dunore. Their delf cups might have been Dresden,
the black ware teapot solid silver, the coarse table-cloth damask--for the very air which he
spread around the breakfast arrangements. One might have fancied that he infused an orange-pekoe
flavour into the rough muddy congou for which Bunting exacted the highest price. He did not
know that the coffee, which he strongly recommended to his guest, was of native Canadian growth,
being to all intents and purposes dandelion roots; for you see they were obliged to conceal
many of their contrivances from this grand old father. I doubt if he was aware that candles
were made on the premises: likewise soap, by Liberia's energetic hands. The dandelion expedient
was suggested by thrifty Mrs. Davidson, who had never bought a pound of coffee since she emigrated;
and exceedingly well the substitute answered, with its bitter aromatic flavour, and pleasant
smell. If Captain Argent had looked into the little house closet, he would have seen a quantity
of brownish roots cut up and stored on a shelf. Part of Linda's morning duty was to chop a
certain quantity of these to the size of beans, roast them on a pan, and grind a cupful for
breakfast. They cost nothing but the trouble of gathering from among the potato heaps, when
the hills were turned up in autumn, and a subsequent washing and spreading in the sun to dry.

Mrs. Davidson would also fain have introduced peppermint and sage tea; but even Zack's bad
congou was declared more tolerable than those herb drinks, which many a settler imbibes from
year to year.

'Throth an' there's no distinction o' thrades at all in this counthry,' said Andy; 'but every
man has to be a farmer, an' a carpinther, an' a cobbler, an' a tailor, an' a grocer itself!
There's Misther Robert med an iligant shute o' canvas for the summer; an' Misther Arthur is
powerful at boots; an' sorra bit but Miss Linda spins yarn first-rate, considherin' she never
held a distaff before. An' the darlin' Missus knits stockins; oh mavrone, but she's the beautiful
sweet lady intirely, that ought to be sitting in her carriage!'

News arrived from Dunore this spring, which Linda fancied would sorely discompose Andy. The
Wynns kept up a sort of correspondence with the old tenantry, who loved them much. In an April
letter it was stated that the pretty blue-eyed Mary Collins, Andy's betrothed, had been base
enough to marry another, last Shrovetide. But the detaching process had gone on at this side
of the Atlantic also. Linda was amazed at the apathy with which the discarded lover received
the intelligence. He scratched his red head, and looked somewhat bewildered; indulged in a
few monosyllable ejaculations, and half an hour afterwards came back to the parlour to ask
her 'if she was in airnest, to say that over agin.'

'Poor fellow! he has not yet comprehended the full extent of his loss,' thought the young lady
compassionately. She broke the news to him once more, and he went away without a remark.

When Arthur came in, she would beg of him to look after the poor suffering fellow. The request
was on her lips at his appearance, but he interrupted her with,--

'What do you think of that scamp, Andy, proposing for Libby in my hearing? The fellow told
her that his heart was in her keeping, and that she was the light of his life, and grew quite
poetical, I assure you; in return for which, he was hunted round the wood-yard with a log!'

And Linda's sympathy expired.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

SETTLER THE SECOND.

Next summer brought a scourge of frequent visitation to the 'Corner.' Lake fever and ague broke
out among the low-lying log-houses, and Zack's highly adulterated and heavily priced drugs
came into great demand. He was the farthest west adventurer at that date who took upon him
to supply apothecary's wares among the threescore and ten other vendibles of a backwoods store.
So the ill wind which blew hot fits and cold fits to everybody else blew profit into Zack's
pockets.

The population had swelled somewhat since our first introduction to this little pioneer settlement.
The number of wooden huts mottling the cleared space between the forest and the river edge,
clustering, like bees round their queen, about the saw and grist mill, had increased during
the last two years by some half-score--a slow rate of progression, as villages grow in Canada;
but the 'Corner' had a position unfavourable to development. An aguish climate will make inhabitants
sheer off speedily to healthier localities. No sensible emigrant will elect to live on a marshy
site where he can help it. The value of the 'Corner' was just now as a stage on the upper branch
of that great western highway, whose proper terminus lies no nearer than the Pacific, and whose
course is through the fertile country of future millions of men.

This summer waggon-loads of emigrants and their chattels began to file each month into the
bush beyond. Cedar Creek ceased to be farthest west by a great many outlying stations where
the axe was gradually letting in light on the dusky forest soil. To these the 'Corner' must
be the emporium, until some enterprising person set up a store and mills deeper in the wilderness.

The shrewd Davidson saw the country opening about him, and resolved to gather to himself the
profit which must accrue to somebody. His first measure was to walk down one evening to the
Wynns' farm. A thoroughly good understanding had always existed between these neighbours. Even
patrician Mr. Wynn relished the company of the hard-headed Lanark-weaver, whose energy and
common sense had won him the position of a comfortable landholder in Canada West. Added to
which qualifications for the best society, Davidson was totally devoid of vulgar assumption,
but had sufficient ballast to retain just his own proper footing anywhere.

He found the family assembled in their summer parlour, beneath the handsome butternut tree
which Robert's axe had spared, and which repaid the indulgence by grateful shade and continual
beauty of leafage. They were enjoying supper in the open air, the balmy evening air afloat
with fragrant odours. I say advisedly supper, and not tea; the beverage was a lady's luxury
out here, and ill suited hours of foregoing labour. Milk was the staple draught at Cedar Creek
meals for all stout workers.

'Gude even, leddies;' and Davidson doffed his bonnet with European courtesy. 'Fine weather
for loggin' this.' Indeed, he bore evident grimy and smoky tokens on his clothes that such
had been his day's work. Applepie order was a condition of dress which he rarely knew, though
he possessed a faultless homespun suit, in which he would have been happy to gang to the kirk
on Sabbath, were that enjoyment practicable.

English papers had come to hand an hour before; among them a bundle of the provincial print
nearest Dunore. Linda had learned not to love the arrival of these. It was a pebble thrown
in to trouble their still forest life. The yearning of all hearts for home--why did they never
dream of calling Canada home?--was intensified perhaps to painfulness. She could interpret
the shadow on her father's brow for days after into what it truly signified; that, however
the young natures might take root in foreign soil, he was too old an oak for transplantation.
Back he looked on fifty-eight years of life, since he could remember being the petted and cherished
heir of Dunore; and now--an exile! But he never spoke of the longing for the old land; it was
only seen in his poring over every scrap of news from Britain, in his jealous care of things
associated with the past, nay, in his very silence.

Now, the dear old gentleman was letting his tea grow cool beyond all remedy, while, with gold
double eyeglass in hand, he read aloud various paragraphs of Irish news. Diverging at last
into some question of party politics uppermost at the time, though now, in 1861, extinct as
the bones of the iguanodon, he tried to get Davidson interested in the subject, and found him
so totally ignorant of even the names of public men as to be a most unsatisfactory listener.

''Deed, then, Mr. Wynn, to tell you truth, I hae never fashed my head wi' politics sin' I cam'
oot to Canada,' observed the Scotchman a little bluntly. ''Twas nae sae muckle gude I gained
by't at hame; though I mind the time that a contested election was ane o' my gran' holidays,
an' I thought mair o' what bigwig was to get into Parliament for the borough than I did o'
my ain prospects in life, fule that I was; until I found the bairns comin', an' the loom going
to the wall a'thegither before machinery and politics wouldna mak' the pot boil, nor gie salt
to our parritch. So I came oot here, an' left politics to gentlefolk.'

Mr. Wynn, rather scandalized at Davidson's want of public spirit, said something concerning
a citizen's duty to the State.

'Weel, sir, my thought is, that a man's first earthly duty is to himsel' and his bairns. When
I mind the workin' men at hame, ruggin', an' rivin', an' roarin' themselves hoarse for Mr.
This or Sir Somebody That, wha are scramblin' into Parliament on their shouthers, while the
puir fallows haen't a pound in the warld beyond their weekly wage, an' wull never be a saxpence
the better for a' their zeal, I'm thankfu' that mair light was given me to see my ain interest,
an' to follow it.'

'I hardly wonder at your indifference to the paltry politics of the Province,' observed the
gentleman from the old country, sipping his tea loftily.

'I wish Mr. Hiram Holt heard that speech, sir,' said Robert. 'To him Canada is more important
than Great Britain by so much as it is larger.'

'The citizen of Monaco has similar delusions as to the importance of his petty Principality,'
rejoined Mr. Wynn. 'I should rather say there was no political principle among Canadians.'

'No, sir, there's none in the backwoods,' replied Davidson, with perfect frankness. 'We vote
for our freends. I'm tauld they hae gran' principles in the auld settlements, an' fecht ane
anither first-rate every election. We hae too much to do in the new townships for that sort
o' work. We tak' it a' easy.'

Robert remembered a notable example of this political indifference in an election which had
taken place since their settlement at Cedar Creek. On the day of polling he and his retainer
Andy went down to the 'Corner,' the latter with very enlarged anticipations of fun, and perchance
a 'row.' His master noticed him trimming a sapling into a splendid 'shillelagh,' with a slender
handle and heavy head as ever did execution in a faction fight upon Emerald soil. The very
word election had excited his bump of combativeness. But, alas! the little stumpy street was
dull and empty as usual; not even the embryo of a mob; no flaring post-bills soliciting votes;
the majesty of the people and of the law wholly unrepresented.

'Arrah, Misther Robert, this can't be the day at all at all,' said Andy, after a prolonged
stare in every direction. 'That villain Nim tould us wrong.'

'Jacques!' called Robert into the cottage adorned with flowers in front, 'is this polling day?'

'Oh, oui,' said the little Canadian, running out briskly. 'Oui, c'est vat you call le jour
de poll. Voilà, over dere de house.'

A log-cabin, containing two clerks at two rude desks, was the booth; a few idlers lounged about,
whittling sticks and smoking, or reading some soiled news-sheets. Andy looked upon them with
vast disdain.

'An' is this what ye call a 'lection in America?' said he. 'Where's the vothers, or the candidates,
or the speeches, or the tratin,' or the colours, or the sojers, or anythink at all? An' ye
can't rise a policeman itself to kape the pace! Arrah, let me out ov this home, Misther Robert.
There's not as much as a single spark ov sperit in the whole counthry!'

So he marched off in high dudgeon. His master stayed a short while behind, and saw a few sturdy
yeomen arrive to exercise the franchise. Their air of agricultural prosperity, and supreme
political apathy, contrasted curiously with young Wynn's memories of the noisy and ragged partisans
in home elections. It was evident that personal character won the electoral suffrage here in
the backwoods, and that party feeling had scarce an influence on the voters.

The franchise is almost universal throughout Canada. In 1849 it was lowered to thirty dollars
(six pounds sterling) for freeholders, proprietary, or tenantry in towns, and to twenty dollars
(four pounds) in rural districts. This is with reference to the hundred and thirty representatives
in the Lower House of the Provincial Legislature. The members of the indissoluble Upper House,
or Legislative Council, are also returned at the rate of twelve every two years, by the forty-eight
electoral divisions of the Province.

But to come back to our family party under the butternut tree. Robert related the above anecdote
of Andy's disappointment; and from it old Mr. Wynn and Davidson branched off to a variety of
cognate topics.

'Noo, I'll confess,' said the Scotchman, 'that the municipal elections hae an interest for
me far aboon thae ithers. The council in my township can tax me for roads, an' bridges, an'
schules: that's what I call a personal and practical concern. Sae I made nae manner of objection
to bein' one of the five councillors mysel'; and they talk of electin' you too, Maister Robert.'

Robert shook his head at the honour.

'I hae a fancy mysel' for handlin' the purse strings wherever I can,' added Davidson. 'Benson
will be the neist town-reeve, as he has time to be gaun' to the county council, which I couldna
do. I chose the first alternative.

Business prevented me from doing my errand on Monday last--and if I am here to-day, notwithstanding
Mr. Forley's unexpected death, it is emphatically because I understood nothing of the matter, on
knocking at this door; and therefore felt myself bound, as executor, to clear it up. That, on
my word of honour, is the whole truth, so far as I am personally concerned."

"I feel quite sure of it, sir," I answered.

"You mentioned Mr. Forley's death, just now, as unexpected. May I inquire if you were present,
and if he has left any last instructions?"

"Three hours before Mr. Forley's death," said Mr. Dalcott, "his medical attendant left him
apparently in a fair way of recovery. The change for the worse took place so suddenly, and was accompanied
by such severe suffering, to prevent him from communicating his last
wishes to any one.

When I reached his house, he was insensible. I have since examined his papers. Not one of them refers
to the present time or to the serious matter which now occupies us.

In the absence of instructions I must act cautiously on what you have told me; but I will be rigidly
fair and just at the same time. The first thing to be done," he continued, addressing himself
to Trottle, "is to hear what the man and woman, down-stairs, have
to say.

If you can supply me with writing-materials, I will take their declarations separately on the
spot, in your presence, and in the presence of the policeman who
is watching the house.

To-morrow I will send copies of those declarations, accompanied by
a full statement of the case, to Mr. and Mrs. Bayne in Canada (both
of whom know me well as the late Mr. Forley's legal adviser); and
I will suspend all proceedings, on my part, until I hear from them,
or from their solicitor in London.

In the present posture of affairs this is all I can safely do."

We could do no less than agree with him, and thank him for his frank
and honest manner of meeting us.

 Weel, noo, I'm
glad that's settled; though 'twull be an awfu' expense first cost. I dinna exactly ken how
to overtake it.'

Robert imagined that he was magnifying matters, in order to lessen any possible demand of ground-rent.
But it is probable that Davidson would have even paid something over and above his ideas of
equitable, for the pleasure of Zack Bunting's anticipated mortification at finding a rival
mill set up in the neighbourhood.

CHAPTER XL.

AN UNWELCOME SUITOR.

When the affair of the mill was arranged, and Robert's mind's eye beheld it already built and
noisily flourishing, they sauntered along the bend of the pond towards where the charcoal forest
of last autumn had donned a thin veil of greenery. The sight set Davidson upon his favourite
irritation--the decay of his farm Daisy Burn, under its present owner.

'He's an a'thegither gude-for-naething,' was his conclusion respecting Captain Armytage. 'Such
men as he hae nae mair business settlin' in the bush than he wad hae in tryin' the life o'
a fish. A mon may come without land, or money, or freends, an I'll warrant him to get on; but
there's ane thing he must hae, the willingness to work hard. That will bring him the lands,
and money, and freends, as plenty as blackberries. Sae far as I can see, your gentlefolk dinna
do weel in the bush; they're ower proud to tak' to the axe and the hoe as they ought, an' they
hae maistly fine habits o' life that mak' them unhappy. I wad like to see the captain or his
son cobblin' their ain shoon! Though I'm tauld the young fellow's greatly improved sin' his
hurt; but that winna mak' him handier.'

'He is much more industrious,' said Robert, 'and I hope will be able to pull up affairs on
the farm, even yet.'

'Na, sir, na! Zack Bunting's got his claw on it in the shape of a mortgage already. That farm
o' his below the "Corner" he grasped in just the same way; put the owner in debt to the store,
foreclosed the mortgage, and ruined the puir man. I ken he has his eye on Daisy Burn for Nim,
ever sin' he saw the captain. And that Yankee cam' here, Maister Robert, without as much as
a red cent aboon the pack on his back!'

Just then Arthur and George came in sight round the lee of a small island, paddling swiftly along.

'Trolling for black bass and maskelongé,' remarked Robert. 'There! he has a bite.'

Arthur's line, some seventy or eighty feet long, was attached to his left arm as he paddled,
which gave a most tempting tremulousness to the bait--a mock-mouse of squirrel fur; and a great
pike-fish, lying deep in the clear water, beheld it and was captivated. Slowly he moved towards
the charmer, which vibrated three or four feet beneath the surface; he saw not the treacherous
line, the hook beneath the fur; his heavily under-jawed mouth (whence he obtained the name
of masque-longue, misspelled continually in a variety of ways by his Canadian captors), his
tremendous teeth, closed voraciously on the temptation. Arthur's arm received a sudden violent
jerk from the whole force of a lively twenty-five pound maskelongé; a struggle began, to be
ended successfully for the human party by the aid of the gaff-hook.

This was the noblest prey of the pond. Pickerel of six or seven pounds were common; and a profusion
of black bass-spotted trout in all the creeks; sheep-heads and suckers ad libitum, the last-named
being the worst fish of Canada. George thought the success far too uniform for sport; Arthur
hardly cared to call the killing of God's creatures 'sport' during some time back.

'Davidson, here's a contribution for your bee,' cried Arthur, holding up the prize by its formidable
snout. 'For your good wife, with my compliments.'

Mrs. Davidson was in the thick of preparations for a logging-bee, to be held two days subsequently,
and whither all the Cedar Creek people were invited. Every settler's wife's housekeeping is
brought to a severe test on such occasions, and the huge maskelongé was a most acceptable addition.

The four gentlemen and Mr. Callaghan went with their team of oxen to help their good neighbour
on the appointed morning.

It might have been four hours afterwards that Linda was working in her garden, hoeing a strawberry
bed, and singing to herself some low song, when, attracted by a slight movement at the fence,
she raised her eyes. Mr. Nimrod Bunting was leaning against the rails.

'I guess you may go on, Miss,' said he, showing all his yellow teeth. 'I've been admirin' yar
voice this quarter of an hour past. I've never happened to hear you sing afore; and I assure
you, Miss, I'm saying the truth, that the pleasure is highly gratifyin'.'

Linda felt greatly inclined to put down her hoe and run into the house; but that would be so
ridiculous. She hoed on in silence, with a very displeased colour on her cheek.

'I see all yar people at the bee: yar too high yarself to go to them kind'er meetings, I reckon,
Miss? Wal, I like that. I like pride. Th' ole woman said always, so did Uncle Zack, "Nim, yar
above yar means; yar only fit for a Britisher gentleman," they did, I guess!'

'The sun is getting so hot,' quoth Miss Wynn, laying down her hoe.

'I reckon I ain't agoin' to have come down from Davidson's to here to speak to you, Miss,'
and Nim vaulted over the fence, 'an' let you slip through my fingers that way. Uncle Zack said
he'd speak to the ole feller up at the bee, an' bade me make tracks an' speak to you, Miss.
He's agoin' to foreclose the mortgage, he is.'

'What, on Daisy Burn?' Linda was immensely relieved for the moment.

''Tain't on nothen' else, I guess. 'Tis an elegant farm--ain't it?'

'Cannot your father wait for his money--even a little time? Captain Armytage would surely pay
in the long run; or his son would'--

'But s'pose we don't want 'em to pay? S'pose we wants the farm, and house, and fixins, and
all, for a new-married pair to set up, Miss?'

'I don't think you should allow anything to interfere with what is just and merciful,' said
Miss Wynn, with a strong effort. Her tormentor stood on the path between her and the house.

'S'pose I said they wanted that new-married pair to be you an' me, Miss?'

The audacity of the speech nearly took away her breath, and sent the blood in violent crimson
over her face and throat. 'Let me pass, sir,' was her only answer, most haughtily spoken.

'Uncle Zack's a rich man,' pleaded his son. 'He's always been an ole 'coon, with a fine nest
of cash at his back. It's in a New York bank, 'vested in shares. He's promised me the best
part of it, an' the store into the bargain. You'll be a fool if you say "No," I guess.'

Here he was seized from behind by the throat, and hurled round heavily to the ground.

'Why, then, you spalpeen of an owdacious vagabone, it's well but I smash every bone in yer
skin. Of all the impudence I ever heerd in my whole life, you bate it out, clear and clane!
O, murther, if I could only give you the batin' I'd like, only maybe the master 'ud be vexed!'
And Mr. Callaghan danced round his victim, wielding a terrible shillelagh.

CHAPTER XLI.

THE MILL-PRIVILEGE.

Meanwhile the noonday dinner at Davidson's bee progressed merrily. The mighty maskelongé disappeared
piecemeal, simultaneously with a profusion of veal and venison pies, legs and sides of pork,
raspberry tarts, huge dishes of potatoes and hot buns, trays of strawberries, and other legitimate
backwoods fare; served and eaten all at the same time, with an aboriginal disregard of courses.
After much wriggling and scheming--for he could not do the smallest thing in a straightforward
manner--Zack Bunting had edged himself beside Mr. Wynn the elder; who, to please his good friend
Davidson, occupied what he magnificently termed the vice-chair, being a stout high stool of
rough red pine; and Zack slouched beside him, his small cunning eyes glancing sidelong occasionally
from his tin platter to the noble upright figure of the old gentleman.

'What's in the wind now?' quoth Robert to himself, at the other end of the board, as he surveyed
this contrast of personages. Looking down the lines of hungry labourers for Nim's duplicate
face, it was absent, though he had seen it a-field. Andy's was 343 also wanting, and with it
the hilarity which radiated from him upon surrounding company. Not having the key of the position,
Robert failed to connect these absences, although just then they were being connected in a
very marked manner at Cedar Creek.

Zack wanted to speak on a particular subject to his lofty neighbour, but somehow it stuck in
his throat. His usual audacity was at fault. Mr. Wynn had never seemed so inaccessible, though
in reality he was making an effort to be unusually bland to a person he disliked. For the first
time in his existence, cringing Zack feared the face of mortal man.

'Spell o' warm weather, squire, ain't it, rayther? I wor jest a sayin' to Silas Duff here that
I never want to see no better day for loggin', I don't.'

'It is indeed beautifully fine,' answered Mr. Wynn, who was generally called in the neighbourhood
'the squire,' a sort of compliment to his patriarchal and magisterial position. 'I hope our
friend Davidson will have his work cleared off satisfactorily before dark.'

'Oh, no fear, squire, no fear, I guess. There's good teams a-field. Them cattle druv by my
lad Nim are the finest in the township, I reckon.'

'Indeed!' quoth Mr. Wynn, who just knew an ox from an ass.

''Tain't a losin' game to keep a store in the bush, ef you be a smart man,' observed Zack,
with a leer, after a few minutes' devotion to the contents of his tin plate. By this adjective
'smart' is to be understood 'sharp, overreaching'--in fact, a cleverness verging upon safe
dishonesty. 'I guess it's the high road to bein' worth some punkins, ef a feller has sense
to invest his money well.'

'I daresay,' rejoined Mr. Wynn vaguely, looking down on the mean crooked face.

'Fact, squire, downright fact. Now, I don't mind tellin' you, squire,' lowering his voice to
a whisper, 'that I've cleared a hundred per cent. on some sales in my time; an' the money hain't
been idle since, you may b'lieve. Thar! that's sharp tradin', I guess?'

'Yes, sir, very sharp indeed.' Mr. Wynn's face by no means reflected the Yankee's smile. But
Zack saw in his gravity only a closer attention to the important subject of gain.

'I've shares in a big bank in New York, that returns me fifteen per cent.--every copper of
it: an' I've two of the best farms in the township--that's countin' Daisy Burn, whar I'll foreclose
some day soon, I guess.'

'You are a prosperous man, as you calculate prosperity, Mr. Bunting.'

'I guess I ain't nothin' else' answered the storekeeper, with satisfaction. 'But I kin tell
you, squire, that my lad Nim is 'tarnal 'cute too, an' he'll be worth lookin' arter as a husband,
he will.'

Still with an unsuspicious effort at cordiality, Mr. Wynn answered, 'I suppose so.'

'He might get gals in plenty, but he has a genteel taste, has Nim: the gal to please Nim must
be thorough genteel. Now, what would you say, squire'--an unaccountable faint-heartedness seized
Uncle Zack at this juncture, and he coughed a hesitation.

'Well, sir!' For the old gentleman began to suspect towards what he was drifting, but rejected
the suspicion as too wild and improbable.

'Wal, the fact is, squire, Nim will have the two farms, an' the store, an' the bank shares--of
course not all that till I die, but Daisy Burn at once: an'--an'--he's in a 'tarnal everlastin'
state about your daughter Linda, the purtiest gal in the township, I guess.'

Mr. Wynn rose from his seat, his usually pale countenance deeply flushed. What! his moss-rose
Linda--as often in a fond moment he named her--his pretty Linda, thought of in connection with
this vulgar, cheating storekeeper's vulgar son? 'Sir, how dare you?' were all the words his
lips framed, when Robert, beholding the scene from the other end of the board, came to the rescue.

'The fellow has been drinking,' was the most charitable construction Mr. Wynn could put upon
Zack's astounding proposition. His dignity was cruelly outraged. 'Baiting the trap with his
hateful knavish gains!' cried Linda's father. 'This is the result of the democracy of bush-life;
the indiscriminate association with all classes of people that's forced on one. Any low fellow
that pleases may ask your daughter in marriage!'

Robert walked up and down with him outside the building. Though sufficiently indignant himself,
he tried to calm his father. 'Don't make the affair more public by immediate withdrawal,' he
advised. 'Stay an hour or so longer at the bee, for appearance' sake. It's hardly likely the
fellow will attempt to address you again, at least on that subject.' So the old gentleman very
impatiently watched the log heaps piling, and the teams straining, and the 'grog-bos' going
his rounds, for a while longer.

We left Andy Callaghan over his victim, with a flourishing shillelagh. Having spun him round,
he stirred him up again with a few sharp taps; and it must be confessed that Nim showed very
little fight for a man of his magnitude, but sneaked over the fence after a minute's bravado.

'Och, but it's myself that 'ud like to be batin' ye!' groaned Andy for the second time, most
sincerely. 'Only I'm afeard if I began I wouldn't know how to lave off, 'twould be so pleasant,
ye owdacious villain. Ha! ye'd throw the stick at me, would ye?' and Mr. Callaghan was across
the fence in a twinkling. Whereupon Nim fairly turned tail, and fled ignominiously, after having
ineffectually discharged a piece of timber, javelin-wise, at his enemy.

A loud peal of laughter, in a very masculine key, broke upon Andy's ear. It proceeded from
the usually undemonstrative maiden Liberia, who was bringing a pail of water from the creek
when her path was crossed by the flying pair. From that hour the tides of her feminine heart
set in favour of the conqueror.

'Troth, an' I may as well let ye have the benefit of yer heels, ye mortal spalpeen,' said Andy,
reining himself in. 'An' it's the father of a good thrashin' I could give ye for yer impidence.
To think o' Miss Linda, that's one of the ould auncient Wynns of Dunore since Adam was a boy!
I donno why I didn't pound him into smithereens when I had him so 'andy on the flat of his
back--only for Miss Linda, the darlin' crathur, telling me not. Sure there isn't a peeler in
the whole counthry, nor a jail neither, for a thousand mile. Now I wondher, av it was a thing
I did bate him black an' blue, whose business would it be to 'rest me; an' is it before the
masther I'd be brought to coort?'

Cogitating thus, and chewing the cud on the end of his sapling, Andy returned homewards leisurely.
His young mistress was nowhere to be seen; so he picked up the hoe and finished her strawberry
bed; and when he saw the elder Mr. Wynn approaching, he quietly walked off to Davidson's and
took his place among the hive again, as if nothing had happened. Nor did the faithful fellow
ever allude to the episode--with a rare delicacy judging that the young lady would prefer silence--except
once that Robert asked him what had brought him to Cedar Creek so opportunely.

'Why, thin, didn't I know what the vagabone wanted, lavin' the bee 'athout his dinner, an'
goin' down this road, afther me lookin' at him this twel'month dressing himself out in all
the colours of neckties that ever was in the rainbow, an' saunterin' about the place every
Sunday in particler, an' starin' at her purty face as impident as if he was her aqual. Often
I'd ha' given me best shute of clothes to pluck the two tails off his coat; an' he struttin'
up to Daisy Burn, when she and Miss Armytage tached the little childher there; an' Miss Linda
thinkin' no more of him than if a snake was watchin' her out ov the bushes. But, moreover,
I heerd him an' his old schemer of a father whispering at the bee: "Do you go down to herself,"
said Zack, "an' I'll spake to the squire." "Sure, my lad," thinks I, "if you do you'll have
company along wid you;" so I dogged him every step of the way.'

Which explains Andy's interposition.

Robert Wynn, when his wrath at the Buntings' presumption subsided, had gloomy anticipations
that this would prove the beginning of an irreconcilable feud, making the neighbourhood very
disagreeable. But not so. A week afterwards, while he stood watching the workmen building the
dam for the projected mill, he heard the well-known drawl at his elbow, and turning, beheld
the unabashed Zack. He had duly weighed matters for and against, and found that the squire
was too powerful for a pleasant quarrel, and too big to injure with impunity.

'Wal, Robert, so yer raisin' a sawmill!' he had uttered in a tone of no agreeable surprise.
Mr. Wynn pointed to Davidson, and left him to settle that point of rivalry.

'We wull divide the custom o' the country, neebor Zack,' quoth the other.

'I don't deny that you have an elegant mill-privilege here; but I guess that's all you'll have.
Whar's grist to come from, or lumber? D'ye think they'll pass the four roads at the "Corner,"
whar my mill stands handy?'

'Room eneugh i' the warld for baith o' us,' nodded Davidson; 'a' room eneugh in Canada for
a million ither mills, freend.' And he walked down the sloping bank to assist at the dam.

This last--a blow at the pocket--seemed to affect Zack far more than that other blow at the
intangible essence, his family honour. He could see his son Nim set off for the back settlements
of Iowa without a pang; for it is in vulgar Yankee nature to fling abroad the sons and daughters
of a house far and wide into the waters of the world, to make their own way, to sink or swim
as happens. But the new sawmill came between him and his rest. Before winter the machinery
had been noisily at work for many a day; with huge beams walking up to the saw, and getting
perpetually sliced into clean fresh boards; with an intermittent shooting of slabs and sawdust
into the creek. 'Most eloquent music' did it discourse to Robert's ears, whose dream of a settlement
was thus fulfilling, in that the essential requisite, lumber for dwelling-houses, was being
prepared.

CHAPTER XLII.

UNDER THE NORTHERN LIGHTS.

For some sufficient reason, the Yankee storekeeper did not at that time prosecute his avowed
intention of foreclosing the mortgage on Daisy Burn. Perhaps there was something to be gained
by dallying with the captain still--some further value to be sucked out of him in that villainous
trap, the tavern bar, whither many a disappointed settler has resorted to drown his cares,
and found the intoxicating glass indeed full of 'blue ruin.'

One brilliant day in midwinter, when the sky was like a crystallized sapphire dome, and the
earth spotless in snow, a single sleigh came bowling along the smooth road towards the 'Corner.'
'A heavy fall of snow is equivalent to the simultaneous construction of macadamized roads all
through Canada,' saith that universally quoted personage, Good Authority. So it is found by
thousands of sleighs, then liberated after a rusty summer rest. Then is the season for good
fellowship and friendly intercourse: leisure has usurped the place of business, and the sternest
utilitarian finds time for relaxation.

The idlers in Bunting's bar heard the sleigh-bells long before they left the arches of the
forest; and as the smallest atom of gravel strikes commotion into a still pool, so the lightest
event was of consequence in this small stagnant community of the 'Corner.' The idlers speculated
concerning those bells, and a dozen pair of eyes witnessed the emergence of the vehicle into
the little stumpy street.

Zack's sharp vision knew it for one that had been here last year, as he peered through the
store-window, stuffed with goods of all sorts; but the occupant was not the same. Grizzled
hair and beard escaped the bounds of the fur cap tied down over his ears, and the face was
much older and harder. The mills seemed to attract his attention, frozen up tightly as they
were; he slackened his sleigh to a pause, threw his reins on the horse's neck, and walked to
the edge of the dam. After a few minutes, Bunting's curiosity stimulated him to follow, and
see what attracted the stranger's regard.

'Are you the proprietor of this mill, sir?' called out the tall grey-haired gentleman, in no
mild tone. Zack hesitated, weighing the relative advantages of truth and falsehood. 'Wal, I
guess'--

'You need guess nothing, sir; but the construction of your dam is a disgrace to civilisation--a
murderous construction, sir. Do you see that it is at least twelve feet, perpendicular, sir?
and how do you ever expect that salmon can climb over that barrier? I suppose a specimen of
the true "salmo salar" has never been caught in these waters since you blocked up the passage
with your villainous dam, sir?'

'I warn't ever a-thinkin' o' the salmon at all, I guess,' answered the millowner truly and
humbly, because he conceived himself in the authoritative presence of some bigwig, senator,
or M.P., capable of calling him, Zack Bunting, to a disagreeable account, perchance.

'But you should have thought,' rejoined the stranger irately. 'Through such wrong-headedness
as yours Canada is losing yearly one of her richest possessions in the way of food. What has
exterminated the salmon in nearly all rivers west of Quebec? dams like this, which a fish could
no more ascend than he could walk on dry land. But I hope to see parliamentary enactments which
shall render this a felony, sir,--a felony, if I can. It is robbery and murder both together, sir.'

Mr. Hiram Holt walked rapidly to his sleigh, wrapped himself again in the copious furs, and
left the storekeeper staring after the swift gliding cutter, and wondering more than ever who
he was.

This matter of the dams had so much occupied his attention of late, that even after he reached
Cedar Creek he reverted to it once and anon; for this fine old Canadian had iron opinions welded
into his iron character. The capacity of entertaining a conviction, yet being lukewarm about
it, was not possible to Hiram Holt. He believed, and practised suitably, with thorough intensity,
in everything; even in such a remote subject as the Canadian fisheries.

The squire, who knew what preservation of salmon meant in the rivers of Britain, and who in
his time had been a skilful angler, could sympathize with him about the reckless system of
extinction going on through the Province, and which, if it be not arrested by the hand of legislative
interference, will probably empty the Canadian streams of this most delicious and nutritive
of fish.

'A gold-field discovered in Labrador would not be more remunerative than that single item of
salmon, if properly worked,' remarked Hiram. 'When the fisheries of the tiny Tweed rent for
fifteen thousand a-year, a hundred times that sum would not cover the value of the tributaries
of the St. Lawrence. And yet they're systematically killed out, sir, by these abominable dams.'

'Why, Mr. Holt,' said Linda, looking up from her work, 'I think the mills are of more consequence
than the salmon.'

'But they're not incompatible, my young lady,' he answered. 'Put steps to the dams--wooden
boxes, each five feet high, for the salmon to get upstairs into the still water a-top.' Whereat
Miss Linda, in her ignorance, was mightily amused at the idea of a fish ascending a staircase.

'The quantity of salmon was almost infinite twenty years ago,' said Hiram, after condescending
to enlighten her on the subject of its leaping powers. 'I remember reading that Ross purchased
a ton weight of it from the Esquimaux for a sixpenny knife; and one haul of his own seine net
took thirty-three hundred salmon.'

George, manufacturing a sled in the corner, whistled softly, and expressed his incredulity
in a low tone; not so low but that Mr. Holt's quick ears caught the doubt, and he became so
overflowing with piscatory anecdotes, that Linda declared afterwards the very tea had tasted
strongly of salmon on that particular evening.

'It is only a few years since Sir John Macdonald and his party killed four hundred salmon in
one week, from a part of l'Esquemain River, called the Lower Pools. Thirty-five such rivers,
equally full, flow through Labrador into the St. Lawrence; am I not then right in saying that
this source of wealth is prodigious?' asked Mr. Holt. 'But the abominable dams, and the barrier
nets, and the Indians' spearing, have already lessened it one-fourth.' A relative comparing
of experiences, with reference to fishy subjects, ensued between the squire and his guest;
and both agreed that--quitting the major matter of the dams--an enforcement of 'close time,'
from the 20th of August till May, would materially tend to preserve the fish.

'Nature keeps them tolerably close most of that time,' remarked Arthur, 'by building a couple
of yards of ice over them. From November till April they're under lock and key.'

'And han't you ever fished through holes in the ice?' asked Mr. Holt. 'Capital sport, I can
tell you, with a worm for bait.'

'No; but I was going to say, how curiously thin and weak the trout are just when the ice melts.
They've been on prison allowance, I presume, and are ready to devour anything.'

During all the evening, though Linda took openly a considerable share in the conversation,
her mind would beat back on one question, suggested repeatedly: 'Why did Mr. Sam Holt go to
Europe?' for one item of news brought by to-day's arrival was, that his eldest son had suddenly
been seized with a wish to visit England, and had gone in the last boat from Halifax.

Glancing up at some remark, she encountered Mrs. Wynn's eyes, and coloured deeply. That sweetest
supervision of earth, a mother's loving look, had read more deeply than the daughter imagined.
Rising hurriedly, on some slight excuse, she went to the window and looked out.

'Oh, papa! such glorious northern lights!'

Ay, surely. His position for a time, as clerk and overseer of Chantrey's establishment, gave
him the idea of writing The Lives of Eminent British Painters, Sculptors, and Architects. He
was a voluminous author; his poetry is of a high lyrical order, and
true to nature; but his prose will not retain its place in public
favor: it is at once diffuse and obscure.

Thomas Hope, 1770-1831: an Amsterdam merchant, who afterwards resided in London, and who illustrated
the progress of knowledge concerning the East by his work entitled,
Anastasius, or Memoirs of a Modern Greek.

Published anonymously, it excited a great interest, and was ascribed by the public to Lord Byron.
The intrigues and adventures of the hero are numerous and varied,
and the book has great literary merit; but it is chiefly of historical
value in that it describes persons and scenes in Greece and Turkey,
countries in which Hope travelled at a time when few Englishmen visited
them.

William Beckford, 1760-1844: he was the son of an alderman, who became Lord Mayor of London. After
a careful education, he found himself the possessor of a colossal fortune. He travelled extensively,
and wrote sketches of his travels. His only work of importance is that called Vathek, in which
he describes the gifts, the career, and the fate of the Caliph of that name, who was the grandson
of the celebrated Haroun al Raschid. His palaces are described in a style of Oriental gorgeousness;
his temptations, his lapses from virtue, his downward progress, are
presented with dramatic power; and there is nothing in our literature
more horribly real and terror-striking than the Hall of Eblis,--that
hell where every heart was on fire, where "the Caliph Vathek, who,
for the sake of empty pomp and forbidden power, had sullied himself
with a thousand crimes, became a prey to grief without end and remorse
without mitigation."

Many of Beckford's other writings are blamed for their voluptuous character; the last scene in Vathek
is, on the other hand, a most powerful and influential sermon. Beckford was eccentric and unsocial:
he lived for some time in Portugal, but returned to England, and built a luxurious palace at Bath.

William
Roscoe, 1753-1831: a merchant and banker of Liverpool. He is chiefly known by his Life of Lorenzo
de Medici, and The Life and Pontificate of Leo X., both of which contained new and valuable information.
They are written in a pleasing style, and with a liberal and charitable
spirit as to religious opinions.

Since they appeared, history has developed new material and established more exacting canons,
and the studies of later writers have already superseded these pleasing works.

THE NEW SCHOOL.


The pair in the hindmost sleigh diverged equally far from the aurora; for heavy upon Edith's
heart lay the fact that the mortgage was at last about to be foreclosed, and they should leave
Daisy Burn. This very evening, her father coming late to Mrs. Vernon's corn-shelling bee, had
told her that Zack would be propitiated no longer; he wanted to get the farm in time for spring
operations, and vowed he would have it. They must all go to Montreal, where Captain Armytage
had some friends, and where Edith hoped she might be able perhaps to turn her accomplishments
to good account by opening a school.

'Papa is not at all suited for a settler's life,' she said. 'He has always lived in cities,
and town habits are strong upon him. It is the best we can do.'

CHAPTER XLIII.

A BUSH-FLITTING.

Into Robert Wynn's mind, during that sleigh-drive under the northern lights, had entered one
or two novel ideas. The first was a plan for frustrating the grasping storekeeper's design.
He laid the whole circumstances before Mr. Holt, and asked for the means of redeeming the mortgage,
by paying Captain Armytage's debt to Bunting, which was not half the value of the farm.

The gallant officer was not obliged for his friend's officiousness. He had brought himself
to anticipate the move to Montreal most pleasurably, notwithstanding the great pecuniary loss
to himself. The element of practicality had little place in his mental composition. An atmosphere
of vagueness surrounded all his schemes, and coloured them with a seductive halo.

'You see, my dear fellow,' he said to Robert, when the proposition of redeeming the mortgage
was made, 'you see, it does not suit my plans to bury myself any longer in these backwoods,
eh? There are so few opportunities of relaxation--of intellectual converse, of--a--in short,
of any of those refinements required by a man of education and knowledge of the world. You
will understand this, my dear Mr. Robert. I--I wish for a more extended field, in fact. Nor
is it common justice to the girls to keep them immured, I may say, in an atmosphere of perpetual
labour. I am sure my poor dear Edith has lived a slave's life since she came to the bush. Only
for your amiable family, I--I positively don't know what might have been the consequence, eh?'

Robert felt himself getting angry, and wisely withdrew. On Mr. Holt's learning the reception
of his offer, he briefly remarked that he guessed Sam wouldn't object to own a farm near Cedar
Creek, and he should buy it altogether from the captain, which was accordingly done. We refrain
from picturing Zack's feelings.

The other idea which had visited Robert under the aurora--why should he not himself become
the tenant of Daisy Burn? He took his fur cap and went down there for an answer.

The captain had gone to the 'Corner,' this being post-day, and he expected some letters from
the Montreal friends in whom he believed. Reginald was chopping wood; the two sisters were
over their daily lessons. What to do with Jay, while the above question was being asked and
answered, was a problem tasking Robert's ingenuity, and finally he assumed the office of writing-master,
set her a sum in long division, which he assured her would require the deepest abstraction
of thought, and advised a withdrawal to some other room for that purpose.

Jay fell into the snare, and went, boasting of her arithmetical powers, which would bring back
the sum completed in a few minutes. The instant the door closed,--

'I came down this morning,' said Robert, 'to tell you that I have concluded to take Daisy Burn
as tenant to Mr. Holt, from the first of April next. That is,' he added, 'on one condition.'

'What?' she asked, a faint colour rising to her cheek, for his eyes were fixed on her.

'Arthur is much steadier than he was, since that visit to Argent last spring made him see that
a penniless proud man has no business to endeavour to live among his equals in social rank,
but his superiors in wealth. He is good enough farmer to manage Cedar Creek, with George's
increasing help, and Dubois as a sort of steward. Edith, if I come here and settle on this
farm, I cannot live alone; will you be my wife?'

He leaned forward, and took her passive hand. The conscious crimson rose for one moment to
her throat and averted face, crept even to the finger-tips, then left her of the usual marble
paleness again.

'No, Robert,' she answered firmly, withdrawing her hand; 'it cannot be; I cannot leave my father
and Jay.'

To this determination she held fast. For she had known that such an option might be offered
her, as every woman in like circumstances must know; she had weighed the matter well in the
balance of duty, and this was her resolve. Could she have counted the cost accurately, it might
not have been; but she hid from her eyes the bright side of the possible future, and tried
steadily to do what she deemed right.

Great was Jay's surprise, when she came back with the long division sum triumphantly proved,
to find her writing-master gone, and Edith with her eyes very tearful. That occurrence was
a puzzle to her for some time afterwards. Crying was so rare with Edith--and what could Robert
Wynn have to do with it? But Jay prudently asked no questions after the first astonished ejaculation.

When Robert was walking back to the Creek, feeling his pleasant 'castle in the air' shattered
about his ears, blind to the splendour of the sunlit winter world, and deaf to the merry twit
of the snow-birds, young Armytage came out of the woods and joined him. He, poor fellow, was
preoccupied with his own plans.

'I think, and Edith agrees with me, that my best chance is to get a small lot of wild land,
and begin at the beginning, as you did. I want the discipline of all the enforced hard work,
Bob. My unfortunate bringing up in every species of self-indulgence was no good education for
a settler; but, with God's help, I'll get over it.'

Robert was lifted out of his own trouble for a time by seeing the manful struggle which this
other heart had to make against the slavery of habit. He roused himself to speak cheeringly
to the young man, and receive his confidence cordially, in an hour when selfishness would rather
have been alone.

'Perhaps an application for a Governmental free grant of land would be advisable,' said Reginald.
'I've been thinking of it. You see I would rather like to be bound down, and forced to stay
in one spot, as I must if I undertake the hundred acres on Government terms.'

'What are the terms?' asked Robert.

'Well, in the first place, I must be more than eighteen years old; must take possession of
the land in a month from the date of allotment; must put twelve acres at least into cultivation
within four years, besides building a log-house, twenty feet by eighteen; and must guarantee
residence on the lot till these conditions be fulfilled.'

'Hard work, and no mistake,' said Robert. 'I've a mind to go with you.'

'You!' exclaimed the other, with unfeigned surprise, looking in Wynn's face.

'Yes, I feel as if I would be the better for a few months of the old difficulties. I'd like
to get away from this for awhile.'

'But perhaps you wouldn't like the "while" to extend over four years,' remarked Armytage. 'Of
all people, I never expected to find you a rover, Wynn.'

It was the passing fancy of a wounded spirit. Before the captain departed from Daisy Burn,
Robert had become wiser. Duty called on him to remain in the home which his labour had created
in the bush. After some deliberation, he asked Reginald to work Mr. Holt's newly acquired farm
in shares with himself; and Reginald, though looking wistfully on his receding vision of solitary
bush life, consented.

'Farming upon shares' signifies that the owner furnishes the land, implements of husbandry,
and seed; the other contracting party finds all the labour required; and the produce is divided
between them. This agreement was slightly modified in the case of Daisy Burn, for Robert did
many a hard day's work on it himself, and was general superintendent. The plan may answer well
where ignorance and capital go together, and chance to secure the services of honest industry;
but the temptations of the labourer to fraud are strong, and his opportunities unlimited. Many
a new settler has been ruined by farming upon shares with dishonest people.

The last sleighing week saw the departure of the Armytage family. Before a thaw imprisoned
the back settlements in spring isolation, they had reached the city of Ottawa, where the captain
showed a disposition to halt for some days to look about him, he said--a favourite occupation
in his lotos-eating life: Edith protested in vain. No; he might fall in with some employment
to suit him perchance: though what would suit Captain Armytage, except a handsome salary for
keeping his hands in his pockets, he would himself have been puzzled to define.

However, for the purpose of falling in with such employment, he frequented most of the hotel
and tavern bars in the town, leaving the girls chiefly to their own devices. So, as the weather
was fine, Miss Armytage and Jay walked about a great deal beside the broad brown river, just
unchained from ice, and rushing, floe-laden, towards the Chaudière Falls; through the wide
rectangular streets, lined with the splendid stores and massive houses of a busy population;
through the village-like suburbs, where each cottage was fronted with a garden; and ascended
the Major Hill, to behold the unrivalled view of forest, flood, and field from its summit.
Far to the right and left stretched a panorama, such as only British North America could furnish;
the great Ottawa river gliding by, a hundred and fifty feet below, the long line of cataracts
flashing and dashing to the north, a framework of black forest closing into the edge of the
streets, and bounded itself on the horizon by high blue mountains.

Here they were overtaken by Mr. Hiram Holt. He had seen them pass as he sat in some lawyer's
office near by, and followed them when his business was finished. His first proposition was
that they should go with him to Mapleton, while their father chose to idle about Bytown. Miss
Armytage declined, for she hoped they might leave for Montreal in a day or two at furthest;
but if Mr. Holt commanded any influence there,--and she told him, poor girl, the little plan
of teaching which she had formed.

'Come, now,' quoth Hiram, after some conversation on that head, and a promise of writing to
friends in Montreal, 'take my arm, young lady, and I'll show you some of our Ottawa lions.
Biggest of all, to my fancy, is the town itself--only twenty-five years old, and as large as
if it had been growing for centuries. The man is only in the prime of life who felled the first
tree on this site, and now the town covers as much ground as Boston. Certainly the site is
unrivalled.'

Edith, thinking a good deal of other more personally important things, acquiesced in all he said.

'You see, it's the centre of everything: three magnificent rivers flow together here, the Ottawa,
Rideau, and Gatineau; water privilege is unlimited; Chaudière up yonder would turn all the
mills in creation. Now, do you know the reason it is called Chaudière, my dear?'

This to Jay, who had to confess her ignorance.

'Because the vapour--do you see the cloud always ascending from the crest of the Falls?--reminded
somebody of the steam from a boiling kettle. Hence these are the Kettle Falls, Miss Jay.'

She thought the appellation very undignified.

'The finest building sites are on this Barracks Hill,' observed Mr. Holt, relapsing into contemplation.
'But Government won't give them up: it is to be a sort of Acropolis, commanding the whole position
at the fork of the three rivers, and the double mass of houses on both sides. Bytown hasn't
seen its best days yet, by a long chalk, I guess.'

'I thought it was called Ottawa,' said Jay inquiringly.

'Well, madam, in this country, when cities arrive at the dignity of ten thousand inhabitants,
they are permitted to change their names. So a town named York has very properly become Toronto,
and the town founded by Colonel By has become Ottawa. But, as I was saying, its best days are
in the future: it must be the capital of the Canadas yet.'

Jay remembered that her geography book assigned that distinction to Quebec and Montreal. Mr.
Holt affirmed that the pre-eminence of these must dwindle before this young city at their feet,
which could be captured by no coup-de-main in case of war, and was at the head of the natural
land avenue to the great Lakes Huron and Superior.

'The ancient Indian route,' said he--'the only safe one if there were war with the United States;
and you may depend on it, if railways take in the country, one of the greatest termini will
be here, at the headquarters of the lumber trade.'

His vaticination has been fulfilled. Lines of telegraph, rail, and steamers radiate from Ottawa
city as a centre, at this day. It has successfully contended for the honour of being acknowledged
capital of the Canadas, and has been declared such by the decision of Queen Victoria.

Lions in the way of antiquity it had none to show, being the veriest mushroom of a capital;
but Mr. Holt took his friends to see the great sluice-works, the beautiful Suspension Bridge,
the chain of locks forming a water staircase on the Rideau canal, and one of the huge sawmills
turned by a rill from Chaudière Falls, where Jay admired immensely the glittering machinery
of saws, chisels, and planes, and the gay painting of the iron-work. Since then, the vast tubular
bridge of the Grand Trunk Railway spans the river, and is a larger lion than all the rest.

CHAPTER XLIV.

SHOVING OF THE ICE.

We must pass over a year; for so long did Sam Holt continue in Europe. Rambling over many countries,
from the heather hills of Scotland and the deep fiords of Norway, to the Alhambra and the sunlit
'isles of Greece,' this grandson of a Suffolk peasant, elevated to the ranks of independence
and intellectual culture by the wisdom and self-denial of his immediate ancestors, saw, and
sketched, and intensely enjoyed the beauty with which God has clothed the Old World. And in
that same sketch-book, his constant companion, there was one page which opened oftener than
any other--fell open of itself, if you held the volume carelessly--containing a drawing, not
of Alpine aiguille, nor Italian valley, nor Spanish posada, nor Greek temple, but of a comfortable
old mansion, no way romantically situate among swelling hills, and partially swathed in ivy.
The corner of the sketch bore the lightly pencilled letters, 'Dunore.'

And now he fancied that twelve months' travel had completed the cure, and that he had quite
conquered his affection for one who did not return it. He was prepared to settle down in common
life again, with the second scar on his heart just healed.

Coming home by Boston, he took rail thence to Burlington on Lake Champlain, and near the head
of that noble sheet of water crossed the Canadian frontier into French scenery and manners.
The line stopped short at the edge of the St. Lawrence, where passengers take boat for La Chine
or the island of Montreal--that is, ice permitting. Now, on this occasion the ice did not permit,
at least for some time. Sam Holt had hoped that its annual commotion would have been over;
but it had only just begun.

A vast sheet of ice, a mile in breadth and perhaps ten in length, was being torn from its holdfasts
by the current beneath; was creaking, grinding, shoving along, crunching up against the shore
in masses, block over block ten or fifteen feet high, yielding slowly and reluctantly to the
pressure of the deep tide below, which sometimes with a tremendous noise forced the hummocks
into long ridges. The French Canadians call these 'bourdigneaux.'

The sights, the sounds, were little short of sublime. But when night came down with its added
stillness, then the heaving, grating, tearing, wrenching noises were as of some prodigious
hidden strength, riving the very foundations of solid earth itself. People along shore could
hardly sleep. Mr. Holt, having a taste for strange scenery, spent much of that sharp spring
night under 'the glimpses of the moon,' watching the struggle between the long-enchained water
and its icy tyrant. Another passenger, like-minded, was companion of his ramble.

'I fear it is but a utopian scheme to dream of bridging such a flood as this,' observed Holt.
'No piers of man's construction could withstand the force that is in motion on the river to-night.
I fear the promoters of the Victoria Bridge are too sanguine.'

'Well, I could pin my faith upon any engineering project sanctioned by Stephenson,' rejoined
the other. 'We had him here to view the site, just a mile out of Montreal. He recommended the
tubular plan--a modified copy of the English Britannia Bridge. And Ross, the resident engineer,
has already begun preliminaries, with cofferdams and such like mysteries.'

'It will be the eighth wonder of the world if completed,' said Mr. Holt, 'and must add immensely
to the commercial advantages of Canada.'

'My dear sir,' quoth the other impressively (he was a corn merchant in Montreal), 'unless you
are in trade you cannot duly estimate the vast benefits that bridging the St. Lawrence will
confer on the colony. For six months of the year the river is closed to navigation, as you
are aware, and the industry of Canada is consequently imprisoned. But this noble highway which
the Grand Trunk Railway Company have commenced will render all seasons alike to our commerce.
Consider the advantage of being able to transport the inexhaustible cereals of the Far West,
"without break of bulk or gauge," from the great corn countries of the Upper Lakes to the very
wharves on the Atlantic.'

Mr. Holt was not surprised to hear, after this, that the speaker was a heavy shareholder in
the Grand Trunk Railway, and placed unlimited faith in its projects. Whether, in subsequent
years, its complete collapse (for a time) as a speculation lowered his enthusiasm, we cannot
say; perhaps he was satisfied to suffer, in fulfilment of the superb ambition of opening up
a continent to commerce.

The corn merchant had got upon his hobby, and could have talked all night about the rail and
its prospects in Canada. 'The progress of the Province outstrips all sober calculation,' said
he. 'Population has increased twelve hundred per cent. within the last forty years; wherever
the rail touches the ground, an agricultural peasantry springs up. Push it through the very
wilderness, say I; there is no surer means of filling our waste places with industrial life;
and the Pacific should be our terminus.'

This design has ceased to be thought extravagant, since Professor Hind's explorations have
proved the existence of a fertile belt across the continent, through British territory, from
the Lake of the Woods to the Rocky Mountains; along which, if speedily and wisely opened up,
must travel the commerce of China and Japan, as well as the gold of Columbia. The nation which
constructs this line will, by its means, hold the sceptre of the commercial world. Brother
Jonathan is well aware of the fact, and would long since have run a chain of locomotives from
Atlantic to Pacific if he could; but thousands of miles of the great American desert intervene,
and along the western seaboard there is no port fit for the vast trade, from Acapulco to Esquimalt
on Vancouver's Island, except San Francisco, which, for other reasons, is incapacitated.

Grinding, crushing, heaving, the broad current of the St. Lawrence bore its great burden all
night along. The same might continue for many days; and Sam Holt was anxious to get home. He
determined, in company with his new friend the corn merchant, to attempt the passage in a canoe.

'Now, sir,' said the latter gentleman, while they waited on the bank, muffled to their eyes
in furs, 'you will have some experience of what a complete barrier the frozen St. Lawrence
is to Canadian commerce, or the commonest intercourse, and how much the Victoria Bridge is needed.'

'Au large! au large!' called the boatmen--sturdy, muscular fellows, accustomed to river perils;
and, laying themselves at the bottom of the canoe as directed, shoulders resting against the
thwarts, the passengers began their 'traject.' Sometimes they had open water in lanes and patches;
sometimes a field of jagged ice, whereupon the merry-hearted voyageurs jumped out and dragged
the canoe across to water again, singing some French song the while. What perilous collisions
of floes they dexterously avoided! What intricate navigation of narrow channels they wound
through within half a boat's length of crushing destruction! Notwithstanding all their ability,
the passengers were thankful to touch land again some miles below the usual crossing place,
and some hours after embarkation.

Here the banks were deeply excoriated with the pressure of the ice against them; for the edges
of the vast field set in motion the previous day had ploughed into the earth, and piled itself
in immense angular 'jambs.' On the quay of Montreal it lay in block heaps also, crushed up
even into the public thoroughfare; and men were at work to help the break in the harbour with
pickaxes and crowbars on the grey plain.

Mr. Holt had only a few minutes wherewith to visit a friend in one of the obscure streets of
the city in a mean-looking house, made known to him by the coming out of children bearing school
satchels. A gentleman with semi-military air, wearing his hat somewhat jauntily on top of a
bloated face and figure, met them as he emerged from a side street, and, paternally patting
their heads, called them 'little dears;' and, from his seedy dress and unoccupied manner, it
was not hard to perceive that he must still be unsuccessful in his search after the employment
to suit him.

Whether Edith's suited her or not was a question her friend would fain have asked, when he
saw the tired look and dull eye after her morning's work. Captain Armytage observed that he
had frequently wished her to take holidays--in fact, had done everything short of exercising
his paternal authority; which perhaps he ought to have used on the occasion. In fact, he had
thoughts of removal to Toronto; the air of Montreal evidently did not agree with either of
the girls, eh? It is to be noticed that Jay stood by, having suddenly shot into a slender shy
girl, very efficient over the smallest pupils.

Mr. Holt was cordially pleased when Captain Armytage made many apologies for not remaining
longer; the fact was, he had a business appointment; and herewith he whispered to his daughter,
who gave him something from her pocket. Mr. Holt fancied it was money.

She knew of the approaching marriage of his sister Bell, to attend which he had hastened home;
and knew, also, that some of the Cedar Creek household would be there. Sinewy athlete as Sam
Holt was, he could not frame his lips to ask whether Linda might be one of them. But how often
had he to put the question resolutely away during that and the next day's travelling? And what
would have been his disappointment if, on entering the family at Mapleton, that pretty brown
head and fair face had not met his glance? And you fancied that you were cured, Mr. Holt; you
reckoned fifteen months' travel a specific.

Yes; Linda was one of Bell's bridesmaids. And that same sketch-book, filled with glimpses of
European scenery, brought about an enduring result on this wise.

The girls were looking over it the day before the wedding--Miss Bell in a manner rather preoccupied,
which, under the circumstances, was excusable. Having both a trousseau and a bridegroom on
one's hands is quite sufficient for any young lady's capacity; so she presently left her brother
Sam to explain his sketch-book to Linda alone.

All went evenly until the page was opened, the bit of silver paper lifted off, and Dunore was
before her. What a start--colour--exclamation! Her beloved Irish home, with its green low hills,
and its purple sea-line afar. 'Oh, Mr. Holt, I am so glad that you went to see Dunore!' Her
eyes were full of tears as she gazed.

'Are you? I went there for your sake, Linda, to look at the place you loved so much.' And--and--what
precise words he used then, or how he understood that she would prize the drawing a thousandfold
for his sake, neither rightly remembered afterwards. But--

'In April the ice always breaks up,' remarked old Hiram, with a huge laugh at his own joke.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. and Mrs. Sam Holt, after their wedding trip to Niagara, settled down soberly at Daisy Burn
as if they had been married a hundred years, Arthur said. They brought back with them a fugitive
slave, who had made her escape from a Virginian planter. Dinah proved a faithful and useful
nurse to the Daisy Burn children. Fugitive slaves are found all over Canada as servants, and
generally prove trustworthy and valuable.

CHAPTER XLV.

EXEUNT OMNES.

Now, in the year 1857, came a retributive justice upon Zack Bunting, in the shape of a complete
collapse of all his gains and their produce. He had placed them in a New York bank which paid
enormous interest--thirty per cent., people said; and when that figure of returns is offered,
wise men shake their heads at the security of the principal. Nevertheless, all went rightly
till the commercial panic of the period above mentioned, when Zack's possessions were reduced
to their primitive nonentity, and the old proverb abundantly illustrated, 'Ill got, ill gone.'

'Libby,' quoth Andy one afternoon, soon subsequently to the above occurrence, 'they say that
precious limb of an uncle of yours isn't goin' to come back here at all at all. I'm tould Mrs.
Zack an' Ged is packing up, to be off to some wild place intirely.'

He waited, gazing at her energetic movements in washing the dinner plates (for the luxury of
ware had supplanted tin before now at Cedar Creek), to see what effect the news would produce.
None. Miss Liberia merely uttered 'Wal!'

'Won't you be very lonesome in the world all by yourself, Libby, asthore?' he rejoined, casting
a melting tenderness into voice and manner; 'without a relation that ever was?'

'Not a bit, I guess,' was the curt reply.

'Och,' groaned the lover, 'av there ever was in the whole 'varsal world a woman so hard to
manage! She hasn't no more feelin's than one of them chaneys, or she wouldn't be lookin' at
me these four years a-pinin' away visibly before her eyes. "Ah, then indeed, it might go otherwise
with him. But I am glad to say that Sir Guy was an accomplished courtier."

The walk was taken, and the pretty bends of the river were seen; but
they were looked at without much earnestness, and Sir Guy's great
deed was not again mentioned.

The conversation went away to other matters. Of course it was not long before the Prime Minister
was deep in discussing the probabilities of the next Session. It was soon apparent to Phineas that
the Duke was no longer desirous of resigning, though he spoke very freely of the probable necessity
there might be for him to do so.

At the present moment he was in his best humour. His feet were on his own property. He could see
the prosperity around him.


Not long after the happy accomplishment of this last alliance the post-office was transferred
from the decaying knot of cabins at the 'Corner' to the rising settlement of Cedar Creek. Andy's
new store had a letter-box fixed in its window, and his wife added to her multifarious occupations
that of postmistress.

'Anything for me this evening, Mrs. Callaghan?' asked the silver-headed squire, in his stately
way, coming up to the counter.

'I guess thar's the newspaper,' answered Liberia, pushing it across, while the other hand held
a yard measure upon some calico, whence she was serving a customer. A new face Mr. Wynn saw
in a moment: probably one of the fresh emigrants who sometimes halted at the Creek proceeding
up country.

Mrs. Callaghan looked doubtfully at the piece of English silver produced by the woman, and
turned it round between her finger and thumb. 'I say, squire, stop a minute: what sort o' money's
this?'

'A crown-piece sterling; you'll give six shillings and a penny currency for it,' answered Mr. Wynn.

'Now I guess that's what I don't understand,' said Liberia. 'Why ain't five shillin's the same
everywhar?'

That Mr. Wynn could not answer. He had been indulging some thoughts of a pamphlet on currency
reformation, and went out of the store revolving them again.

For it is to be noted that the squire felt somewhat like Lycurgus, or Codrus, or some of those
old law-givers and state-founders in this new settlement of the Creek. He knew himself for
the greatest authority therein, the one whose word bore greatest weight, the referee and arbitrator
in all eases. Plenty of interests had sprung up in his life such as he could not have dreamed
of nine years before, when rooted at Dunore. His thoughts of the latter had changed since he
learned that a railway had cut the lawn across and altered the avenue and entrance gate, and
the new owner had constructed a piece of ornamental water where the trout-stream used to run;
likewise built a wing to the mansion in the Tudor style, with a turret at the end. Which items
of news, by completely changing the aspect of the dear old home, as they remembered Dunore,
had done much towards curing the troublesome yearning after it.

Now the squire walked through the broad sloping street of pretty and clean detached cottages
(white, with bright green shutters outside), fronting fields whence the forest had been pushed
back considerably. Orchards of young trees bloomed about them; the sawmill was noisily eating
its way through planks on the edge of the stream; groups of 'sugar-bush' maples stood about;
over all the declining sun, hastening to immerse itself in the measureless woods westward.
'Pleasant places,' said Mr. Wynn to himself, quoting old words; 'my lot has fallen in pleasant
places.'

Sitting in the summer parlour of the butternut's shade, he read his newspaper--a weekly Greenock
print, the advertisement side half-filled with quack medicines, after the manner of such journals
in Canada. Presently an entry in the 'Deaths' arrested his attention. 

Experience, however, seems to show me that Liberalism is demanded by the country."

"So, perhaps, at certain epochs, may the Devil and all his works;
but you will hardly say that you will carry the Devil's colours because
the country may like the Devil.

It is not sufficient, I think, to say that Liberalism is demanded. You should first know what
Liberalism means, and then assure yourself that the thing itself is good. I dare say you have
done so; but I see some who never make the inquiry."

 But what could you do, my son?'

'Mother'--after a pause--'shall I not bring you another daughter to fill Linda's empty place?'

Mrs. Wynn had long before this been trusted with the story of Robert's affection. Her gentleness
won every secret of her son's heart.

What could she say now but bless him through her tears?

And so he went next day. He found the mean house in the obscure street where Edith had for
years toiled, and not unhappily. Duty never brings unmixed pain in its performance.

The schoolroom was full of the subdued hum of children's voices; the mistress stood at her
desk, deep mourning on her figure and in her face. It was only the twelfth day since her bereavement;
but she was glad of the return of regular work, though the white features and frail hands hardly
seemed equal to much as yet. Presently the German girl who was her servant opened the door,
and Miss Armytage went to hear her message.

'Von gentleman's in parlour;' which suggested to Edith a careful father of fresh pupils. She
gave her deputy, Jay, a few charges, and went to the visitor, who had thought her an interminable
time in coming. He, blooming, strong, fresh from his healthy farm life in the backwoods, saw
with compassion how wan and worn she looked. Nursing at night during her father's illness,
and school-keeping in the day, might be blamed for this. Would she come to Cedar Creek and
be restored?

'Yes,' she answered, with perfect frankness, but not until the current six months of schooling
had elapsed. At the end of June she would be free; and then, if Mrs. Wynn asked her and Jay--

The other, the old question, was on Robert's lips at the instant. And to this also she said 'Yes.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Now for the prospects of the settlement which we have traced from its first shanty to its first
street. Its magnates looked forward confidently to its development as a town--nay, perchance
as a city of ten thousand inhabitants, when it purposes to assume a new name, as risen from
nonage. Future maps may exhibit it as Wynnsboro', in honour of the founder. A station on the
line of rail to connect the Ottawa with Lake Huron is to stand beside that concession line
(now a level plank road) where Robert Wynn halted eleven years ago, axe in hand, and gazed
in dismay on the impenetrable bush.

THE END.

MORRISON AND GIBB, EDINBURGH, PRINTERS TO HER MAJESTY'S STATIONERY OFFICE.

The following changes were made to the text:

In Chapter III, "fell" was changed to "felt" in the sentence "Who has not felt this beside
Lodore, or Foyers, or Torc?"

In Chapter XVII, "hall" was changed to "hail" in the sentence "He turned round at the hail."