THE LIVES AND ADVENTURES
                   OF SUNDRY
               NOTORIOUS PIRATES

                   PIRATES

 With a Foreword and sundry Decorations by

                C. Lovat Fraser

                  NEW YORK:
         ROBERT M. McBRIDE AND COMPANY
                     1922

First American Edition

Printed in the United States of America

Printed in Great Britain by Billing and Sons, Ltd., Guildford and Esher.

CONTENTS

                                                        PAGE
    Foreword                                             vii

    The Life of Captain Avery                              1

    Captain John Rackham, and his Crew                    17

    Captain Spriggs, and his Crew                         29

    Captain Edward Lowe, and his Crew                     37

    Captain George Lowther, and his Crew                  51

    Captain Anstis, and his Crew                          65

    Captain John Phillips, and his Crew                   77

    Captain Teach, alias Blackbeard                     87

    Major Stede Bonnet and his Crew                      101

    Captain William Kid                                  117

    Captain Edward England, and his Crew                 135

    Captain John Gow, alias Smith, and his Crew        145

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

    Captain Avery                             frontispiece

    Captain John Rackham                   facing page  19

    Captain Edward Lowe                          "        39

    Captain Teach                                "        89

    Major Stede Bonnet                           "       103

    Captain William Kid                          "       119

    Captain Edward England                       "       137

    Captain John Gow                             "       147

FOREWORD

Time, though a good Collector, is not always a reliable Historian. That is to say, that although
nothing of interest or importance is lost, yet an affair may be occasionally invested with
a glamour that is not wholly its own. I venture to think that Piracy has fortuned in this particular.
We are apt to base our ideas of Piracy on the somewhat vague ambitions of our childhood; and
I suppose, were such a thing possible, the consensus of opinion in our nurseries as to a future
profession in life would place Piracy but little below the glittering heights of the police
force and engine-driving. Incapable of forgetting this in more mature years, are we not inclined
to deck Her (the "H" capital, for I speak of an ideal), if not in purple and fine linen, at
least with a lavish display of tinsel and gilt? Nursery lore remains with us, whether we would
or not, for all our lives; and generations of ourselves, as schoolboys and pre-schoolboys,
have tricked out Piracy in so resplendent a dress that she has fairly ousted in our affections,
not only her sister profession of "High Toby and the Road," but every other splendid and villainous
vocation. Yet Teach, Kid, and Avery were as terrible or grim as Duval, Turpin, and Sheppard
were courtly or whimsical. And the terrible is a more vital affair than the whimsical. Is it,
then, unnatural that, after a lapse of nigh on two centuries, we should shake our wise heads
and allow that which is still nursery within us to deplore the loss of those days when we ran--before
a favouring "Trade"--the very good chance of being robbed, maimed, or murdered by Captain Howel
Davis or Captain Neil Gow? It is as well to remember that the "Captains" in this book were
seamen whose sole qualifications to the title were ready wit, a clear head, and, maybe, that
certain indefinable "power of the eye" that is the birth-right of all true leaders. The piratical
hero of our childhood is traceable in a great extent to the "thrillers," toy plays, and penny
theatres of our grandfathers. Here our Pirate was, as often as not, a noble, dignified, if
gloomy gentleman, with a leaning to Byronic soliloquy. Though stern in exterior, his heart
could (and would) melt at the distresses of the heroine. Elvira's eyes were certain to awaken
in his mind the recollection of "other eyes as innocent as thine, child." In short, he was
that most touching of all beings, the Hero-cum-Villain. And it was with a sigh of relief that
we saw him at the eleventh hour, having successfully twitted the "Government Men" and the Excise
(should he have an additional penchant for smuggling), safely restored to the arms of the long-suffering
possessor of the other eyes.

Alas! this little book mentions no Poll of Portsmouth, nor does it favour us with a "Yeo, heave,
oh!" nor is there so very much "cut and thrust" about it. It was written in that uninspiring
day when Pirates were a very real nuisance to such law-abiding folk as you and I; but it has
the merit of being written, if not by a Pirate, at least by one who came into actual contact
with them. I am not at all sure that "merit" is the right word to use in this instance, for
to be a Pirate does not necessarily ensure you making a good author. Indeed, it might almost
be considered as a ban to the fine literary technique of an Addison or a Temple. It has, however,
the virtue of being in close touch with some of the happenings chronicled. Not that our author
saw above a tithe of what he records--had he done so he would have been "set a-sun-drying"
at Execution Dock long before he had had the opportunity of putting pen to paper; but, as far
as posterity was concerned, he was lucky in his friend William Ingram--evidently a fellow of
good memory and a ready tongue--"who," as our author states in his Preface, "was a Pirate under
Anstis, Roberts, and many others," and who eventually was hanged in good piratical company
on the 11th of June, 1714.

The actual history of the little book, the major part of which is here reprinted, is as follows:

Its full title is "The History and Lives of all the most Notorious Pirates and their Crews,"
and the fifth edition, from which our text is taken, was printed in 1735. A reproduction of
the original title-page is given overleaf.

As a matter of fact, the title is misleading. How could a book that makes no mention of Morgan
or Lollonois be a history of all the most notorious Pirates? It deals with the last few years
of the seventeenth century and the first quarter of the eighteenth, a period that might with
justice be called "The Decline and Fall of Piracy," for after 1730 Piracy became but a mean
broken-backed affair that bordered perilously on mere sea-pilfering.

This was published in London, in 8vo., by Charles Rivington in 1724. A second edition, considerably
augmented, was issued later in the same year, a third edition in the year following, and a
fourth edition--in two volumes, as considerable additions in the form of extra "Lives," and
an appendix necessitated a further volume--in 1725.

This two-volume edition contained the history of the following Pirates: Avery, Martel, Teach,
Bonnet, England, Vane, Rackham, Davis, Roberts, Anstis, Morley, Lowther, Low, Evans, Phillips,
Spriggs, Smith, Misson, Bowen, Kid, Tew, Halsey, White, Condent, Bellamy, Fly, Howard, Lewis,
Cornelius, Williams, Burgess, and North, together with a short abstract on the Statute and
Civil Law in relation to "Pyracy," and an appendix, completing the Lives in the first volume,
and correcting some mistakes.

The work evidently enjoyed a great vogue, for it was translated into Dutch by Robert Hannebo,
of Amsterdam, in 1727, and issued there, with several "new illustrations," in 12mo. A German
version by Joachim Meyer was printed at Gosslar in the following year, while in France it saw
the light as an appendix to an edition of Esquemeling's "Histoire des Avanturiers," 1726.

But little is known of the author, Captain Charles Johnson, excepting that he flourished from
1724 to 1736, and it is more than probable that the name by which we know him is an assumed
one. It is possible that his knowledge of Pirates and Piracy was of such a nature to have justified
awkward investigations on the part of His Majesty's Government.

There is one thing that we do know for certain about him, and that is that the worthy Captain's
spelling, according to the pirated version of his book, was indefinite even for his own day.
He was one of those inspired folk who would be quite capable of spelling "schooner" with three
variations in as many lines. In this edition the spelling has been more or less modernized.

Lastly, it is to be remembered that the ships of this period, according to our modern ideas,
would be the veriest cockle-shells, and so that we should know what manner of vessel he refers
to in these pages, I had recourse to a friend of mine whose knowledge of things nautical is
extensive enough to have gained for him the coveted "Extra Master's Certificate," and who was
kind enough to supply me with the following definitions:

GALLEY.

A large vessel rowed by oars and sometimes having auxiliary sail of various rigs.

PINK.

Probably a small, fast vessel used as a tender and despatch boat for river work.

    C. L. F.

THE LIFE OF CAPTAIN AVERY

He was the son of John Avery, a victualler near Plymouth, in Devonshire, who in a few years
was grown as opulent in his purse as in his body, by scoring two for one; and when he had so
done, drinking the most of the liquor himself. By which means, and having a handsome wife,
who knew her business as well as if she had been brought up to it from a child (which, indeed,
she mostly was, her mother keeping the House before she married Mr. Avery), they soon became
very rich and very able to give credit to a whole ship's crew upon their tickets, which in
those days were sold for less than half their value.

Having but one child (afterwards the Captain), they at first resolved to bring him up a scholar,
that he might advance the dignity of the family. But instead of learning his book, he was taught
by such companions that he could soon swear to every point of his compass, which was a very
diverting scene for the Boatswain and his crew, who were then drinking in the kitchen, having
just received ten pounds apiece short allowance money on board the Revenge, every farthing
of which they spent before leaving the house.

But as soon as their money was spent, they were all like to have been imprisoned by their Landlady
for a riot, as she called it, so they were soon glad to sheer off, and he thought himself happiest
that could get first aboard. Indeed, it would have been happy for them if they had, for the
ship was unmoored and gone to sea; which put the Boatswain and his crew swearing in earnest,
and not knowing what to do, they resolved to return to their Landlady, Mrs. Avery, at "the
Sign of the Defiance." But she shut them out of doors, calling them a parcel of beggarly rascals,
and swearing that if they would not go from the door she would send for the Constable; and
notwithstanding all the entreaties and tears of her only son, who was then about six years
of age, she could not be prevailed upon to let them in, so they were obliged to stroll about
the street all night. In the morning, spying the ship at anchor, being driven back by contrary
winds, they resolved to make the best of their way aboard; but on the way, whom should they
meet but young Avery, who had no sooner seen them, but he cried after them. "Zounds," says
the Boatswain, "let's take the young dog aboard, and his mother shall soon be glad to adjust
the reckoning more to our satisfaction before she shall have her son."

This was agreed upon by all hands, and the boy was as willing as any of them. So, stepping
into the boat, in about an hour's time they reached the ship, which they had no sooner boarded
but they were brought before the Captain, who, being in want of hands, contented himself with
bidding them all go to their business; for the wind turned about, and there was occasion for
all hands to be at work to carry out the ship.

All this while young Avery was at the heels of the Boatswain, and was observed to swear two
oaths to one of the Boatswain's; which being soon observed by the Captain, he inquired who
brought that young rascal aboard.

To which the Boatswain replied that he did, that the boy's mother was his Landlady on shore,
and he had taken him up in jest, but was afraid that they would now have to keep him in earnest.

When the hurry was a little over, the Captain commanded the boy to be brought to him in his
cabin. He had not talked long to him before he took a fancy to him, telling him that if he
would be a good boy, he should live with him.

He, being a mighty lover of children, would often divert himself by talking to the boy, till
at length he took such a fancy to him, that he ordered him a little hammock in his own cabin,
and none were so great as the Captain and his boy Avery, which had like to have proved very
fatal to him; for Avery one night, observing the Captain to be very drunk with some passengers
that were on board, got a lighted match and had like to have blown up the ship, had not the
Gunner happened accidentally to follow him into the store-room. This made the Captain ever
after very shy of his new Acquaintance, and Avery, after he had been well whipped, was ordered
down into the hold, where he remained until they arrived at Carolina, which happened four or
five days after.

The boy was given to a merchant, who, taking a fancy to him, put him to school; but he made
so little progress in learning, and committed so many unlucky tricks, that the merchant, in
about three years, shipped him off to his friends at Plymouth on board the Nonesuch, where
he was no sooner arrived but his mother was overjoyed with the sight of her son, his father
being dead about a month before his arrival.

And, indeed, it was thought the loss of their son broke his heart, for it was observed the
father never held up his head after, the neighbours often reflecting upon him for his ill-usage
of the seamen, who had spent so much money at his house; saying he could never expect that
all his ill-gotten riches could prosper him, which so happened, as you shall hear presently.
For his mother, dying soon after, the boy was left under the guardianship of one Mr. Lightfoot,
a merchant, who, having great losses at sea, became a bankrupt, and so young Avery was left
to look out after himself; there he continued for many years in pilfering and stealing till
the country was too hot for him, when he betook him to sea again, where in time he became as
famous for robbing as Cromwell for rebellion.

He entered himself on board the Duke, Captain Gibson Commander, being one of the two ships
of twenty-four guns and one hundred men which were fitted out by the merchants of Bristol for
the service of Spain, which they had no sooner done, but they were ordered by their agents
at Bristol to sail for the Groyne to receive their orders.

On board one of which ships Avery, being at this time above twenty years old, entered himself,
where he had not been long before he observed the Captain was much addicted to drunkenness.

He endeavoured to spirit up not only his own ship's crew, but having also given the word to
part of the other ship's crew, the conspirators gave the signal.

At which the Duchess, as the other ship was named, put off her longboat; which the conspirators
hailing were answered by the men in the boat, "Is your drunken Boatswain on board?" This being
the word agreed upon, Avery answered, "All is safe;" upon which twenty lusty fellows came aboard
and joined them, which they had no sooner done but they secured the hatches and went to work,
putting to sea without any disorder, although there were several ships in the bay, amongst
whom was a frigate of forty-four guns.

The Captain, by this time being awaked by the noise of the conspirators working the ship, rung
the bell, inquiring what was the matter, to whom Avery and some of the crew replied, "Nothing.
Are you mutinous in your cups? Can't you lie down, sleep, and be quiet?"

"No," saith the Captain. "I am sure something's the matter with the ship. Does she drive? What
weather is it? Is it a storm?"

Saith Avery: "Cannot you lie quiet while you are quiet? I tell you all's well; we are at sea
in a fair wind and good weather."

"At sea," saith the Captain; "that can't be."

"Be not frightened," saith Avery, "and I'll tell you. You must note, I am now the Captain of
the ship; nay, you must turn out, for this is my cabin, and I am bound for Madagascar, to make
my own fortune as well as my companions."

The Captain, being more terrified than ever, did not know what to say, which Avery perceiving,
bid him take heart. "For," saith he, "if you will join me and these brave fellows, my companions,
in time you may get some post under me. If not, step into the longboat and get about your business."

This the Captain was glad to hear, but yet began to expostulate with them upon the injustice
of such doings. Saith Avery: "What do I care? Every man for himself. Come, come, Captain, if
you will go, get you gone; the longboat waits for you, and if there be any more cowards in
the ship, you may all go together." Which words so affrighted the whole crew, that there was
not above nine or ten of them that durst venture, who made the best of their way to the shore
as fast as they could, and thought they were well off.

The Captain was no sooner gone, but they called a Council, which agreed to own Avery as their
Captain; which he accepted of with all humility imaginable, seeming to excuse himself on account
of his inexperience at sea. But he did it so artfully that it more confirmed them in the good
opinion of their choice. "Gentlemen," said he, "what we have done we must live or die by; let
us all be hearty and of one mind, and I don't question but we shall make our fortune in a little
time. I propose that we sail first to Madagascar, where we may settle a correspondence, in
order to secure our retreats, whenever we think fit to lie by."

To which they all agreed, "Nemine contradicente."

"But hold," saith Avery; "it is necessary that we make some order among us, for the better
governing of the ship's crew." Which were in a few days drawn up by the clerk of the ship.

And Avery promising them vast things, they all came into them at last, although some things
went very much against the grain of many of them.

It took up all their spare time till they arrived at Madagascar, where they saw a Ship lying
at the N.E. part of the Island, with which the men had run away from New England; and seeing
Avery, they supposed that he had been sent after them to take them, but Avery soon undeceived
them, and promised them protection; therefore they resolved to sail together. In the whole
company, there was not above ten that pretended to any skill in navigation; for Avery himself
could neither write nor read very well, he being chosen Captain of the Duke purely for his
courage and contrivance.

In the latitude of Descada, one of the Islands, they took two other sloops, which supplied
them with provisions, and then they agreed to proceed to the West Indies; and coming to Barbadoes,
they fell in with a ship for London with twelve guns, from which they took some clothes and
money, ten barrels of powder, ten casks of beef, and several other goods, and five of her men,
and then let her go. From thence he went to the Island of Dominico, and watered; there he met
with six Englishmen, who willingly entered with Avery. They stayed not long before they sailed
for the Granada Island to clean their ships; which being known to the French Colony, the Governor
of Martenico sent four sloops well manned after them. But they stayed there not long, but made
the best of their way for Newfoundland, entering the harbour of Trepasse with black colours,
drums beating, and trumpets sounding.

It is impossible to relate the havoc they made there, burning all before them. When they left
Newfoundland they sailed for the West Indies, and from thence to the Island Descada, it being
judged the most convenient place, at that time of the year, to meet with a rich booty.

From hence they steered towards the Arabian Coast, near the River Indus, where, spying a sail,
they gave chase. At their near approach she hoisted Mogul colours and seemed as if she would
stand upon her defence, whilst Avery contented himself by cannonading her at a distance, which
made many of his men begin to mutiny, thinking him a coward.

But Avery knew better, and commanding his sloops to attack her, one in the Bow, and the rest
on the Quarter, clapt her on board, upon which she struck her colours and yielded. Aboard her
was one of the Mogul's own daughters, with several persons of distinction, who were carrying
rich offerings of jewels and other valuable presents to Mecca; which booty was the more considerable,
because these people always travel with great magnificence, having all their slaves and attendants
always with them, besides jewels and great sums of money to defray the charges. But Avery,
not content with this, seized the young Princess, and taking her with him into his own ship,
made the best of his way to Madagascar, where she soon broke her heart and died. Also her father,
the Great Mogul, did no sooner hear of it but he threatened all Europe with revenge. And when
he knew they were Englishmen who had captured his daughter and robbed him, he threatened to
send a mighty army, with fire and sword, to extirpate all the English from their settlements
on the Indian Coasts, which gave no small uneasiness to the Indian Company at London, when
they heard of it.

CAPTAIN JOHN RACKHAM, AND HIS CREW

John Rackham was Quarter-Master to Vane's Company, till Vane was turned out for not fighting
the French Man-of-War, and Rackham put in Captain in his place, which happened about the 24th
day of November, 1718. His first cruise was among the Caribbe Islands, where he took and plundered
several vessels. Afterwards, to the windward of Jamaica, he fell in with a Madeira Man, which
he detained till he had made his market out of her, and then restored her to her Master, suffering
Hosea Tisdel, a tavern-keeper at Jamaica, whom he had taken among his Prizes, to go aboard
her, she being bound for that Island.

Afterwards he sailed towards the Island Bermuda, where he took a Ship bound to England from
Carolina, and a small Ship from New England, both which he carried to the Bahama Islands, and
there clean'd. But staying too long in that Neighbourhood, Captain Rogers sent out a Sloop
well mann'd, which retook both the Prizes, the Pirate making his Escape.

From hence they proceeded to the Back of Cuba, where Rackham staid a long Time with his Delilahs,
till their Provision was consumed, when he concluded it Time to look out for more. As he was
putting to Sea, a Garda del Costa came in with a small English Sloop, which he had taken as
an interloper on that coast. The Spaniards seeing the Pirate, attacked her; but finding he
could not come to her that night, because she lay close behind a little island, he warps into
the channel, to make sure of her in the morning. Upon this Rackham took his Crew into the Boat,
with their pistols and cutlasses, and falls aboard the Spaniards in the night, without being
discovered, telling them, if they spoke a word they were dead men: And so shipping their cables,
drove out to sea, commanding them to take the Boat, and go aboard their Sloop immediately,
or else they were all dead men. Afterwards they waking the Captain and his men in the Hammocks,
who rose full of their expectation of the Prizes, they sent them aboard their empty Sloop.

In the Beginning of September, they went off of the French part of Hispaniola, where they took
two or three Frenchmen on board, that were looking after some cattle grazing near the waterside.
Then plundered two Sloops, they returned to Jamaica, where they took a Schooner.

Rackham continuing about this Island longer than a Man of his business ought to have done,
gave time to a Canoe, which he had surprised in Ocho Bay, to inform the Governor of Jamaica
of his civilities to all he met with going or coming from the Island. Thereupon a Sloop was
sent out in quest of him, well mann'd and arm'd, under Captain Barnet, to repay him for all
his good-natured Actions, and, if possible, to bring him into the Island. In the mean Time
Rackham met, near the Negril Point, a small Pettiauger, which, upon sight of him, ran ashore,
and landed her Men; but Rackham hailing them, desired the Pettiauger's men to come aboard him,
and drink a bowel of punch; swearing, They were all Friends and would do no Harm. Hereupon
they agreed to his Request, and went aboard him, though it proved fatal to every one of them,
they being nine in all. For, they were no sooner got aboard, and had laid down their muskets
and cutlasses, in order to take up their pipes, and make themselves merry with their new acquaintance
over a can of Flip, but Captain Barnet's Sloop was in sight, which soon put a damp to all their
merriment: Finding she stood directly towards them, they immediately weighed their anchor and
stood off. Barnet gave them chase, and having the advantage of the wind, soon came up with
her, gave her a broadside or two, and, after a very small dispute, took her and his nine new
guests, and brought them all together into Port-Royal in Jamaica, in about a fortnight's time.

November the 10th, 1720, a Court of Admiralty was held at St. Jago de la Vega, where the following
Persons were tried and convicted of Piracy, and accordingly Sentence of Death was passed upon
them by the Governor, viz.: John Rackham, Captain; George Fetherstone, Master; Richard Corner,
Quarter-Master; John Davis, John Howel, Patrick Carty, Thomas Earle, James Dobbin, and Noah
Harwood; Five of whom was hang'd the next day at Gallows-point, and the rest the day after.
The three first were taken and hanged in Chains; Rackham at Plumb-point, Fetherstone at Bush-key,
and Corner at Gun-key.

But what was yet more strange was the conviction of the nine guests, that knew nothing of the
matter, or at least they pretended so; but the People would not believe them, because it was
proved that they came on board with pistols and cutlasses: However, they were so much favoured
as to have the Court adjourned to the 24th of January following, to give a better Account of
themselves than at the time appeared to the Court: Beside, the Jury also then wanted sufficient
evidence to prove the piratical intention of going aboard the said Sloops. The two Frenchmen
taken by Rackham from the Island of Hispaniola, deposed, That John Eaton, Edward Warner, Thomas
Baker, Thomas Quick, John Cole, Benjamin Palmer, Walter Rouse, John Hanson, and John Howard,
came on board the Pirate's Sloop at Negril Point in Jamaica. Indeed they owned, That at first
Sight of them, they run away from Rackham's Sloop, but that he hailing them, they returned,
and Rackham sent his canoe ashore to fetch them aboard him, when they saw them all armed with
guns and cutlasses, which they brought with them; and that when they were chased by Captain
Barnet, they were frank and free, some drinking and walking about the deck not at all dispirited;
during which time there was a great gun, and small arms, fired by the Pirate Sloop at Captain
Barnet's Sloop; but that they could not say that the Prisoners were any way concerned in it:
However, they were certain that when Captain Barnet's Sloop fired at Rackham's, the Prisoners
at the Bar went under Deck, for cowardice, as they supposed; not so much as once peeping up
during the time of the whole action: But when Captain Barnet drew nigh to them to board them,
all of them came up, and helped to row the sloop, in order to escape from him: And that Rackham's
Men and they seemed to agree very well together, and that they did verily believe they were
all of a Party, having heard them say, when they came on board, They liked them never the worse
for being Pirates, since they were all honest Boys, and loved their Bottles.

To which the Prisoners answered, in their own Defence; That they were a great way off from
friends and acquaintance, and, therefore it was impossible to have any one to give an account
of them. That they were very honest pains-taking men, and came out to go a-turtling to provide
for their families; accordingly going ashore at Negril Point they saw a Sloop, with a white
pendant, making towards them, whereupon they took up their arms, which were no other but what
all people carry upon such occasions, and ran into the woods, to hide themselves among the
bushes, not knowing what she might be. But when they hailed them and told them they were Englishmen,
they ventured out, and came aboard them, as they desired, to drink a bowl of punch, they being
poor men, who get their livelihood very hardily, and such a thing was very acceptable to them.
But when they came on board the Sloop, to their very great surprise, they found they were Pirates;
upon which they begged to be released; but Rackham swore, That if they did not stay and assist
them against that Sloop that was coming down against them, he would cut all their throats.
So being compelled thereunto by Rackham and his men, to save their Lives, they did assist him,
and with no other design but to prevent their being cut in pieces, but as soon as Captain Barnet
came up with them, they all very readily and willingly submitted.

This being all they had to say in their own Defence, the Prisoners were ordered from the Bar:
The Court were divided in their Judgments; but the majority were of opinion, that they were
all guilty of the Piracy and Felony they were charged with; thereupon they all received Sentence
of Death, as usual in such cases, the Judge making a very pathetic Speech to them, exhorting
them to bear their Sufferings patiently, assuring them, that if they were innocent, which he
very much doubted, then their reward would be greater in the Other World: But everybody must
own their case was very hard in this.

February the 17th, John Eaton, Thomas Quick, and Thomas Baker, were accordingly executed at
Gallows-Point; and the next Day, John Cole, John Howard, and Benjamin Palmer, underwent the
same fate at Kingston. The other three got a Reprieve, they being against going aboard the
Pirate's Sloop, and are now living.

CAPTAIN SPRIGGS, AND HIS CREW

Spriggs sailed at first with Lowe, and came away with him from Lowther. Afterwards Lowe took
a ship of twelve guns on the Coast of Guinea, called the Delight, which Spriggs went off on
board with twenty men, and leaving Lowe in the night, came to the West Indies. In their passage
they made a Black Ensign, which they called the Jolly Roger, with a skeleton in the middle
holding a dart in one hand, striking a bleeding heart; and in the other an hour-glass; and
being hoisted, they fired all their guns to salute Spriggs, whom they chose Captain, and then
went to look out for prey.

In their voyage they took a Portugueze barque, wherein they had rich plunder. Near St. Lucia,
they took a Sloop belonging to Barbadoes, which they first plundered, and then burnt, forcing
some of the men into their Service, and beating, in a barbarous manner, those that refused
to join with them, and afterwards sent them away in the Boat, half dead with their wounds,
the rest got to Barbadoes, with much ado, though some of them died soon after of their cuts
and slashes. After this they took a Martinico Man, which they used in like manner, save that
they did not burn the ship. Then running down to the Leeward, they took one Captain Hawkins
coming from Jamaica, laden with Logwood; out of which, they took her stores, arms, and ammunition,
and what they did not want they threw over-board; they cut the cables to pieces, knocked down
the cabins, broke the windows, and did what mischief they could, taking Burridge and Stephens,
the two Mates, and some other Hands, by force; and then after keeping her a week, they let
her go. On the 27th they took a Rhode Island Sloop, compelling the Captain, and all his men,
to go on board the Pirate: One of them not being willing to stay with them, they told him he
should have a discharge presently, which was to receive ten lashes from every man on board.

The next day Burridge signed their Articles; which pleased them so much, that they fired all
the Guns, and made him Master, spending that day in rejoicings and drinking healths.

The First of April they spied a sail, and gave her chase all night, believing she had been
a Spaniard; but when they came up to her, and gave her a broadside, she cried out for Quarters,
which made them cease firing, and ordered the Captain to come aboard, which proved to be Captain
Hawkins, whom they had dismissed three days before, not worth a groat. Two Days after, they
anchored at Ratran, not far from Honduras, and put ashore Captain Hawkins, and several others,
giving them powder and ball, and a musquet, and then left them to shift as well as they could.
Here they staid three weeks, when two men came in a canoe, that had been left in another Maroon
Island near Benecca, and carried them thither. A fortnight after they espied a Sloop at sea,
which had lately escaped from the Spaniards at the Bay of Honduras, which, upon a signal stood
in and took them all off.

At an Island to the westward, the Pirates cleaned their ship, and then sailed towards St. Christophers
to meet Captain Moor.

Spriggs next stood towards Bermudas, where he took a Schooner belonging to Boston, from which
he took all the Men, and sunk the Vessel.

Instead of going to Newfoundland, they came back to the Islands, and on the 8th of June, to
windward of St. Christophers, they took a Sloop, Nicholas Trot, Master, belonging to St. Eustatia,
whose men they hoisted as high as the main fore-tops, and so let them fall down again; then
whipping them about the deck, they gave Trot his Sloop, and let him go, keeping only two of
his men, besides the plunder. Two or three days after, they took a ship coming from Rhode Island
to St. Christophers, laden with provisions and some horses, and burnt ship, men, and horses:
Since when Spriggs has not been heard of: though it is supposed he went to Madagascar, to spend,
in rioting and wantonness, his ill gotten plunder; till by a letter from Jamaica, of the 2nd
of March last, we understood, That he had been again at the Bay of Honduras, and taken sixteen
Sail.

CAPTAIN EDWARD LOWE, AND HIS CREW

Edward Lowe, born at Westminster, very early began the Trade of Plundering; for if any Child
refused him what he had, he must fight him. When he grew bigger, he took to Gaming among Blackshoe
Boys upon the Parade, with whom he used to play the Whole Game, as they call it; that is, cheat
every Body, and if they refused, they had to fight him.

Ned went to Sea with his eldest Brother, and leaving him in New-England, he worked in a Rigging
House, at Boston, for some Time, when not liking that, he returned to England to see his Mother,
with whom he did not stay long before he took his Leave of her, for the last Time, as he said,
and returned to Boston, where he shipped himself in a Sloop that was bound to the Bay of Honduras;
and when he arrived there, he was made Patron of the Boat, to bring the logwood on board to
lade the ship; where he differing with the Captain about the hurry of taking the logwood on
board, Lowe takes up a loaden Musquet, and fired at him; then putting off the Boat, he, with
twelve of his companions, goes to sea. Next day they met a small vessel, which they took, made
a Black Flag, and declared War against all the world. From hence they proceed to the Island
of the Grand Caimanes, where they met with George Lowther, who took him under his protection
as an ally, without any formal Treaty; which Lowe readily agreed to. But parting with Lowther
on the 28th of May, as we have already given in an Account in Lowther's Life, Lowe took a Vessel
belonging to Amboy, which he plundered, and then stood away to the South East, by which he
avoided two Sloops which the Governor had sent to take him from Rhode Island.

July the 12th, he sailed into the Harbour of Port Rosemary, where he found 13 small vessels
at anchor, whom he told they would have no quarters if they resisted; which so frightened the
Masters of the vessels, that they all yielded. Out of them he took whatever he wanted, keeping
for his own Use a Schooner of 80 Tons, on board of which he put 10 Carriage Guns, and 50 men,
and named her the Fancy making himself Captain, and appointing Charles Harris Captain of the
Brigantine. Making up a complement of 80 men out of the vessels, some by force, and others
by their own inclinations, he sailed away from Mablehead, and soon after he met two Sloops
bound for Boston, with provisions for the garrison; but there being an officer and soldiers
on board, he thought it the safest way, after some small resistance, to let them go on about
their business.

They then steered for the Leeward Islands; but in their voyage met with such a hurricane, as
had not been known in the memory of man. After the storm was over, they got safe to one of
the small Islands of the Carribees, and there refitted their vessels as well as they could.
As soon as the Brigantine was ready, they took a short cruise, leaving the Schooner in the
harbour till their return; which had not been many days at sea, before she met a ship that
had lost all her masts, on board of which they went, and took, in money and goods, to the value
of 1000l. Upon this success, the Brigantine returned to the Schooner, which being then ready
to sail, they agreed to go to the Azores, or Western Islands, where Lowe took a French Ship
of 32 Guns, and in St. Michael's Road, he took several sail that were lying there, without
firing a gun. Being in great want of water, he sent to the Governor of St. Michael's for a
Supply, promising upon that Condition, to release the Ships he had taken, otherwise to burn
them all; which the Governor, for the sake of the Ships, agreed to. Thereupon he released six,
keeping only the Rose Pink, of which he took the Command.

The Pirates took several of the Guns out of the ships, and mounted them on board the Rose.
Lowe ordered the Schooner to lie in the Fare between St. Michael's and St. Mary's, where he
met with Captain Carter in the Wright Galley; who, defending himself, they cut and mangled
him and his Men in a barbarous manner; after which, they were for burning the ship, but contented
themselves with cutting her cable, rigging, and sails to pieces, and so left her to the mercy
of the seas. From hence they sailed to the Island of Maderas, where they took a fishing boat,
with two old men and a boy in her, one of whom they sent ashore, demanding a boat of water,
otherwise they would kill the old man, which being complied with, the old man was discharged.
From hence they sailed to the Canaries, and thence continued their course for the Cape de Verde
Islands, where they took a ship called the Liverpool Merchant, from which they took 300 gallons
of brandy, two guns and carriages, besides six of the men, and then obliged them to go to the
Isle of May. They also took two Portugueze ships bound to Brazil, and three Sloops from St.
Thomas's bound to Curaso: All of which they plundered, and let them go, except one Sloop, by
which they heard that two Gallies were expected at the Western Islands. Her they manned, and
sent in Quest of these Ships whilst they careened the Rose at Cape de Verde; but the Sloop
missing the prey, was reduced to great want of water and provisions, so that they ventured
to go ashore St. Michael's, and pass for Traders; where, being suspected by the Governor, they
were conducted into the Castle, and provided for as long as they lived.

Lowe's ship was overset a-careening, so that he was reduced to his old Schooner, aboard of
which there went about an hundred as bold rogues as ever was hanged, and sailed to the West-Indies,
where they took a rich Portugueze ship bound Home from Bahia, putting to the torture several
of the men, who confest the Captain flung into the sea a bag of 11000 Moidores. This made Lowe
swear a thousand oaths; and after cutting off his lips, he murdered him and all his Crew, being
36 men.

After this, they cruised to the Northward, and took several Vessels and then steered for the
Bay of Honduras, where they took Five English Sloops, and a Pink, and a Spaniard of 6 Guns
and 70 men, whom they killed every man; which being done they rummaged the Spanish Ship, bringing
all the booty on board their own vessel.

In the next cruise, between the Leeward Islands and the Main, they took two Snows from Jamaica
to Liverpool, and just after a Ship called the Amsterdam Merchant, the Captain thereof he slit
his Nose, cut his Ears off, and then plundered the ship and let her go. Afterwards he took
a Sloop bound to Amboy, of whose Men he tied lighted matches between the fingers, which burnt
the flesh off the bones, and afterwards set them ashore in an uninhabited part of the country,
as also other ships which fell a prey to those villains.

One of His Majesty's Men-of-War called the Greyhound, of 20 guns and 120 men, hearing of their
barbarous actions, went in search of them and, seeing the Pirates, allowed Lowe to chase them
at first, till they were in readiness to engage him, and when he was within gunshot, tacked
about and stood towards him. The Pirates edged away under the Man-of-War's stern, making a
running fight for about two hours. But little wind happening, the Pirates gained from her;
thereupon the Greyhound left off firing, and turned all her hands to her oars, and came up
with them, when the fight was renewed with a brisk fire on both sides, till the Ranger's main-yard
was shot down; upon which, the Greyhound pressing close, Lowe bore away and left his consort,
who seeing the cowardice of his Commadore, and that there was no possibility of escaping, called
out for quarters.

Lowe's conduct in this engagement shewed him to be a cowardly villain; for had he fought half
as briskly as Harris, the Man-of-War could never have taken either of them. The Greyhound carried
her Prize to Rhode-Island, which was looked upon to be of such signal Service to the Colony,
that in Council they resolved to compliment Peter Sulgard Captain, with the Freedom of their
Corporation. They secured the prisoners under a strong guard in Jail, till a Court of Vice-Admiralty
could be held for their Trials, which was on the 10th of July at Newport, lasting three Days.
The Judges were William Dummer, Esq; Lieutenant Governor of the Massachusets, President; Nathaniel
Payne, Esq; John Lechmore, Esq; Surveyor General; John Valentine, Esq; Advocate General; Samuel
Cranston, Governor of Rhode Island; John Menzies, Esq; Judge of the Admiralty; Richard Ward,
Esq; Registrar; and Mr. Jahleet Brinton, Provost Marshal. Robert Auchmuta, Esq, was appointed
by the Court, Counsel for the prisoners here under mentioned.

Charles Harris, Captain, William Blads, Daniel Hyde, Thomas Powel, jun., Stephen Munden, Thomas
Hugget, William Read, Peter Kneeves, James Brinkley, Joseph Sound, William Shutfield, Edward
Eaton, John Brown, Edward Lawson, Owen Rice, John Tomkins, John Fitzgerald, Abraham Lacy, Thomas
Linester, Francis Leyton, John Walters, Quarter-master, William Jones, Charles Church, Thomas
Hazel, and John Bright, who were all executed the 19th of July, 1723, near Newport in Rhode
Island; but John Brown and Patrick Cunningham were recommended to Mercy.

The eight following were found Not Guilty; John Wilson, Henry Barnes, Thomas Jones, Joseph
Switzer, Thomas Mumper, Indian, John Hencher, Doctor, John Fletcher, and Thomas Child.

Instead of working repentance in Lowe, this deliverance made him ten times worse, vowing revenge
upon all they should meet with for the future, which they executed upon Nathan Skiff, Master
of a Whale-fishing Sloop, whom they whipt naked about the deck, and then cut off his ears,
making his torture their sport. At length being weary thereof, they shot him through the head,
and sunk his vessel. Some days after, he took a fishing boat off of Black Island, and only
cut off the master's head; but next day taking two Whale Boats near Rhode Island, he brutally
killed one of the masters and cut off the ears of the other. From hence he went to Newfoundland,
where he took 23 French Vessels, and mann'd one of them of 22 Guns with pirates; after which,
they took and plundered 18 ships, some of which they destroyed.

The latter end of July, Lowe took a large ship called the Merry Christmas, and mounted her
with 34 Guns, on which he goes aboard, taking the title of Admiral, and sails to the Western
Islands, where he took a Brigantine manned with English and Portugueze, the Latter of whom
he hanged.

Afterwards Lowe went to the Coast of Guinea, but nothing happened till he came to Sierra Leon,
in Africa, when he met with the Delight, which he took, mounting her with 16 Guns, and 60 men,
appointing Spriggs Captain, and from whom two days after he separated.

In January after, he took a Ship called Squirrel, but what came of him afterwards we cannot tell.

CAPTAIN GEORGE LOWTHER, AND HIS CREW

George Lowther went second Mate on board the Gambia Castle, belonging to the Royal African
Company, on board which was Captain Massey, with soldiers that he was to command under Colonel
Whitney, whom were landed on James Island; but the Fort and Garrison not agreeing the Company
soon after lost a Galley worth 10000l. by it.

Massey finding he must be over-ruled by the merchants, soon began to complain of their ill-treatment
of his men in their allowance, saying he did not come to be a Guinea Slave; and that if they
did not use him and his men better, he should take other measures.

At the same time, there happened a dispute between the Captain of the ship and Lowther, which
very much contributing to Lowther's design: For Lowther finding himself neglected by the Captain,
found means to ingratiate himself into the favour of the sailors, who, upon the Captain's going
to punish him, swore, They would knock down the first man that should offer to lay hands on
him; which Lowther improved to a general disaffection of the ship's Crew. Massey in the meantime,
having contracted an intimacy with Lowther, they agreed to curb their enemies, and provide
for themselves some other way; which the Captain perceiving, he goes on shore to the Governor
and Factor, to consult what methods to take. But Lowther apprehending it was against him, he
sent a letter in the same boat to Massey, advising him to repair on board, to put their project
in execution.

Upon which Massey harangued the Soldiers, saying, You that have a Mind to return to England,
may now do it; which they all agreed to. Then he went to the Governor's appartment, and took
his bed, baggage, plate and furniture, believing the Governor would go with him, which he refused;
however Massey came aboard with the Governor's son. After demolishing all the guns of the Fort,
they weighed anchor, and fell down, but soon ran the ship aground; upon which Massey returns
to the Fort, remounts the guns, and keeps garrison till the ship got clear. In the meantime
Captain Russell got off but was not suffered to come on board, although he offered Lowther
what terms he pleased. Next tide they got the ship afloat, having first nailed up and dismounted
all the cannon. Then putting the Governor's son ashore, they put out to sea, when Lowther called
upon the men, and told them, It was Madness to think of returning to England; for what they
had done, would be judged a Capital Offence; and therefore, since they had a good ship under
them, he proposed that they should seek their fortunes upon the Seas, as others had done before
them, which they all agreed to, calling the ship The Delivery, and swore to stand by one another.

Lowther left the Fort the 13th of June, and on the 20th, near Barbadoes, he came up with a
Brigantine, belonging to Boston, which he plundered, and then let go. After this he proceeded
to Hispaniola, where he met with a French Sloop loaden with wine and brandy, on board whom
Captain Massey went, pretending at first to be a merchant; but finding her to be a Ship of
value, he told Monsieur, He must have it all without money. On board her, there was 30 casks
of brandy, 5 hogsheads of wine, several pieces of chintz, and 70l. in money, all of which they
took, only Lowther return'd the French Master five pounds again.

But this good harmony did not last long amongst them, Massey was uneasy, and resolved to leave
them; which Lowther agreed to, giving him a Sloop he had just before taken, to go where he
thought fit. Accordingly Massey goes aboard, with ten men, and comes in directly for Jamaica,
where, putting a bold face on the matter, he informs Sir Nicholas Laws, the then Governor,
how he had left Lowther the pirate, and of all that had been transacted before, adding, That
he assisted him at the River Gambia only to save so many of His Majesty's subjects, and return
to England.

Massey was well received, and, at his own report, he was sent on board the Happy Sloop, to
cruise off Hispaniola for Lowther; but not meeting with him, he returned to Jamaica, and getting
a Certificate, he came home to England, where, when he arrived, he writes to the African Company,
relating the whole transaction of his voyage, but excuses it as an inadvertency, by his being
ill-used; for which, if they would not forgive him, he begged to die like a soldier, and not
be hanged like a dog. This not producing so favourable an answer as he expected, he went the
next day to the Lord Chief Justice Chambers, and enquired, If there had been ever a Warrant
granted and against one Captain Massey for Piracy. But being told, There was not, he said,
He was the Man, and that the African Company would soon apply to my Lord for one, which if
they did, he lodged in Aldersgate street, where the Officer might at any time find him. This
the Clerk took down in writing, and a Warrant being soon granted, the Tipstaff went accordingly,
and took him without any trouble.

But still there was no person to charge him, neither could they prove the letter to be his
own hand-writing, till the Justice interrogated him, Whether he did write the letter or not;
which he readily confessed, as also gave an ample account of the whole voyage, thereupon he
was committed to Newgate, though soon after he was admitted out upon bail.

July the 5th, 1723, he was tried at the Old-Baily by a Court of Admiralty, when Captain Russell
and others appeared against him: But he would have saved them all that trouble, for he confessed
more than they knew, fixing the facts so firm upon himself, that he was found Guilty, received
Sentence of Death, and was executed three weeks after at Execution Dock.

But to return to Lowther, whom Massey left cruising off of Hispaniola, who plying to the Windward
near Porto Rico, took two sail, one was a small Bristol Ship, the other a Spanish Pirate, who
had taken the Bristol Ship; which so provoked Lowther, that he threatened to put all the Spaniards
to Death, for daring to intermeddle in his Affairs: But at last he contented himself with burning
both their ships; and the Spaniards getting away in their launch, they thought they were well off.

Afterwards he took a small Sloop from St. Christophers, which he manned; and carried with him
to an island where they cleaned, and then going aboard, they sailed towards the Bay of Honduras,
where they met with a small vessel with 13 Hands, of the same employment, under Captain Lowe,
whom Lowther received as friends, inviting them, as they were few in number, to join their
strength together; which being accepted of, Lowther continued Captain, and Lowe was made Lieutenant,
burning his own ship. Then coming into the Bay, they fell upon a ship of two hundred tons,
called the Greyhound; against whom Lowther firing his guns, hoisted the piratical Colours,
which Captain Edward bravely returned; but at length finding the Pirate too strong for him
he yielded, and the Pirate came on Board, and not only rifling the ship, but beat and cut the
men in a cruel manner. In crusing about the Bay, they took several other vessels without any
resistance, particularly a Sloop of 100 Tons, which they mounted with 8 carriages and 10 swivel
guns. With this fleet, Lowther in the Happy Delivery, Lowe in the Rhode Island Sloop, Harris
in Hamilton's Sloop, left the Bay, and came to Port Mayo, where they made preparations to careen,
carrying ashore all their sails, to lay their plunder and stores in; but when they were busy
at work, a body of the natives came down and attacked the Pirates unprepared, who were glad
to fly to their Sloops, and leave them masters of the field, leaving the Happy Delivery behind
them, contenting themselves with the Ranger, which had only 20 guns, and 8 swivels, taking
all the men on board her, wherein they presently began to quarrel, laying the blame upon one
another. Being very much in want of provisions, they got to the West Indies, May 1722, and
near the Island of Descada took a Brigantine stored with provisions and necessaries, which
put them in better temper. Then they watered and stood to the Northward, intending to visit
the North Coast of America, and in Latitude 38, they took the Rebecca of Boston, at which Time
the Crews divided, Lowe with 44 Hands went on board the Brigantine, and Lowther with the same
number, staid in the Sloop, separating that very night, being the 28th of May 1722.

Lowther cruised a pretty while among the Islands to no purpose, till at length he fell in with
a Martinico Man, which proved a seasonable relief, he being reduced to great want of provisions,
and after that a Guinea Man. After which they thought it time to clean, in order to prepare
for new adventures; for which purpose they sailed to the Island of Blanco, which is a low Island
30 leagues from the main of Spanish America, where he unrigged his Sloop, sending his guns,
rigging, and sails ashore, and putting his vessel upon the careen. But the Eagle Sloop of Barbadoes,
coming near this Island, and seeing her, supposing her to be a Pirate, took the advantage of
attacking her when unprepared, who immediately hoisted the St. George's Flag at her top-mast
head to bid them defiance: But when they found the Eagle resolved to board them in good earnest,
the Pirates cut their cable, and hawled the stern on shore, which obliged the Eagle to come
to an anchor athwart the hawse, where they engaged them till they cried out for Quarters. At
which time Lowther and 12 men made their escape, but they took the rest, and brought them to
Camena, where the Spanish Governor condemned the Sloop to the captors, and sent 23 Hands to
scour the Bushes of Blanco for the Pirates, when they took 40; but could not find Lowther,
three men and a little Boy. John Churchill, Edward Mackonald, Nicholas Lewis, Rich. West, Sam
Lavercot, Rob. White, John Shaw, And. Hunter, Jonathan Delve, Matthew Freeborn, and Henry Watson,
were hanged, Roger Granger, Ralph Candem, and Robert Willis, were acquitted. And Captain Lowther,
it is said, afterwards shot himself, being found dead, and a pistol burst by his side.

CAPTAIN ANSTIS, AND HIS CREW

Thomas Anstis shipped himself at Providence, in the Year 1718, aboard the Buck Sloop, and was
one of the six that conspired together to get off with the vessel, along with Howel Davis,
Dennis Topping, and Walter Kennedy, etc. I shall only observe, that this combination was the
beginning of Captain Roberts's company, which afterwards proved so formidable, from whom Anstis
separated the 18th of April, 1721, leaving his Commodore to pursue his adventures upon the
Coasts of Guinea, whilst he returned to the West Indies, upon the same design.

About the middle of June, he met with one Captain Maiston, between Hispaniola and Jamaica,
bound to New-York, from which he took all the wearing apparel, liquors and provisions, and
six men. Afterwards he met with the Irwin, Captain Ross from Cork, on the Coast of Martinico,
which ship had Colonel Doyly of Montserrat on board, and his Family, and 600 barrels of beef.

Afterwards they went into one of the Islands to clean, and thence proceeding towards Bermudas,
they met with a stout ship called the Morning Star, bound from Guinea to Carolina, which they
kept for their own use. Just after, they took a ship from Barbadoes bound to New England, from
whence taking her guns, they mounted the Morning Star with 32 pieces of cannon, and 100 men,
appointing John Fenn Captain: For Anstis was so in love with his own vessel, she being a good
sailor, he made it his choice to stay in her, and let Fenn have the other ship. Though they
were not sufficiently strong, yet being most new men, they could not agree, but resolving to
break up company, sent a Petition to His Majesty by a Merchant Ship, expecting her Return at Cuba.

Here they staid about nine months; but not having provisions for above two, they were obliged
to take what the Island afforded; which is many sorts of fish, particularly turtle; though
they eat not a bit of bread, nor flesh meat, during their being on the Island.

They passed their time here in dancing, and other diversions, agreeable to these sort of folks.
Among the rest, they appointed a mock Court of Judicature, to try one another for Piracy, and
he that was a Criminal one day, was made a Judge another. I shall never forget one of their
Trials, which for the curiosity of it, I shall relate.

    Judge. Harkee me, Sirrah--you ill-looked dog. What
    have you to say why you may not be tucked up, and set
    a-sun-drying like a scare-crow?--Are you Guilty, or not?

    Prisoner. Not Guilty, an't please your Worship.

    Judge. Not Guilty! say so again, and I will have you
    hanged without any Trial.

    Prisoner.

    Judge. Answer me, Sirrah--how will you be tried?

    Prisoner. By God and my country.

    Judge. The Devil you will.... Then, Gentlemen of the
    Jury, we have nothing to do but to proceed to Judgment.

    Prisoner. What have we to do with Reason?--I would have
    you to know, Sirrah, we do not sit here to hear
    Reason--we go according to Law.--Is our dinner ready?

    Attorney-General. Yes, my Lord.

    Judge. Then harkee you rascal at the Bar, hear me,
    Sirrah, hear me.--You must be hanged for three reasons:
    First, because it is not fit that I should sit as
    Judge, and no-body to be hang'd: Secondly, You must be
    hang'd because you have a damn'd hanging Look:
    Thirdly, You must be hanged, because I am hungry.
    There's Law for you, ye dog; take him away, Gaoler.

By this we may see how these fellows can jest upon things, the thoughts of which should make
them tremble.

August 1722, they made ready the Brigantine, and came out to sea, where meeting their correspondent
returning, and finding nothing done, they all agreed to ply their old trade. So they sailed
with the ship and Brigantine to the Southward, where they ran the Morning Star upon the Grand
Carmanes, and wrecked her; the next Day Anstis went ashore to fetch the men off, who were all
safe. Anstis had just time to get Captain Fenn, and a few others on board, before the Hector
and Adventure came down upon him; but he got to sea, and one of the Men-of-War after him, keeping
within gun-shot several hours, when the wind dying away, the Pirates got to their oars, and
rowed for their lives.

The Hector landed her men, and took 40 of the Morning Star's Crew, without any resistance,
they pretending they were glad of this opportunity; the rest hid themselves in the woods.

The Brigantine after her escape, sailed to an Island, near the Bay of Honduras, to clean, and
in her way took a Sloop, Captain Durfey Commander, which they destroyed, but brought the men
on board. While she was cleaning, Durfey conspired with some of the prisoners, to carry off
the Brigantine; but it being discovered, he and four or five more got ashore, with arms and
ammunition; and when the Pirates' Canoe came in for Water, seized the boat and men; upon which,
Anstis sent another boat with 30 hand ashore; but Durfey gave them such a warm reception that
they were glad to return back again.

In December 1722, Anstis left this place, taking in his cruise a good ship. He mounted her
with 24 Guns and made Fenn Commander. From hence they went to the Bahama Islands, taking what
they wanted.

As they were cleaning their ship the Winchelsea came down upon them, when most of them escaped
to the woods; but Anstis having a light pair of heels, escaped in the Brigantine. Afterwards,
some of the Company, being tired of this trade, shot Anstis in his Hammock, and put the rest
in irons, and then carried the Brigantine to Curacco, a Dutch Settlement, where they were hanged,
and those that delivered up the vessel acquitted. Fenn was soon after taken by the Man-of-War's
Men, straggling in the woods, with a few more, and carried to Antegoa and hanged. But some
escaped among the negroes, and were never heard of since.

CAPTAIN JOHN PHILLIPS, AND HIS CREW

John Phillips was bred a carpenter, but sailing in a West Country ship to Newfoundland, was
taken by Anstis, who soon persuaded him to join with him, making him Carpenter of the Vessel,
in which station he continued till they broke up at Tobago, when he came Home in a Sloop that
was sunk in Bristol Channel. But he did not stay long in England; for hearing of some of his
companions being taken in Bristol Gaol, he moved off to Topsham, and there shipped himself
with one Captain Wadham for Newfoundland, where when the ship came he ran away, and hired himself
a splitter in the Fishery for the season: but he soon combined with others in the Fishery,
to go off with one of the vessels that lay in the Harbour, and turn Pirate, and accordingly
fixed upon the 29th of August, 1713, at Night; but of 16 Men that promised five only were as
good as their Word. Notwithstanding, Phillips was for pushing on, assuring them that they should
soon increase their company. Hereupon they seized a vessel, and went out to sea, when they
soon began to settle their Officers to prevent dispute, appointing, John Phillips, Captain;
John Nutt, Navigator of the Vessel; James Sparks, Gunner; Thomas Fern, Carpenter; and William
White was only a private man among them.

Before they left the Banks, they took several small fishing vessels, out of which they took
some more Hands, and then sailed to the West-Indies: Among those that were taken, was one John
Rose Archer who having been a pirate under Blackbeard was made Quarter-Master to the company:
They came off Barbadoes in October, and cruised about the Islands about three Months, without
meeting with a vessel, so that they were almost starved for want of provisions, when at length
they fell in with a Martinico Man of 12 guns and 35 hands, upon which they hoisted the Black
Flag and ran up along side of the Sloop, with piratical Colours flying, swearing, If they did
not strike immediately, they must expect no quarters; which so frightened the Frenchman, that
he never fired a gun. Having got this supply, they took her provisions, and four of her men.

Having occasion to clean their vessel, Phillips proposed Tobago; and just as they had done,
a Man-of-War's boat came into the Harbour, the ship cruising to the Leeward of the Island;
which was no sooner gone, but they warped out, and plied to the Windward for safety.

In a few days they took a Snow with a few Hands in it, on board of which they sent Fern the
Carpenter, William Smith, Philips Wood, and Taylor; but Fern being dissatisfied at Archer's
being preferred before him to be Quarter-Master, persuaded the rest to go off with the prize;
but Phillips gave them Chase, and coming up with them, shot Wood, and wounded Taylor in the
leg; upon which the other two surrendered.

From Tobago they stood away to the Northward, and took a Portugueze bound for Brazil, and two
or three Sloops for Jamaica, in one of which Fern endeavouring to go off, was killed by Phillips,
as was also another man for the like attempt, which made all the others more fearful of discovering
their Minds, dreading the villany of a few hardened wretches, who feared neither God nor Devil,
as Phillips was often used blasphemously to say.

On the 25th of March, they took two ships from Virginia, the Master's name of one was John
Phillips, the Pirate's Name-sake; of the other, Robert Mortimer, a stout young man. Phillips
staid on board Mortimer's Ship, while they transported the crew to the Sloop, when Mortimer
took up a hand-spike and struck Phillips over the Head; but not knocking him down, he recovered
and wounded Mortimer with his sword; and the other two Pirates who were on board, coming to
Phillip's assistance they cut Mortimer to pieces, while his own two men stood and looked on.
Out of the other Virginia Man, they took Edward Cheesman, a carpenter, to supply the Place
of Fern, who being averse to that way of life, proposed to J. Philamore, who was ordered to
row Cheesman on board Mortimer's ship, to overthrow their Piratical government; which from
time to time, as occasion offered, they consulted how to do. The Pirates, in the mean time,
robbed and plundered several ships and vessels, bending their course towards Newfoundland,
where they designed to raise more men, and do all the mischief they could on the Banks, and
in the harbours. Towards which country, Phillips making his way, took one Salter in a Sloop
on the Isle of Sables, which he kept, and gave Mortimer's Ship to the Mate and crew; also a
Schooner, one Chadwell Master, which they scuttled in order to sink: But Phillips understanding
that she belonged to Mr. Menors of Newfoundland, with whose Vessel they first went off a-Pirating,
said, We have done him injury enough already, and so ordering his Vessel to be repaired, returned
her to the Master.

In the Afternoon, they chased another vessel, whose Master was an Inward Light Man, named Dependence
Ellery, who told Phillips he took him for a Pirate as soon as he saw him, otherwise he would
not have given him the Trouble of chasing him so long. This so provoked Phillips and his Crew,
that they made poor Dependence, for his Integrity, dance about the Ship till he was weary.
After which they took 10 other ships and vessels; and on the 14th of April, they took a Sloop
belonging to Cape Anne, Andrew Harradine Master; which looking upon to be more fit for their
purpose, they came on board, keeping only the Master of her Prisoner, and sending the crew
away in Salter's vessel. Cheesman broke his mind to Harradine, to destroy the crew. Upon this,
it was concluded to be 12 a Clock at Noon, when Cheesman leaves his working-tools on the deck,
as if he had been going to use them, walks off. But perceiving some signs of fear in Harradine,
he fetches his brandy bottle, and gives him and the rest a dram, saying, Here's to our next
Meeting; then he talks to Nutt, in the mean while Philamore takes up an axe, while Cheesman
and Harradine seize Nutt by the Collar, and toss him over the Side of the Vessel.

By this Time the Boatswain was dead; for as soon as Philamore saw the Master laid hold on,
he up with the axe, and cut off the Boatswain's head, which Noise soon brought the Captain
upon Deck, whom Cheesman saluted with the blow of a mallet, which broke his jaw-bone, but did
not knock him down; upon which Harradine came to the Carpenter's aid, when Sparks the Gunner
interposing, Cheesman trips up his Heels, and flung him into the arms of Charles Ivemay, who
at that moment threw him into the Sea; and at the same Time Harradine throws Captain Phillips
after him, bidding the Devil take them both. This done, Cheesman jumps from the deck into the
Hold, to knock Archer on the Head, when Harry Gyles came down after him, desired his Life might
be spared; which being agreed to, he was made a Prisoner, and secured.

All being over, they altered their course from Newfoundland to Boston, where they arrived the
3rd of May, to the great joy of the Province, and on the 12th of May, a special Court of Admiralty
was held for the Trial of these Pirates, when John Philamore, Edward Cheesman, John Cobs, Henry
Gyles, Charles Joymay, John Bootman, and Henry Payne, were honourably acquitted; as also three
French Men, John Baptis, Peter Taffery, and Isaac Lassen, as also three Negroes, Pedro, Francisco,
and Pierro. John Rose Archer, the Quarter-Master, William White, William Taylor, and William
Phillips were condemned; altho' the two latter got a Reprieve, and the two former, Archer and
White, were executed the 2nd of June following.

CAPTAIN TEACH, ALIAS BLACKBEARD

Edward Teach was a Bristol Man, and had served many years in the late wars, in a Privateer
fitted out from Jamaica, in which he had often distinguished himself for his boldness. He was
never thought fit to be entrusted with any Command, till he went a-pirating in the Year 1716,
when Captain Benjamin Hornigold put him into a Prize Sloop, with whom he kept company till
Hornigold surrendered.

In 1727, Teach and Hornigold sailed from Providence for America, where, in their way, they
took a vessel with above 100 Barrels of Flour, as also a Sloop from Bermudas, and a Ship bound
to Carolina; from which they had a good plunder. After cleaning at Virginia, they returned
to the West-Indies, and made Prize of a French Guinea Man bound to Martinico, which Teach was
made Captain of; but Hornigold with his Sloop returned to Providence, and surrendered to mercy.
Aboard the French Guinea Ship, Teach mounted 46 guns, and called her Queen Anne's Revenge.
Not long after he fell in with the Scarborough Man-of-War, who, after a long fight finding
she could do no good with Teach, left him, and returned to Barbadoes, while Teach sailed to
Spanish America. In his way, he met with Major Bonnet a Gentleman, formerly of a good estate
in Barbadoes, in a small Sloop with which he had turned Pirate: But Teach finding Bonnet knew
nothing of the matter, took him into his own Ship, and put one Richards Captain in his room,
telling the Major, That he had not been us'd to the Fatigues of the Sea, he had better decline
it, and take his pleasure aboard his Ship. At Turnissi they took in fresh water; but seeing
a Sloop coming in, they ran to meet her, which struck her sail, upon the sight of the Black
Flag, to Teach, who took the Captain and his men aboard, and put Israel Hands to mann the Sloop:
From thence they sailed to the Bay, where they found a ship and four Sloops. Teach hoisted
his Black Colours, at the Sight of which, the Captain and his men left the Ship, and ran into
the woods. Teach's Quarter-Master, with some of his Men, took possession of her, and Richards
secured the Sloops: One of which they burnt, because she belonged to Boston, where some of
his Men had been hanged; but the others they let go after plundering them.

From hence they sailed to the Grand Canaries, then to the Bahama Wrecks, and then to Carolina,
where they took a Brigantine and two Sloops, lying off the Bar of Charles Town; as also a Ship
bound for London, with some passengers aboard. The next Day they took another Vessel coming
out, and two Pinks going in, and a Brigantine with negroes, in the Face of the Town; which
put the Inhabitants into a sad fright, being in no condition to help themselves.

Teach, alias Blackbeard, sent Richards along with Mr. Mark, one of the Prisoners, to demand
a chest of medicines of the Governor, several of his Men being sick aboard; threatening otherwise
to burn the Ships, and destroy all the prisoners, among whom was Mr. Samuel Wrag, one of his
Council. Altho' this went very much against the inhabitants, yet they were forced to comply
with it to save the lives of the many souls had in his custody. So sending him a chest worth
about 3 or 4 hundred Pounds, Richards went back safe to the ships with his booty; which as
soon as Blackbeard had received, (for so I shall call him for the future) he let the ships
and the prisoners go, having first taken 1500l. Sterling, and some provisions out of her. From
thence they sailed to North Carolina, where he had thoughts of breaking up the company, and
securing the money and the best of the effects for himself and friends. Accordingly he ran
a-ground, as if it had been by accident, and calling Israel Hands to his assistance, he ran
the Sloop ashore near the other, and so they were both lost. This done Blackbeard goes into
the Revenge and maroons 17 men upon a desert island; where they must inevitably have perished,
if Bonnet had not after taken them up.

Blackbeard goes straight to the Governor of North Carolina, with Twenty of his Men, and pleads
his Majesty's Pardon, and receives Certificates thereupon. He went to his Sloop which lay at
Okere-Cock Inlet, and set out for Sea upon another expedition, steering his Ship towards Bermudas.
Meeting with one or two English Vessels in his way, he robb'd them only of provisions for his
present occasion; but meeting with a French Ship laden with sugar and cocoa, he brought her
home with her cargoe to North Carolina, where the Governor and the Pirates shared the plunder.
He had no sooner arrived there, but he and four of his Men made affidavit, That they found
the French Ship at Sea, without ever a Man on board; upon which she was condemned. The Governor
had sixty hogheads of sugar for his dividend, his Secretary twenty, and the rest were shared
amongst the other Pirates. And for fear the ship might be discovered by some that might come
into the River, Blackbeard, under pretence that she was leaky, and might sink, obtained an
order from the Governor to bring her out into the River, and burn her; which they did, and
sunk her bottom.

The Sloops trading in the River, being so often pillaged by Blackbeard, consulted with the
traders what course to take, knowing it was in vain to make any application to the Governor;
therefore they sent a deputation to the Governor of Virginia, to sollicit a force from the
Men-of-War to destroy this Pirate. Accordingly the Governor consulted with the Captains of
the Pearl and Lime Men-of-War, which lay in St. James's River; whereupon it was agreed, That
the Governor should have a couple of small Sloops, and they should be mann'd out of the Men
of War, the Command of which was given to Mr. Robert Maynard, first Lieutenant of the Pearl.
But before they sailed, it was agreed in Council, to offer a reward of 100l. for any one that
should take Edward Teach, commonly called Blackbeard; for every Lieutenant, Master, Quarter-Master,
Boatswain, or Carpenter Twenty Pounds; For every inferior Officer, Fifteen Pounds; And for
every Man taken on Board each Sloop, Ten Pounds.

Upon this, the Lieutenant sailed from James's River in Virginia, the 17th of November, 1718,
and the 21st in the evening came to Okere-cock Inlet, where he had fight of the Pirate: And
altho' this Expedition was made with all the Secrecy imaginable, yet Blackbeard had notice
of it from the Governor of North Carolina and his Secretary: But having heard several false
reports before, he gave the less credit to this, till he saw the Sloops; and then he put himself
in a Posture of defence, with his 25 Men.

Lieutenant Maynard came to an anchor that night, because the Channel was so intricate that
there was no getting in, in the dark. In the Morning, coming within gun-shot of the Pirate,
he received his fire: whereupon the Maynard stood directly towards him, endeavouring to make
a running fight. Maynard's men being most expos'd, he lost twenty at one broadside; upon which
he ordered his men under deck, and bid them get ready for close fighting upon the first signal.
Then Blackbeard's men pour'd in grenadoes; after which, seeing no Hands aboard, he told his
men they were all kill'd; Let's jump in, and fall to Plunder: Which they had no sooner done,
but the Lieutenant and his men gave them as unwelcome a reception as ever they met with before.
The Lieutenant and Blackbeard fired first at each other, and then they went to it sword in
hand, whilst the men on each side were as warmly engaged as their Captains, until the vessel
was all over blood. Blackbeard stood it till he had received above twenty wounds, five of them
being shots, before he fell down dead. Eight of his fourteen men being kill'd, and the other
six being much wounded, they call'd for quarters; which was granted, and then the Lieutenant
attacked with equal bravery the men that remained in the Sloop and took them.

The Lieutenant caused Blackbeard's head to be cut off, and hung at the bowsprit end; with which
he sailed to Bath Town to get his wounded men cured, and then began to rummage the Pirate Sloop,
aboard which they found several Letters of Correspondence betwixt the Governor of North Carolina,
his Secretary, and some Traders of New York and Blackbeard. Thereupon going to Bath Town in
North Carolina, he seized in the Governors Store-house, the Sixty Hogsheads of Sugar, and Mr.
Knight his Secretary's 20, which was their dividend of the plunder taken in the French Ship
before-mentioned.

After his Men were a little recovered, he returned to the Men-of-War in James's River in Virginia,
with Blackbeard's head hanging at his bowsprit, and 15 prisoners, 13 of whom were hanged, one
of them being taken but the night before out of a trading Sloop: The other, not being in the
fight, was taken at Bath Town, being just before disabled by Blackbeard in one of his drunken
humours.

The night before he was killed, being ask'd if he should chance to be killed, whether his wife
knew where his money was; he answered, That no-body but himself and the Devil, knew where it
was, and the longest Liver should take all.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Names of the Pirates killed in the engagement were Edward Blackbeard, Commander; Philip
Morton, Gunner; Garnet Gibbons, Boatswain; Owen Roberts, Carpenter; Thomas Miller, Quarter-Master;
John Husk, Joseph Curtice, Joseph Brooks, Nath. Jackson.

The following, except the two last, were hanged, viz.: John Carnes, Jo. Brookes, jun., James
Blake, John Gibbs, Thomas Gates, James White, Richard Styles, Cesar, Joseph Philip, James Robbins,
John Martyn, Edward Salter, Stephen Daniel, Richard Greensarl, Israel Hands, and Samuel Odel.

MAJOR STEDE BONNET, AND HIS CREW

The Major was a Gentleman of Fortune and Distinction in the Island of Barbadoes, who before
his Piracy bore the character of a worthy honest man, and no-body could ever account for this
his undertaking, for he wanted neither learning nor understanding. He fitted out a Sloop with
ten guns and sixty men, which he named the Revenge, at his own expence, and sailed from Barbadoes
for the Cape of Virginia, where he took the Anne from Glasgow, the Turbet from Barbadoes, the
Endeavour from Bristol, the Young from Leith, and many others. From thence he went to New York,
and there took a Sloop, and then stood in at Gardiner's Island where he bought provisions,
and went off. August, 1717, he came off at the Bar of South Carolina, and took a Sloop and
Brigantine, which they plundered, and then he dismissed the Brigantine, but took the Sloop
with him to an Inlet in North-Carolina, where he careened, and set her on fire.

Afterwards he put to sea, but could not agree with the men what course to take; for the Major
being no sailor, was obliged to submit to many things his men imposed upon him, when falling
in with Edward Teach, alias Blackbeard, who was a good sailor, but a hardened villain, Bonnet's
Crew joined with him, and put Bonnet aboard Blackbeard's Ship.

But Blackbeard losing his Ship at Topsail Inlet, surrendered to the King's Proclamation; when
Bonnet re-assumed the command of his own Sloop, and sailed directly for Bath Town in North-Carolina,
where he also surrenders himself, and receives a certificate. There getting a clearance for
his Sloop, he pretended to sail for the Island of St. Thomas, to get the Emperor's Commission
to go a-Privateering upon the Spaniards. But returning to Topsail Inlet, he found that Blackbeard
and his gang were gone, with their effects; and that they had set on shore, on a small sandy
island about a league from the continent, seventeen men, without any provisions, or vessel
to escape. There they had been two nights and one day without any sustenance, when, to their
inexpressible joy, they saw Major Bonnet, who had been informed of their being there by two
of Blackbeard's crew, who had escaped to avoid his cruelty.

Then he steered his course towards Virginia, where meeting with a Pink having Provisions on
board, and they being in want, he took out of her ten barrels of pork, and five hundredweight
of bread, and gave her, in exchange, ten casks of Rice, and an old cable.

Two days after they took a Sloop of sixty tons, from which they took two hogsheads of rum,
and two of molasses, and then put in her eight men, to take care of the Prize; but they not
liking her new acquaintance took the first opportunity to get off with her.

After this the Major threw off all restraint, and became a downright Pirate, by the name of
Captain Thomas, taking and plundering all the vessels he met with. He took off Cape Henry,
two Ships from Virginia, bound to Glasgow; the next day a small Sloop from Virginia bound to
Bermudas; from which they took twenty barrels of pork, and gave her in return, two barrels
of rice, and as much molasses. The next day they took another Virginia man, bound to Glasgow,
out of which they took two men, and a few small things, and gave her a barrel of pork, and
another of bread. From thence they sailed to Philadelphia, where they took a Schooner coming
from North Carolina to Boston, from which they took two men, and two dozen of calves skins,
to make covers for guns. In the latitude of 32°, off of Delaware River, near Philadelphia,
they took two Snows bound to Bristol, from which they took money and goods to the value of
two hundred pounds; as also a Sloop of sixty tons, from Philadelphia to Barbadoes, from which
they took a few goods, and let her go. The 29th of July, they took a Sloop of fifty tons, bound
from Philadelphia to Barbadoes, laden with provisions, which they kept; as also another of
sixty tons, from Antegoa to Philadelphia, having on board, rum, molasses, sugar, cotton and
indigo, to the value of five hundred Pounds, all of which they kept. Then they left Delaware
Bay, and sailed to Cape Fear River, where they staid almost two months to repair their Sloop,
which proved very leaky, till news came to Carolina of a Pirate's Sloop, with her Prizes, being
there a-careening.

Whereupon Colonel William Rhet offered to go with two Sloops to attack them; which being by
the Governor and Council approved of, he was commissioned on board the Henry, with eight guns
and seventy men, commanded by Captain John Masters; and the Sea Nymph, commanded by Captain
Farier-Hall, with as many guns and men; both under the Direction of the Colonel, who went on
board the Henry the 14th of September, and sailed from Charles Town to Swillivant's Island,
in order to cruise: where he was informed, by a small ship from Antegoa, which in sight of
the Bar, was taken and plundered by Charles Vane, in a Brigantine of sixteen guns, and a hundred
men; that he had taken two Sloops, one Captain Dill, Master, from Barbadoes; the other Captain
Thompson, from Guinea, with seventy negroes, which they put on board one Yeats his consort,
being a small Sloop with twenty-five men, who being weary of this course of life, ran into
Edisto River, and surrender'd to his Majesty's Pardon, by which the owners got their negroes
again, and Yeats and his men had their certificates sign'd.

Vane cruised for some time thereabouts, in hopes to take Yeats, and be revenged on him; during
which time, he took a ship bound to London, to whom he gave out, that he designed to go to
the southward; which Colonel Rhet hearing, sailed over the Bar the 15th with the two Sloops,
and went after the Pirate Vane; but not meeting with him, tack'd and stood for Cape Fear, according
to his first Design; and on the 26th following he entered the River, where he saw Bonnet, and
the three Sloops his Prizes, at anchor; but the Pilot running the Sloops a-ground, hindered
their getting up that Night. The Pirates seeing the Sloops, and not knowing who they were,
mann'd three canoes, and sent them down to take them; but finding their mistake, Bonnet took
all the men out of the Prizes to engage them. Colonel Rhet's Sloops the next morning getting
under sail, stood for the Pirates, who designed only to make a running fight; but the Colonel
getting upon his quarters, he edged in upon the shore, and ran his Sloop a-ground. The Colonel's
Sloops were soon in the same condition: The Henry grounded within pistol-shot of the Pirate,
on his bow; the other, right a-head of him, almost out of gun-shot, which made it of but very
little use to the Colonel. By this time the Pirate had a very great advantage: For his Sloop
lifted from Colonel Rhet's, which converted them all over; and the Colonel's Sloop lifting
the same way, was much exposed for about five hours, whilst they lay a-ground. The Colonel's
Sloop being first a-float, he got into deeper water, and after mending his rigging, he stood
for the Pirate, to go directly on board him; which they prevented, by hoisting a flag of truce,
and surrendering soon after. The Colonel lost in this action ten men, and had fourteen wounded.
The Sea Nymph had two killed, and four wounded. Among the Pirates were none killed, and three
were wounded. The next day the Colonel weighed from Cape Fear, and arrived at Charles Town
the 3d of October, to the no small joy of the people of Carolina.

There being no publick prison, Bonnet was committed into the custody of the marshal, and his
Men were kept at the Watch-house under a strict guard; a little before the trial, David Harriot
the Master, and Ignatius Rathe Boatswain, the evidences, were removed from the Crew, to the
Marshal's house, from whence on the 24th Bonnet and Harriott made their escape; which as soon
as the Governor heard of, he published a Proclamation, promising a reward of 700l. to any one
that would take him, and also sent several boats with armed men in pursuit of him.

Bonnet stood to the northward, in a small vessel; but through stress of weather, and want of
necessaries, he was forced to Swillivant's Island. Of which information being given to the
Governor, he sent for Colonel Rhet, and desired him once more to go in pursuit of him; which
the Colonel readily accepted of; and having got all Things ready, went that Night for Swillivant's
Island, where, after a long search, he discovered them. After the Colonel's men had fired upon
them, and killed Harriott, Bonnet immediately surrendered himself, and was, next Morning, brought
back to Charles Town, and confined under a strong guard till his trial, which was hastened
for fear he should give them the slip again.

On the 28th of October, 1718, a Court of Vice-Admiralty was held at Charles Town, and, by several
adjournments continued to the 12th of November following, by Nicholas Trot, Esq; Judge of the
Vice-Admiralty, and Chief Judge of Carolina, and other Assistant Judges; where, after the King's
Commission was read, and a Grand Jury sworn, Judge Trot gave them a learned Charge: And then
the Grand Jury went out, and found the Bills; upon which, a Petit-Jury was sworn, and the following
Persons were arraingn'd and try'd.

    Stede Bonnet, alias Edwards, alias Thomas, late of
    Barbadoes, Merchant.

    Robert Tucker, late of Jamaica, Merchant.

    Edward Robinson, late of Newcastle-upon-Tine,
    Mariner.

    Neal Peterson, late of Aberdeen, Mariner.

    William Scot, late of Aberdeen, Mariner.

    William Eddy, alias Neddy, late of Aberdeen,
    Mariner.

    Alexander Annand, late of Jamaica, Mariner.

    George Rose, late of Glasgow, Mariner.

    George Dubin, late of Glasgow, Mariner.

    John Ridge, late of London, Mariner.

    Matthew King, late of Jamaica, Mariner.

    Daniel Perry, late of Guernsey, Mariner.

    Henry Virgin, late of Bristol, Mariner.

    James Rattle, alias Robbins, late of London,
    Merchant.

    James Mullet, alias Millet, late of London,
    Mariner.

    Thomas Price, late of Bristol, Mariner.

    James Wilson, late of Dublin, Mariner.

    John Lopez, late of Oporto, Mariner.

    Zachariah Long, late of the Province of Holland,
    Mariner.

    Job. Barley, late of London, Mariner.

    John William Smith, late of Charles Town in
    Carolina, Mariner.

    Thomas Carman, late of Maidstone in Kent, Mariner.

    John Thomas, late of Jamaica, Mariner.

    William Morrison, late of Jamaica, Mariner.

    Samuel Booth, late of Charles Town, Mariner.

    William Howet, late of Jamaica, Mariner.

    John Kent, late of North Carolina, Mariner.

    William Livres, alias Evis, late of Carolina,
    Mariner.

    John Brierly, alias Timberhead, late of Bath Town
    in North Carolina, Mariner.

    Robert Boyd, late of Bath Town in North Carolina,
    Mariner.

    Thomas Nicholas, late of London, Mariner.

    Rowland Sharp, late of Bath Town, Mariner.

    Jonathan Clark, late of Charles Town, Mariner.

    Thomas Gerrard, late of Antegoa, Mariner.

All of whom, except the four last, were found Guilty, and received Sentence of Death, upon
two Indictments, for Robbing upon the High Sea the Francis, Peter Manwaring, Commander; and
for seizing, in a Piratical Manner, the Sloop Fortune, Thomas Read, Commander: To which they
all pleaded Not Guilty, except James Wilson and John Levit, who pleaded Guilty to both Indictments,
and Daniel Piercy to one only. Bonnet moved to go through both the Indictments at once; but
the Court overruling it, he was found Guilty of one, and retracted his Plea to the other. They
made but little Defence, pretending they were taken off a Maroon Shore, and were shipped with
Major Bonnet to go to St. Thomas's, but wanting provisions they were obliged to do what they
did; and the Major himself pretended it was Necessity and not Inclination that compelled them
to do it. But that not appearing, they having all shared ten or eleven Pounds a man, except
the four last, they were all found Guilty. After which the Judge set forth the enormity of
their Crimes: And then pronounced Sentence of Death upon the persons aforesaid, except Major
Bonnet, who not being brought back in time, was not tried till the 10th of November; and being
then also found Guilty, he received Sentence in like manner as the others; before whom Judge
Trot made an excellent speech, saying afterwards.

And now, having discharged my Duty as a Christian, I must do my Office as a Judge, which is

You the said Stede Bonnet shall go from hence, to the Place from whence you came, and from
thence to the Place of Execution, where you shall be hanged by the Neck till you are dead.

CAPTAIN WILLIAM KID

We are now going to give an account of one whose name is better known in England, than most
of those whose histories we have already related; the person we mean is Captain Kid, whose
public Trial and Execution here, rendered him the subject of all conversation. Kid soon fell
in with them, and getting into the midst of them, fir'd at a Moorish ship which was next him;
but the Men-of-War taking the Alarm, bore down upon Kid, and firing upon him, obliged him to
sheer off, he not being strong enough to contend with them. Kid forc'd him and a Portugueze
that was call'd Don Antonio, which were all the Europeans on Board, to take on with them; the
first he design'd as a pilot, and the last as an interpreter. In which Proclamation, Avery
and Kid were excepted by Name. Wherefor he sail'd directly for New York, where he was no sooner
arrived, but by the Lord Bellamont's orders, he was secured with all his papers and effects.
Many of his fellow-adventurers who had forsook him at Madagascar, came over from thence passengers,
some to New England and some to Jersey; where hearing of the King's Proclamation for pardoning
of Pirates, they surrendered themselves to the Governor of those places: At first they were
admitted to bail, but soon after were laid in strict confinement, where they were kept for
some time, till an opportunity happened of sending them with their Captain over to England
to be tried.

CAPTAIN EDWARD ENGLAND, AND HIS CREW

Edward England went Mate of a Sloop that sailed out of Jamaica, and was taken by Winter, a
Pirate, from whom he had the Command of a Sloop just before their Settlement at Providence.
The man was brave and good natured, and far from being cruel, as most of them are; and would
not have committed such barbarous actions as he did, had not his comrades compelled him to it.

He sailed to the Coast of Africa, after the Island of Providence was inhabited by the English.
In his Passage he took several Ships, particularly the Cadogan Snow belonging to Bristol, one
Skinner Master, who was murdered by those very men who had formerly served under him, upon
a quarrel that happened between Skinner and them, about their wages: He shipped them on board
a Man-of-War, from whence they deserted, and went on board a ship in the West-Indies, where
they were taken by a pirate, and brought to Providence, and then they sailed with Captain England
a-Pirating.

As soon as Skinner came on board, he saw his old Boatswain, who said, Ah! Captain Skinner is
it you, I am much in your Debt, and now I shall pay you in your own Coin. These words put the
Captain in a panic Fear: And indeed he had Reason enough to be afraid, for they immediately
seized him, bound him to the Windlass, pelted him with Glass Bottles, afterwards whipt him
about the Deck, and then said, because he had been a good Master, he should have an easy Death,
and so shot him through the Head; the vessel and her Cargoe being given to Howel Davis.

After this England went into an Harbour to clean his Ship, and also fitted up the Peterborough,
which he called the Victory. Then putting out to sea, they sailed for the East-Indies, and
took Madagascar, by the Way. From thence, after taking in water and provisions, they went for
Malabar, in the Empire of the Mogul. Here they took several Indian Vessels, and one European,
a Dutch Ship, which they exchanged for one of their own, and then came back to Madagascar,
where they sent several Hands on shore to kill venison, and then resolved to seek out for the
remains of Avery's Crew; but returning without success, they being settled on the other side,
they stay'd no longer than till they had cleaned their ships, and then sailed to Juanna.

In the Year 1720, the Bombay Fleet, consisting of four Grabs, the London Chandois, and some
other ships, carried 1000 Men to bombard and batter Gapra, a fort belonging to Angria, on the
Malabar Coast; which they not being able to do, fell in with the Pirates, in their return to
Bombay: But Captain Upton the Commodore, having no orders, would not engage them; which so
provoked the Governor, for missing so favourable an opportunity of cutting the Pirates all
off, that he gave the command to Captain Mackra, with orders to fight them wherever he met
with them.

But the Pirates proceeded to the southward, and took a small ship out of Orincro Road, with
a Dutch and two Portugueze Men on board, one of which they sent to the Captain, to inform him,
that if he would supply them with provisions and water he should have his ship again. But the
Master would not agree to it; thereupon they sent other persons ashore, and swore he should
be the last man they would give quarter to, and so put directly for Laccadeva Island, and arrived
there in three days. But being informed by a Menchew, there was no anchor-ground there, they
went to the next Island, called Melincha, whence they were driven by a storm, leaving behind
them a hundred people, and all their water-casks: But in a week's time, they regained the island,
took their people on board, and filled the water-casks. Provisions being scarce, they resolved
to visit the Dutch at Cochin, and after three days sail, arrived off of Tellechery, where they
took a small Vessel belonging to Governor Adams; who giving an account of Captain Mackra's
fitting out against them, put them into a grievous passion.

Afterward they arrived at Mauritius, where they refitted the Victory, and then sailed the 5th
of April for Madagascar, but called first at the Island Mascarine, at which they found a Portugueze
ship of seventy guns at anchor, disabled by a violent storm, so that they easily became a Prize
to the Pirates. She had on board the Conde Ereceira Vice-Roy of Goa, also they found on board
her, in diamonds only, to the value of four millions of Dollars. They made the Vice-Roy a prisoner;
but in consideration of his losses, accepted of a ransom of 2000 dollars and then set him and
his followers ashore. Learning that an Ostender was on the leeward of that Island, they sailed
and took her, and sent her to Madagascar with news of their success, where they followed themselves
soon after, with two hundred Mozambique Negroes in the Portugueze Ship.

When Taylor came with the Portugueze Prize to Madagascar, they found that the Ostender had
made his men drunk, and seized his ship, which they carried to the Mozambique; from thence
the Governor ordered her to Goa. But the Pirates staid and clean'd the Cassandra, and divided
very great plunder. Some, who thought they had got enough, staid at Madagascar, and the rest,
having no occasion for two ships, burnt the Victory, she being leaky, and went on board the
Cassandra, under the Command of Captain Taylor, designing to go for Cochin to dispose of his
diamonds, amongst his old Friends the Dutch, and also to avoid the dangers of the Men-of-War
that were in pursuit of them. But as he was preparing to sail, and heard of four Men-of-War
coming after him; therefore he altered his mind, and sailed for the Main of Africa, and put
in at Delagoa: But the Pirates were surprized in the evening with some shot from the shore.
They took it for a desert shore, but it proved otherwise; for a few months before, the Dutch
East India Company had settled one hundred men upon it, who, not being supplied with necessaries,
were reduced to about sixteen; whom Taylor, upon their humble petition took aboard, and they
all became Pirates with him. This brought down the Lanceston, though it was a day or two too
late, for they had just before surrendered, with all their riches, to the Governor of Porto-Bello,
where they now live upon their Spoils, saying, others would have done as much, had they had
the same opportunity; swearing, That whatever Robberies they had committed they are not the
only Rogues in the World; for that the South-Sea[A] did more Mischief in one Year, than they
were able to do in their whole Lives.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] The South-Sea Bubble.

CAPTAIN JOHN GOW, ALIAS SMITH, AND HIS CREW

John Gow, alias Smith, was born at a place called Caristoun, in the Orkney Islands, and was
brought up a sailor from his youth, having served on board several Men-of-War, and last of
all on board the Suffolk, along with T. Swan, who was engaged with him in the conspiracy to
murder Captain Ferneau, and seize the ship and cargoe, as they went off the Texel, but they
were prevented by James Belvin, who was led into the secret and discovered it. Captain Ferneau
taking little notice of it, contented himself with turning off Swan, and preferred Gow to be
second Mate and Gunner.

They sailed on board the George Galley, August the 1st, 1724, from the Texel to Santa Cruz,
having 15000l. on board, when Gow designed to have seized the Ship as they went out, but could
not get a party strong enough to join with him, till he worked up a misunderstanding between
the Captain and part of the crew, concerning the provisions of the ship, particularly Winter,
Peterson, and Mc.Cawley, who came upon the Quarter-Deck, in presence of the Owners, just before
they sailed, and made a long complaint against the Captain; who assured them that if there
was any wrong done them, it was not by his consent; and that he would enquire into it as soon
as they had unmoored the ship.

About eight a clock at night, Captain Ferneau, as usual, called them up to prayers in the great
Cabin, and then set the watch, and went to sleep, little thinking his end was so near, when
Winter, Rawlisson, and Melvin, begun the scene of blood, Gow lying snug in his hammock, as
if he knew nothing of the matter, till he saw whether the villany would succeed, or not. Winter
cut the Doctor's throat as he was asleep in his hammock, and then went up to Melvin and Rawlisson,
who in the mean time had seized the Captain and cut his throat also, but not touching the windpipe,
Gow stept up and shot him with a brace of bullets, and then threw him over-board. Mc.Cawley
cut Stephen Algiers the Clerk's throat, as he lay in the hammock, and Williams shot him dead
afterwards. Peterson cut the throat of Bonaventure Jelphs, the Chief Mate; and Michael Moor,
at the Command of Williams, shot him.

After this Williams came upon the Quarter-Deck, and saluted Gow with Captain Ferneau's sword,
first striking it upon one of the guns, and saying, Welcome Captain Gow, welcome to your new
Command. After which, Gow told the men, That if any of them durst murmur or cabal together,
they must expect to meet with the same Fate; and then calling a Council, they agreed to go,
Upon the Account, as they called it.

They called the ship the Revenge, and mounted six more of her guns, she being able to carry
four and twenty in all. But instead of going to Genoa as intended, they sailed for the coasts
of Spain and Portugal, in hopes of getting a ship laden with wine, to keep up their spirits;
but all was alike they met with; and instead of wine, they contented themselves with fish,
which they took out of a ship called the Delight of Poole, Thomas Wise, Master, bound from
New-England to Cadiz, out of which they took the men, and what they wanted, and then sunk the
Ship, to prevent their being discovered to the English Men-of-War who lay in the Straights.

On the 18th of December, they took the Snow-Galley, out of which Crew they kept Rob, and discharged
the Captain and the rest of the men, after having plundered the Ship of the arms, ammunition,
cloth, provisions, sails, anchors, cables, and then let her go.

By this time, they were got a great way to the southward; and being in want of water as well
as wind, they agreed to go to Maderas, which Island they made in two days, cruising about it
near a week, expecting some vessel to come in or come out; but the Country discovering what
they were, they were disappointed in their attempts. Then they stood away for Porto Santa,
where they put up British Colours, and sent their Boat ashore with a compliment to the Governor,
desiring leave to Water, and buy some refreshments; which he readily agreed to, and went with
them to pay the English Captain a Visit, who received him in a very grand Manner. But the refreshments
not coming as expected, he at length told him he was his Prisoner, and must remain so till
the provisions were come on board, which was not till next day, when Gow discharged him, giving
him three Cerons of Bees-wax, and three Guns at his going away.

Having now got provisions, they agreed to return to the Coasts of Spain and Portugal; where
they had not been above two days, before they met with the Batchelor, Benjamin Cross Master,
from New-England bound to Cadiz; out of which they took Cross and his Men, and gave the Ship
to Captain Wise, as also 24 Cerons of Bees-wax to him and his mate, and to his four men 8 Cerons.
After this they took a French Ship from Cadiz, loaded with wine, oil, and fruit, which was
what they wanted, and manned her with their own men, taking on board the Revenge the French
Master, and his 12 Men, and most Part of the cargoe, with five guns and their carriages, ammunition,
small arms, and sails, and gave the ship to Somerville, Captain of the Snow Galley; and to
Captain Cross the New-English Man, to who they gave half the ship and cargoe and Somerville
had all his Men, but Alexander Rob, whom they detained, and who was executed in 1725, for engaging
along with them.

Soon after they saw a large ship to the windward bearing down upon them, which at first they
thought to have been a Portugueze Man-of-War; but they found afterwards, it was a French Merchant
Ship coming home from the West-Indies, which not fearing them, came on to the windward. Gow
perceiving she was a Ship of great strength, called all his men together, telling them they
had a great many prisoners on board, and that he could not trust many of his own men; besides,
six of his best Hands were on Board the other Ship, therefore he advised them not to meddle
with her, she being far superior in Force. This so exasperated Williams, that he demanded of
Gow to give his orders for fighting; but he, by the advice of the whole crew, declined it;
whereupon Williams snapt his pistol at his Face; which not going off, made him still madder.
Winter and Peterson standing by him fired each a Pistol at Williams, one shooting him through
the arm, and the other in the belly; at which he fell, and they believing he was killed, were
going to throw him overboard, when he leapt up, and ran into the Powder-Room, with his pistol
cocked in his hand, swearing he would blow them all up; which he had certainly done, had they
not prevented him that very moment, he having opened the scuttle to do it.

They immediately put him in irons, and hand-cuffed him, and then put him between decks, in
a place prepared for prisoners.

Two days after this, they took the Triumvirate, a Bristol Sloop, Joel Davis Master, bound from
Newfoundland to Oporto, with fish; from whence they took all her provisions, arms, sails, and
two of her men, and then let her go with the rest, and all her cargoe. Not knowing what to
do with Williams, they resolved to put him on board them, and send him away, for fear of further
danger, ordering the Master to put him on board the first English man of War he should meet
with, to hang him for Piracy; which when Williams found they were resolved to do, he made all
the submission he was able to Captain Gow, begging for pardon, knowing if he was carried to
Lisbon he should meet with his deserts. But all his entreaties would not do, he was brought
up double fettered, when he begged they would throw him into the sea, and drown him, rather
than give him up to be hanged in chains, which he knew he deserved from the Portugueze as well
as English. This made many of them begin to relent and pity him; but considering his savage
disposition, they knew there was no safety to keep him on board, and so resolved to let him
go, and give him a hearty curse at parting, wishing him a safe voyage to the gallows, not dreaming
that they themselves should accompany him.

The Bristol Captain obeyed their orders, and as soon as he came to Lisbon put him on board
the Argyle man of War, Captain Bowler Commander, who brought him home not above three days
before Gow and his Crew came to keep him company.

In the middle of last January, they arrived at Caristoun in the Isles of Orkney, when Gow gave
them instructions, what account they should give of themselves to the people of the country,
to avoid suspicion. But now began their misfortunes, for several of their men began to think
of making their escape, the first was one Read, who took an opportunity to get away when the
boat went ashore, who went to a farm-house which lay under a hill where he hired a horse and
rode to Kirkwall, a market town about twelve miles off, where he informed them what they were;
whereupon they raised the Country to defend themselves. The Pirates soon hearing what was done,
ten more of them went away with the longboat, making the best of their way for Scotland, who
were some time after taken in the Frith of Edinburgh, and made Prisoners.

This so provoked Gow, that he resolved to plunder the Country, be the consequence what it would,
and in order thereto, he sent Belvin his Boatswain, with Rob and Four more, to Mr. Honnyman's
house, the Sheriff, who not being at home, his Servants let them in, not suspecting their design.
They immediately fell to work, but Mr. Honnyman's Daughter had the presence of mind to hide
the money in a tub of feathers, till she found an opportunity to carry it away, by the contrivance
of Alexander Rob, who was placed centinel at the door. But when the Boatswain found the treasure
was gone, Gow having before told them where it lay, he swore he would burn the house, and all
that was in it, which the young Lady hearing, she runs to the Charter-room where the Treasure
lay, and threw it out of the Window, jumping herself after. However, they plundered the house
of about fifty pounds, and some plate, and then forced a servant who played on the bag-pipes,
to pipe before them to the ship, whom they also detained, and was brought along with them to
the Marshalsea, where he was sick till his release.

The next day they weighed anchor, and came to Calf-Sound, where the boatswain went ashore again
with four armed Men, meeting with no Plunder. From thence they went to the Island of Eda, to
plunder the house of Mr. Fea, whom Gow had formerly been School-fellow with, and knowing him
to be a Man of Courage, believed that the Alarm at Caristoun had drawn him thither: But Mr.
Fea's wife at that Time being very sick in Bed, kept him at home, and having notice of them
he sent a letter to Gow by James Laing, to desire him to withdraw, assuring him that most of
the inhabitants were fled to the mountains on the report of his being a Pirate, desiring him
to send the messenger safe back, at whose return the affrights of the people would be over.
Gow sent him word back, that he would write to nobody, but if Mr. Fea would send his men with
a Boat, he would reward them handsomely, which Mr. Fea hearing, he ordered his great Boat to
be staved, and sunk, and the sails to be carried out of sight. In the mean time, perceiving
Gow's boat come on shore, with five men in it, well armed, he met them, and said if they would
go to a Publick House in the neighbourhood, and take a cup of ale with him, he would see what
he could do to serve them, which they agreed to, seeing Mr. Fea was all alone, not suspecting
any danger. Mr. Fea had before given orders for half a dozen men, well armed, to lie in ambush
to surprize them, which being done, Mr. Fea sent to Mr. Gow to let him know, that the country
was alarmed, and that it would be his best way peaceable to surrender, which Gow did in a day
or two, thinking thereby to make himself an evidence; but it would not do, although he complied
so far as to delude all his men ashore one after another, who would certainly have cut his
throat, had they known of any ways afterwards to have escaped.

They were put on board the Greyhound, which delivered them into the Marshalsea, March 30, 1714,
where they continued till June following, when eight of them were hanged at Execution Dock,
viz. John Gow, James Williams, James Belvin, John Winter, Peter Rawlisson, Daniel Mc.Cawley,
William Ingram, for another Piracy under Anstis, and a month afterwards Alexander Rob was hanged
for Piracy under Gow.

Fraser notes in his foreword to this book that the original author's spelling was "indefinite
even for his own day", and adds that it has "has been more or less modernized" in this edition;
however, there are still many inconsistencies in spelling, use of hyphenation and italics,
and capitalisation of words. These inconsistencies, along with archaic spelling, have been
retained throughout.

Minor typographic errors in punctuation have been corrected without note. The word 'with' was
printed as 'htiw' (page 138), and has been corrected. The word 'were' has been amended to 'where'
(page 139, "... where they sent several Hands ..."), for the sentence to make sense. Two instances
of transposed letters have also been corrected--sieze changed to seize, and Goaler changed
to Gaoler. The original title page illustration also contained an error, Jnae, which referred
to a month. This was cross-checked with the rest of the text, and has been amended to read
June in the transcription of the text.

The frontispiece illustration has been moved to follow the front matter.

