The reader may well judge that sailing on a yacht presents innumerable novelties and advantages
not attainable by any other conveyance. Since the parties on board a pleasure-boat concentrate
all their thoughts to the expected enjoyments they cast aside all irksome forms and strait-laced
habitudes, delivering themselves up to the free air to live less conventionally than at home.
The preferableness of such an existence, freed from all unnecessary ceremonies, is still more
perceptible when the trip is of long duration and having, moreover, for its terminus the World's
Columbian Exposition, a place where the wonders, beauties, and evidences of nature's power
and man's skill are gathered from all lands.

The great anticipations we had of our unique voyage were justified in every respect. For it
offered us the opportunity to store our memories with that which will never die, and to adorn
them with pictures whose colors will never fade.

All this will be revealed subsequently to my courteous reader, who is cordially invited to
follow me now on board the steam yacht, which formed our home for six eventful weeks.

What first strikes the observer on approaching the "Marguerite," are the graceful lines which
run from the sharp, slightly bent stem to the well-rounded stern. So beautiful is her form,
and so majestically does she rest upon the water, that you will have no difficulty to recognize
her, even at a great distance. You observe that she is painted with taste, and all the mouldings
are gilded; you also perceive that the railings are of oak wood, surmounted by finely polished
brass, and the deck of narrow deal planks is as white as snow. This, too, may account for his
often-repeated remark that he would not shield his own son if he should incur the censure
of the Inquisition. When his eldest son and heir openly avowed his hatred to the Inquisition, we
find him dying a mysterious death.

It has already been remarked that there can be no such thing as reliance upon historical truth
in a country where the Inquisition is in full authority. But it does not follow from this that
we ought to adopt the popular surmise that Philip was privy to the murder of his son, or even that
he was actually murdered.

It may have been a murder, as the inquisitorial assassins were numerous,
or it may have been a natural death, as represented in books that
have been published by permission of the censors.
From it you can conclude that the yacht is capable of running with considerable speed, amounting
to thirteen miles an hour, if desired.

Let us descend to the cabin next; can anything be more tasteful and convenient? Is it not luxurious?
And, although small, does not its very limited space astonish you when you view so many comforts?
This is the dining-room. What can be more complete! Just look at this side-board, with its
sumptuous outfit in silver and crystal. A multum in parvo.

The kitchen is admirably arranged; the spacious refrigerator making it possible that a considerable
amount of all sorts of provisions and delicacies can be kept on board for some time.

Let us peep into the cozy staterooms. Are they not nicely furnished? Glance at the large and
comfortable berths, which can be extended so as to form double berths, as in a Pullman car.
All the rooms receive light, either through side-windows or from the upper deck. Every facility
for enjoying open air exercise is offered by the main deck running the whole length of the
ship. The portion pertaining to the stern is especially commodious, and constituted our dining-room
on pleasant days. Even when the weather was unfavorable, the awnings which inclosed this delightful
place formed an excellent shelter, giving the impression we were living in a large tent.

Thus, you observe, that nothing is omitted to secure comfort. Do you see this electric bell?
Well, all the staterooms are provided with such bells, which are connected with the steward's
pantry.

Now, let us go forward. These two doors form the entrance to the pilot-house; please, step
in. Here is the steering wheel, and by means of these brass tubes the steersman communicates
with the engineer. Look up to the ceiling. It is decorated with multitudinous charts and maps.
Before we leave this room do not forget to glance at the mariner's compass in its elegant brass
case.

Close by is the entrance to the fore-castle, which contains the men's berths. The crew occupying
them consists of the captain, the engineer, the cook, the steward, and the seamen.

There not being accommodation for more female servants, Mrs. James was attended by only one
maid. She, however, could easily spare larger retinue, because this excellent girl has assisted
her mistress in performing the manifold domestic duties for more than fourteen years, and during
this long period Mrs. James has learned to value her for her dexterity in all female occupations.
She is also a faithful guardian of the children for whom she tenderly cares. 

A dealer had an old cloak which took the fancy of Pacheco, and to purchase this thing he gave
ore from which the dealer realized $8000. Three twenty-fourths (three bars) of the product
of this mine netted, between the years 1811 and 1814, $337,000. On the Sonora side of the mountain
is Santa Eulalia. The ores of this real [district] are found in loose earth, filling immense
caverns, or what are called "rotten ores" in California, and are
easily separated by smelting.

CHAPTER I.

VOYAGE ON THE ERIE CANAL FROM JULY 22ND, 10.40 A.M., TILL JULY 29TH, 1.30 P.M.

Finally, the 22nd of July, the day appointed for our departure, had arrived. Great was my satisfaction
to find the auspices predicting fine weather; and, indeed, it was as beautiful as if Heaven
smiled on our enterprise. When taking leave of my neighbors, it was not at all with a sad sentiment,
for I had been well aware that I was going to undertake a trip which but few mortals are so
fortunate as to participate.

Accompanied by my dear parents I went to Dock street, where the "Marguerite" lay all ready
for leaving the flourishing city of Schenectady.

My mother, whose domestic duties recalled her to the hearth at home, was compelled to leave
me, while my father remained on board the yacht, anxious to enjoy my company as long as circumstances
would permit. Therefore, he gladly accepted Mr. James's kind invitation to accompany us on
our journey for a short distance.

Three intimate friends of Mr. James and his family were also invited guests on the boat. These
temporary traveling companions were Dr. A. Veeder, Lawyer Charles Hastings and Congressman
S.J. Schermerhorn, three well known and highly estimated gentlemen from Schenectady.

At 11.40 A.M., Mr. James gave orders to haul in the lines attaching the boat to the shore;
and a gun-shot at departing announced to the numerous spectators that the "Marguerite" was
on the point to set out for her unusual, but most interesting trip.

We had been sailing only a very short distance, and were just facing the buildings of the General
Electric Company, when our attention was attracted by a photographer who seemed to be very
desirous of taking a photo of the yacht and her passengers; for he aspired to gain the most
favorable posture, apparently quite a task under the circumstances. How well he succeeded in
his endeavors, the readers can judge for themselves by glancing at the frontispiece of this book.

Resuming our journey, we soon had opportunity to admire the beautiful and fertile Mohawk Valley,
once the home of one of the tribes composing the Five Nations. Arendt Van Curler, the noble
founder of the "Place Beyond the Pines," pronounced this picturesque region the most beautiful
the eye of man had ever beheld, at a time when the country was yet in its infancy. Though great
changes have taken place since that remote date (1642), the grandeur of the scenes spread before
us evidently showed that the country has lost little of its beauty, even at the present day,
nothwithstanding the white man has established in many places his smoking factories and noisy
looms.

At the second lock Mr. Schermerhorn, who owns a beautiful residence near this place, in the
Township of Rotterdam, joined our party, whereupon we continued sailing on the smooth surface
of the canal with accelerated speed. 

Contests of this kind are very different from those which used to take place in California
some years ago, when twenty feet square was marked off upon the top of a ridge, through which the
claimant had to sink his shaft to the base rock on which the gold was supposed to be deposited.
When the rock was reached, it was often found difficult to keep the
lines that had been marked off on the surface, particularly when the
lead grew richer as it approached the border of the claim.

 Thus I leave you, feeling very happy that so many pleasures and enjoyments
are awaiting you."

I answered his kind words with a hearty parting kiss, as a token of my filial love.

The two gentlemen, after having abandoned the yacht, ascended the bridge that spans the canal
at that point; and bidding us farewell once more, they pursued us with their eyes until the
graceful lines of the "Marguerite" had become invisible in the distance.

Continuing our voyage, I was in perfect rapture with the ever varying magnificence of the luxuriant
Mohawk Valley. In the afternoon the sky became overcast and the quietude that had been prevailing
was interrupted by a thunder-clap, which gave us the signal to prepare for a shower. After
the expiration of a few minutes the full-charged clouds poured their deluge upon mother earth.
This natural phenomenon, however, was only of short duration; but sufficient to render the
atmosphere most delightfully pure and refreshing. It was now a redoubled pleasure to view the
many hills and dales, adorned in every shade of verdure, varying with romantic forest scenes;
all mingling into one inexpressibly rich garniture in which Nature had royally clad herself
in order to give us greeting on our way.

As we reached Fultonville, a suburban village of Fonda, about twenty-six miles from Schenectady,
Dr. Veeder and Congressman Schermerhorn parted with us, wishing us a pleasurable voyage.

The "Marguerite," gliding along, neared the vicinity of Sprakers when suddenly the "heaven
grew black again with the storm-cloud's frown," and a flash of lightning illuminated the sky
with crimson radiance. It is for a moment as if the horizon was in flames, a spectacle glorious
to behold. Another minute and a peal of thunder reaches our ears. Then the dark, heavy clouds
discharge their contents in copious abundance.

   "In grateful silence earth receives
      The general blessing: fresh and fair
    Each flower expands its little leaves
      As glad the common joy to share."

While it is still raining,

   "The sun breaks forth, from off the scene
      Its floating veil of mist is flung.
    And all the wilderness of green
      With trembling drops of light is hung."

A magnificent rainbow, spanning the boundless arch on high, embellishes this superb panorama. 

But in the midst of the preliminary exercises Lamport escaped burning alive, for when his neck
had been placed in the ring, he let himself fall and broke his neck,
so that the crowd were compelled indignantly to put up with burning
of the dead body of a heretic.

This small town, noted for its fine stone quarries, was chosen for our abode over Sunday, and
busy hands carried out the order to safely moor our craft near the bridge pertaining to the
main street.

When taking a long walk about the town, I found that, although inferior in size, it is a very
desirable place for summer residences; being beautifully situated on romantic slopes crowned
with elegant and tasty villas.

