The committee of the American Society of Engineers were not agreed upon this matter. Messrs.
James B. Eads and Charles Shaler Smith suggested the appointment in each State of an expert,
to whom all plans should be submitted, and by whom all work should be inspected,--such expert
to have been examined and approved by the American Society of Civil Engineers. The inspector
was also to visit the scene of every accident, so called, and to ascertain, as far as possible,
the cause. Messrs. T. C. Clarke and Julius W. Adams believed, that, in the present state of
public opinion, the above method would be impracticable, and feared, that, if inspectors were
appointed, it would be by political influence, and that the result would be worse than at present,
as the inspectors would be inefficient, and yet, to a great extent, would relieve the owners
of bad bridges from legal responsibility. They held that the best that could be done would
be to provide means, in case of disaster, to fix plainly the responsibility, and recommended,
First, that the standard for strength fixed by the Society should be the legal standard; and,
in case it should be found that any bridge was of less strength than this, it should be taken
as prima facie evidence of neglect on the part of the owners. Second, that no bridge should
be opened to the public until a plan giving all dimensions, strains, and loads, sworn to by
the designers and makers, and attested by the corporation having control of it, had been deposited
with the American Society; and further, that the principal pieces of iron in the bridge should
be stamped with the name of the maker, place of manufacture, and date. Messrs. A. P. Boller
and Charles Macdonald looked rather toward effecting the desired result by so directing public
sentiment by keeping the correct standard for bridges before it, that it would eventually compel
the passage of the necessary laws.

Whether it is possible, in this country, to make an appointment dependent purely upon honesty
and capacity, and free from political influence, may well be doubted. No competent engineer
would be willing to accept a position which would place upon him so great a responsibility,
except under a very carefully devised plan. A very considerable force of inspectors would be
required to carry out a system which should produce the desired result. The amount of work
to be done at the commencement would be very great, as no proper inspection has ever been made
of the greater part of the bridges in the country, of which the number is very large. If any
such plan as above suggested should be found feasible, the inspectors should have in their
possession a complete set of plans of every bridge of importance in the State, with all the
computations of its strength, and as complete a history of each structure from its commencement
as can be made up, all this to be supplemented by periodic examinations. If, from such records,
we find that a bridge was made of ordinary green timber twenty-five years ago, and that it
has been getting rotten ever since; that it has rods of common merchant iron that were bought
by some person, not specially acquainted with the business, from an unknown firm,--we had better
pull it down before it falls. If, from such records, we find an iron bridge built twenty-five
years ago by an unknown company, with iron, at best, of a doubtful quality, and having a factor
of three or four for the rolling-stock and speeds of twenty years ago, instead of a factor
of six for the rolling-stock and speeds of to-day, we had better remove that bridge before
it removes itself.

Such a record would be the property of the State, always accessible to any one, and would be
handed down, so that the knowledge of one person would not expire with his term of office.
No bridge should be erected in any State without first submitting the plans to the inspector,
and receiving his approval, and depositing with him a complete set of the plans and computations
for the work. By this approval is not meant that the inspector is merely to give a favorable
opinion as to the plan, but that he is to find, as a matter of fact, whether the proposed dimensions
and proportions are such as will make a safe bridge--and just what a safe bridge is, can be
plainly defined by law, as it is in Europe, and as it has been proposed by the American Society
of Civil Engineers. For example, if the law says that an iron railway bridge of 100 feet span
shall be proportioned to carry a load of 3,000 pounds per lineal foot besides its own weight,
and that, with such a load, no part shall be strained by more than 10,000 pounds per inch,
all the inspector has to do is to go over the figures, and see that the dimensions given on
the plan are such as will enable the bridge to carry the load without exceeding the specified
strains. When the work is erected, the inspection must show that the plan has been exactly
carried out, that the details are good, and proper evidence of the quality of the material
used should also be given. Such inspection as this would at once prevent the erection of bridges
like those at Ashtabula and Tariffville, and would save the public from such traps as those
that fell at Dixon and at Groveland. Perhaps the most difficult thing to do will be to get
satisfactory evidence in regard to the bridges that have been for a considerable time in use,
and of which we do not know the history. This will be especially true in regard to the wooden
bridges, of which there are so many about the country. Not only is it very difficult to be
sure of the exact condition of the timber, but it is equally hard to tell any thing about the
iron. The Tariffville bridge fell on account of defective iron, and the defect was of such
a nature as to defy any ordinary inspection. What do we know to-day of the quality of the iron
rods in any wooden bridge in Massachusetts? It is very doubtful if the best inspection we have
in the United States at the present time would have found any defect so evident in the Tariffville
bridge as to condemn it as unfit for the passage of trains. There are hundreds of exactly such
bridges all over New England, as far as we can tell by the best inspection we now have, made
on the same plan, with no more material, and of which we know just as little of the quality
of the iron as we did in the Tariffville bridge.

Of course we cannot expect to get a perfect system all at once. Any plan which might be proposed
would, no doubt, be found more or less defective at first. We can hardly get a system worse
than the one we now have, which allows forty bridges to break down every year. We may get a
better one. To make the public see the need of such a system is the first step to be taken.

       *       *       *       *       *

LEE AND SHEPARD'S POPULAR HANDBOOKS.

Price, each, in cloth, 50 cents, except when other price is given.

Forgotten Meanings; or an Hour with a Dictionary. By ALFRED WAITES, author of Historical Student's
Manual. (4) Mistakes and Improprieties of Speaking and Writing Corrected. Designed to prevent
1,000 common blunders in writing and speaking. By HARLAN H. BALLARD, A. M., Principal of Lenox
Academy, Lenox, Mass.

Broken English. A Frenchman's Struggle in the English Language. Instructive as a handbook of
French conversation. By Professor E. C. DUBOIS. By WALTER P. MANTON.

Taxidermy without a Teacher.

Insects. How to Catch and how to Prepare them for the Cabinet. A Manual of Instruction for
the Field-Naturalist. By W. P. MANTON.

What is to be Done? A Handbook for the Nursery, with Useful Hints for Children and Adults.
By ROBERT B. DIXON, M. D.

Whirlwinds, Cyclones, and Tornadoes. By WILLIAM MORRIS DAVIS, Instructor in Harvard College.
Illustrated.

Mistakes in Writing English, and How to Avoid Them. For the use of all who Teach, Write, or
Speak the language. By MARSHALL T. BIGELOW.

Warrington's Manual. A Manual for the Information of Officers and Members of Legislatures,
Conventions, Societies, etc., in the practical governing and membership of all such bodies,
according to the Parliamentary Law and Practice in the United States. By W. S. ROBINSON (Warrington).
By WILLIAM A. EMERSON. Illustrated. Price $1.00.

Five-Minute Recitations. Selected and arranged by WALTER K. FOBES.

Five-Minute Declamations. Selected and arranged by WALTER K. FOBES.

Five-Minute Readings for Young Ladies. Selected and adapted by WALTER K. FOBES.

Educational Psychology. A Treatise for Parents and Educators. By LOUISE PARSONS HOPKINS, Supervisor
in Boston Public Schools.

The Nation in a Nutshell. A Rapid Outline of American History. By GEORGE MAKEPEACE TOWLE.

English Synonymes Discriminated. By RICHARD WHATELY, D. D., Archbishop of Dublin. A new edition.

Hints on Writing and Speech-making. By THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON.

Arithmetic for Young Children. Being a series of Exercises exemplifying the manner in which
Arithmetic should be taught to young children. By HORACE GRANT. American Edition. Edited by
WILLARD SMALL.

Bridge Disasters in America. The Cause and the Remedy. By Prof. GEORGE L. VOSE.

A Few Thoughts for a Young Man. By HORACE MANN. A new Edition.

Handbook of Debate. The Character of Julius Cæsar. Adapted from J. SHERIDAN KNOWLES. Arranged
for Practice in Speaking, for Debating Clubs, and Classes in Public and Private Schools.

Price, each, in cloth, 50 cents, except when other price is given.

Exercises for the Improvement of the Senses. For Young Children. By HORACE GRANT, author of
"Arithmetic for Young Children." Edited by WILLARD SMALL.

Hints on Language in connection with Sight-Reading and Writing in Primary and Intermediate
Schools. By S. ARTHUR BENT, A. M., Superintendent of Public School, Clinton, Mass.

The Hunter's Handbook. Containing lists of provisions and camp paraphernalia, and hints on
the fire, cooking utensils, etc.; with approved receipts for camp-cookery. By "AN OLD HUNTER."

Universal Phonography; or, Shorthand by the "Allen Method." A self-instructor. By G. G. ALLEN.

Hints and Helps for those who Write, Print, or Read. By B. DREW, proof-reader.

Pronouncing Handbook of Three Thousand Words often Mispronounced. By R. SOULE and L. J. CAMPBELL.

Short Studies of American Authors. By THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON. D.

Handbook of the Earth. Natural Methods in Geography. By LOUISA PARSONS HOPKINS, teacher of
Normal Methods in the Swain Free School, New Bedford.

Natural-History Plays. Dialogues and Recitations for School Exhibitions. By LOUISA P. HOPKINS.

The Telephone. An account of the phenomena of Electricity, Magnetism, and Sound, with directions
for making a speaking-telephone. By Professor A. E. DOLBEAR.

Lessons on Manners. By EDITH E. WIGGIN.

Water Analysis. A Handbook for Water-Drinkers. A Treatise on the House-Culture of Ornamental
Plants. By CORNELIA J. RANDOLPH. With illustrations. WENTWORTH HIGGINSON.

Square 16mo. 380 pp. With over 100 Illustrations. Price $1.50.

