As it was, we were obliged to "double trip it" in order to get our deer and duffle down to
"Babb's." And we gave away more than half our venison. For the rest, the illustration shows
the campfire--all but the fire--as it should be made.

CHAPTER V Fishing, With And Without Flies--Some Tackle And Lures--Discursive Remarks On The
Gentle Art--The Headlight--Frogging

THERE is probably no subject connected with outdoor sport so thoroughly and exhaustively written
up as Fly-fishing and all that pertains thereto. Fly-fishing for speckled trout always, and
deservedly, takes the lead. Bass fishing usually comes next, though some writers accord second
place to the lake trout, salmon trout or land-locked salmon. The mascalonge, as a game fish,
is scarcely behind the small-mouthed bass and is certainly more gamy than the lake trout. The
large-mouthed bass and pickerel are usually ranked about with the yellow perch, I don't know
why: they are certainly gamy enough. Perhaps it is because they do not leap out of water when
hooked. Both are good on the table.

A dozen able and interesting authors have written books wherein trout, flies and fly-fishing
are treated in a manner that leaves an old backwoodsman little to say. Rods, reels, casting
lines, flies and fish are described and descanted on in a way and in a language, the reading
whereof reduces me to temporary insanity. And yet I seem to recollect some bygone incidents
concerning fish and fishing. I have a well-defined notion that I once stood on Flat Rock, in
Big Pine Creek and caught over 350 fine trout in a short day's fishing. Also that many times
I left home on a bright May or June morning, walked eight miles, caught a twelve-pound creel
of trout and walked home before bedtime.

I remember that once, in Michigan, on the advice of local fishermen, I dragged a spoon around
High Bank Lake two days, with little result save half a dozen blisters on my hands; and that
on the next morning, taking a long tamarack pole and my own way of fishing, I caught, before
10 A.M., fifty pounds of bass and pickerel, weighing from two to ten pounds each.

Gibson, whose spoon, line and skiff I had been using and who was the fishing oracle of that
region, could hardly believe his eyes. I kept that country inn, and the neighborhood as well,
supplied with fish for the next two weeks.

It is truth to say that I have never struck salt or fresh waters, where edible fish were at
all plentiful, without being able to take, in some way, all that I needed. Notably and preferably
with the fly if that might be; if not, then with worms, grubs, minnows, grasshoppers, crickets,
or any sort of doodle bug their highnesses might affect. When a plump, two-pound trout refuses
to eat a tinseled, feathered fraud, I am not the man to refuse him something more edible.

That I may not be misunderstood, let me say that I recognized the speckled brook trout as the
very emperor of all game fish, and angling for him with the fly as the neatest, most fascinating
sport attainable by the angler. But there are thousands of outers who, from choice or necessity,
take their summer vacations where Salmo fontinalis is not to be had. They would prefer him,
either on the leader or the table; but he is not there; "And a man has got a stomach and we
live by what we eat."

Wherefore, they go a-fishing for other fish. So that they are successful and sufficiently fed,
the difference is not so material. I have enjoyed myself hugely catching catties on a dark
night from a skiff with a hand-line.

I can add nothing in a scientific way to the literature of fly-fishing; but I can give a few
hints that may be conducive to practical success, as well with trout as with less noble fish,
In fly-fishing, one serviceable four-ounce rod is enough; and a plain click reel, of small
size, is just as satisfactory as a more costly affair. Twenty yards of tapered, waterproof
line, with a six-foot leader, and a cost of two flies, complete the rig, and will be found
sufficient. In common with most fly-fishers, I have mostly thrown a cast of three flies, but
have found two just as effective, and handier.

We all carry too many flies, Some of my friends have more than sixty dozen and will never use
a tenth of them. In the summer of '88, finding I had more than seemed needful, I left all but
four dozen behind me. I wet only fifteen of them in a seven weeks' outing. And they filled
the bill. I have no time or space for a dissertation on the hundreds of different flies made
and sold at the present day. Abler pens have done that. I will, however, name a few that I
have found good in widely different localities, i.e., the Northern Wilderness of New York and
the upper waters of Northern Pennsylvania. For the Northern Wilderness: Scarlet ibis, split
ibis, Romeyn, white-winged coachman, royal coachman, red hackle, red-bodied ashy and gray-bodied
ashy. The ashies were good for black bass also. For Northern Pennsylvania: Queen of the waters,
professor, red fox, coachman, black may, white-winged coachman, wasp, brown hackle, Seth Green.
Ibis flies are worthless here. Using the dark flies in bright water and clear weather and the
brighter colors for evening, the list was long enough.

At the commencement of the open season and until the young maple leaves are half grown, bait
will be found far more successful than the fly. At this time the trout are pretty evenly distributed
along lake shores and streams, choosing to lie quietly in rather deep pools and avoiding swift
water. A few may rise to the fly in a logy, indifferent way; but the best way to take them
is bait-fishing with well-cleansed angle-worms or white grubs, the latter being the best bait
I have ever tried. They take the bait sluggishly at this season, but, on feeling the hook,
wake up to their normal activity and fight gamely to the last. When young, newborn insects
begin to drop freely on the water about the 20th of May, trout leave the pools and take to
the riffles. And from this time until the latter part of June the fly-fisherman is in his glory.
It may be true that the skillful bait-fisherman will rather beat his creel. He cares not for
that. He can take enough; and he had rather take ten trout with the fly, than a score with
bait. As for the man who goes a-fishing simply to catch fish, the fly-fisher does not recognize
him as an angler at all.

When the sun is hot and the weather grows warm, trout leave the ripples and take to cold springs
and spring-holes; the largest fish, of course, monopolizing the deepest and coolest places,
while the smaller ones hover around, or content themselves with shallower water. As the weather
gets hotter, the fly-fishing falls off badly. A few trout of four to eight ounces in weight
may still be raised, but the larger ones are lying on the bottom and are not to be fooled with
feathers. They will take a tempting bait when held before their noses--sometimes; at other
times, not. As to raising them with a fly--as well attempt to raise a sick Indian with the
temperance pledge. And yet, they may be taken in bright daylight by a ruse that I learned long
ago, of a youngster less than half my age, a little, freckled, thin-visaged young man, whose
health was evidently affected by a daily struggle with a pair of tow-colored side whiskers
and a light mustache. There was hardly enough of the whole affair to make a door mat for a
bee hive. But he seemed so proud of the plant, that I forebore to rig him. He was better than
he looked--as often happens. The landlord said, "He brings in large trout every day, when our
best fly-fishermen fail." One night, around an outdoor fire, we got acquainted and I found
him a witty, pleasant companion. Before turning in I ventured to ask him how he succeeded in
taking large trout, while the experts only caught small ones, or failed altogether.

"Go with me tomorrow morning to a spring-hole three miles up the river and I'll show you," he said.

Of course, we went. He, rowing a light skiff and I paddling a still lighter canoe. The spring-hole
was in a narrow bay that set back from the river and at the mouth of a cold, clear brook; it
was ten to twelve feet deep and at the lower end a large balsam had fallen in with the top
in just the right place for getting away with large fish, or tangling lines and leaders. We
moored some twenty feet above the spring-hole and commenced fishing, I with my favorite cast
of flies, my friend with the tail of a minnow, He caught a 1 1/2 pound trout almost at the
outset, but I got no rise; did not expect it. Then I went above, where the water was shallower
and raised a couple of half-pounders, but could get no more, I thought he had better go to
the hotel with what he had, but my friend said "wait"; he went ashore and picked up a long
pole with a bushy tip; it had evidently been used before. Dropping down to the spring-hole,
he thrust the tip to the bottom and slashed it around in a way to scare and scatter every trout
within a hundred feet.

"And what does all that mean?" I asked.

"Well," he said, "every trout will be back in less than an hour; and when they first come back,
they take the bait greedily. Better take off your leader and try bait."

Which I did. Dropping our hooks to the bottom, we waited some twenty minutes, when he had a
bite, and having strong tackle, soon took in a trout that turned the scale at 2 1/4 pounds.
Then my turn came and I saved one weighing 1 1/2 pounds. He caught another of 1 1/4 pounds
and I took one of 1 pound. Then they ceased biting altogether.

"And now," said my friend, "if you will work your canoe carefully around to that old balsam
top and get the light where you can see the bottom, you may see some large trout."

I did as directed, and making a telescope of my hand, looked intently for the bottom of the
spring-hole. At first I could see nothing but water; then I made out some dead sticks and finally
began to dimly trace the outlines of large fish. There they were, more than forty of them,
lying quietly on the bottom like suckers, but genuine brook trout, every one of them.

"This," said he, "makes the fifth time I have brushed them out of here and I have never missed
taking from two to five large trout. I have two other places where I always get one or two,
but this is the best."

At the hotel we found two fly-fishers who had been out all the morning. They each had three
or four small trout. During the next week we worked the spring-holes daily in the same way
and always with success. I have also had good success by building a bright fire on the bank
and fishing a spring-hole by the light--a mode of fishing especially successful with catties
and perch.

A bright, bull's-eye headlight, strapped on a stiff hat, so that the light can be thrown where
it is wanted, is an excellent device for night fishing. And during the heated term, when fish
are slow and sluggish, I have found the following plan works well: Bake a hard, well salted,
water Johnnycake, break it into pieces the size at a hen's egg and drop the pieces into a spring-hole.
This calls a host of minnows and the larger fish follow the minnows. It will prove more successful
on perch, catties, chubs, etc., than on trout, however. By this plan, I have kept a camp of
five men well supplied with fish when their best flies failed--as they mostly do in very hot
weather.

Fishing for mascalonge, pickerel and bass, is quite another thing, though by many valued as
a sport scarcely inferior to fly-fishing for trout. I claim no especial skill with the fly-rod.
It is a good day when I get my tail fly more than fifteen yards beyond the reel, with any degree
of accuracy.

My success lies mainly with the tribes of Esox and Micropterus. Among these, I have seldom
or never failed during the last thirty-six years, when the water was free of ice; and I have
had just as good luck when big-mouthed bass and pickerel were in the "off season," as at any
time. For in many waters there comes a time--in late August and September when neither bass
nor pickerel will notice the spoon, be it handled never so wisely. Even the mascalonge looks
on the flashing cheat with indifference; though a very hungry specimen may occasionally immolate
himself. It was at such a season that I fished High Bank Lake--as before mentioned--catching
from twenty to fifty pounds of fine fish every morning for nearly two weeks, after the best
local fishermen had assured me that not a decent sized fish could be taken at that season.
Perhaps a brief description of the modes and means that have proved invariably successful for
many years may afford a few useful hints, even to old anglers.

To begin with, I utterly discard all modern "gangs" and "trains," carrying from seven to thirteen
hooks each. They are all too small and all too many; better calculated to scratch and tear,
than to catch and hold, Three hooks are enough at the end of any line and better than more.
These should be fined or honed to a perfect point and the abrupt part of the barb filed down
one-half. All hooks, as usually made, have twice as much barb as they should have; and the
sharp bend of the barb prevents the entering of the hook in hard bony structures, wherefore
the fish only stays hooked so long as there is a taut pull on the line. A little loosening
of the line and shake of the head sets him free. But no fish can shake out a hook well sunken
in mouth or gills, though two-thirds of the barb be filed away.

For mascalonge or pickerel I invariably use wire snells made as follows: Lay off four or more
strands of fine brass wire 13 inches long; turn one end of the wires smoothly over a No. 1
iron wire and work the ends in between the strands below. Now, with a pair of pincers hold
the ends, and using No. 1 as a handle, twist the ends and body of the snell firmly together;
this gives the loop; next, twist the snell evenly and strongly from end to end. Wax the end
of the snell thoroughly for two or three inches and wax the tapers of two strong Sproat or
O'Shaughnessy hooks and wind the lower hook on with strong, waxed silk, to the end of the taper;
then lay the second hook at right angles with the first and one inch above it; wind this as
the other and then fasten a third and smaller hook above that for a lip hook. This gives the
snell about one foot in length, with the two lower hooks standing at right angles, one above
the other and a third and smaller hook in line with the second.

The bait is the element of success; it is made as follows: Slice off a clean, white pork rind,
four or five inches long by an inch and a half wide; lay it on a board and with a sharp knife
cut it as nearly to the shape of a frog as your ingenuity permits. Prick a slight gash in the
head to admit the lip hook, which should be an inch and a half above the second one and see
that the back of the bait rests securely in the barb of the middle hook.

Use a stout bait-rod and a strong line. Fish from a boat, with a second man to handle the oars,
if convenient. Let the oarsman lay the boat ten feet inside the edge of the lily-pads and make
your cast, say, with thirty feet of line; land the bait neatly to the right, at the edge of
the lily-pads, let it sink a few inches, and then with the tip well lowered, bring the bait
around on a slight curve by a quick succession of draws, with a momentary pause between each;
the object being to imitate as nearly as possible a swimming frog. If this be neatly done and
if the bait be made as it should be, at every short halt the legs will spread naturally and
the imitation is perfect enough to deceive the most experienced bass or pickerel. When half
a dozen casts to right and left have been made without success, it is best to move on, still
keeping inside and casting outside the lily-pads.

A pickerel of three pounds or more will take in all three hooks at the first snap; and, as
he closes his mouth tightly and starts for the bottom, strike quickly, but not too hard, and
let the boatman put you out into deep water at once, where you are safe from the strong roots
of the yellow lily.

It is logically certain your fish is well hooked. You cannot pull two strong, sharp hooks through
that tightly closed mouth without fastening at least one of them where it will do most good.
Oftener both will catch and it frequently happens that one hook will catch each lip, holding
the mouth nearly closed and shortening the struggles of a large fish very materially. On taking
off a fish and before casting again, see that the two lower hooks stand at right angles. If
they have got turned in the struggle you can turn them at any angle you like; the twisted wire
is stiff enough to hold them in place. Every angler knows the bold, determined manner in which
the mascalonge strikes his prey. He will take in bait and hooks at the first dash, and if the
rod be held stiffly usually hooks himself. Barring large trout, he is the king of game fish.
The big-mouthed bass is less savage in his attacks, but is a free biter. He is apt to come
up behind and seize the bait about two-thirds of its length, turn and bore down for the bottom.
He will mostly take in the lower hooks however, and is certain to get fastened. His large mouth
is excellent for retaining the hook. As for the small-mouthed (Micropterus dolomieu, if you
want to be scientific), I have found him more capricious than any game fish on the list. One
day he will take only dobsons, or crawfish; the next, he may prefer minnows, and again, he
will rise to the fly or a bucktail spinner.

On the whole, I have found the pork frog the most successful lure in his case; but the hooks
and bait must be arranged differently. Three strands of fine wire will make a snell strong
enough and the hooks should be strong, sharp and rather small, the lower hooks placed only
half an inch apart and a small lip hook two and a quarter inches above the middle one. As the
fork of the bait will not reach the bend of the middle hook, it must be fastened to the snell
by a few stitches taken with stout thread and the lower end of the bait should not reach more
than a quarter of an inch beyond the bottom of the hook, because the small-mouth has a villainous
trick of giving his prey a stern chase, nipping constantly and viciously at the tail, and the
above arrangement will be apt to hook him at the first snap. Owing to this trait, some artificial
minnows with one or two hooks at the caudal end, are very killing--when he will take them.

Lake, or salmon trout, may be trolled for successfully with the above lure; but I do not much
affect fishing for them. Excellent sport may be had with them, however, early in the season,
when they are working near the shore, but they soon retire to water from fifty to seventy feet
deep and can only be caught by deep trolling or buoy-fishing. I have no fancy for sitting in
a slow-moving boat for hours, dragging three or four hundred feet of line in deep water, a
four pound sinker tied by six feet of lighter line some twenty feet above the hooks. The sinker
is supposed to go bumping along the bottom, while the bait follows three or four feet above
it. The drag of the line and the constant joggling of the sinker on rocks and snags, make it
difficult to tell when one has a strike--and it is always too long between bites.

Sitting for hours at a baited buoy with a hand-line and without taking a fish, is still worse,
as more than once I have been compelled to acknowledge in very weariness of soul. There are
enthusiastic anglers, however, whose specialty is trolling for lake trout. A gentleman by the
name of Thatcher, who has a fine residence on Raquette Lake--which he calls a camp makes this
his leading sport and keeps a log of his fishing, putting nothing on record of less than ten
pounds weight. His largest fish was booked at twenty-eight pounds, and he added that a well-conditioned
salmon trout was superior to a brook trout on the table; in which I quite agree with him. But
he seemed quite disgusted when I ventured to suggest that a well-conditioned cattie or bullhead,
caught in the same waters was better than either.

"Do you call the cattie a game fish?" he asked.

Yes; I call any fish a "game fish" that is taken for sport with hook and line. I can no more
explain the common prejudice against the catfish and eel than I can tell why an experienced
angler should drag a gang of thirteen hooks through the water--ten of them being wane than
superfluous. Frank Forester gives five hooks as the number for a trolling gang. We mostly use
hooks too small and do not look after points and barbs closely enough. A pair of No. 1 O'Shaughnessy,
or 1 1/2 Sproat, or five tapered blackfish hooks, will make a killing rig for small-mouthed
bass using No. 4 Sproat for lip hook. Larger hooks are better for the big-mouthed, a four-pound
specimen of which will easily take in one's fist. A pair of 5-0 O'Shaughnessy's, or Sproat's
will be found none too large; and as for the mascalonge and pickerel, if I must err, let it
be on the side of large hooks and strong lines.

It is idle to talk of playing the fish in water where the giving of a few yards insures a hopeless
tangle among roots, tree-tops, etc. I was once fishing in Western waters where the pickerel
ran very large, and I used a pair of the largest salmon hooks with tackle strong enough to
hold a fish of fifteen pounds, without any playing; notwithstanding which, I had five trains
of three hooks each taken off in as many days by monster pickerel. An expert mascalonge fisherman--Davis
by name--happened to take board at the farm house where I was staying, and he had a notion
that he could "beat some of them big fellows;" and he did it; with three large cod hooks, a
bit of fine, strong chain, twelve yards of cod-line, an eighteen-foot tamarack pole and a twelve
inch sucker for bait. I thought it the most outlandish rig I had ever seen, but went with him
in the early gray of the morning to see it tried, just where I had lost my hooks and fish.

