THE CUSTOM OF THE COUNTRY

by EDITH WHARTON

1913

THE CUSTOM OF THE COUNTRY

I

"Undine Spragg--how can you?" her mother wailed, raising a prematurely-wrinkled hand heavy
with rings to defend the note which a languid "bell-boy" had just brought in.

But her defence was as feeble as her protest, and she continued to smile on her visitor while
Miss Spragg, with a turn of her quick young fingers, possessed herself of the missive and withdrew
to the window to read it.

"I guess it's meant for me," she merely threw over her shoulder at her mother.

"Did you EVER, Mrs. Heeny?" Mrs. Spragg murmured with deprecating pride.

Mrs. Heeny, a stout professional-looking person in a waterproof, her rusty veil thrown back,
and a shabby alligator bag at her feet, followed the mother's glance with good-humoured approval.

"I never met with a lovelier form," she agreed, answering the spirit rather than the letter
of her hostess's enquiry.

Mrs. Spragg and her visitor were enthroned in two heavy gilt armchairs in one of the private
drawing-rooms of the Hotel Stentorian. The Spragg rooms were known as one of the Looey suites,
and the drawing-room walls, above their wainscoting of highly-varnished mahogany, were hung
with salmon-pink damask and adorned with oval portraits of Marie Antoinette and the Princess
de Lamballe. In the centre of the florid carpet a gilt table with a top of Mexican onyx sustained
a palm in a gilt basket tied with a pink bow. But for this ornament, and a copy of "The Hound
of the Baskervilles" which lay beside it, the room showed no traces of human use, and Mrs.
Spragg herself wore as complete an air of detachment as if she had been a wax figure in a show-window.
Her attire was fashionable enough to justify such a post, and her pale soft-cheeked face, with
puffy eye-lids and drooping mouth, suggested a partially-melted wax figure which had run to
double-chin.

Mrs. Heeny, in comparison, had a reassuring look of solidity and reality. The planting of her
firm black bulk in its chair, and the grasp of her broad red hands on the gilt arms, bespoke
an organized and self-reliant activity, accounted for by the fact that Mrs. Heeny was a "society"
manicure and masseuse. Toward Mrs. Spragg and her daughter she filled the double role of manipulator
and friend; and it was in the latter capacity that, her day's task ended, she had dropped in
for a moment to "cheer up" the lonely ladies of the Stentorian.

The young girl whose "form" had won Mrs. Heeny's professional commendation suddenly shifted
its lovely lines as she turned back from the window.

"Here--you can have it after all," she said, crumpling the note and tossing it with a contemptuous
gesture into her mother's lap.

"Why--isn't it from Mr. Popple?" Mrs. Spragg exclaimed unguardedly.

"No--it isn't. What made you think I thought it was?" snapped her daughter; but the next instant
she added, with an outbreak of childish disappointment: "It's only from Mr. Marvell's sister--at
least she says she's his sister."

Mrs. Spragg, with a puzzled frown, groped for her eye-glass among the jet fringes of her tightly-girded
front.

Mrs. Heeny's small blue eyes shot out sparks of curiosity. "Marvell--what Marvell is that?"

The girl explained languidly: "A little fellow--I think Mr. Popple said his name was Ralph";
while her mother continued: "Undine met them both last night at that party downstairs. And
from something Mr. Popple said to her about going to one of the new plays, she thought--"

"How on earth do you know what I thought?" Undine flashed back, her grey eyes darting warnings
at her mother under their straight black brows.

"Why, you SAID you thought--" Mrs. Spragg began reproachfully; but Mrs. Heeny, heedless of
their bickerings, was pursuing her own train of thought.

"What Popple? Claud Walsingham Popple--the portrait painter?"

"Yes--I suppose so. He said he'd like to paint me. Mabel Lipscomb introduced him. I don't care
if I never see him again," the girl said, bathed in angry pink.

"Do you know him, Mrs. Heeny?" Mrs. Spragg enquired.

"I should say I did. I manicured him for his first society portrait--a full-length of Mrs.
Harmon B. Driscoll." Mrs. Heeny smiled indulgently on her hearers. "I know everybody. If they
don't know ME they ain't in it, and Claud Walsingham Popple's in it. But he ain't nearly AS
in it," she continued judicially, "as Ralph Marvell--the little fellow, as you call him."

Undine Spragg, at the word, swept round on the speaker with one of the quick turns that revealed
her youthful flexibility. She was always doubling and twisting on herself, and every movement
she made seemed to start at the nape of her neck, just below the lifted roll of reddish-gold
hair, and flow without a break through her whole slim length to the tips of her fingers and
the points of her slender restless feet.

"Why, do you know the Marvells? Are THEY stylish?" she asked.

Mrs. Heeny gave the discouraged gesture of a pedagogue who has vainly striven to implant the
rudiments of knowledge in a rebellious mind.

"Why, Undine Spragg, I've told you all about them time and again! His mother was a Dagonet.
They live with old Urban Dagonet down in Washington Square."

To Mrs. Spragg this conveyed even less than to her daughter, "'way down there? Why do they
live with somebody else? Haven't they got the means to have a home of their own?"

Undine's perceptions were more rapid, and she fixed her eyes searchingly on Mrs. Heeny.

"Do you mean to say Mr. Marvell's as swell as Mr. Popple?"

"As swell? Why, Claud Walsingham Popple ain't in the same class with him!"

The girl was upon her mother with a spring, snatching and smoothing out the crumpled note.

"Laura Fairford--is that the sister's name?"

"Mrs. Henley Fairford; yes. What does she write about?"

Undine's face lit up as if a shaft of sunset had struck it through the triple-curtained windows
of the Stentorian.

"She says she wants me to dine with her next Wednesday. Isn't it queer? See that musk-rat, how
boldly he plunges into the stream, and, with his oar-like tail, stems the current till he
gains in safety the sedges on the other side.

What gurgling sound is that?--it attracts the practised ear of the
old hunter.

"Well, there you are... When a young man in society wants to meet a girl again, he gets his
sister to ask her."

Undine stared at her incredulously. "How queer! But they haven't all got sisters, have they?
It must be fearfully poky for the ones that haven't."

"They get their mothers--or their married friends," said Mrs. Heeny omnisciently.

"Married gentlemen?" enquired Mrs. Spragg, slightly shocked, but genuinely desirous of mastering
her lesson.

"Mercy, no! Married ladies."

"But are there never any gentlemen present?" pursued Mrs. Spragg, feeling that if this were
the case Undine would certainly be disappointed.

