You do not feel very affectionate toward the country on a wet day. Indeed, it is a most mournful
affair altogether, unless you have a particularly merry house party. There is absolutely nothing
to do. The heavens weep at such inopportune moments too. There is sure to be some large picnic,
some delightful gathering on the "tapis," when they choose to exhibit their griefs. And they
never notice how unwelcome such a display of feelings is, but go on weeping, weeping, weeping
all day long, until at last you catch the malady yourself, and are obliged perforce to mingle
a few of your own tears with theirs.

No, there is simply nothing to be done, and Satan has quite a difficulty to find enough work
for all the idle hands. Some can be perfectly happy in spending all their time in solving the
intricacies of those many wonderful puzzles which have appeared lately as a sort of antidote
to the mischief generally supposed to be perpetrated by the aforesaid gentleman. Unfortunately,
an entirely contrary effect is produced on me. They did not look far enough ahead when they
made me. They could not conceive the wonderful minds of this time, and so did not endow me
with a sufficient quantity of patience. If they could have imagined those marvelous little
tin saucers, with shot running in and out of horse-shoes, &c., with me in the perspective,
well, I think they would have gone about their work more carefully, and perhaps brought about
a happier result. As it is, the puzzles are always swept away now at my approach. I have smashed
so many.

It is base ingratitude, too, on my part, to bring them to so speedy an end; for what I owe
to those dear little things I am powerless to express. Those entertaining people who sit speechless,
and only answer yes and no with an eternal smile on their faces: give them a puzzle. There
is no further effort to amuse them required on your part. They are at once absorbed in "shot."
Their only idea is to successfully get them into their places. They never do; but being good
thorough-going characters will never give up the attempt.

You meet several of these people in the country, but they never get very friendly. You shock
them too much with your "London manners." They vote you "fast," and turn aside, fearful of
contamination for their daughters.

Oh, the dreariness, the heaviness of a country dinner party! It seems to last four times as
long as any other--parish, horses, or crops the only topic of conversation. How can you be
interested in old Jane Smith's rheumatism when you have never heard of her before; in the swelling
of a favorite mare's hock, when you did not know it possessed such a thing. People's views
grow so dreadfully narrow, shut up in their small parish. Their stock of conversation is so
very small. It is wise to find out your dinner partner at once, and avoid that man as you would
a disease until the meal is announced. If not, if you accidentally get in his neighborhood,
and he talks to you, all his conversation is at once exhausted, and you are obliged to hear
it over again at table, or submit to an interesting silence.

Dinner parties anywhere are, I think, a mistake. It is a wicked waste of time to spend nearly
three hours over eating and drinking. And you require such a very interesting "taker-in" to
make it bearable at all.

The river is the nicest way of spending a holiday, in my opinion; you are so free and untrammeled.
Mrs. Grundy even waives some of her laws on the river. The smaller the cottage, the more primitive
the place, the more enjoyable it is. You can spend your time on the water, and when you are
tired of that, you can hire a pony and trap and drive through some of the loveliest bits of
English scenery, to your heart's content.

Only be careful before engaging your pony to find out its previous occupations. It is a necessary
caution, I assure you. It once took me nearly an hour to drive out of one of the smallest villages
imaginable. And why? Because my pony had formerly belonged to the butcher, and insisted on
first going his rounds! I coaxed, I persuaded, I lashed him, but it was all of no avail. On
he trotted until he reached the familiar doors of his late customers, and then he stopped and
would not go on for at least five minutes. One place was worse than any. I could not get him
away for over a quarter-of-an-hour. This rather mystified me until I was told later that the
butcher was on "walking out" terms with the cook residing there!

CHAPTER VIII.

ON TOWN.

There is not much difference of opinion as to when Town is at its best. Perhaps a few misanthropists,
wrapped up in their little selves and their narrow thoughts, would shut themselves up during
the season, in order to escape the pain of witnessing us all in our ungodly career. Shallow
butterflies they call us. And what do they know about our lives? They judge from appearances;
and because we wear a cheerful expression, shutting down our cares and struggles in our inmost
hearts, and not burdening other people with them, we are called shallow and worldly. No, you
good and godly people, what do you know about us? You are no more capable of judging than the
ephemera, which lives but for a day, and so must consider the world all sunshine, all light.
How can it imagine the night which closes round later on, when neither it nor any of its ancestors
have ever lived to see it?

You ought to be punished for your ignorant mutterings. You complain of the well-dressed happy
throng. You should be turned out in the streets in August and September, and if the utter destitution
does not shortly turn your brains back in the right direction I am afraid your case is hopeless.

Does any place come up to London I wonder? Having never been out of England I cannot give an
opinion. Unfortunately I have not the gift, like some people, of either imagining or describing
places I have never seen--descriptions generally gleaned from other books and compiled under
one authorship as original compositions. Why cannot they be content with laying their English
stories in English scenery: places they know well and can write about. Some save up their money
in order to go abroad and visit one particular place, so as to bring new scenes into their
new books. But ah, how weary you get of this one place! It is brought into at least three of
their next novels. Everything, past, present and future seems to happen there. Your one prayer,
as you lay down the book, is to the effect that they may soon be able to save up a little more
and visit another spot.

There is so much going on in May, June, and July, that it is a difficulty to get through all
your engagements and yet see everything there is to be seen. Then there is the Park. Two or
three hours of the day must at least be spent in the Park. There we all come out to show ourselves
and to look at others. There the equestrians canter up and down the Row. Such equestrians too!
If foreigners take their ideas of English riding from the Row, they must form a high opinion
of our horsemanship.

There are the loungers flocking around their friends or walking up and down in the hope of
admiration. And they get it too, for who could help admiring such master-pieces of a tailor's
skill? Are these really the descendants of that Adam whose posterity had all to earn their
bread by the sweat of their brow? These automatons, whose only business in life seems to be
to look after pretty women and themselves? Men are supposed to be bread winners, but they have
a very easy time of it, I think, though they generally try to make themselves out so overworked.
Go into that great centre of business, the City, and you find everyone of these busy men out
and about, always apparently in a great hurry, never seeming to arrive at any destination,
running about and hustling each other, occasionally meeting an acquaintance, which proves a
good opportunity for one to stand the other a "drink." A funny way men have of showing their
affection, have they not? "Ah! how de do, old fellow? Come and have a drink," is their invariable
salutation to an intimate friend. After all it is better than the mutual kissing on the part
of women, which is the more emphatic the more they dislike one another. Men are less demonstrative
and therefore more sincere in their friendships. Anyhow there cannot be many at work in their
offices, or where could this idle crowd come from?

In spite of their haste, though, they generally find time to stare at any woman who crosses
their path. Why should not a woman go to the City? She has as much right there as man, and
yet if she is in the least degree superior to the flower girls (?) who surround the Royal Exchange,
she is looked on as a freak of nature, a positive curiosity, and is followed by every pair
of male eyes within reach!

Mrs. Grundy is inclined to rather overdo her season, I think. There is so much she might leave
undone, so many things that "never would be missed." Imagine the gratitude that would be displayed
to anyone who would put down and demolish those dreadful crushes, so called "at homes," where
nobody ever is at home; where you have neither space nor air from the moment you arrive until
the glad time comes for departing. Does anyone enjoy them, I wonder! Does anybody like being
literally baked with heat, which I am sure must exceed even that at Mexico; where one of the
inhabitants of that delightful climate, when he died and went to perdition, found the contrast
so striking that he was obliged to send home for his greatcoat!

Still, I suppose such entertainments will continue to exist. They are a good deal cheaper than
balls or dinners, and you can "knock off" ever so many people at the same time.

It is well, at any rate, to consider economy in some matters in these wofully extravagant days.
When the shops are decked out in their gayest colors to lure us on to destruction, why is it
that "just the very thing you want" is placed so conspicuously in the front of the window,
put cunningly near a mirror too, so that you see it all the way round, and it appears doubly
precious?

How convenient it is, by the way, when they have mirrors in the shop windows. You can look
to see if your hat is straight, or your veil nicely arranged, without being credited with vanity.
You are supposed to be admiring the bonnets displayed to view, not yourself. Girls make a great
mistake when they take little surreptitious glances at any mirror they come across. The action
is always noticed and condemned; while if they, instead, went up boldly, ostensibly to smooth
their hair or alter a pin, it would be taken as a matter of course.

It so soon grows into a habit, this always looking about for your reflection, and one that
is very difficult to get out of. Not that the men are at all behind us in this respect. There
are not many of our little follies that the lords of creation do not take up and cultivate.
You see them at dinner, addressing nearly all their conversation opposite--where hangs a mirror.
At dances they are admiring and smiling at their reflections the whole evening, finding far
more satisfaction in gazing there than at their partner, even though she be the loveliest in
the land.

But to return to my subject. (I seem to be always wandering away.) You need never be idle in
town. A wet day even makes no difference, when a place teems with picture galleries, as London
does. They are such good places to meet your friends. You always see someone you know. You
might as well be there as anywhere else. Of course you do not look at the pictures. You glance
at the few you have heard talked about, just so as to say you have seen them. But you do not
go to a picture gallery to look at pictures! "We always go the wrong way round. You avoid the
crowd like that, you know," I have heard people say. "Avoid the crowd!" It is the crowd they
want to see! There is less chance of missing your friends if you go in the opposite direction!
There is one real advantage though in beginning at the other end. You don't have the same people
following you all the time, nor have to listen to ignorant remarks. "Who's that? She don't
look very happy, to be sure," I once heard one woman ask of another as they were going round.
"That? why that's Adam and Eve, o' course, and the serpent in the distance. I never 'eard of
anyone else who went about without their clothes on, though why they put chains on her I can't
think: it says nothing about 'em in the Bible."

I glanced at the picture. It was "Andromeda!" And they talk of the strides education has been
making of late years!

CHAPTER IX.

ON CHILDREN AND DOGS.

Are you very shocked that I should couple these two subjects? An insult to the children, do
you say? Well, do you know, I am afraid I consider it an insult to the dogs. I am not fond
of children, and I love dogs. A man may be a superior animal to a dog, but a puppy is decidedly
more intelligent than a baby. What can you find more helpless, more utterly incapable, than
a baby? Look at a puppy in comparison. At a month old it is trotting about, and growing quite
independent; more sensible altogether than a child aged a year.

I am afraid I shock people often by my opinions, but they are really genuine. I am always more
interested in the canine race than in the blossoms of humanity. Very likely it is the behavior
of each that makes me so. Children never take to me, nor come near me if they can help it.
I do not understand them, or know what to talk to them about. On the other hand, dogs will
come to me at once, and, what is more, keep to me. I have never been growled at in my life,
and I have come across a good many dogs, too.

"You were a baby yourself once!" How often has this been said to me when I have aired the above
opinions. It is put before me as an unanswerable argument, a sort of annihilating finale to
the conversation. Yet I really don't see what it has to do with the matter. I suppose I was
a baby once. At least they say so. Which protestation, by the way, rather leaves it open to
doubt, for "on dits" like weather forecasts are nice reliable institutions if you do but follow
the opposite of what they tell you. Still, as there is more than one witness to the effect,
I will give in and admit it; I was a baby.

But the admission makes me no fonder of the species. If anything it makes me admire them the
less; for if I at all resembled the photographs that were taken of me--"before my eyes were
open," I was going to say; at any rate before I could stand--I wonder a stone was not put round
my neck, and they did not drown me in the first bucket of water they came across.

It is said that ugly babies grow up the best looking, and vice versa. This is a pleasant and
comforting thought for the ugly baby. It can bear a little depreciation now, because it can
look forward to the time when it will far outdo its successful rival. And the pretty baby's
glory is soon over. It becomes only a memory which rather irritates than soothes. For after
all, retrospection is not so pleasant as anticipation.

The above remark was said before a child about four years old, the other day. She must have
been listening intently, and having taken in the sense she inwardly digested it; for the next
time she quarrelled with her sister, she broke in spitefully, "You must have been the beautifullest
baby that ever was born."

Children should never be seen until they are over two. Until then they are neither pretty nor
entertaining. But at this age they begin to say funny things, and so are interesting. "You
only care for them when they amuse you!" cried a young mother once, indignant at my selfishness.
I suppose it is a selfish way of looking at it; but if modern children were brought up as we
were brought up I should not object to them in the least. We were always kept strictly in the
nursery, only appearing down-stairs on the rarest occasions: and when we arrived there we behaved
properly--we were seen and not heard. We did not run noisily up and down the room, taking up
the whole conversation of the party. We did not try to make the most disagreeable personal
remarks; or if we did we were sent up-stairs at once, and not laughed at for our "sharpness."

There are no children, now-a-days; they are mimic men and women. They dine late, they stay
up until the small hours, and are altogether as objectionable a faction as can be. They respect
their father and mother not a whit. It was only two or three days ago I heard a child of five
allude to her father as "the fat old governor," and simply get laughed at for her remark, no
one joining more heartily than the said parent himself. Of course, with such applause, the
child repeats it again and again.

They have such dreadfully sharp eyes, too, these children. Not a defect escapes their notice.
You tremble to hear what will come out next. They ask Mr. Jones what makes his nose so red.
They want to know why Mrs. Smith puts flour on her face. In spite of a thick veil, they discover
at once that Miss. Blank has a moustache, and inquire of her with interest if she is a man!

There are some nice children, of course--there are exceptions to every rule--and if they are
pretty I cannot help admiring them. It is fortunate that I have never had anything to do with
children. If I were a governess I should be so dreadfully unjust, I should always favor the
pretty ones. I love beauty in any form. There are girls I could sit and look at all day, if
they would let me. Only they are most of them so self-conscious; they expect to be admired,
and when I see girls laying themselves out for admiration, however beautiful they may be, however
strong my inclination to gaze, I will not gratify their vanity. For it is certainly true, that
though we prefer the praise of men, we do not disdain any like offering from our own sex.

That is the best of very young children. They do not notice you, they are not yet awake to
the power of their charms, so that you are able to look your full. I say "very" young, because
it is a knowledge that comes to them only too soon, and a little of this knowledge is, at any
rate, "a dangerous thing."

Children sometimes set you thinking more than any philosopher who ever existed. Their ideas
are so fresh, so unsophisticated, so original. The atmosphere of the great unknown still seems
to cling to their souls. They are not yet tainted with the world's impure air. They ask you
questions impossible to answer, but which you are obliged to parry in an underhand manner,
so as not to expose your ignorance. They solve problems and reach conclusions after a way of
their own, which, at any rate, have plenty of reason about them. I remember being very much
struck by a little boy's idea once when his mother was remarking on the strange appearance
of a man who, while his whiskers were black as ebony, possessed hair of a snowy white. "But
why, mother, should it seem funny?" broke in the child. "Aren't his whiskers twenty years younger
than his hair?"

Dogs certainly cannot talk or say quaint things, but they can do nearly everything else. At
any rate they can understand you and distinguish between the words, as the following instance
proves.

We have family prayers at home, and have had them ever since we were quite little things. What
an ordeal they used to be too! We used to be watched so strictly, and the moment our eyes wavered
from our books, attention would at once be drawn to the culprits and cover them with confusion.
Woe be to him, too, who forgot to turn over the leaf of his book with the rest! It is such
an unkind thing to do to print all the books alike. If you forget and turn over later, you
are at once detected. Being sharp children, however, we used to make this our first care, so
that whatever we were doing--laughing, pinching, winking, our pages all went over together,
so we sounded attentive.

Our little dog was even more cunning than ourselves. He was never permitted, on any plea, to
lie before the fire. "It enlarged his liver," his master said. Now this decree is a great deprivation
to dogs. They like warmth and comfort just as much as we do; indeed, they love the fire to
such an extent that if all the terrors of Hades were put before them, they would by no means
have a salutary effect. The dogs would try to be as naughty as possible in the hopes of getting
there.

But this particular little animal was made of most obstinate materials, and had no intention
of being baulked; so directly we knelt down for prayers, he scrambled from under the table,
and stretched his full length before the fire. He knew he would not be spoken to until we had
finished, and felt quite safe until we all joined in the Lord's Prayer at the end, when he
would immediately decamp, and thus escape any scolding for his disobedience. It was more especially
clever of him because we all joined in the Confession as well, but he never took any notice
of that, and always put off his departure until the last minute.

We had this dog twelve years altogether, and a sad night it was, indeed, when he had a fit
and died. The breakfast-table next morning presented a most distressing spectacle. We were
all positively swimming in tears. The whole family was upset at his death; and when, later
on in the day, he was wrapped up in a fish basket and buried in the garden, next door to a
favorite rabbit--on whose grave a cabbage had been planted, most unkindly reminding him of
the sweets of life he had left behind--we all lifted up our voices and wept again.

I often wonder if we shall meet our faithful dumb friends hereafter! Sages say no; but I cannot
believe they are so entirely blotted out, and like to think they have some happy sugary existence
somewhere, and that we shall see them again some day.

Dogs are very human after all; they have a great many of our virtues and nearly all our vices.
I expect it is this that endears them to us, for "One touch of nature makes all the world kin."
They are just as contradictory, as disappointing, as ourselves. Why will they always show off
to such bad advantage? After spending weeks in teaching them, and fortunes on pieces of sugar,
why, before an audience, will they insist on ringing the bell when they are told to shut the
door? and when you ask them to sit up and beg, why do they die for the Queen?

A little while ago we used to have grand steeplechases with our dogs. We put up fences and
water jumps, all of which--with the aid of sugar again--they were able to master in time. I
think they used to get quite excited themselves at last. Our old gardener, who used to watch
the races with great interest, told me once that he "'ad seen one of the little dawgs a'jumpin'
backwards and forwards over that 'ere bit of wood (the highest and most perilous jump), and
a'practisin' by hisself!" He was a very clever "little dawg," but I don't think he ever reached
such a pitch of intelligence as to practice "by hisself."

We had to fill up the fences down to the ground, or, to save themselves the trouble of getting
over, they would run under or scramble through in some extraordinary fashion, which in the
end took much the most time and pains. Humanity again! Lazy people always take the most trouble!

When I was a little girl I had every morning to learn and repeat to my governess three verses
from a French Bible. I thought I had hit upon an easy way of getting over this, and of reducing
the quantity I had to commit to memory; so I chose the cxxxvi. Psalm, in which you will find,
if you care to look it up (I have just had to do the same to find out the number, not being
by any means a living concordance to the Psalms!)--you will find that half of each verse is
composed of the words, "For His mercy endureth for ever." Ingenuity wasted! Trouble increased!
Not one whit the better off was I. Until that Psalm was finished I had to learn six verses
instead of three. I retired anything but satisfied, and heartily wishing I had left that Psalm
alone. It was very mean of my governess all the same. She should better have appreciated the
craftiness of her pupil. But, poor things, they have to be very sharp and always on the look-out,
or the children will take them in; they will not let any opportunity escape them, and, indeed,
I pity anyone who has the care of these unraveled Sphinxes, these uncut Gordian knots.

CHAPTER X.

ON CONCERTS.

I am not thinking about the Albert Hall Concerts, where the highest in the musical world go
time after time, always singing the same songs.

Neither am I thinking of "Monday Pops," and purely classical concerts, to which at least half
the audience listens with closed eyes and thoughts somewhere in dreamland. They like to be
thought musical; they know they ought to appreciate such renderings of such compositions; and
after all, when they describe "the treat they had! such a perfect touch, my dear! and the execution!!--"
no one knows they have never heard a note, so what does their inattention matter. They have
been seen there, and that is all they care about.

No, my thoughts take a much lower range. They are intent on only amateur productions, from
penny readings upwards, to those superintended by the élite of the neighborhood, when the seats
rise in price to five shillings each.

They are such nice cheery entertainments, so much life, such a great deal of energy about them!
You are called on by four separate people to take tickets. In desperation you have to yield
at last; paying extra for having your seat reserved, or else you must start half-an-hour beforehand,
and scramble in with the crowd. There is generally a series of them too, and you are obliged
to go to them all. They are so considerate, these concert-makers, they would not allow you
to miss one for worlds.

There is a great deal of novelty and variety about the artists themselves. All the musical
members in the neighborhood are routed out, and each is persuaded to contribute to the public
pleasure--by the way, there is never very much persuasion needed. It is such a treat to listen
to people you know, and whom you have heard perform dozens and dozens of times before in every
drawing-room in the place. At least, you know what to expect. You recognize each song, each
piece. You wait in suspense until Miss. Brown has passed her high A--always half a tone too
flat. You take it as a matter of course that Mr. Black--the first violinist in the place--after
tuning up for ten minutes, will break a string directly he begins to play. I should have thought
he would be pretty well used to it by now, but he never gets in tune again for the rest of
the evening. You would be quite disappointed if Mrs. Green ever concluded her most finished
and spirited pianoforte solo on the right chord.

These concerts always begin with a pianoforte solo, and the performers ought to feel very flattered
at the way in which they are received. We, the audience, regard them no more than we do the
mounted policemen in the Lord Mayor's Show. They are not part of the procession. They are only
meant to clear the way and let us know that the concert is going to begin, and then we must
leave off our chatter. Naturally, we make the most of our time, and try to get all our talking
done at once. In fact, we are so taken up with what we are saying that we actually forget to
applaud when the performance is over.

After the introduction in this form, the chief moving spirit of the entertainment comes forward,
and, after bowing right and left, stammers out (the chief moving spirit is never a good speaker)
that he much regrets that, on account of Mr. Jones, Mr. Smith, and Miss. Blank having been
prevented by illness from turning up, he is afraid there will be a little change in the programme.
Now as Mr. Jones, Mr. Smith, and Miss. Blank are down for seven things between them there is
likely to be a very great change in the programme. Why is it that people never know they cannot
come until the last moment, I wonder? Perhaps they think that the more often they disappoint
the more they emulate the "stars" in the musical world. Only the force of example, you see.
And, after all, what does it matter? The other performers are most kind and sympathetic, and
ready to help all they can. They are delighted to sing four times each instead of twice. Selfish
people! they have no consideration for the audience, they only think of their own enjoyment!

There is the youth who looks as if he were going to favor us with a sweet treble. Lo, and behold!
he opens his mouth, and out comes a loud double bass voice that seems to spring somewhere from
the region of his boots. It is not a pretty sound by any means.

There is the smiling, simpering girl who comes forward gorgeously arrayed in light blue satin.
She chooses a song, all trills and little scales, running up and down, shaking at last upon
a high note for nearly two minutes, and then coming down with a rush. This brings down the
house. We applaud lustily; we begin the encoring business here, which, having once started,
we do not intend to give up again. We like to get as much as we can for our money, we Britons.
She keeps us waiting some time, too--taking a little refreshment in between, perhaps--and then
comes back beaming with smiles and, under the impression that she is a second Patti, shrieks
out in plaintive tones, "Home, sweet home!" A cat might as well try to emulate a thrush! And
we never find it "sweet" either. Never do you dislike "Home" more than when you hear it sung thus.

There is the sentimental man, who gets into position while the introduction to his song is
being played. He sticks his finger down his collar (the object of which I can never understand),
pulls both cuffs out, stretches out his music a yard or two in front of him and gazes above
the audience with a hungry yearning look. His is always a love song, an unhappy love song,
that should bring tears to our eyes, only we are so taken up with his expression, and the fear
that he is going to die or have a fit, that we have no time for weeping. True to our instincts,
he is greeted with deafening applause, and coming back, he generously treats us to the last
verse over again.

Everyone is not so fortunate in receiving an encore, though. It depends on how well they are
known, not on their desserts. The newcomer in the neighborhood tries her hardest and does her
best, but as we have never seen her before we scarcely take the trouble to applaud her, which
must be rather disappointing, especially when her mother is sitting among the audience with
the encore song on her lap, ready to hand it up.

The best exhibition of all is made by the flutist. He is the only one who plays that instrument
for miles round, and so the swagger with which he steps on to the platform is perhaps excusable.

How anyone can play it I do not know. It is such a singularly unbecoming instrument. But the
wretched owner never seems to think so. When he once commences he gives us a good dose of it.
We begin to think he is going on all night. Suddenly there comes a pause, and applause is started
at once, we being only too delighted to make a little noise on our own account. But no--it
is a mistake, a delusion, after all. The pause was only an interval between an Andante and
a Scherzo; and, with a bland smile at his ovation, on he goes again for another quarter of
an hour. We--the audience--are disappointed, we feel we have been tricked, and we therefore
sulk for a season. But the Scherzo is so long, it gives us time to get over our ill-humor,
though we are mutually resolved that we will not have him back again. Vain hope! From the far
end of the room comes thundering applause, which never dies away until the talented flutist
appears on the platform again. We find out afterwards that he treats the whole of his establishment
to the cheap seats; so, of course, poor things, we cannot blame them. They are only earning
their wages. Perhaps they are presented with an extra shilling each when their master returns home.

It is a curious thing how we all like applauding and making a noise. If you notice, at organ
recitals in the Church we feel quite uncomfortable. We think we ought to do something at the
conclusion of the pieces; so, as we may not clap our hands, we all give a little rustle and
cough. This is to show our approbation. Everyone coughs. It is astonishing how many people
have bad colds. For my part I think it is a pity applause is not allowed. It is infinitely
preferable to the coughing at any rate.

Of course the comic singer goes down best. He is called back three, sometimes four times. The
schoolboys behind grow excited, and greet him with a whistle that would do credit to the "gods."
This is too much for decently-clad minds, anything so profane as that whistle. The clergyman,
who is in the chair (the proceeds are always to be devoted to some charitable object), rises
and insists "that if that most objectionable noise does not cease, the boys will have to be
turned out."

Where the "objectionable" comes in I cannot think. The boys are very clever to be able to do
it. I have often tried it, and cannot succeed, and so conclude it must be a difficult accomplishment.
They stick about four fingers in their mouths, and thereby make quite a different sound to
any ordinary whistle. However, it is no wonder the chairman discourages it. When he was reading
a few minutes before, reading out some dry little tale with a moral, in which the humorous
parts were the heaviest, no encore whistle was accorded him. He was clapped loudly, of course--is
he not one of the chief men in the parish? But no one wished to hear him read again, so we
stopped our applause just in time to prevent him from re-appearing.

We go home glad at heart, and two mornings later read an account of the evening's performance
in the local paper.

We find there a few statements which agree with our own feelings. They say that "Mr. Jones
sang in a pure and cultured manner, and deserves special attention for his sweet tenor voice
and the refinement of the sentiment in his songs" (whatever that may mean!) "Mr. Smith played
two violin solos with remarkable precision of touch and with the greatest ease;" while "Miss.
Blank, with a good contralto, was all that could be desired in both her songs!" They were none
of them there, but that does not matter. They were praised up more than anyone else, which
must be very discouraging to those who did perform. But on account of their non-appearance
alone we feel they deserve some approbation, and so do not grudge it them. It is of no consequence
to a newspaper reporter who is there and who is not. He takes the programme, ticks off the
names, and writes his remarks and criticisms just as he likes. It would be wiser, all the same,
on his part, if he found out the absentees, for otherwise his little hints rather lose their
effect.

He writes that this one wants a little "animation," that one "sings out of tune." Miss So-and-So
plays the piano "with faultless manipulation, the only drawback being a slight preponderance
of pedal," and so on. He generally has as good an ear for music as a parish priest who only
knew two tunes: one of which was "God save the Queen," and the other wasn't. And once, when
a brass band was playing a selection outside the vicarage, he went on to his balcony, hat in
hand, and waved it vigorously as he commenced to sing the first line of "God save the Queen."

Well, it does not matter after all. The only object is to appear learned, and to use long words.
If the artists do not like being ignorantly criticized they must forbear to appear in public,
a result which would incline us to go and shake hands with the reporters all round in the exuberance
of our gratitude.

CHAPTER XI.

ON DANCING.

I was looking through a "Querist Album" the other day; one of those dreadful confession books
in which you are required to answer the most absurd questions. Dreadful indeed they are to
write in, but not altogether uninteresting to peruse, though the interest comes not so much
in the answers themselves as in the manner in which they are written.

Some go in for it seriously, and describe their inmost feelings on the pages; some take a witty
strain, and put down the most ridiculous things they can think of; while others write just
what comes first.

Some are such hypocrites, too. Here is a man who describes his wife as his ideal woman; and
when we know that he scarcely ever addresses a civil word to the poor little woman, his admission
is, to say the least of it, amusing.

"Have you ever been in love? and if so, how often?" This is one of the questions. The answers
to it are of doubtful veracity. All the single ladies reply "Never!" underlining the word three
times. "Yes, only once," is the statement of the married ones. According to the Querist Album,
"The course of true love always runs smooth." No one seems to be attacked by Cupid but they
must immediately marry the object of their choice, and "all goes merrily as a marriage bell."
The men, on the contrary, like to appear somewhat inflammable. It is generally the masculine
writers who adopt the sprightly key. Twenty--forty--thousands of times they admit falling in
love. Such one-sided affairs they must have been, too; for the girls, according to their own
confessions, never reciprocated any attachment until their rightful lords and masters appeared
on the scene. I am afraid we must be a very hard-hearted race!

But it is the question relating to your idea of "the greatest earthly happiness" that struck
me most. "Never being called in the morning," was one lazy person's reply. "To write M.P. after
my name," was the ambition of another. "Married life," wrote the bride on the completion of
her honeymoon. Ah, little bride, you have been married some years now. Are your ideas still
the same, I wonder? "A good partner, a good floor, and good music," said a fourth, and it is
this one that has my entire sympathy. I agree with her. It is my idea also of "the greatest
earthly happiness." I do not require much, you see. These are not very difficult things to
procure now-a-days; and yet I am often taunted with my love of dancing. If I express disapproval
of a man, "I suppose he can't dance," they say with a sneer.

