That the sublime grotesqueness of the whole contention is clearly visible to other besides
Catholic eyes is clearly proved by the occasional observations of the non-Catholic Press. Here,
again, we will offer the gentle reader a specimen. The Daily News is one of London's big dailies.
It has a wide circulation. It is representative of a large section of the English people. Let
us select a passage from one of its leaders. Speaking of the arrogance of the Anglican Church,
which, as compared to the Catholic Church, is but a baby, still in long clothes, it gives expression
to its views in the following caustic lines. One might almost imagine it were the Tablet or
Catholic Times that we are about to quote from, but, nothing of the kind, it is the Nonconformist
organ, the Daily News. It writes: "The Anglicans may still persist in patronising the Roman
Catholics as a new set of modern dissidents under the old name. It is the sort of vengeance
which, under favourable circumstances, the mouse may enjoy at the expense of the elephant.
If he can mount high enough by artificial means, the smallest of created things may contrive
to look down on the greatest, and to affect to compassionate his want of range. For purposes
of controversy, the Anglican could talk of himself as a terrestrial ancient-of-days, and regret
the rage for innovation, which led, not, of course, to his separation from Rome, but to Rome's
separation from him! So the pebble, if determined to put a good face on it, might wonder what
had become of the rock, and recite the parable of the return of the prodigal to the Atlas Range";
and so forth. The fact is that every unprejudiced man, who has so much as a mere bowing acquaintance
with the facts of history, knows perfectly well that before the sixteenth century the Church
in England was united to the Holy See, and rested where Christ Himself had built it, viz.,
on Peter, the rock. Whereas, after the sixteenth century, it became a State Church, dependent,
not on Peter, but upon Parliament, and as purely local, national, and English as the British
Army or the British Navy. Bramhall tells us that, "whatsoever power our laws did divest the
Pope of, they invested the King with" (Schism Guarded, p. 340).

We dealt in the last chapter with the relation between the pre-Reformation Archbishops and
Metropolitans and the Pope, and we saw how each in turn swore obedience to the Vicar of Christ
as his spiritual sovereign. We will now conclude the present chapter by transcribing a typical
address presented by another representative body of men to the Pope, in past times. It is the
year 1427. Now Chicheley, the Archbishop of Canterbury, had been accused at Rome of some fault
or indiscretion, so the other Bishops of the province met together for the purpose of defending
him. With this end in view, they address a letter to Pope Martin V. It begins as follows:--

"Most Blessed Father, one and only undoubted Sovereign Pontiff, Vicar of Jesus Christ upon
earth, with all promptitude of service and obedience, kissing most devoutly your blessed feet,"
and so forth. They then proceed to defend their Metropolitan, and in doing so declare that
"the Archbishop of Canterbury is, Most Blessed Father, a most devoted son of your Holiness
and of the Holy Roman Church". Nay, more; they go on to testify that "he is so rooted in his
loyalty, and so unshaken in his allegiance especially to the Roman Church, that it is known
to the whole world, and ought to be known to the city (i.e., Rome) that he is the most faithful
son of the Church of Rome, promoting and securing, with all his strength, the guarantees of
her liberty".

Now, what we wish to know is, how in the world can a man be "the most faithful son of the Church
of Rome," so rooted in his loyalty to her that "his allegiance is known to the whole world,"
and yet not be a Roman Catholic? The Bishops then add that "they go down upon their knees"
to beseech the Pope's favour for the Archbishop, and in doing so declare that they are "the
most humble sons of your Holiness and of the Roman Church".

Then Archbishop Chicheley follows up their letter, by writing one himself, in which he says:
"Most Blessed Father, kissing most devotedly the ground beneath your feet, with all promptitude
of service and obedience, and whatsoever a most humble creature can do towards his lord and
master" (i.e., domino et creatori--literally "creator," in the sense that the Pope had made
or "created" him archbishop) and so forth. Then he goes on to explain that "Long before now,
were it not for the perils of the journey and the infirmities of my old age, I would have made
my way, Most Blessed Father, to your feet, and have accepted most obediently whatsoever your
Holiness would have decided" (see Wilkins, vol. iii. pp. 471 and 486). Surely, no Archbishop
or Bishop could use language of such profound reverence and of such perfect loyalty and obedience,
unless he recognised the Pope as the true representative of Christ upon earth, invested with
His divine authority ("To Thee do I give the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven"). Nevertheless, seeing
that there is nothing in nature at all like the chambered shell of the Belemnite, except the
shells of the Nautilus and of the Spirula, it was legitimate to prophesy that the animal from
which the fossil proceeded must have belonged to the group of the
Cephalopoda.

Nautilus and Spirula are both very rare animals, but the progress
of investigation brought to light the singular fact, that, though
each has the characteristic cephalopodous organisation, it is very
different from the other.

The shell of Nautilus is external, that of Spirula internal; Nautilus
has four gills, Spirula two; Nautilus has multitudinous tentacles,
Spirula has only ten arms beset with horny-rimmed suckers; Spirula,
like the squids and cuttle-fishes, which it closely resembles, has
a bag of ink which it squirts out to cover its retreat when alarmed;
Nautilus has none.

No amount of physiological reasoning could enable any one to say whether
the animal which fabricated the Belemnite was more like Nautilus,
or more like Spirula.

But the accidental discovery of Belemnites in due connection with black elongated masses which
were: certainly fossilised ink-bags, inasmuch as the ink could be ground up and used for painting
as well as if it were recent sepia, settled the question; and it became perfectly safe to prophesy
that the creature which fabricated the Belemnite was a two-gilled cephalopod with suckers on
its arms, and with all the other essential features of our living squids, cuttle-fishes, and
Spirulae. The palaeontologist was, by this time, able to speak as confidently about the animal
of the Belemnite, as Zadig was respecting the queen's spaniel. He could give a very fair description
of its external appearance, and even enter pretty fully into the details of its internal organisation,
and yet could declare that neither he, nor any one else, had ever seen one. And as the queen's
spaniel was found, so happily has the animal of the Belemnite; a few exceptionally preserved
specimens have been discovered, which completely verify the retrospective prophecy of those
who interpreted the facts of the case by due application of the method of Zadig.

These Belemnites flourished in prodigious abundance in the seas of the mesozoic, or secondary, age
of the world's geological history; but no trace of them has been
found in any of the tertiary deposits, and they appear to have died
out towards the close of the mesozoic epoch.

The method of Zadig, therefore, applies in full force to the events of a period which is immeasurably
remote, which long preceded the origin of the most conspicuous mountain masses of the present
world, and the deposition, at the bottom of the ocean, of the rocks which form the greater part
of the soil of our present continents. The Euphrates itself, at the mouth of which Oannes landed,
is a thing of yesterday compared with a Belemnite; and even the liberal chronology of magian
cosmogony fixes the beginning of the world only at a time when other applications of Zadig's method
afford convincing evidence that, could we have been there to see, things would have looked very
much as they do now. Truly the magi were wise in their generation; they foresaw rightly that
this pestilent application of the principles of common sense, inaugurated by Zadig, would
be their ruin.

But it may be said that the method of Zadig, which is simple reasoning from analogy, does not
account for the most striking feats of modern palaeontology--the reconstruction of entire
animals from a tooth or perhaps a fragment of a bone; and it may be justly urged that Cuvier,
the great master of this kind of investigation, gave a very different account of the process which
yielded such remarkable results.
 There was no post such as we have now, and special
couriers had to be despatched from London to Rome. Paper had not as yet been invented, so the
message had to be carefully written, by paid scribes, on vellum or parchment. Further, a letter
from a King to the Pope was not a thing to be dashed off on the spur of the moment, but to
be carefully thought out, and expressed with great accuracy. The King would summon his advisers,
and his Secretary of State, and probably consult some of the Bishops and weigh each word before
committing his message to parchment. In short, the document would represent his own deliberate
convictions as well as those of his official advisers and counsellors.

After addressing the Pope in the usual respectful and filial way, he says: "Let not the envious
information of our detractors find place in the meek mind of your Holiness, or create any sinister
opinion of a son" [observe the King calls himself a son of the Pope], "who after the manner
of his predecessors" [so previous Kings were as loyal as he] "shall always firmly persist in
amity and obedience to the Apostolic See. Nay, if any such evil suggestion concerning your
son should knock for entrance at your Holiness's ears, let no belief be allowed it till the
son who is concerned be heard, who trusts and always intends both to say and to prove that
each of his actions is just before the tribunal of your Holiness, presiding over every creature,
which to deny is to maintain heresy." Nothing could be stronger than this last sentence; but
we will return to that later. Then the King goes on to speak of others, who are dependent upon
him, and proceeds as follows: "And further, this we say, adjoining it as a further evidence
of our intention and greater devotion, that if there be any one of our kindred or allies who
walks not as he ought in the way of obedience towards the Apostolic See, we intend to bestow
our diligence--and we trust to no little purpose--that leaving his wandering course, he may
return into the path of duty and walk regularly for the future".

From these words it is clear that the King of England, not satisfied with obeying the Pope
himself, likewise insisted upon all under his authority obeying him likewise. Indeed, he would
have made short work of those who should refuse to do so. Then, alluding to some reproach,
admonition or censure which he had received from the Pope, he goes on to express himself in
words strangely out of harmony with the whole tone and spirit of modern Anglicanism. They are
as follows:--

"That the Kings of England, our predecessors, those illustrious champions of Christ, those
defenders of the Faith, those" [listen!] "zealous asserters of the rights of the Holy Roman
Church, and devout observers of her commands, that they or we should deserve this unkindness,
we neither know nor believe. And though, for this very reason many do say--though we say not
so--that this aiding of our enemies against us, seems neither the act of a father nor of a
mother towards us, but rather of a stepmother; yet this notwithstanding, we constantly avow
that we are" [remember, it is still the King of England speaking], "and shall continue to be,
to your Holiness and to your seat, a devout and humble son, and not a step-son".

Can any one imagine greater reverence or greater loyalty to the Vicar of Christ than is shown
forth in these words? Can you, dear readers, by any stretch of the imagination, conceive any
one who is not a Roman Catholic giving vent to such sentiments as are here expressed? Have
words lost their plain meaning for the Bishop of London, and for those who (we must in charity
suppose, blindly) follow him?

The letter is a long one, and we need not transcribe the whole of it, but we will offer for
your consideration just one more paragraph. The King writes: "Your Holiness best knows the
measure of good and just, in whose hands are the keys to open and to shut the gates of heaven
on earth, as the fulness of your power and the excellence of your judicature requires.... We
being ready to receive information of the truth, from your sacred tribunal, which is over all,"
etc.

Observe these words were written over five hundred years ago, long before the present Anglican
Establishment was so much as dreamed of; yet, even if King Edward III. had actually foreseen
the craze that would seize Anglicans of to-day to prove that he, and his subjects were not
loyal Roman Catholics, he could not have expressed his Catholicity and his loyalty to the Vicar
of Christ in more unmistakable or in more explicit terms.

Whom shall we believe? King Edward III. himself, who, in the above words, declares he is a
staunch Roman Catholic, and an obedient son of the Pope, ready to defend his rights against
all, or the present Bishop of London, who declares he was not?

There is one sentence in the King's letter which is especially worthy of consideration, as
it is so pregnant with meaning. We refer to the following: knowing that "your Holiness presides
over every creature, which to deny is heresy".

You will observe that the King not only believes, but that he here practically makes an explicit
profession of faith in the spiritual supremacy of St. Peter and his successors, the Popes.
In fact, he not only admits and confesses the Pope's supremacy to be true, which is one thing,
but he declares it to be a revealed truth, taught by Our Blessed Lord Himself, which is a great
deal more. How does he do this? Suffer us to explain.

To deny any truth of religion is wrong and sinful, but it is not necessarily and always heretical.
Heresy is not the denial of any kind of truth: it is the denial only of a special form of truth.
It is the denial of those truths which have been taught by Jesus Christ and the Apostles. But
the King explicitly declares in his letter to the Holy Father that to deny the Pope's spiritual
supremacy over all is not only wrong, not only sinful, but that it is to be guilty of the specially
horrible sin of heresy. His words are: "It is to maintain heresy". Yet Anglicans still fondly
cling to the delusion that the Church in England in the time of Edward III. is in unbroken
continuity with the Church of England in the time of King Edward VII.!

But, to continue. It is interesting to note that the Pope, Benedict XII., in due course replies
to this letter from his "devout and humble son," as Edward describes himself. He begins by
expressing his satisfaction that His "most dear Son in Christ King Edward of England" should
thus "follow the commendable footsteps of your progenitors, Kings of England who," he goes
on to say, "were famous for the fulness of their devotion and faith towards God and the Holy
Roman Church". We pause for a reply. Of course we know that Anglicans are very hard pressed,
and in a quandary, and that some allowance must be made for drowning men when they stretch
forth their trembling hands to clutch at straws. But really the claim to continuity, however
vital to them, should hardly be put forward in the face of such clear and overwhelming evidence
of its falsity. The ultimate effects of such vain efforts to prove black to be white can only
be to make them ridiculous, and to discredit them in the eyes of honest men.

In conclusion, we are persuaded that some may feel curious or interested to see and read King
Edward's letter for themselves, and in its entirety. Some may even wish to satisfy themselves
that we are stating actual facts, and not romancing; so let us inform any such persons that
the letter quoted belongs to the thirteenth year of King Edward III.'s reign (An. Regni xiii.
Ed. Rex III.). The original, if not at the Vatican, should be either at the Record Office or
at the British Museum. The English version, of which we have made use, may be found on pages
126-30 of The History of Edward III., by J. Barnes, Fellow of Emmanuel College, Cambridge,
and published in 1688. Had this history been composed in more modern times, this famous letter
to Pope Benedict would probably have been quietly suppressed or omitted.

But in 1688 the theory of continuity had not been invented by the father of lies, to bolster
up a lost cause, so the letter actually appears in Barnes' History, to tell its own unvarnished
tale: and to bear its uncompromising testimony to the truth.

In the meanwhile, time wears on, and the end draws near when each man will have to give an
account of his life and conduct to the Supreme Judge of the living and the dead. And it will
go hard with us if we turn our back upon the truth. God is speaking in this England of ours,
and shedding His light, and many are finding their way back to that glorious Faith of which
they were cruelly robbed at the "Reformation". "To-day, if you shall hear His voice, harden
not your hearts," but lend an attentive ear to His invitation, and pray that you may have courage
enough to join hands once again with Bede, and Dunstan, Anselm, and Thomas à Becket, and with
Edward III. and his royal predecessors, all faithful sons of St. Peter and the Holy See, and
to enter that Church which was built by God Incarnate on Peter, and upon no other foundation;
which still rests securely upon Peter, and which (if there be any truth in God's promises)
will continue to rest on Peter till the end of time. "Upon this Rock (Peter) will I build My
Church, and the gates of hell (i.e., the powers of darkness) shall never prevail against it."

=Also by Rt. Rev. JOHN S. VAUGHAN, D.D.,= =Bishop of Sebastopol.= =To be had of all Catholic
Booksellers.=

1. CONCERNING THE HOLY BIBLE: ITS USE AND ABUSE.
   With a Letter from H.E. Cardinal LOGUE.
   Pp. xvi.-270. Price 3s. 6d.

   "It is impossible to take up this delightful volume without
   desiring to express one's admiration of it.... As to the matter,
   it would be well if every Catholic had it at his fingers'
   ends, especially in this country.... It has an irresistible
   charm of style."--The Tablet.

   H.E. Cardinal LOGUE writes to Bishop Vaughan: "You are to be
   congratulated on the success with which you have treated
   your important subject."

   N.B.--The volume has already been translated into French and
   Italian, and is now being translated into other foreign
   languages.

2. EARTH TO HEAVEN. Fourth Edition. Pages 200. Price 2s. 6d. net.

