By this dreadful expedient the Spaniards managed to reach Jamaica again, and when they landed
they immediately fell to quarrelling as to what they should do next.  Some were for trying
to make the island of Cuba, the wind being favourable for that direction; others were for returning
and making their submission to the Admiral; others for going back and seizing the remainder
of his arms and stores; others for staying where they were for the present, and making another
attempt to reach Espanola when the weather should be more favourable.  This last plan, being
the counsel of present inaction, was adopted by the majority of the rabble; so they settled
themselves at a neighbouring Indian village, behaving in: the manner with which we are familiar. He
has shot certain superstitions through with doubt, and in his manner of dealing with error he
has proved to us a thing it were well not to forget: that pleasantry is more efficacious than
vehemence.

Let me name one incident by way of proof--the well-known one of Partridge,
the almanac-maker.

This worthy cobbler was an astrologer of no mean repute. He foretold events with much discretion.
The ignorant bought his almanacs, and many believed in them as a Bible--in fact, astrology
was enjoying a "boom."

Swift came to London and found that Partridge's predictions were the
theme at the coffeehouses. He saw men argue and wax wroth, grow red
in the face as they talked loud and long about nothing--just nothing.

But now unfortunately the evil harvest sown by the Porras gang in their journey to the east
of the island began to ripen.  The supplies of provisions, which had hitherto been regularly
brought by the natives, began to appear with less punctuality, and to fall off both in quantity
and quality.  The trinkets with which they were purchased had now been distributed in such
quantities that they began to lose their novelty and value; sometimes the natives demanded
a much higher price for the provisions they brought, and (having by this time acquired the
art of bargaining) would take their stores away again if they did not get the price they asked.

But even of this device they soon grew weary; from being irregular, the supplies of provisions
from some quarters ceased altogether, and the possibilities of famine began to stare the unhappy
castaways in the face. It must be remembered that they were in a very weak physical condition,
and that among the so-called loyal remnant there were very few who were not invalids; and they
were unable to get out into the island and forage for themselves.  If the able-bodied handful
were to sally forth in search of provisions, the hulks would be left defenceless and at the
mercy of the natives, of whose growing hostility the Admiral had by this time discovered abundant
evidence.  Thus little by little the food supply diminished until there was practically nothing
left, and the miserable company of invalids were confronted with the alternative of either
dying of starvation or desperately attempting a canoe voyage.

