We may escape in just that hour that we sense the power of our own personal creation, and set
up a conscious relationship with the positive constructive things in our own consciousness.
We become lords of our physical conditions and our environment just as soon as we cut out all
thought relationship with the laws which make for loss and lack. "The spirit beareth witness
with our spirit day by day that we are the Sons of God," and as soon as the soul knows this
it senses its divine relationship, and is born again on the planes of a higher consciousness,
and in the wisdom of its understanding it builds itself new conditions, and lives in a new
world, surrounded with the objects of its own creating, at first subjectively, but in time
manifested on the objective plane, to bear witness to the truth which its soul knows and obeys.

When this is done we live in a new world made perfect by our own inspired workmanship; we know
nothing of disease and pain, we have never a morrow of fear, "our today of content is eternal."

There are many who have mastered health, because it was the first thing they demanded, and
after they have done this, they find that they are still related to the laws which make for
poverty and lack in material possessions; they have liberty in flesh but not the perfect law
of it in environment. There are those who have known the grinding hand of need, who have stood
with crushed lives, hopeless; with courage dead and the devil of despair crouched on their
shoulder, whispering words of disappointment; there are those who are homeless in a land of
homes, and those who are starving in a world of plenty; what can we say to them? How can we
comfort them and point them to the hope of a new endeavor?

The world is full of these half-fledged lives and we must answer them.

As soon as we can teach a life to know the truth of its own power of conscious thought relationship,
it can face about and begin a new line of attraction and accumulation. It is an unwritten law
that we pass on as we become fit, and we can at any moment begin a new thought attitude which,
if persisted in, will relate us with everything which we conceive to be opulence or abundance.

When we want to come into perfect liberty for wealth, we must never recognize poverty or the
things which make for it; we must refuse to sense a separation from whatever we desire; the
universal abundance is for all, and we get and express just the amount we have power to connect.

The ALL WILL wants us to have whatever we want, remember this! And it will aid us to secure
what we want and help us to keep it just so long as we show we can make intelligent connection
with it.

We must believe in our divine kinship with supply, and the divine kinship of every other soul
with it; over the same line which we send out our desire for abundance there will pass back
to us the answer to our prayer; the things we seek are seeking us; this is a great psychological
truth which we can prove to ourselves if we try. Under the lines of the higher spiritual affinity
the lines of transference never cross; our gain never becomes another's loss, and vice versa.

The whole scheme of life is for freedom; it is only the perverted building of the minds of
men that have externalized lack and bondage. We have forgotten the eternal promise, "With what
measure ye mete it shall be meted unto you," we have related with lack of supply, never knowing
the truth that no one limits us but ourselves.

Under the law of liberty, we place ourselves in the very heart of divine opulence and though
at first we cry abundance from the very depth of poverty, if we hold our life servant to this
relation, all lack will slowly slip away from us, and we can, and do walk out into new relations
of attraction, and become one with all that our Father hath.

This, then, is the truth of perfect liberty:

  "To him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath not shall be
  taken away even that which be hath."

Those who have laid hold of the Divine truth of abundance of supply and related themselves
with it through the power of conscious thinking may go on in calm security from demand to supply,
coming each day deeper into the universal cosmic opulence of health, wealth, love and usefulness.

The word, then, to the sick or poverty-stricken or loveless is this: Recognize your union with
whatever you desire; reach out and make relation with it through the power of conscious thinking;
look with wide open soul eyes straight into the face of the Universal Being, and taking your
wants firmly into your mind walk on in your daily life demanding them and expecting them to
manifest; never lay down your consecration until it does express for you.

Make every conscious relationship one with health, wealth, love and usefulness, accompanied
by peace, power, plenty and divine realization.

As soon as we lift our personal life to the level of the universal life in positive recognition
of our own, it will come to us and abide.

Union with the cosmic life is a possible thing here and now; the human life is but the remote
picture of our place in the universal; our life's relations may become the flowers on our tree
of life, and our manifold experiences the fruits of our own growing and all life be one perfect
round of liberty born from conscious righteous choice.

Cosmic Therapeutics

"And He stood between the living and the dead, and the plague was stayed."

The greatest secret of the age is the connection with and manipulation of the cosmic energy.

In every age and every race men have stumbled on to relationship with their atmospheric environment
and have each demonstrated it in their own way, but it remained for the twentieth century investigators
to give us the real key to our continuous connection and the methods by which this connection
could be demonstrated to the thinking world.

The minds of the past taught us the existence of an atmospheric environment and to a degree
manifested our connection with it, but accomplished it through the medium of objective lines
of connection and transference; today we are finding the new truth that man is able to create
his own environment even to the most minute thing and create it from atmospheric energy lifting
his creations aloft in his life in finite form through the medium of a power that, in its first
expression, far transcends sight and touch.

Today we know that the great Cosmic currents in which the whole world lives, and moves, is
nothing but a vast undifferentiated sea of energy. This energy is acting always in the formless
as electrical currents; these currents are always waiting to be set in motion with any other
current which corresponds with them in electrical reaction either positive or negative.

Man's whole atmospheric environment is formed of these currents and he is a localized attracting
center, registering in himself and his environment just those electrical reactions with which
he relates under the great Cosmic law of correspondence.

We have found in the past that these atmospheric currents can be sent as vibrations through
the medium of any object that is brought into relation with them and the degree of registration
depends upon the instrument used.

In some rates of vibration these waves may be made to become heat; in others, cold; in others,
light; in others, sound; in others, just motion, without sound being separated. Physical science
has given us examples too numerous to mention of the positive expression of enforced vibration
in relation to objective things, but it was left for Marconi to show conclusively that these
vibrations may be produced and transmitted through the medium of the atmospheric waves themselves,
and psychology has shown that any instrument, either mechanical or human, may register vibrations
in the very moment they are attuned to them.

Atmospheric environment has passed deeply into the development stage scientifically, and even
in this it does not yet really appear what it may be, but it is easy to see how all atmospheric
energy becomes really a substance from which every skilled mechanic may create his own expression.

Metaphysically, it is plain to see that man is only one part of this great cosmic energy, and
that standing as he does, a localized point in the ocean of formless vibrating ether, he becomes
a specialized, attracting center and the lines which connect him with this ocean of energy
are his own thoughts.

In the physical plane men use wires and machines and objective localization, but on the higher
planes of consciousness we only need to use the vibrations of that plane, and the higher connecting
thought wires become as tangible to those who use them as do the objective connections on the
physical planes.

On the human plane our thoughts become the metaphysical avenues of connection; with thoughts
we reach out into this formless ocean of cosmic energy and create through recognition the things
which we desire, and our environment under this law becomes the world-picture of just what
we have had the power to create for ourselves.

This cosmic substance is neither great, nor small, finite nor infinite, it simply is substance
from the highest to the lowest expression of life. There is no escaping this universal product
of energy. We ourselves are It!

The physical universe, and everything that we call matter, is simply universal energy manifested
in form; everything expressed on the physical plane is cosmic energy materialized; and every
human being is only this cosmic energy localized and expressed in human flesh and form. Form
is only the physical side of Divine mind.

In this ocean of universal energy or atmospheric environment which we call formless, there
is always some form of some kind, but the formless is a form too high for our human mind to
comprehend, we have not yet reached the plane of unfoldment where we have cosmic recognition.

As we investigate this atmospheric environment, we find it has two distinct forces at work
within it, and these forces are the positive and negative reaction of its atoms. This positive
and negative reaction of the atoms is continually going on, and they each have their corresponding
embodiment in the eternal world of matter; they act independently or together, and when one
has learned how to blend these two reactions in his consciousness, as do the skilled magi,
he has come to the center of his own and universal being.

In the manifested world of substance, mankind takes its place in one or both of these energies;
it is drawn into their expression by the universal law of attraction. Each life is in its first
expression, positive or negative in its cosmic polarity. In the universal interpretation, we
learn to look upon the positive life as the creative, and the negative life as the receptive.

Every individual is just what he is by the natural law of his own cosmic relationship, and
he will remain just what he is at any point of progress, and express himself in his own way
until he grows into a deeper state of comprehension, and knows the method of changing his cosmic
positions.

When we get the truth of the universal energy in our minds and realize that this energy is
really positive and negative, and that both these reactions have their corresponding material
manifestation in ourselves, then we are ready to go farther into the study of the registration
of this energy, and from this into the higher psychology of function.

