The chief harbour of Malta is a deep bay, turned towards the north, and divided into two lesser
bays by a large tongue of rock, on the point of which stood a strong castle, called Fort St.
Elmo. The gulf to the westward has a little island in it, and both gulf and islet are called
Marza Muscat. The gulf to the east, called the Grand Port, was again divided by three fingers
of rock projecting from the mainland, at right angles to the tongue that bore Fort St. Elmo.
Each finger was armed with a strong talon--the Castle of La Sangle to the east, the Castle
of St. Angelo in the middle, and Fort Ricasoli to the west. Between St. Angelo and La Sangle
was the harbour where all the ships of war were shut up at night by an immense chain; and behind
was il Borgo, the chief fortification in the island. Citta Notabile and Gozo were inland, and
their fate would depend upon that of the defenses of the harbor. To defend all this, the Grand
Master could only number 700 knights and 8,500 soldiers. He sent to summon home all those of
the Order who were dispersed in the different commanderies in France, Spain, and Germany, and
entreated aid from the Spanish king, Philip II., who wished to be considered as the prime champion
of Roman Catholic Christendom, and who alone had the power of assisting him. The Duke of Alva,
viceroy for Philip in Sicily, made answer that he would endeavor to relieve the Order, if they
could hold out Fort St. Elmo till the fleet could be got together; but that if this castle
were once lost, it would be impossible to bring them aid, and they must be left to their fate.

The Grand Master divided the various posts to the knights according to their countries. The
Spaniards under the Commander De Guerras, Bailiff of Negropont, had the Castle of St. Elmo;
the French had Port de la Sangle; the Germans, and the few English knights whom the Reformation
had left, were charged with the defense of the Port of the Borgo, which served as headquarters,
and the Commander Copier, with a body of troops, was to remain outside the town and watch and
harass the enemy.

On the 18th of May, 1565, the Turkish fleet came in sight. It consisted of 159 ships, rowed
by Christian slaves between the decks, and carrying 30,000 Janissaries and Spahis, the terrible
warriors to whom the Turks owed most of their victories, and after them came, spreading for
miles over the blue waters, a multitude of ships of burthen bringing the horses of the Spahis,
and such heavy battering cannon as rendered the dangers of a siege infinitely greater than
in former days. These Janissaries were a strange, distorted resemblance of the knights themselves,
for they were bound in a strict brotherhood of arms, and were not married, so as to care for
nothing but each other, the Sultan, and the honor of their troop. They were not dull, apathetic
Turks, but chiefly natives of Circassia and Georgia, the land where the human race is most
beautiful and nobly formed. They were stolen from their homes, or, too often, sold by their
parents when too young to remember their Christian baptism, and were bred up as Mahometans,
with no home but their corps, no kindred but their fellow soldiers. Their title, given by the
Sultan who first enrolled them, meant New Soldiers, their ensign was a camp kettle, as that
of their Pashas was one, two, or three horses' tails, in honor of the old Kurdish chief, the
founder of the Turkish empire; but there was no homeliness in their appointments, their weapons--scimitars,
pistols, and carabines--were crusted with gold and jewels; their head-dress, though made in
imitation of a sleeve, was gorgeous, and their garments were of the richest wool and silk,
dyed with the deep, exquisite colours of the East. Her notion that form and disposition (or
content) must correspond in order to give aesthetic pleasure suggests, though the terms are different,
certain of Coleridge's basic ideas.

One other point might be stressed: Miss Reynolds takes an extreme moralistic position toward the
arts. Again and again it is insisted that taste and beauty are moral attributes, not purely
aesthetic concepts. Chapter II ends with the ringing statement: "Of this I am certain, that
true refinement is the effect of true virtue; that virtue is truth, and good; and that beauty
dwells in them, and they in her." And the next chapter begins: "Taste seems to be an inherent
impulsive tendency of the soul towards true good."

Indeed, it could not hold above 300 men, but these were some of the bravest of the knights,
and as it was only attacked on the land side, they were able to put off boats at night and
communicate with the Grand Master and their brethren in the Borgo. The Turks set up their batteries,
and fired their enormous cannon shot upon the fortifications. One of their terrible pieces
of ordnance carried stone balls of 160 lb., and no wonder that stone and mortar gave way before
it, and that a breach was opened in a few days' time. That night, when, as usual, boatloads
of wounded men were transported across to the Borgo, the Bailiff of Negropont sent the knight
La Cerda to the Grand Master to give an account of the state of things and ask for help. La
Cerda spoke strongly, and, before a great number of knights, declared that there was no chance
of so weak a place holding out for more than a week.

'What has been lost,' said the Grand Master, 'since you cry out for help?'

'Sir,' replied La Cerda, 'the castle may be regarded as a patient in extremity and devoid of
strength, who can only be sustained by continual remedies and constant succor.'

'I will be doctor myself,' replied the Grand Master, 'and will bring others with me who, if
they cannot cure you of fear, will at least be brave enough to prevent the infidels from seizing
the fort.'

The fact was, as he well knew, that the little fort could not hold out long, and he grieved
over the fate of his knights; but time was everything, and the fate of the whole isle depended
upon the white cross being still on that point of land when the tardy Sicilian fleet should
set sail. He was one who would ask no one to run into perils that he would not share, and he
was bent on throwing himself into St. Elmo, and being rather buried under the ruins than to
leave the Mussulmans free a moment sooner than could be helped to attack the Borgo and Castle
of St. Angelo. But the whole Chapter of Knights entreated him to abstain, and so many volunteered
for this desperate service, that the only difficulty was to choose among them. Indeed, La Cerda
had done the garrison injustice; no one's heart was failing but his own; and the next day there
was a respite, for a cannon shot from St. Angelo falling into the enemy's camp, shattered a
stone, a splinter of which struck down the Piali Pasha. He was thought dead, and the camp and
fleet were in confusion, which enabled the Grand Master to send off his nephew, the Chevalier
de la Valette Cornusson, to Messina to entreat the Viceroy of Sicily to hasten to their relief;
to give him a chart of the entrance of the harbour, and a list of signals, and to desire in
especial that two ships belonging to the Order, and filled with the knights who had hurried
from distant lands too late for the beginning of the siege, might come to him at once. To this
the Viceroy returned a promise that at latest the fleet should sail on the 15th of June, adding
an exhortation to him at all sacrifices to maintain St. Elmo. This reply the Grand Master transmitted
to the garrison, and it nerved them to fight even with more patience and self-sacrifice. A
desperate sally was led by the Chevalier de Medran, who fought his way into the trenches where
the Turkish cannon were planted, and at first drove all before him; but the Janissaries rallied
and forced back the Christians out of the trenches. Unfortunately there was a high wind, which
drove the smoke of the artillery down on the counter-scarp (the slope of masonry facing the
rampart), and while it was thus hidden from the Christians, the Turks succeeded in effecting
a lodgment there, fortifying themselves with trees and sacks of earth and wool. When the smoke
cleared off, the knights were dismayed to see the horse-tail ensigns of the Janissaries so
near them, and cannon already prepared to batter the ravelin, or outwork protecting the gateway.

La Cerda proposed to blow this fortification up, and abandon it, but no other knight would
hear of deserting an inch of wall while it could yet be held.

But again the sea was specked with white sails from the south-east. Six galleys came from Egypt,
bearing 900 troops--Mameluke horsemen, troops recruited much like the Janissaries and quite
as formidable. These ships were commanded by Ulucciali, an Italian, who had denied his faith
and become a Mahometan, and was thus regarded with especial horror by the chivalry of Malta.
And the swarm thickened for a few days more; like white-winged and beautiful but venomous insects
hovering round their prey, the graceful Moorish galleys and galliots came up from the south,
bearing 600 dark-visaged, white-turbaned, lithe-limbed Moors from Tripoli, under Dragut himself.
The thunders of all the guns roaring forth their salute of honor told the garrison that the
most formidable enemy of all had arrived. And now their little white rock was closed in on
every side, with nothing but its own firmness to be its aid.

Dragut did not approve of having begun with attacking Fort St. Elmo; he thought that the inland
towns should have been first taken, and Mustafa offered to discontinue the attack, but this
the Corsair said could not now be done with honor, and under him the attack went on more furiously
than ever. The one does not enough for nature, the other too much. But, as the former has an object
before him, to which nature herself directs him, the other is receding from it; and, as it
is more agreeable, more easy, and more natural, to the human mind, to learn than to unlearn,
I should sooner expect the most uncultivated nation, the negro excepted, to arrive at taste
in true beauty than them. The negro-race seems to be the farthest removed from the line of
true cultivation of any of the human species; their defect of form and complexion being, I
imagine, as strong an obstacle to their acquiring true taste (the produce of mental cultivation)
as any natural defect they may have in their intellectual faculties. For if, as I have observed,
the total want of cultivation would preclude external beauty, the total want of external beauty
would preclude the power of cultivation. It appears to me inconceivable, that the negro-race supposing
their mental powers were upon a level with other nations, could ever arrive at true taste,
when their eye is accustomed only to objects so diametrically opposite to taste as the face
and form of negroes are! Our being used or not used to the object cannot make us perceive any similarity
in the lineaments of their countenance to the lineaments, if I may so say, of our refined virtues
and affections, which alone constitute beauty; and therefore I am induced to believe that they
are a lower order of human beings than the Europeans.

Beauty is an assemblage of every human charm; yet what we call the
agreeable is often more captivating.

The agreeable, in person, is composed of beauties and defects, as
is the common form, but differently composed.

The beauties and defects of the latter are blended into the idea of mediocrity; those of the
former are always distinct and perceptible, contrasting each other, they engage the attention,
and create a kind of pleasing re-creation to the mental faculties; and, in proportion as we
can bring them to unite with our governing principles of pleasure, they create affection, which
gives the person a more fascinating charm than beauty itself.

It is the mental character that is the moving principle of affection; and any strong peculiarity,
that contradicts not the moral sense, i.e. that is not unnatural, gives the object an accessary
charm, and raises the affection to passion. The object is at once the common and the uncommon;
an union, which constitutes all we call excellent, all we admire!

The perception of the charms of the agreeable seem to be wrought up to excellence by the operation
of our own powers. We ourselves have blended its beauties and defects into the sentiment of beauty,
pleasure; and hence, probably, the strength and durability of the
passion which it creates.

Beauty, on the contrary, is composed to our hands, full, perfect, and intire; its idea is also a
compound of the common and the uncommon, being at once like and unlike the general form; but
inherently it has no contrast, and therefore affords no recreation,
no pleasing exercise, to the mental faculties; there is nothing to
re-create, nothing to wish; and hence the instability of the passion
which it inspires. Perfect beauty is, like perfect happiness, lost
as soon as it is attained.

It is, I imagine, to the principles of
the masculine and the feminine character, that we owe the perception
of beauty or taste, in any object whatever, throughout all nature
and all art that imitates nature; and, in objects which differ from
the human form, the principles must be in the extreme, because the
object is then merely symbolical. It is believed
that Philip II. thought that the Turks would exhaust themselves against the Order, and forbade
his Viceroy to hazard his fleet; but at last he was shamed into permitting the armament to
be fitted out. Two hundred knights of St. John were waiting at Messina, in despair at being
unable to reach their brethren in their deadly strait, and constantly haunting the Viceroy's
palace, till he grew impatient, and declared they did not treat him respectfully enough, nor
call him 'Excellency'.

'Senor,' said one of them, 'if you will only bring us in time to save the Order, I will call
you anything you please, excellency, highness, or majesty itself.'

At last, on the 1st of September, the fleet really set sail, but it hovered cautiously about
on the farther side of the island, and only landed 6,000 men and then returned to Sicily. However,
the tidings of its approach had spread such a panic among the Turkish soldiers, who were worn
out and exhausted by their exertions, that they hastily raised the siege, abandoned their heavy
artillery, and, removing their garrison from Fort St. Elmo, re-embarked in haste and confusion.
No sooner, however, was the Pasha in his ship than he became ashamed of his precipitation,
more especially when he learnt that the relief that had put 16,000 men to flight consisted
only of 6,000, and he resolved to land and give battle; but his troops were angry and unwilling,
and were actually driven out of their ships by blows.

In the meantime, the Grand Master had again placed a garrison in St. Elmo, which the Turks
had repaired and restored, and once more the cross of St. John waved on the end of its tongue
of land, to greet the Spanish allies. A battle was fought with the newly arrived troops, in
which the Turks were defeated; they again took to their ships, and the Viceroy of Sicily, from
Syracuse, beheld their fleet in full sail for the East.

Meantime, the gates of the Borgo were thrown open to receive the brethren and friends who had
been so long held back from coming to the relief of the home of the Order. Four months' siege,
by the heaviest artillery in Europe, had shattered the walls and destroyed the streets, till,
to the eyes of the newcomers, the town looked like a place taken by assault, and sacked by
the enemy; and of the whole garrison, knights, soldiers, and sailors altogether, only six hundred
were left able to bear arms, and they for the most part covered with wounds. The Grand Master
and his surviving knights could hardly be recognized, so pale and altered were they by wounds
and excessive fatigue; their hair, beards, dress, and armor showing that for four full months
they had hardly undressed, or lain down unarmed. The newcomers could not restrain their tears,
but all together proceeded to the church to return thanks for the conclusion of their perils
and afflictions. Rejoicings extended all over Europe, above all in Italy, Spain, and southern
France, where the Order of St. John was the sole protection against the descents of the Barbary
corsairs. The Pope sent La Valette a cardinal's hat, but he would not accept it, as unsuited
to his office; Philip II. presented him with a jeweled sword and dagger. Some thousand unadorned
swords a few months sooner would have been a better testimony to his constancy, and that of
the brave men whose lives Spain had wasted by her cruel delays.

The Borgo was thenceforth called Citta Vittoriosa; but La Valette decided on building the chief
town of the isle on the Peninsula of Fort St. Elmo, and in this work he spent his latter days,
till he was killed by a sunstroke, while superintending the new works of the city which is
deservedly known by his name, as Valetta.

The Order of St. John lost much of its character, and was finally swept from Malta in the general
confusion of the Revolutionary wars. The British crosses now float in the harbour of Malta;
but the steep white rocks must ever bear the memory of the self-devoted endurance of the beleaguered
knights, and, foremost of all, of those who perished in St. Elmo, in order that the signal
banner might to the very last summon the tardy Viceroy to their aid.

THE VOLUNTARY CONVICT

1622

In the early summer of the year 1605, a coasting vessel was sailing along the beautiful Gulf
of Lyons, the wind blowing gently in the sails, the blue Mediterranean lying glittering to
the south, and the curved line of the French shore rising in purple and green tints, dotted
with white towns and villages. Suddenly three light, white-sailed ships appeared in the offing,
and the captain's practiced eye detected that the wings that bore them were those of a bird
of prey. He knew them for African brigantines, and though he made all sail, it was impossible
to run into a French port, as on, on they came, not entirely depending on the wind, but, like
steamers, impelled by unseen powers within them. Alas! that power was not the force of innocent
steam, but the arms of Christian rowers chained to the oar. Sure as the pounce of a hawk upon
a partridge was the swoop of the corsairs upon the French vessel. A signal to surrender followed,
but the captain boldly refused, and armed his crew, bidding them stand to their guns. But the
fight was too unequal, the brave little ship was disabled, the pirates boarded her, and, after
a sharp fight on deck, three of the crew lay dead, all the rest were wounded, and the vessel
was the prize of the pirates. The captain was at once killed, in revenge for his resistance,
and all the rest of the crew and passengers were put in chains. Among these passengers was
a young priest named Vincent de Paul, the son of a farmer in Languedoc, who had used his utmost
endeavors to educate his son for the ministry, even selling the oxen from the plough to provide
for the college expenses. A small legacy had just fallen to the young man, from a relation
who had died at Marseilles; he had been thither to receive it, and had been persuaded by a
friend to return home by sea. And this was the result of the pleasant voyage. The legacy was
the prey of the pirates, and Vincent, severely wounded by an arrow, and heavily chained, lay
half- stifled in a corner of the hold of the ship, a captive probably for life to the enemies
of the faith. It was true that France had scandalized Europe by making peace with the Dey of
Tunis, but this was a trifle to the corsairs; and when, after seven days' further cruising,
they put into the harbour of Tunis, they drew up an account of their capture, calling it a
Spanish vessel, to prevent the French Consul from claiming the prisoners.

The captives had the coarse blue and white garments of slaves given them, and were walked five
or six times through the narrow streets and bazaars of Tunis, by way of exhibition. They were
then brought back to their ship, and the purchasers came thither to bargain for them. They
were examined at their meals, to see if they had good appetites; their sides were felt like
those of oxen; their teeth looked at like those of horses; their wounds were searched, and
they were made to run and walk to show the play of their limbs. All this Vincent endured with
patient submission, constantly supported by the thought of Him who took upon Him the form of
a servant for our sakes; and he did his best, ill as he was, to give his companions the same
confidence.

Weak and unwell, Vincent was sold cheap to a fisherman; but in his new service it soon became
apparent that the sea made him so ill as to be of no use, so he was sold again to one of the
Moorish physicians, the like of whom may still be seen, smoking their pipes sleepily, under
their white turbans, cross-legged, among the drugs in their shop windows--- these being small
open spaces beneath the beautiful stone lacework of the Moorish lattices. The physician was
a great chemist and distiller, and for four years had been seeking the philosopher's stone,
which was supposed to be the secret of making gold. He found his slave's learning and intelligence
so useful that he grew very fond of him, and tried hard to persuade him to turn Mahometan,
offering him not only liberty, but the inheritance of all his wealth, and the secrets that
he had discovered.

The Christian priest felt the temptation sufficiently to be always grateful for the grace that
had carried him through it. At the end of a year, the old doctor died, and his nephew sold
Vincent again. His next master was a native of Nice, who had not held out against the temptation
to renounce his faith in order to avoid a life of slavery, but had become a renegade, and had
the charge of one of the farms of the Dey of Tunis. The farm was on a hillside in an extremely
hot and exposed region, and Vincent suffered much from being there set to field labour, but
he endured all without a murmur. His master had three wives, and one of them, who was of Turkish
birth,, used often to come out and talk to him, asking him many questions about his religion.
Sometimes she asked him to sing, and he would then chant the psalm of the captive Jews: 'By
the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept;' and others of the 'songs' of his Zion. The woman
at last told her husband that he must have been wrong in forsaking a religion of which her
slave had told her such wonderful things. Her words had such an effect on the renegade that
he sought the slave, and in conversation with him soon came to a full sense of his own miserable
position as an apostate. A change of religion on the part of a Mahometan is, however, always
visited with death, both to the convert and his instructor. An Algerine, who was discovered
to have become a Christian, was about this time said to have been walled up at once in the
fortifications he had been building; and the story has been confirmed by the recent discovery,
by the French engineers, of the remains of a man within a huge block of clay, that had taken
a perfect cast of his Moorish features, and of the surface of his garments, and even had his
black hair adhering to it. Vincent's master, terrified at such perils, resolved to make his
escape in secret with his slave. It is disappointing to hear nothing of the wife; and not to
know whether she would not or could not accompany them. All we know is, that master and slave
trusted themselves alone to a small bark, and, safely crossing the Mediterranean, landed at
Aigues Mortes, on the 28th of June, 1607; and that the renegade at once abjured his false faith,
and soon after entered a brotherhood at Rome, whose office it was to wait on the sick in hospitals.

This part of Vincent de Paul's life has been told at length because it shows from what the
Knights of St. John strove to protect the inhabitants of the coasts. We next find Vincent visiting
at a hospital at Paris, where he gave such exceeding comfort to the patients that all with
one voice declared him a messenger from heaven.

He afterwards became a tutor in the family of the Count de Joigni, a very excellent man, who
was easily led by him to many good works. M. de Joigni was inspector general of the 'Galeres',
or Hulks, the ships in the chief harbors of France, such as Brest and Marseilles, where the
convicts, closely chained, were kept to hard labour, and often made to toil at the oar, like
the slaves of the Africans. Going the round of these prison ships, the horrible state of the
convicts, their half-naked misery, and still more their fiendish ferocity went to the heart
of the Count and of the Abbé de Paul; and, with full authority from the inspector, the tutor
worked among these wretched beings with such good effect that on his doings being represented
to the King, Louis XIII., he was made almoner general to the galleys.

While visiting those at Marseilles, he was much struck by the broken- down looks and exceeding
sorrowfulness of one of the convicts. He entered into conversation with him, and, after many
kind words, persuaded him to tell his troubles. His sorrow was far less for his own condition
than for the misery to which his absence must needs reduce his wife and children. And what
was Vincent's reply to this? His action was so striking that, though in itself it could hardly
be safe to propose it as an example, it must be mentioned as the very height of self- sacrifice.

He absolutely changed places with the convict. Probably some arrangement was made with the
immediate jailor of the gang, who, by the exchange of the priest for the convict, could make
up his full tale of men to show when his numbers were counted. At any rate the prisoner went
free, and returned to his home, whilst Vincent wore a convict's chain, did a convict's work,
lived on convict's fare, and, what was worse, had only convict society. He was soon sought
out and released, but the hurts he had received from the pressure of the chain lasted all his
life. He never spoke of the event; it was kept a strict secret; and once when he had referred
to it in a letter to a friend, he became so much afraid that the story would become known that
he sent to ask for the letter back again. It was, however, not returned, and it makes the fact
certain. It would be a dangerous precedent if prison chaplains were to change places with their
charges; and, beautiful as was Vincent's spirit, the act can hardly be justified; but it should
also be remembered that among the galleys of France there were then many who had been condemned
for resistance to the arbitrary will of Cardinal de Richelieu, men not necessarily corrupt
and degraded like the thieves and murderers with whom they were associated. At any rate, M.
de Joigni did not displace the almoner, and Vincent worked on the consciences of the convicts
with infinitely more force for having been for a time one of themselves. Many and many were
won back to penitence, a hospital was founded for them, better regulations established, and,
for a time, both prisons and galleys were wonderfully improved, although only for the life-time
of the good inspector and the saintly almoner. But who shall say how many souls were saved
in those years by these men who did what they could?

The rest of the life of Vincent de Paul would be too lengthy to tell here, though acts of beneficence
and self-devotion shine out in glory at each step. The work by which he is chiefly remembered
is his establishment of the Order of Sisters of Charity, the excellent women who have for two
hundred years been the prime workers in every charitable task in France, nursing the sick,
teaching the young, tending deserted children, ever to be found where there is distress or pain.

But of these, and of his charities, we will not here speak, nor even of his influence for good
on the King and Queen themselves. The whole tenor of his life was 'golden' in one sense, and
if we told all his golden deeds they would fill an entire book. So we will only wait to tell
how he showed his remembrance of what he had gone through in his African captivity. The redemption
of the prisoners there might have seemed his first thought, but that he did so much in other
quarters. At different times, with the alms that he collected, and out of the revenues of his
benefices, he ransomed no less then twelve hundred slaves from their captivity. At one time
the French Consul at Tunis wrote to him that for a certain sum a large number might be set
free, and he raised enough to release not only these, but seventy more, and he further wrought
upon the King to obtain the consent of the Dey of Tunis that a party of Christian clergy should
be permitted to reside in the consul's house, and to minister to the souls and bodies of the
Christian slaves, of whom there were six thousand in Tunis alone, besides those in Algiers,
Tangier, and Tripoli!

Permission was gained, and a mission of Lazarist brothers arrived. This, too, was an order
founded by Vincent, consisting of priestly nurses like the Hospitaliers, though not like them
warriors. They came in the midst of a dreadful visitation of the plague, and nursed and tended
the sick, both Christians and Mahometans, with fearless devotion, day and night, till they
won the honor and love of the Moors themselves.

The good Vincent de Paul died in the year 1660, but his brothers of St. Lazarus, and sisters
of charity still tread in the paths he marked out for them, and his name scarcely needs the
saintly epithet that his church as affixed to it to stand among the most honorable of charitable
men.

The cruel deeds of the African pirates were never wholly checked till 1816, when the united
fleets of England and France destroyed the old den of corsairs at Algiers, which has since
become a French colony.

THE HOUSEWIVES OF LOWENBURG

1631

Brave deeds have been done by the burgher dames of some of the German cities collectively.
Without being of the first class of Golden Deeds, there is something in the exploit of the
dames of Weinsberg so quaint and so touching, that it cannot be omitted here.

It was in the first commencement of the long contest known as the strife between the Guelfs
and Ghibellines--before even these had become the party words for the Pope's and the Emperor's
friends, and when they only applied to the troops of Bavaria and of Swabia--that, in 1141,
Wolf, Duke of Bavaria, was besieged in his castle of Weinberg by Friedrich, Duke of Swabia,
brother to the reigning emperor, Konrad III.

The siege lasted long, but Wolf was obliged at last to offer to surrender; and the Emperor
granted him permission to depart in safety. Finally, the rules of art are perceptions of moral
virtue, yet art which exhibits these rules can corrupt.

It is easy to pick flaws in Miss Reynolds' thinking, for the lack of sustained logic which
Johnson early recognized is apparent at every turn.

This was freely granted, and presently the castle gates opened. From beneath them came the
ladies--but in strange guise. No gold nor jewels were carried by them, but each one was bending
under the weight of her husband, whom she thus hoped to secure from the vengeance of the Ghibellines.
Konrad, who was really a generous and merciful man, is said to have been affected to tears
by this extraordinary performance; he hastened to assure the ladies of the perfect safety of
their lords, and that the gentlemen might dismount at once, secure both of life and freedom.
He invited them all to a banquet, and made peace with the Duke of Bavaria on terms much more
favorable to the Guelfs than the rest of his party had been willing to allow. The castle mount
was thenceforth called no longer the Vine Hill, but the Hill of Weibertreue, or woman's fidelity.
We will not invidiously translate it woman's truth, for there was in the transaction something
of a subterfuge; and it must be owned that the ladies tried to the utmost the knightly respect
for womankind.

The good women of Lowenburg, who were but citizens' wives, seem to us more worthy of admiration
for constancy to their faith, shown at a time when they had little to aid them. It was such
constancy as makes martyrs; and though the trial stopped short of this, there is something
in the homeliness of the whole scene, and the feminine form of passive resistance, that makes
us so much honor and admire the good women that we cannot refrain from telling the story.

It was in the year 1631, in the midst of the long Thirty Years' Was between Roman Catholics
and Protestants, which finally decided that each state should have its own religion, Lowenburg,
a city of Silesia, originally Protestant, had passed into the hands of the Emperor's Roman
Catholic party. It was a fine old German city, standing amid woods and meadows, fortified with
strong walls surrounded by a moat, and with gate towers to protect the entrance.

In the centre was a large market-place, called the Ring, into which looked the Council-house
and fourteen inns, or places of traffic, for the cloth that was woven in no less than 300 factories.
The houses were of stone, with gradually projecting stories to the number of four or five,
surmounted with pointed gables. Although some of the ideas are similar, the wording and specific
details are different. By no stretch of the imagination could they be considered to come from
the same piece. Thus Northcote blocked the solution of the mystery for nearly fifteen years.
 It seems they slept in the room
below, though they had upstairs a handsome wainscoted apartment.

