What was the philosophy congenial to Conservatism? There is, of course, the simple answer,
None. Toryism was a 'reaction' due to the great struggle of the war and the excesses of the
revolution. A 'reaction' is a very convenient phrase. We are like our fathers; then the resemblance
is only natural. We differ; then the phrase 'reaction' makes the alteration explain itself.
No doubt, however, there was in some sense a reaction. Many people changed their minds as the
revolutionary movement failed to fulfil their hopes. I need not argue now that such men were
not necessarily corrupt renegades. I can only try to indicate the process by which they were
led towards certain philosophical doctrines. Scott, Wordsworth, and Coleridge represent it
enough for my purpose. When Mill was reproaching Englishmen for their want of interest in history,
he pointed out that Thierry, 'the earliest of the three great French historians' (Guizot and
Michelet are the two others), ascribed his interest in his subject to Ivanhoe.[631] Englishmen
read Ivanhoe simply for amusement. Frenchmen could see that it threw a light upon history,
or at least suggested a great historical problem. Scott, it is often said, was the first person
to teach us that our ancestors were once as much alive as ourselves. Scott, indeed, the one
English writer whose fame upon the Continent could be compared to Byron's, had clearly no interest
in, or capacity for, abstract speculations. An imaginative power, just falling short of the
higher poetical gift, and a masculine common-sense were his most conspicuous faculties. The
two qualities were occasionally at issue; his judgment struggled with his prejudices, and he
sympathised too keenly with the active leaders and concrete causes to care much for any abstract
theory. Yet his influence upon thought, though indirect, was remarkable. The vividness of his
historical painting--inaccurate, no doubt, and delightfully reckless of dates and facts--stimulated
the growing interest in historical inquiries even in England. His influence in one direction
is recognised by Newman, who was perhaps thinking chiefly of his mediævalism.[632] But the
historical novels are only one side of Scott. Patriotic to the core, he lived at a time when
patriotic feeling was stimulated to the utmost, and when Scotland in particular was still a
province, and yet in many ways the most vigorous and progressive part of a great empire. He
represents patriotism stimulated by contact with cosmopolitan movements. Loving every local
peculiarity, painting every class from the noble to the peasant, loving the old traditions,
and yet sharing the great impulses of the day, Scott was able to interest the world at large.
While the most faithful portrayer of the special national type, he has too much sense not to
be well aware that picturesque cattle-stealers and Jacobite chiefs were things of the past;
but he loves with his whole heart the institutions rooted in the past and rich in historical
associations. He transferred to poetry and fiction the political doctrine of Burke. To him,
the revolutionary movement was simply a solvent, corroding all the old ties because it sapped
the old traditions, and tended to substitute a mob for a nation. The continuity of national
life seemed to him the essential condition; and a nation was not a mere aggregate of separate
individuals, but an ancient organism, developing on an orderly system--where every man had
his rightful place, and the beggar, as he observes in the Antiquary, was as ready as the noble
to rise against foreign invasion. To him, the kings or priests who, to the revolutionist, represented
simple despotism, represented part of a rough but manly order, in which many virtues were conspicuous
and the governing classes were discharging great functions. Though he did not use the phrase,
the revolutionary or radical view was hateful to him on account of its 'individualism.' It
meant the summary destruction of all that he cherished most warmly in order to carry out theories
altogether revolting to his common-sense. The very roots of a sound social order depend upon
the traditions and accepted beliefs which bind together clans or families, and assign to every
man a satisfactory function in life. The vivid realisation of history goes naturally with a
love--excessive or reasonable--of the old order; and Scott, though writing carelessly to amuse
idle readers, was stimulating the historical conceptions, which, for whatever reason, were
most uncongenial to the Utilitarian as to all the revolutionists.

The more conscious philosophical application is illustrated by Wordsworth and Coleridge. Both
of them had shared the truly revolutionary enthusiasm, and both came in time to be classed
with the Tories. Both, as will be seen, had a marked influence upon J. S. Mill. Wordsworth
has written in the Prelude one of the most remarkable of intellectual autobiographies. He was
to be, though he never quite succeeded in being, a great philosophical poet. He never succeeded,
because, in truth, he was not a great philosopher. But no one has more clearly indicated the
history of his mental evolution. His sympathy with the revolution was perfectly genuine, but
involved a vast misconception. A sturdy, independent youth, thoroughly imbued with the instincts
of his northern dalesmen, he had early leaned to a republican sentiment. His dislike of the
effete conventionalism of the literary creed blended with his aversion to the political rule
of the time. He caught the contagion of revolutionary enthusiasm in France, and was converted
by the sight of the 'hunger-bitten' peasant girl--the victim of aristocratic oppression. 'It
is against that,' said his friend, 'that we are fighting,' and so far Wordsworth was a convert.
The revolution, therefore, meant to him the restoration of an idyllic state, in which the homely
virtues of the independent peasant should no longer be crushed and deprived of reward by the
instruments of selfish despotism. The outbreak of war put his principles at issue with his
patriotism. He suffered keenly when called upon to triumph over the calamities of his countrymen.
But gradually he came to think that his sympathies were misplaced. The revolution had not altered
human nature. The atrocities disturbed him, but for a time he could regard them as a mere accident.
As the war went on, he began to perceive that the new power could be as tyrannical and selfish
as the old. Instead of reconstructing a simple social ideal, it was forming a military despotism.
When the French armies put down the simple Swiss peasantry, to whom he had been drawn by his
home-bred sympathies, he finally gave up the revolutionary cause. He had gone through a mental
agony, and his distracted sympathies ultimately determined a change which corresponded to the
adoption of a new philosophy. Wordsworth, indeed, had little taste for abstract logic. He had
imbibed Godwin's doctrine, but when acceptance of Godwin's conclusions involved a conflict
with his strongest affections--the sacrifice not only of his patriotism but of the sympathies
which bound him to his fellows--he revolted. Godwin represents the extreme of 'individualism,'
the absolute dissolution of all social and political bonds. Wordsworth escaped, not by discovering
a logical defect in the argument, but by yielding to the protest of his emotions. The system,
he thought, was fatal to all the affections which had made life dear to him; to the vague 'intimations'
which, whatever else they might be, had yet power to give harmony to our existence.

By degrees he adopted a new diagnosis of the great political evils. On one side, he sympathised
with Scott's sense of the fatal effects upon the whole social organism. Among his noblest poems
are the 'Brothers' and 'Michael,' to which he specially called the attention of Fox. They were
intended, he explained, to show the surpassing value of the domestic affections conspicuous
among the shepherds and 'statesmen' of the northern dales. He had now come to hold that the
principles of Godwin and his like were destructive to the most important elements of human
welfare. The revolutionists were not simply breaking the fetters of the simple peasant, but
destroying the most sacred ties to which the peasant owed whatever dignity or happiness he
possessed. Revolution, in short, meant anarchy. It meant, therefore, the destruction of all
that gives real value to life. It was, as he held, one product of the worship of the 'idol
proudly named the "wealth of nations,"'[633] selfishness and greed replacing the old motives
to 'plain living and high thinking.' Wordsworth, in short, saw the ugly side of the industrial
revolution, the injury done to domestic life by the factory system, or the substitution of
a proletariate for a peasantry, and the replacement of the lowest social order by a vast inorganic
mob. The contemporary process, which was leading to pauperism and to the evils of the factory
system, profoundly affected Wordsworth, as well as the impulsive Southey; and their frequent
denunciations gave colour to the imputations that they were opposed to all progress. Certainly
they were even morbidly alive to the evil aspects of the political economy of Malthus and Ricardo,
which to them seemed to prescribe insensibility and indifference to most serious and rapidly
accumulating evils.

Meanwhile, Wordsworth was also impressed by the underlying philosophical difficulties. The
effect of the revolutionary principles was to destroy the religious sentiment, not simply by
disproving this or that historical statement, but by making the whole world prosaic and matter-of-fact.
His occasional outbursts against the man of science--the 'fingering slave' who would 'peep
and botanise upon his mother's grave'--are one version of his feeling. The whole scientific
method tended to materialism and atomism; to a breaking up of the world into disconnected atoms,
and losing the life in dissecting the machinery. His protest is embodied in the pantheism of
the noble lines on Tintern Abbey, and his method of answering might be divined from the ode
on the 'Intimations of Immortality.' Somehow or other the world represents a spiritual and
rational unity, not a mere chaos of disconnected atoms and fragments. We 'see into the heart
of things' when we trust to our emotions and hold by the instincts, clearly manifested in childhood,
but clouded and overwhelmed in our later struggles with the world. The essential thing is the
cultivation of our 'moral being,' the careful preservation and assimilation of the stern sense
of duty, which alone makes life bearable and gives a meaning to the universe.

Wordsworth, it is plain, was at the very opposite pole from the Utilitarians. He came to consider
that their whole method meant the dissolution of all that was most vitally sacred, and to hold
that the revolution had attracted his sympathies on false pretences. Yet it is obvious that,
however great the stimulus which he exerted, and however lofty his highest flights of poetry,
he had no distinct theory to offer. His doctrine undoubtedly was congenial to certain philosophical
views, but was not itself an articulate philosophy. He appeals to instincts and emotions, not
to any definite theory. In a remarkable letter, Coleridge told Wordsworth why he was disappointed
with the Excursion.[634] He had hoped that it would be the 'first and only true philosophical
poem in existence.' Wordsworth was to have started by exposing the 'sandy sophisms of Locke,'
and after exploding Pope's Essay on Man, and showing the vanity of (Erasmus) Darwin's belief
in an 'ourang-outang state,' and explaining the fall of man and the 'scheme of redemption,'
to have concluded by 'a grand didactic swell on the identity of a true philosophy with true
religion.' He would show how life and intelligence were to be substituted for the 'philosophy
of mechanism.' Facts would be elevated into theory, theory into laws, and laws into living
and intelligent powers--true idealism necessarily perfecting itself in realism, and realism
refining itself into idealism.'

The programme was a large one. If it represents what Coleridge seriously expected from Wordsworth,
it also suggests that he was unconsciously wandering into an exposition of one of the gigantic
but constantly shifting schemes of a comprehensive philosophy, which he was always proposing
to execute. To try to speak of Coleridge adequately would be hopeless and out of place. I must
briefly mention him, because he was undoubtedly the most conspicuous representative of the
tendencies opposed to Utilitarianism. The young men who found Bentham exasperating imbibed
draughts of mingled poetry and philosophy from Coleridge's monologues at Hampstead. Carlyle
has told us, in a famous chapter of his Life of Sterling, what they went out to see: at once
a reed shaken by the wind and a great expounder of transcendental truth. The fact that Coleridge
exerted a very great influence is undeniable. To define precisely what that influence was is
impossible. His writings are a heap of fragments. He contemplated innumerable schemes for great
works, and never got within measurable distance of writing any. He poured himself out indefinitely
upon the margins of other men's books; and the piety of disciples has collected a mass of these
scattered and incoherent jottings, which announce conclusions without giving the premises,
or suggest difficulties without attempting to solve them. He seems to have been almost as industrious
as Bentham in writing; but whereas Bentham's fragments could be put together as wholes, Coleridge's
are essentially distracted hints of views never really elaborated. He was always thinking,
but seems always to be making a fresh start at any point that strikes him for the moment. Besides
all this, there is the painful question of plagiarism. His most coherent exposition (in the
Biographia Literaria) is simply appropriated from Schelling, though he ascribes the identity
to a 'genial coincidence' of thought. I need make no attempt to make out what Coleridge really
thought for himself, and then to try to put his thoughts together,--and indeed hold the attempt
to be impossible. The most remarkable thing is the apparent disproportion between Coleridge's
definite services to philosophy and the effect which he certainly produced upon some of his
ablest contemporaries. That seems to prove that he was really aiming at some important aspect
of truth, incapable as he may have been of definitively reaching it. I can only try to give
a hint or two as to its general nature. Coleridge, in the first place, was essentially a poet,
and, moreover, his poetry was of the type most completely divorced from philosophy. Nobody
could say more emphatically that poetry should not be rhymed logic; and his most impressive
poems are simply waking dreams. They are spontaneous incarnations of sensuous imagery, which
has no need of morals or definite logical schemes. Although he expected Wordsworth to transmute
philosophy into poetry, he admitted that the achievement would be unprecedented. Even in Lucretius,
he said, what was poetry was not philosophy, and what was philosophy was not poetry. Yet Coleridge's
philosophy was essentially the philosophy of a poet. He had, indeed, great dialectical ingenuity--a
faculty which may certainly be allied with the highest imagination, though it may involve certain
temptations. A poet who has also a mastery of dialectics becomes a mystic in philosophy. Coleridge
had, it seems, been attracted by Plotinus in his schooldays. At a later period he had been
attracted by Hartley, Berkeley, and Priestley. To a brilliant youth, anxious to be in the van
of intellectual progress, they represented the most advanced theories. But there could never
be a full sympathy between Coleridge and the forefathers of English empiricism; and he went
to Germany partly to study the new philosophy which was beginning to shine--though very feebly
and intermittingly--in England. When he had returned he began to read Kant and Schelling, or
rather to mix excursions into their books with the miscellaneous inquiries to which his versatile
intellect attracted him.

Now, it is abundantly clear that Coleridge never studied any philosophy systematically. He
never acquired a precise acquaintance with the technical language of various schemes, or cared
for their precise logical relations to each other. The 'genial coincidence' with Schelling,
though an unlucky phrase, represents a real fact. He dipped into Plotinus or Behmen or Kant
or Schelling, or any one who interested him, and did not know whether they were simply embodying
ideas already in his own mind, or suggesting new ideas; or, what was probably more accurate,
expressing opinions which, in a general way, were congenial to his own way of contemplating
the world. His power of stimulating other minds proves sufficiently that he frequently hit
upon impressive and suggestive thoughts. He struck out illuminating sparks, but he never diffused
any distinct or steady daylight. His favourite position, for example, of the distinction between
the Reason and the Understanding is always coming up and being enforced with the strongest
asseverations of its importance. That he had adopted it more or less from Kant is obvious,
though I imagine it to be also obvious that he did not clearly understand his authority.[635]
To what, precisely, it amounts is also unintelligible to me. Somehow or other, it implies that
the mind can rise into transcendental regions, and, leaving grovelling Utilitarians and the
like to the conduct of the understanding in matters of practical expediency, can perceive that
the universe is in some way evolved from the pure reason, and the mind capable of ideas which
correspond to stages of the evolution. How this leads to the conclusions that the Christian
doctrines of the Logos and the Trinity are embodiments of pure philosophy is a problem upon
which I need not touch. When we have called Coleridge a mystic, with flashes of keen insight
into the weakness of the opposite theory, I do not see how we are to get much further, or attribute
to him any articulate and definite scheme.

