But to return to Cyrus and his Persians.

"There were giants in the earth in those days.

RONDELET, {7} THE HUGUENOT NATURALIST {8}

"Apollo, god of medicine, exiled from the rest of the earth, was straying once across the Narbonnaise
in Gaul, seeking to fix his abode there. Driven from Asia, from Africa, and from the rest of
Europe, he wandered through all the towns of the province in search of a place propitious for
him and for his disciples.  At last he perceived a new city, constructed from the ruins of
Maguelonne, of Lattes, and of Substantion.  He contemplated long its site, its aspect, its
neighbourhood, and resolved to establish on this hill of Montpellier a temple for himself and
his priests.  All smiled on his desires.  By the genius of the soil, by the character of the
inhabitants, no town is more fit for the culture of letters, and above all of medicine.  What
site is more delicious and more lovely?  A heaven pure and smiling; a city built with magnificence;
men born for all the labours of the intellect.  All around vast horizons and enchanting sites--meadows,
vines, olives, green champaigns; mountains and hills, rivers, brooks, lagoons, and the sea.
Everywhere a luxuriant vegetation--everywhere the richest production of the land and the water.
Hail to thee sweet and dear city!  Hail, happy abode of Apollo, who spreadest afar the light
of the glory of thy name!"

"This fine tirade," says Dr. Maurice Raynaud--from whose charming book on the "Doctors of the
Time of Moliere" I quote--"is not, as one might think, the translation of a piece of poetry.
It is simply part of a public oration by Francois Fanchon, one of the most illustrious chancellors
of the faculty of medicine of Montpellier in the seventeenth century."  "From time immemorial,"
he says, "'the faculty' of Montpellier had made itself remarkable by a singular mixture of
the sacred and the profane.  The theses which were sustained there began by an invocation to
God, the Blessed Virgin, and St. Luke, and ended by these words: 'This thesis will be sustained
in the sacred Temple of Apollo.'"

But however extravagant Chancellor Fanchon's praises of his native city may seem, they are
really not exaggerated.  The Narbonnaise, or Languedoc, is perhaps the most charming district
of charming France.  In the far north-east gleam the white Alps; in the far south-west the
white Pyrenees; and from the purple glens and yellow downs of the Cevennes on the north-west,
the Herault slopes gently down towards the "Etangs," or great salt-water lagoons, and the vast
alluvial flats of the Camargue, the field of Caius Marius, where still run herds of half-wild
horses, descended from some ancient Roman stock; while beyond all glitters the blue Mediterranean.
The great almond orchards, each one sheet of rose- colour in spring; the mulberry orchards,
the oliveyards, the vineyards, cover every foot of available upland soil: save where the rugged
and arid downs are sweet with a thousand odoriferous plants, from which the bees extract the
famous white honey of Narbonne.  The native flowers and shrubs, of a beauty and richness rather
Eastern than European, have made the "Flora Montpeliensis," and with it the names of Rondelet
and his disciples, famous among botanists; and the strange fish and shells upon its shores
afforded Rondelet materials for his immortal work upon the "Animals of the Sea."  The innumerable
wild fowl of the Benches du Rhone; the innumerable songsters and other birds of passage, many
of them unknown in these islands, and even in the north of France itself, which haunt every
copse of willow and aspen along the brook-sides; the gaudy and curious insects which thrive
beneath that clear, fierce, and yet bracing sunlight; all these have made the district of Montpellier
a home prepared by Nature for those who study and revere her.

Neither was Chancellor Fanchon misled by patriotism, when he said the pleasant people who inhabit
that district are fit for all the labours of the intellect.  They are a very mixed race, and,
like most mixed races, quick-witted, and handsome also.  There is probably much Roman blood
among them, especially in the towns; for Languedoc, or Gallia Narbonnensis, as it was called
of old, was said to be more Roman than Rome itself.  The Roman remains are more perfect and
more interesting--so the late Dr. Whewell used to say--than any to be seen now in Italy; and
the old capital, Narbonne itself, was a complete museum of Roman antiquities ere Francis I.
destroyed it, in order to fortify the city upon a modern system against the invading armies
of Charles V.  There must be much Visigothic blood likewise in Languedoc: for the Visigothic
Kings held their courts there from the fifth century, until the time that they were crushed
by the invading Moors.  Spanish blood, likewise, there may be; for much of Languedoc was held
in the early Middle Age by those descendants of Eudes of Aquitaine who established themselves
as kings of Majorca and Arragon; and Languedoc did not become entirely French till 1349, when
Philip le Bel bought Montpellier of those potentates.  The Moors, too, may have left some traces
of their race behind.  They held the country from about A.D. 713 to 758, when they were finally
expelled by Charles Martel and Eudes.  One sees to this day their towers of meagre stonework,
perched on the grand Roman masonry of those old amphitheatres, which they turned into fortresses.
One may see, too--so tradition holds--upon those very amphitheatres the stains of the fires
with which Charles Martel smoked them out; and one may see, too, or fancy that one sees, in
the aquiline features, the bright black eyes, the lithe and graceful gestures, which are so
common in Languedoc, some touch of the old Mahommedan race, which passed like a flood over
that Christian land.

Whether or not the Moors left behind any traces of their blood, they left behind, at least,
traces of their learning; for the university of Montpellier claimed to have been founded by
Moors at a date of altogether abysmal antiquity.  They looked upon the Arabian physicians of
the Middle Age, on Avicenna and Averrhoes, as modern innovators, and derived their parentage
from certain mythic doctors of Cordova, who, when the Moors were expelled from Spain in the
eighth century, fled to Montpellier, bringing with them traditions of that primaeval science
which had been revealed to Adam while still in Paradise; and founded Montpellier, the mother
of all the universities in Europe.  Nay, some went farther still, and told of Bengessaus and
Ferragius, the physicians of Charlemagne, and of Marilephus, chief physician of King Chilperic,
and even--if a letter of St. Bernard's was to be believed--of a certain bishop who went as
early as the second century to consult the doctors of Montpellier; and it would have been in
vain to reply to them that in those days, and long after them, Montpellier was not yet built.
The facts are said to be: that as early as the beginning of the thirteenth century Montpellier
had its schools of law, medicine, and arts, which were erected into a university by Pope Nicholas
IV. in 1289.

The university of Montpellier, like--I believe--most foreign ones, resembled more a Scotch
than an English university.  The students lived, for the most part, not in colleges, but in
private lodgings, and constituted a republic of their own, ruled by an abbe of the scholars,
one of themselves, chosen by universal suffrage.  A terror they were often to the respectable
burghers, for they had all the right to carry arms; and a plague likewise, for, if they ran
in debt, their creditors were forbidden to seize their books, which, with their swords, were
generally all the property they possessed.  If, moreover, anyone set up a noisy or unpleasant
trade near their lodgings, the scholars could compel the town authorities to turn him out.
They were most of them, probably, mere boys of from twelve to twenty, living poorly, working
hard, and--those at least of them who were in the colleges--cruelly beaten daily, after the
fashion of those times; but they seem to have comforted themselves under their troubles by
a good deal of wild life out of school, by rambling into the country on the festivals of the
saints, and now and then by acting plays; notably, that famous one which Rabelais wrote for
them in 1531: "The moral comedy of the man who had a dumb wife;" which "joyous patelinage"
remains unto this day in the shape of a well-known comic song.  That comedy young Rondelet
must have seen acted.  The son of a druggist, spicer, and grocer--the three trades were then
combined--in Montpellier, and born in 1507, he had been destined for the cloister, being a
sickly lad.  His uncle, one of the canons of Maguelonne, near by, had even given him the revenues
of a small chapel--a job of nepotism which was common enough in those days.  But his heart
was in science and medicine.  He set off, still a mere boy, to Paris to study there; and returned
to Montpellier, at the age of eighteen, to study again.

The next year, 1530, while still a scholar himself, he was appointed procurator of the scholars--a
post which brought him in a small fee on each matriculation--and that year he took a fee, among
others, from one of the most remarkable men of that or of any age, Francois Rabelais himself.

And what shall I say of him?--who stands alone, like Shakespeare, in his generation; possessed
of colossal learning--of all science which could be gathered in his days--of practical and
statesmanlike wisdom--of knowledge of languages, ancient and modern, beyond all his compeers--of
eloquence, which when he speaks of pure and noble things becomes heroic, and, as it were, inspired--of
scorn for meanness, hypocrisy, ignorance--of esteem, genuine and earnest, for the Holy Scriptures,
and for the more moderate of the Reformers who were spreading the Scriptures in Europe,--and
all this great light wilfully hidden, not under a bushel, but under a dunghill.  He is somewhat
like Socrates in face, and in character likewise; in him, as in Socrates, the demigod and the
satyr, the man and the ape, are struggling for the mastery.  In Socrates, the true man conquers,
and comes forth high and pure; in Rabelais, alas! the victor is the ape, while the man himself
sinks down in cynicism, sensuality, practical jokes, foul talk.  He returns to Paris, to live
an idle, luxurious life; to die--says the legend--saying, "I go to seek a great perhaps," and
to leave behind him little save a school of Pantagruelists--careless young gentlemen, whose
ideal was to laugh at everything, to believe in nothing, and to gratify their five senses like
the brutes which perish.  There are those who read his books to make them laugh; the wise man,
when he reads them, will be far more inclined to weep.  Let any young man who may see these
words remember, that in him, as in Rabelais, the ape and the man are struggling for the mastery.
Let him take warning by the fate of one who was to him as a giant to a pigmy; and think of
Tennyson's words--

         Arise, and fly
   The reeling faun, the sensual feast;
   Strive upwards, working out the beast,
   And let the ape and tiger die.

But to return.  Down among them there at Montpellier, like a brilliant meteor, flashed this
wonderful Rabelais, in the year 1530.  He had fled, some say, for his life.  Like Erasmus,
he had no mind to be a martyr, and he had been terrified at the execution of poor Louis de
Berquin, his friend, and the friend of Erasmus likewise.  This Louis de Berquin, a man well
known in those days, was a gallant young gentleman and scholar, holding a place in the court
of Francis I., who had translated into French the works of Erasmus, Luther, and Melancthon,
and had asserted that it was heretical to invoke the Virgin Mary instead of the Holy Spirit,
or to call her our Hope and our Life, which titles--Berquin averred--belonged alone to God.
Twice had the doctors of the Sorbonne, with that terrible persecutor, Noel Beda, at their head,
seized poor Berquin, and tried to burn his books and him; twice had that angel in human form,
Marguerite d'Angouleme, sister of Francis I., saved him from their clutches; but when Francis--taken
prisoner at the battle of Pavia--at last returned from his captivity in Spain, the suppression
of heresy and the burning of heretics seemed to him and to his mother, Louise of Savoy, a thank-offering
so acceptable to God, that Louis Berquin--who would not, in spite of the entreaties of Erasmus,
purchase his life by silence--was burnt at last on the Place de Greve, being first strangled,
because he was of gentle blood.

Montpellier received its famous guest joyfully.  Rabelais was now forty- two years old, and
a distinguished savant; so they excused him his three years' undergraduate's career, and invested
him at once with the red gown of the bachelors.  That red gown--or, rather, the ragged phantom
of it--is still shown at Montpellier, and must be worn by each bachelor when he takes his degree.
Unfortunately, antiquarians assure us that the precious garment has been renewed again and
again--the students having clipped bits of it away for relics, and clipped as earnestly from
the new gowns as their predecessors had done from the authentic original.

Doubtless, the coming of such a man among them to lecture on the Aphorisms of Hippocrates,
and the Ars Parva of Galen, not from the Latin translations then in use, but from original
Greek texts, with comments and corrections of his own, must have had a great influence on the
minds of the Montpellier students; and still more influence--and that not altogether a good
one--must Rabelais's lighter talk have had, as he lounged--so the story goes--in his dressing-gown
upon the public place, picking up quaint stories from the cattle-drivers off the Cevennes,
and the villagers who came in to sell their olives and their grapes, their vinegar and their
vine-twig faggots, as they do unto this day.  To him may be owing much of the sound respect
for natural science, and much, too, of the contempt for the superstition around them, which
is notable in that group of great naturalists who were boys in Montpellier at that day.  Rabelais
seems to have liked Rondelet, and no wonder: he was a cheery, lovable, honest little fellow,
very fond of jokes, a great musician and player on the violin, and who, when he grew rich,
liked nothing so well as to bring into his house any buffoon or strolling-player to make fun
for him.  Vivacious he was, hot-tempered, forgiving, and with a power of learning and a power
of work which were prodigious, even in those hard-working days.  Rabelais chaffs Rondelet,
under the name of Rondibilis; for, indeed, Rondelet grew up into a very round, fat, little
man; but Rabelais puts excellent sense into his mouth, cynical enough, and too cynical, but
both learned and humorous; and, if he laughs at him for being shocked at the offer of a fee,
and taking it, nevertheless, kindly enough, Rondelet is not the first doctor who has done that,
neither will he be the last.

Rondelet, in his turn, put on the red robe of the bachelor, and received, on taking his degree,
his due share of fisticuffs from his dearest friends, according to the ancient custom of the
University of Montpellier.  He then went off to practise medicine in a village at the foot
of the Alps, and, half-starved, to teach little children.  Then he found he must learn Greek;
went off to Paris a second time, and alleviated his poverty there somewhat by becoming tutor
to a son of the Viscomte de Turenne.  There he met Gonthier of Andernach, who had taught anatomy
at Louvain to the great Vesalius, and learned from him to dissect.  We next find him setting
up as a medical man amid the wild volcanic hills of the Auvergne, struggling still with poverty,
like Erasmus, like George Buchanan, like almost every great scholar in those days; for students
then had to wander from place to place, generally on foot, in search of new teachers, in search
of books, in search of the necessaries of life; undergoing such an amount of bodily and mental
toil as makes it wonderful that all of them did not--as some of them doubtless did--die under
the hard training, or, at best, desert the penurious Muses for the paternal shop or plough.

Rondelet got his doctorate in 1537, and next year fell in love with and married a beautiful
young girl called Jeanne Sandre, who seems to have been as poor as he.

But he had gained, meanwhile, a powerful patron; and the patronage of the great was then as
necessary to men of letters as the patronage of the public is now.  Guillaume Pellicier, Bishop
of Maguelonne--or rather then of Montpellier itself, whither he had persuaded Paul II. to transfer
the ancient see--was a model of the literary gentleman of the sixteenth century; a savant,
a diplomat, a collector of books and manuscripts, Greek, Hebrew, and Syriac, which formed the
original nucleus of the present library of the Louvre; a botanist, too, who loved to wander
with Rondelet collecting plants and flowers.  He retired from public life to peace and science
at Montpellier, when to the evil days of his master, Francis I., succeeded the still worse
days of Henry II., and Diana of Poitiers.  That Jezebel of France could conceive no more natural
or easy way of atoning for her own sins than that of hunting down heretics, and feasting her
wicked eyes--so it is said--upon their dying torments. Bishop Pellicier fell under suspicion
of heresy: very probably with some justice.  He fell, too, under suspicion of leading a life
unworthy of a celibate churchman, a fault which--if it really existed--was, in those days,
pardonable enough in an orthodox prelate, but not so in one whose orthodoxy was suspected.
And for awhile Pellicier was in prison.  After his release he gave himself up to science, with
Rondelet and the school of disciples who were growing up around him.  They rediscovered together
the Garum, that classic sauce, whose praises had been sung of old by Horace, Martial, and Ausonius;
and so child-like, superstitious if you will, was the reverence in the sixteenth century for
classic antiquity, that when Pellicier and Rondelet discovered that the Garum was made from
the fish called Picarel--called Garon by the fishers of Antibes, and Giroli at Venice, both
these last names corruptions of the Latin Gerres--then did the two fashionable poets of France,
Etienne Dolet and Clement Marot, think it not unworthy of their muse to sing the praises of
the sauce which Horace had sung of old.  A proud day, too, was it for Pellicier and Rondelet,
when wandering somewhere in the marshes of the Camargue, a scent of garlic caught the nostrils
of the gentle bishop, and in the lovely pink flowers of the water-germander he recognised the
Scordium of the ancients.  "The discovery," says Professor Planchon, "made almost as much noise
as that of the famous Garum; for at that moment of naive fervour on behalf of antiquity, to
re-discover a plant of Dioscorides or of Pliny was a good fortune and almost an event."

I know not whether, after his death, the good bishop's bones reposed beneath some gorgeous
tomb, bedizened with the incongruous half-Pagan statues of the Renaissance; but this at least
is certain, that Rondelet's disciples imagined for him a monument more enduring than of marble
or of brass, more graceful and more curiously wrought than all the sculptures of Torrigiano
or Cellini, Baccio Bandinelli or Michael Angelo himself. For they named a lovely little lilac
snapdragon, Linaria Domini Pellicerii--"Lord Pellicier's toad-flax;" and that name it will
keep, we may believe, as long as winter and summer shall endure.

But to return.  To this good Patron--who was the Ambassador at Venice--the newly-married Rondelet
determined to apply for employment; and to Venice he would have gone, leaving his bride behind,
had he not been stayed by one of those angels who sometimes walk the earth in women's shape.
Jeanne Sandre had an elder sister, Catharine, who had brought her up.  She was married to a
wealthy man, but she had no children of her own.  For four years she and her good husband had
let the Rondelets lodge with them, and now she was a widow, and to part with them was more
than she could bear. She carried Rondelet off from the students who were seeing him safe out
of the city, brought him back, settled on him the same day half her fortune, and soon after
settled on him the whole, on the sole condition that she should live with him and her sister.
For years afterwards she watched over the pretty young wife and her two girls and three boys--the
three boys, alas! all died young--and over Rondelet himself, who, immersed in books and experiments,
was utterly careless about money; and was to them all a mother--advising, guiding, managing,
and regarded by Rondelet with genuine gratitude as his guardian angel.

Honour and good fortune, in a worldly sense, now poured in upon the druggist's son.  Pellicier,
his own bishop, stood godfather to his first- born daughter.  Montluc, Bishop of Valence, and
that wise and learned statesman, the Cardinal of Tournon, stood godfathers a few years later
to his twin boys; and what was of still more solid worth to him, Cardinal Tournon took him
to Antwerp, Bordeaux, Bayonne, and more than once to Rome; and in these Italian journeys of
his he collected many facts for the great work of his life, that "History of Fishes" which
he dedicated, naturally enough, to the cardinal.  This book with its plates is, for the time,
a masterpiece of accuracy.  Those who are best acquainted with the subject say, that it is
up to the present day a key to the whole ichthyology of the Mediterranean.  Two other men,
Belon and Salviani, were then at work on the same subject, and published their books almost
at the same time; a circumstance which caused, as was natural, a three- cornered duel between
the supporters of the three naturalists, each party accusing the other of plagiarism.  The
simple fact seems to be that the almost simultaneous appearance of the three books in 1554-55
is one of those coincidences inevitable at moments when many minds are stirred in the same
direction by the same great thoughts--coincidences which have happened in our own day on questions
of geology, biology, and astronomy; and which, when the facts have been carefully examined,
and the first flush of natural jealousy has cooled down, have proved only that there were more
wise men than one in the world at the same time.

And this sixteenth century was an age in which the minds of men were suddenly and strangely
turned to examine the wonders of nature with an earnestness, with a reverence, and therefore
with an accuracy, with which they had never been investigated before.  "Nature," says Professor
Planchon, "long veiled in mysticism and scholasticism, was opening up infinite vistas.  A new
superstition, the exaggerated worship of the ancients, was nearly hindering this movement of
thought towards facts. Nevertheless, Learning did her work.  She rediscovered, reconstructed,
purified, commented on the texts of ancient authors.  Then came in observation, which showed
that more was to be seen in one blade of grass than in any page of Pliny.  Rondelet was in
the middle of this crisis a man of transition, while he was one of progress.  He reflected
the past; he opened and prepared the future.  If he commented on Dioscorides, if he remained
faithful to the theories of Galen, he founded in his 'History of Fishes' a monument which our
century respects.  He is above all an inspirer, an initiator; and if he wants one mark of the
leader of a school, the foundation of certain scientific doctrines, there is in his speech
what is better than all systems, the communicative power which urges a generation of disciples
along the path of independent research, with Reason for guide, and Faith for aim."

Around Rondelet, in those years, sometimes indeed in his house--for professors in those days
took private pupils as lodgers--worked the group of botanists whom Linnaeus calls "the Fathers,"
the authors of the descriptive botany of the sixteenth century.  Their names, and those of
their disciples and their disciples again, are household words in the mouth of every gardener,
immortalised, like good Bishop Pellicier, in the plants that have been named after them.  The
Lobelia commemorates Lobel, one of Rondelet's most famous pupils, who wrote those "Adversaria"
which contain so many curious sketches of Rondelet's botanical expeditions, and who inherited
his botanical (as Joubert his biographer inherited his anatomical) manuscripts.  The Magnolia
commemorates the Magnols; the Sarracenia, Sarrasin of Lyons; the Bauhinia, Jean Bauhin; the
Fuchsia, Bauhin's earlier German master, Leonard Fuchs; and the Clusia--the received name of
that terrible "Matapalo" or "Scotch attorney," of the West Indies, which kills the hugest tree,
to become as huge a tree itself--immortalises the great Clusius, Charles de l'Escluse, citizen
of Arras, who, after studying civil law at Louvain, philosophy at Marburg, and theology at
Wittemberg under Melancthon, came to Montpellier in 1551, to live in Rondelet's own house,
and become the greatest botanist of his age.

These were Rondelet's palmy days.  He had got a theatre of anatomy built at Montpellier, where
he himself dissected publicly.  He had, says tradition, a little botanic garden, such as were
springing up then in several universities, specially in Italy.  He had a villa outside the
city, whose tower, near the modern railway station, still bears the name of the "Mas de Rondelet."
There, too, may be seen the remnants of the great tanks, fed with water brought through earthen
pipes from the Fountain of Albe, wherein he kept the fish whose habits he observed. Professor
Planchon thinks that he had salt-water tanks likewise; and thus he may have been the father
of all "Aquariums."  He had a large and handsome house in the city itself, a large practice
as physician in the country round; money flowed in fast to him, and flowed out fast likewise.
He spent much upon building, pulling down, rebuilding, and sent the bills in seemingly to his
wife and to his guardian angel Catharine.  He himself had never a penny in his purse: but earned
the money, and let his ladies spend it; an equitable and pleasant division of labour which
most married men would do well to imitate.  A generous, affectionate, careless little man,
he gave away, says his pupil and biographer, Joubert, his valuable specimens to any savant
who begged for them, or left them about to be stolen by visitors, who, like too many collectors
in all ages, possessed light fingers and lighter consciences.  So pacific was he meanwhile,
and so brave withal that even in the fearful years of "The Troubles," he would never carry
sword, nor even tuck or dagger: but went about on the most lonesome journeys as one who wore
a charmed life, secure in God and in his calling, which was to heal, and not to kill.

These were the golden years of Rondelet's life; but trouble was coming on him, and a stormy
sunset after a brilliant day.  He lost his sister-in- law, to whom he owed all his fortunes,
and who had watched ever since over him and his wife like a mother; then he lost his wife herself
under most painful circumstances; then his best-beloved daughter.  Then he married again, and
lost the son who was born to him; and then came, as to many of the best in those days, even
sorer trials, trials of the conscience, trials of faith.

For in the meantime Rondelet had become a Protestant, like many of the wisest men round him;
like, so it would seem from the event, the majority of the university and the burghers of Montpellier.
It is not to be wondered at.  Montpellier was a sort of halfway resting-place for Protestant
preachers, whether fugitive or not, who were passing from Basle, Geneva, or Lyons, to Marguerite
of Navarre's little Protestant court at Pan or at Nerac, where all wise and good men, and now
and then some foolish and fanatical ones, found shelter and hospitality.  Thither Calvin himself
had been, passing probably through Montpellier and leaving--as such a man was sure to leave--the
mark of his foot behind him.  At Lyons, no great distance up the Rhone, Marguerite had helped
to establish an organised Protestant community; and when in 1536 she herself had passed through
Montpellier, to visit her brother at Valence, and Montmorency's camp at Avignon, she took with
her doubtless Protestant chaplains of her own, who spoke wise words--it may be that she spoke
wise words herself--to the ardent and inquiring students of Montpellier. Moreover, Rondelet
and his disciples had been for years past in constant communication with the Protestant savants
of Switzerland and Germany, among whom the knowledge of nature was progressing as it never
had progressed before.  For--it is a fact always to be remembered--it was only in the free
air of Protestant countries the natural sciences could grow and thrive.  They sprung up, indeed,
in Italy after the restoration of Greek literature in the fifteenth century; but they withered
there again only too soon under the blighting upas shade of superstition. Transplanted to the
free air of Switzerland, of Germany, of Britain, and of Montpellier, then half Protestant,
they developed rapidly and surely, simply because the air was free; to be checked again in
France by the return of superstition with despotism super-added, until the eve of the great
French Revolution.

So Rondelet had been for some years Protestant.  He had hidden in his house for a long while
a monk who had left his monastery.  He had himself written theological treatises: but when
his Bishop Pellicier was imprisoned on a charge of heresy, Rondelet burnt his manuscripts,
and kept his opinions to himself.  Still he was a suspected heretic, at last seemingly a notorious
one; for only the year before his death, going to visit patients at Perpignan, he was waylaid
by the Spaniards, and had to get home through bypasses of the Pyrenees, to avoid being thrown
into the Inquisition.

And those were times in which it was necessary for a man to be careful, unless he had made
up his mind to be burned.  For more than thirty years of Rondelet's life the burning had gone
on in his neighbourhood; intermittently it is true: the spasms of superstitious fury being
succeeded, one may charitably hope, by pity and remorse; but still the burnings had gone on.
The Benedictine monk of St. Maur, who writes the history of Languedoc, says, quite en passant,
how someone was burnt at Toulouse in 1553, luckily only in effigy, for he had escaped to Geneva:
but he adds, "next year they burned several heretics," it being not worth while to mention
their names.  In 1556 they burned alive at Toulouse Jean Escalle, a poor Franciscan monk, who
had found his order intolerable; while one Pierre de Lavaur, who dared preach Calvinism in
the streets of Nismes, was hanged and burnt.  So had the score of judicial murders been increasing
year by year, till it had to be, as all evil scores have to be in this world, paid off with
interest, and paid off especially against the ignorant and fanatic monks who for a whole generation,
in every university and school in France, had been howling down sound science, as well as sound
religion; and at Montpellier in 1560-61, their debt was paid them in a very ugly way.  News
came down to the hot southerners of Languedoc of the so-called conspiracy of Amboise.--How
the Duc de Guise and the Cardinal de Lorraine had butchered the best blood in France under
the pretence of a treasonable plot; how the King of Navarre and the Prince de Conde had been
arrested; then how Conde and Coligny were ready to take up arms at the head of all the Huguenots
of France, and try to stop this life-long torturing, by sharp shot and cold steel; then how
in six months' time the king would assemble a general council to settle the question between
Catholics and Huguenots.  The Huguenots, guessing how that would end, resolved to settle the
question for themselves.  They rose in one city after another, sacked the churches, destroyed
the images, put down by main force superstitious processions and dances; and did many things
only to be excused by the exasperation caused by thirty years of cruelty.  At Montpellier there
was hard fighting, murders--so say the Catholic historians--of priests and monks, sack of the
new cathedral, destruction of the noble convents which lay in a ring round Montpellier.  The
city and the university were in the hands of the Huguenots, and Montpellier became Protestant
on the spot.

Next year came the counter-blow.  There were heavy battles with the Catholics all round the
neighbourhood, destruction of the suburbs, threatened siege and sack, and years of misery and
poverty for Montpellier and all who were therein.

Horrible was the state of France in those times of the wars of religion which began in 1562;
the times which are spoken of usually as "The Troubles," as if men did not wish to allude to
them too openly.  Then, and afterwards in the wars of the League, deeds were done for which
language has no name.  The population decreased.  The land lay untilled. The fair face of France
was blackened with burnt homesteads and ruined towns.  Ghastly corpses dangled in rows upon
the trees, or floated down the blood-stained streams.  Law and order were at an end.  Bands
of robbers prowled in open day, and bands of wolves likewise.  But all through the horrors
of the troubles we catch sight of the little fat doctor riding all unarmed to see his patients
throughout Languedoc; going vast distances, his biographers say, by means of regular relays
of horses, till he too broke down.  Well, for him, perhaps, that he broke down when he did;
for capture and recapture, massacre and pestilence, were the fate of Montpellier and the surrounding
country, till the better times of Henry IV. and the Edict of Nantes in 1598, when liberty of
worship was given to the Protestants for awhile.

In the burning summer of 1566, Rondelet went a long journey to Toulouse, seemingly upon an
errand of charity, to settle some law affairs for his relations.  The sanitary state of the
southern cities is bad enough still.  It must have been horrible in those days of barbarism
and misrule.  Dysentery was epidemic at Toulouse then, and Rondelet took it. He knew from the
first that he should die.  He was worn out, it is said, by over-exertion; by sorrow for the
miseries of the land; by fruitless struggles to keep the peace, and to strive for moderation
in days when men were all immoderate.  But he rode away a day's journey--he took two days over
it, so weak he was--in the blazing July sun, to a friend's sick wife at Realmont, and there
took to his bed, and died a good man's death. The details of his death and last illness were
written and published by his cousin Claude Formy; and well worth reading they are to any man
who wishes to know how to die.  Rondelet would have no tidings of his illness sent to Montpellier.
He was happy, he said, in dying away from the tears of his household, and "safe from insult."
He dreaded, one may suppose, lest priests and friars should force their way to his bedside,
and try to extort some recantation from the great savant, the honour and glory of their city.
So they sent for no priest to Realmont; but round his bed a knot of Calvinist gentlemen and
ministers read the Scriptures, and sang David's psalms, and prayed; and Rondelet prayed with
them through long agonies, and so went home to God.

The Benedictine monk-historian of Languedoc, in all his voluminous folios, never mentions,
as far as I can find, Rondelet's existence.  Why should he?  The man was only a druggist's
son and a heretic, who healed diseases, and collected plants, and wrote a book on fish.  But
the learned men of Montpellier, and of all Europe, had a very different opinion of him.  His
body was buried at Realmont; but before the schools of Toulouse they set up a white marble
slab, and an inscription thereon setting forth his learning and his virtues; and epitaphs on
him were composed by the learned throughout Europe, not only in French and Latin, but in Greek,
Hebrew, and even Chaldee.

So lived and so died a noble man; more noble, to my mind, than many a victorious warrior, or
successful statesman, or canonised saint.  To know facts, and to heal diseases, were the two
objects of his life.  For them he toiled, as few men have toiled; and he died in harness, at
his work--the best death any man can die.

VESALIUS THE ANATOMIST {9}

I cannot begin a sketch of the life of this great man better than by trying to describe a scene
so picturesque, so tragic in the eyes of those who are wont to mourn over human follies, so
comic in the eyes of those who prefer to laugh over them, that the reader will not be likely
to forget either it or the actors in it.

It is a darkened chamber in the College of Alcala, in the year 1562, where lies, probably in
a huge four-post bed, shrouded in stifling hangings, the heir-apparent of the greatest empire
in the then world, Don Carlos, only son of Philip II. and heir-apparent of Spain, the Netherlands,
and all the Indies.  A short sickly boy of sixteen, with a bull head, a crooked shoulder, a
short leg, and a brutal temper, he will not be missed by the world if he should die.  His profligate
career seems to have brought its own punishment.  To the scandal of his father, who tolerated
no one's vices save his own, as well as to the scandal of the university authorities of Alcala,
he has been scouring the streets at the head of the most profligate students, insulting women,
even ladies of rank, and amenable only to his lovely young stepmother, Elizabeth of Valois,
Isabel de la Paz, as the Spaniards call her, the daughter of Catherine do Medicis, and sister
of the King of France.  Don Carlos should have married her, had not his worthy father found
it more advantageous for the crown of Spain, as well as more pleasant for him, Philip, to marry
her himself.  Whence came heart-burnings, rage, jealousies, romances, calumnies, of which two
last--in as far at least as they concern poor Elizabeth--no wise man now believes a word.

Going on some errand on which he had no business--there are two stories, neither of them creditable
nor necessary to repeat--Don Carlos has fallen downstairs and broken his head.  He comes, by
his Portuguese mother's side, of a house deeply tainted with insanity; and such an injury may
have serious consequences.  However, for nine days the wound goes on well, and Don Carlos,
having had a wholesome fright, is, according to Doctor Olivarez, the medico de camara, a very
good lad, and lives on chicken broth and dried plums.  But on the tenth day comes on numbness
of the left side, acute pains in the head, and then gradually shivering, high fever, erysipelas.
His head and neck swell to an enormous size; then comes raging delirium, then stupefaction,
and Don Carlos lies as one dead.

A modern surgeon would, probably, thanks to that training of which Vesalius may be almost called
the father, have had little difficulty in finding out what was the matter with the luckless
lad, and little difficulty in removing the evil, if it had not gone too far.  But the Spanish
physicians were then, as many of them are said to be still, as far behind the world in surgery
as in other things; and indeed surgery itself was then in its infancy, because men, ever since
the early Greek schools of Alexandria had died out, had been for centuries feeding their minds
with anything rather than with facts.  Therefore the learned morosophs who were gathered round
Don Carlos's sick bed had become according to their own confession, utterly confused, terrified,
and at their wits' end.

It is the 7th of May, the eighteenth day after the accident according to Olivarez's story:
he and Dr Vega have been bleeding the unhappy prince, enlarging the wound twice, and torturing
him seemingly on mere guesses. "I believe," says Olivarez, "that all was done well: but as
I have said, in wounds in the head there are strange labyrinths."  So on the 7th they stand
round the bed in despair.  Don Garcia de Toledo, the prince's faithful governor, is sitting
by him, worn out with sleepless nights, and trying to supply to the poor boy that mother's
tenderness which he has never known.  Alva, too, is there, stern, self-compressed, most terrible,
and yet most beautiful.  He has a God on earth, and that is Philip his master; and though he
has borne much from Don Carlos already, and will have to bear more, yet the wretched lad is
to him as a son of God, a second deity, who will by right divine succeed to the inheritance
of the first; and he watches this lesser deity struggling between life and death with an intensity
of which we, in these less loyal days, can form no notion.  One would be glad to have a glimpse
of what passed through that mind, so subtle and so ruthless, so disciplined and so loyal withal:
but Alva was a man who was not given to speak his mind, but to act it.

One would wish, too, for a glimpse of what was passing through the mind of another man, who
has been daily in that sick chamber, according to Olivarez's statement, since the first of
the month: but he is one who has had, for some years past, even more reason than Alva for not
speaking his mind.  What he looked like we know well, for Titian has painted him from the life--a
tall, bold, well-dressed man, with a noble brain, square and yet lofty, short curling locks
and beard, an eye which looks as though it feared neither man nor fiend--and it has had good
reason to fear both--and features which would be exceeding handsome, but for the defiant snub-nose.
That is Andreas Vesalius, of Brussels, dreaded and hated by the doctors of the old school--suspect,
moreover, it would seem to inquisitors and theologians, possibly to Alva himself; for he has
dared to dissect human bodies; he has insulted the mediaevalists at Paris, Padua, Bologna,
Pisa, Venice, in open theatre; he has turned the heads of all the young surgeons in Italy and
France; he has written a great book, with prints in it, designed, some say, by Titian--they
were actually done by another Netherlander, John of Calcar, near Cleves--in which he has dared
to prove that Galen's anatomy was at fault throughout, and that he had been describing a monkey's
inside when he had pretended to be describing a man's; and thus, by impudence and quackery,
he has wormed himself--this Netherlander, a heretic at heart, as all Netherlanders are, to
God as well as to Galen--into the confidence of the late Emperor Charles V., and gone campaigning
with him as one of his physicians, anatomising human bodies even on the battle-field, and defacing
the likeness of Deity; and worse than that, the most religious King Philip is deceived by him
likewise, and keeps him in Madrid in wealth and honour; and now, in the prince's extreme danger,
the king has actually sent for him, and bidden him try his skill--a man who knows nothing save
about bones and muscles and the outside of the body, and is unworthy the name of a true physician.

One can conceive the rage of the old Spanish pedants at the Netherlander's appearance, and
still more at what followed, if we are to believe Hugo Bloet of Delft, his countryman and contemporary.
{10} Vesalius, he says, saw that the surgeons had bound up the wound so tight that an abscess
had formed outside the skull, which could not break: he asserted that the only hope lay in
opening it; and did so, Philip having given leave, "by two cross-cuts.  Then the lad returned
to himself, as if awakened from a profound sleep, affirming that he owed his restoration to
life to the German doctor."

Dionysius Daza, who was there with the other physicians and surgeons, tells a different story:
"The most learned, famous, and rare Baron Vesalius," he says, advised that the skull should
be trepanned; but his advice was not followed.

Olivarez's account agrees with that of Daza.  They had opened the wounds, he says, down to
the skull before Vesalius came.  Vesalius insisted that the injury lay inside the skull, and
wished to pierce it.  Olivarez spends much labour in proving that Vesalius had "no great foundation
for his opinion:" but confesses that he never changed that opinion to the last, though all
the Spanish doctors were against him.  Then on the 6th, he says, the Bachelor Torres came from
Madrid, and advised that the skull should be laid bare once more; and on the 7th, there being
still doubt whether the skull was not injured, the operation was performed--by whom it is not
said--but without any good result, or, according to Olivarez, any discovery, save that Vesalius
was wrong, and the skull uninjured.

Whether this second operation of the 7th of May was performed by Vesalius, and whether it was
that of which Bloet speaks, is an open question.  Olivarez's whole relation is apologetic,
written to justify himself and his seven Spanish colleagues, and to prove Vesalius in the wrong.
Public opinion, he confesses, had been very fierce against him. The credit of Spanish medicine
was at stake: and we are not bound to believe implicitly a paper drawn up under such circumstances
for Philip's eye.  This, at least, we gather: that Don Carlos was never trepanned, as is commonly
said; and this, also, that whichever of the two stories is true, equally puts Vesalius into
direct, and most unpleasant, antagonism to the Spanish doctors. {11}

But Don Carlos still lay senseless; and yielding to popular clamour, the doctors called in
the aid of a certain Moorish doctor, from Valencia, named Priotarete, whose unguents, it was
reported, had achieved many miraculous cures.  The unguent, however, to the horror of the doctors,
burned the skull till the bone was as black as the colour of ink; and Olivarez declares he
believes it to have been a preparation of pure caustic.  On the morning of the 9th of May,
the Moor and his unguents were sent away, "and went to Madrid, to send to heaven Hernando de
Vega, while the prince went back to our method of cure."

Considering what happened on the morning of the 10th of May, we should now presume that the
second opening of the abscess, whether by Vesalius or someone else, relieved the pressure on
the brain; that a critical period of exhaustion followed, probably prolonged by the Moor's
premature caustic, which stopped the suppuration: but that God's good handiwork, called nature,
triumphed at last; and that therefore it came to pass that the prince was out of danger within
three days of the operation.  But he was taught, it seems, to attribute his recovery to a very
different source from that of a German knife.  For on the morning of the 9th, when the Moor
was gone, and Don Carlos lay seemingly lifeless, there descended into his chamber a Deus e
machina, or rather a whole pantheon of greater or lesser deities, who were to effect that which
medical skill seemed not to have effected.  Philip sent into the prince's chamber several of
the precious relics which he usually carried about with him. The miraculous image of the Virgin
of Atocha, in embroidering garments for whom, Spanish royalty, male and female, has spent so
many an hour ere now, was brought in solemn procession and placed on an altar at the foot of
the prince's bed; and in the afternoon there entered, with a procession likewise, a shrine
containing the bones of a holy anchorite, one Fray Diego, "whose life and miracles," says Olivarez,
"are so notorious:" and the bones of St. Justus and St. Pastor, the tutelar saints of the university
of Alcala.  Amid solemn litanies the relics of Fray Diego were laid upon the prince's pillow,
and the sudarium, or mortuary cloth, which had covered his face, was placed upon the prince's
forehead.

Modern science might object that the presence of so many personages, however pious or well
intentioned, in a sick chamber on a hot Spanish May day, especially as the bath had been, for
some generations past, held in religious horror throughout Spain, as a sign of Moorish and
Mussulman tendencies, might have somewhat interfered with the chances of the poor boy's recovery.
Nevertheless the event seems to have satisfied Philip's highest hopes; for that same night
(so Don Carlos afterwards related) the holy monk Diego appeared to him in a vision, wearing
the habit of St. Francis, and bearing in his hand a cross of reeds tied with a green band.
The prince stated that he first took the apparition to be that of the blessed St. Francis;
but not seeing the stigmata, he exclaimed, "How? Dost thou not bear the marks of the wounds?"
What he replied Don Carlos did not recollect; save that he consoled him, and told him that
he should not die of that malady.

Philip had returned to Madrid, and shut himself up in grief in the great Jeronymite monastery.
Elizabeth was praying for her step-son before the miraculous images of the same city.  During
the night of the 9th of May prayers went up for Don Carlos in all the churches of Toledo, Alcala,
and Madrid.  Alva stood all that night at the bed's foot.  Don Garcia de Toledo sat in the
arm-chair, where he had now sat night and day for more than a fortnight.  The good preceptor,
Honorato Juan, afterwards Bishop of Osma, wrestled in prayer for the lad the whole night through.
His prayer was answered: probably it had been answered already, without his being aware of
it.  Be that as it may, about dawn Don Carlos's heavy breathing ceased; he fell into a quiet
sleep; and when he awoke all perceived at once that he was saved.

He did not recover his sight, seemingly on account of the erysipelas, for a week more.  He
then opened his eyes upon the miraculous image of Atocha, and vowed that, if he recovered,
he would give to the Virgin, at four different shrines in Spain, gold plate of four times his
weight; and silver plate of seven times his weight, when he should rise from his couch.  So
on the 6th of June he rose, and was weighed in a fur coat and a robe of damask, and his weight
was three arrobas and one pound--seventy- six pounds in all.  On the 14th of June he went to
visit his father at the episcopal palace; then to all the churches and shrines in Alcala, and
of course to that of Fray Diego, whose body it is said he contemplated for some time with edifying
devotion.  The next year saw Fray Diego canonised as a saint, at the intercession of Philip
and his son; and thus Don Carlos re-entered the world, to be a terror and a torment to all
around him, and to die--not by Philip's cruelty, as his enemies reported too hastily indeed,
yet excusably, for they knew him to be capable of any wickedness--but simply of constitutional
insanity.

And now let us go back to the history of "that most learned, famous, and rare Baron Vesalius,"
who had stood by and seen all these things done; and try if we cannot, after we have learned
the history of his early life, guess at some of his probable meditations on this celebrated
clinical case; and guess also how those meditations may have affected seriously the events
of his afterlife.

Vesalius (as I said) was a Netherlander, born at Brussels in 1513 or 1514.  His father and
grandfather had been medical men of the highest standing in a profession which then, as now,
was commonly hereditary.  His real name was Wittag, an ancient family of Wesel, on the Rhine,
from which town either he or his father adopted the name of Vesalius, according to the classicising
fashion of those days.  Young Vesalius was sent to college at Louvain, where he learned rapidly.
At sixteen or seventeen he knew not only Latin, but Greek enough to correct the proofs of Galen,
and Arabic enough to become acquainted with the works of the Mussulman physicians.  He was
a physicist too, and a mathematician, according to the knowledge of those times; but his passion--the
study to which he was destined to devote his life--was anatomy.

Little or nothing (it must be understood) had been done in anatomy since the days of Galen
of Pergamos, in the second century after Christ, and very little even by him.  Dissection was
all but forbidden among the ancients.  The Egyptians, Herodotus tells us, used to pursue with
stones and curses the embalmers as soon as they had performed their unpleasant office; and
though Herophilus and Erasistratus are said to have dissected many subjects under the protection
of Ptolemy Soter in Alexandria itself: yet the public feeling of the Greeks as well as of the
Romans continued the same as that of the ancient Egyptians; and Galen was fain--as Vesalius
proved--to supplement his ignorance of the human frame by describing that of an ape.  Dissection
was equally forbidden among the Mussulmans; and the great Arabic physicians could do no more
than comment on Galen.  The same prejudice extended through the Middle Age.  Medical men were
all clerks, clerici, and as such forbidden to shed blood.  The only dissection, as far as I
am aware, made during the Middle Age was one by Mundinus in 1306; and his subsequent commentaries
on Galen--for he dare allow his own eyes to see no more than Galen had seen before him--constituted
the best anatomical manual in Europe till the middle of the fifteenth century.

Then, in Italy at least, the classic Renaissance gave fresh life to anatomy as to all other
sciences.  Especially did the improvements in painting and sculpture stir men up to a closer
study of the human frame. Leonardo da Vinci wrote a treatise on muscular anatomy.  The artist
and the sculptor often worked together, and realised that sketch of Michael Angelo's in which
he himself is assisting Fallopius, Vesalius's famous pupil, to dissect.  Vesalius soon found
that his thirst for facts could not be slaked by the theories of the Middle Age; so in 1530
he went off to Montpellier, where Francis I. had just founded a medical school, and where the
ancient laws of the city allowed the faculty each year the body of a criminal.  From thence,
after becoming the fellow-pupil and the friend of Rondelet, and probably also of Rabelais and
those other luminaries of Montpellier, of whom I spoke in my essay on Rondelet, he returned
to Paris to study under old Sylvius, whose real name was Jacques Dubois, alias Jock o' the
Wood; and to learn less--as he complains himself--in an anatomical theatre than a butcher might
learn in his shop.

Were it not that the whole question of dissection is one over which it is right to draw a reverent
veil, as a thing painful, however necessary and however innocent, it would be easy to raise
ghastly laughter in many a reader by the stories which Vesalius himself tells of his struggles
to learn anatomy.  How old Sylvius tried to demonstrate the human frame from a bit of a dog,
fumbling in vain for muscles which he could not find, or which ought to have been there, according
to Galen, and were not; while young Vesalius, as soon as the old pedant's back was turned,
took his place, and, to the delight of the students, found for him--provided it were there--what
he could not find himself;--how he went body-snatching and gibbet-robbing, often at the danger
of his life, as when he and his friend were nearly torn to pieces by the cannibal dogs who
haunted the Butte de Montfaucon, or place of public execution;--how he acquired, by a long
and dangerous process, the only perfect skeleton then in the world, and the hideous story of
the robber to whom it had belonged--all these horrors those who list may read for themselves
elsewhere.  I hasten past them with this remark--that to have gone through the toils, dangers,
and disgusts which Vesalius faced, argued in a superstitious and cruel age like his, no common
physical and moral courage, and a deep conscience that he was doing right, and must do it at
all risks in the face of a generation which, peculiarly reckless of human life and human agony,
allowed that frame which it called the image of God to be tortured, maimed, desecrated in every
way while alive; and yet--straining at the gnat after having swallowed the camel--forbade it
to be examined when dead, though for the purpose of alleviating the miseries of mankind.

The breaking out of war between Francis I. and Charles V. drove Vesalius back to his native
country and Louvain; and in 1535 we hear of him as a surgeon in Charles V.'s army.  He saw,
most probably, the Emperor's invasion of Provence, and the disastrous retreat from before Montmorency's
fortified camp at Avignon, through a country in which that crafty general had destroyed every
article of human food, except the half- ripe grapes.  He saw, perhaps, the Spanish soldiers,
poisoned alike by the sour fruit and by the blazing sun, falling in hundreds along the white
roads which led back into Savoy, murdered by the peasantry whose homesteads had been destroyed,
stifled by the weight of their own armour, or desperately putting themselves, with their own
hands, out of a world which had become intolerable.  Half the army perished.  Two thousand
corpses lay festering between Aix and Frejus alone.  If young Vesalius needed "subjects," the
ambition and the crime of man found enough for him in those blazing September days.

He went to Italy, probably with the remnants of the army.  Where could he have rather wished
to find himself?  He was at last in the country where the human mind seemed to be growing young
once more; the country of revived arts, revived sciences, learning, languages; and--though,
alas! only for awhile of revived free thought, such as Europe had not seen since the palmy
days of Greece.  Here at least he would be appreciated; here at least he would be allowed to
think and speak: and he was appreciated.  The Italian cities, who were then, like the Athenians
of old, "spending their time in nothing else save to hear or to tell something new," welcomed
the brave young Fleming and his novelties. Within two years he was professor of anatomy at
Padua, then the first school in the world; then at Bologna and at Pisa at the same time; last
of all at Venice, where Titian painted that portrait of him which remains unto this day.

These years were for him a continual triumph; everywhere, as he demonstrated on the human body,
students crowded his theatre, or hung round him as he walked the streets; professors left their
own chairs--their scholars having deserted them already--to go and listen humbly or enviously
to the man who could give them what all brave souls throughout half Europe were craving for,
and craving in vain--facts.  And so, year after year, was realised that scene which stands
engraved in the frontispiece of his great book--where, in the little quaint Cinquecento theatre,
saucy scholars, reverend doctors, gay gentlemen, and even cowled monks, are crowding the floor,
peeping over each other's shoulders, hanging on the balustrades; while in the centre, over
his "subject"--which one of those same cowled monks knew but too well--stands young Vesalius,
upright, proud, almost defiant, as one who knows himself safe in the impregnable citadel of
fact; and in his hand the little blade of steel, destined--because wielded in obedience to
the laws of nature, which are the laws of God--to work more benefit for the human race than
all the swords which were drawn in those days, or perhaps in any other, at the bidding of most
Catholic Emperors and most Christian Kings.

Those were indeed days of triumph for Vesalius; of triumph deserved, because earned by patient
and accurate toil in a good cause: but Vesalius, being but a mortal man, may have contracted
in those same days a temper of imperiousness and self-conceit, such as he showed afterwards
when his pupil Fallopius dared to add fresh discoveries to those of his master.  And yet, in
spite of all Vesalius knew, how little he knew!  How humbling to his pride it would have been
had he known then--perhaps he does know now--that he had actually again and again walked, as
it were, round and round the true theory of the circulation of the blood, and yet never seen
it; that that discovery which, once made, is intelligible, as far as any phenomenon is intelligible,
to the merest peasant, was reserved for another century, and for one of those Englishmen on
whom Vesalius would have looked as semi-barbarians.

To make a long story short: three years after the publication of his famous book, "De Corporis
Humani Fabrica," he left Venice to cure Charles V., at Regensburg, and became one of the great
Emperor's physicians.

This was the crisis of Vesalius's life.  The medicine with which he had worked the cure was
China--Sarsaparilla, as we call it now--brought home from the then newly-discovered banks of
the Paraguay and Uruguay, where its beds of tangled vine, they say, tinge the clear waters
a dark-brown like that of peat, and convert whole streams into a healthful and pleasant tonic.
On the virtues of this China (then supposed to be a root) Vesalius wrote a famous little book,
into which he contrived to interweave his opinions on things in general, as good Bishop Berkeley
did afterwards into his essay on the virtues of tar-water.  Into this book, however, Vesalius
introduced--as Bishop Berkeley did not--much, and perhaps too much, about himself; and much,
though perhaps not too much, about poor old Galen, and his substitution of an ape's inside
for that of a human being.  The storm which had been long gathering burst upon him. The old
school, trembling for their time-honoured reign, bespattered, with all that pedantry, ignorance,
and envy could suggest, the man who dared not only to revolutionise surgery, but to interfere
with the privileged mysteries of medicine; and, over and above, to become a greater favourite
at the court of the greatest of monarchs.  While such as Eustachius, himself an able discoverer,
could join in the cry, it is no wonder if a lower soul, like that of Sylvius, led it open-mouthed.
He was a mean, covetous, bad man, as George Bachanan well knew; and, according to his nature,
he wrote a furious book--"Ad Vesani calumnias depulsandas."  The punning change of Vesalius
into Vesanus (madman) was but a fair and gentle stroke for a polemic, in days in which those
who could not kill their enemies with steel or powder, held themselves justified in doing so,
if possible, by vituperation, calumny, and every engine of moral torture.  But a far more terrible
weapon, and one which made Vesalius rage, and it may be for once in his life tremble, was the
charge of impiety and heresy.  The Inquisition was a very ugly place.  It was very easy to
get into it, especially for a Netherlander: but not so easy to get out.  Indeed Vesalius must
have trembled, when he saw his master, Charles V., himself take fright, and actually call on
the theologians of Salamanca to decide whether it was lawful to dissect a human body.  The
monks, to their honour, used their common sense, and answered Yes.  The deed was so plainly
useful that it must be lawful likewise.  But Vesalius did not feel that he had triumphed. 
He dreaded, possibly, lest the storm should only have blown over for a time.  He fell, possibly,
into hasty disgust at the folly of mankind, and despair of arousing them to use their common
sense, and acknowledge their true interest and their true benefactors.  At all events, he threw
into the fire--so it is said--all his unpublished manuscripts, the records of long years of
observation, and renounced science thenceforth.

We hear of him after this at Brussels, and at Basle likewise--in which latter city, in the
company of physicians, naturalists, and Grecians, he must have breathed awhile a freer air.
But he seems to have returned thence to his old master Charles V., and to have finally settled
at Madrid as a court surgeon to Philip II., who sent him, but too late, to extract the lance
splinters from the eye of the dying Henry II.

He was now married to a lady of rank from Brussels, Anne van Hamme by name; and their daughter
married in time Philip II.'s grand falconer, who was doubtless a personage of no small social
rank.  Vesalius was well off in worldly things; somewhat fond, it is said, of good living and
of luxury; inclined, it may be, to say, "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die," and to
sink more and more into the mere worldling, unless some shock should awake him from his lethargy.

And the awakening shock did come.  After eight years of court life, he resolved, early in the
year 1564, to go on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem.

The reasons for so strange a determination are wrapped in mystery and contradiction.  The common
story was that he had opened a corpse to ascertain the cause of death, and that, to the horror
of the bystanders, the heart was still seen to beat; that his enemies accused him to the Inquisition,
and that he was condemned to death, a sentence which was commuted to that of going on pilgrimage.
But here, at the very outset, accounts differ.  One says that the victim was a nobleman, name
not given; another that it was a lady's maid, name not given.  It is most improbable, if not
impossible, that Vesalius, of all men, should have mistaken a living body for a dead one; while
it is most probable, on the other hand, that his medical enemies would gladly raise such a
calumny against him, when he was no longer in Spain to contradict it.  Meanwhile Llorente,
the historian of the Inquisition, makes no mention of Vesalius having been brought before its
tribunal, while he does mention Vesalius's residence at Madrid.  Another story is, that he
went abroad to escape the bad temper of his wife; another that he wanted to enrich himself.
Another story--and that not an unlikely one--is, that he was jealous of the rising reputation
of his pupil Fallopius, then professor of anatomy at Venice.  This distinguished surgeon, as
I said before, had written a book, in which he added to Vesalius's discoveries, and corrected
certain of his errors.  Vesalius had answered him hastily and angrily, quoting his anatomy
from memory; for, as he himself complained, he could not in Spain obtain a subject for dissection;
not even, he said, a single skull. He had sent his book to Venice to be published, and had
heard, seemingly, nothing of it.  He may have felt that he was falling behind in the race of
science, and that it was impossible for him to carry on his studies in Madrid; and so, angry
with his own laziness and luxury, he may have felt the old sacred fire flash up in him, and
have determined to go to Italy and become a student and a worker once more.

The very day that he set out, Clusius of Arras, then probably the best botanist in the world,
arrived at Madrid; and, asking the reason of Vesalius's departure, was told by their fellow-countryman,
Charles de Tisnacq, procurator for the affairs of the Netherlands, that Vesalius had gone of
his own free will, and with all facilities which Philip could grant him, in performance of
a vow which he had made during a dangerous illness.  Here, at least, we have a drop of information,
which seems taken from the stream sufficiently near to the fountain-head: but it must be recollected
that De Tisnacq lived in dangerous times, and may have found it necessary to walk warily in
them; that through him had been sent, only the year before, that famous letter from William
of Orange, Horn, and Egmont, the fate whereof may be read in Mr. Motley's fourth chapter; that
the crisis of the Netherlands which sprung out of that letter was coming fast; and that, as
De Tisnacq was on friendly terms with Egmont, he may have felt his head at times somewhat loose
on his shoulders; especially if he had heard Alva say, as he wrote, "that every time he saw
the despatches of those three senors, they moved his choler so, that if he did not take much
care to temper it, he would seem a frenzied man."  In such times, De Tisnacq may have thought
good to return a diplomatic answer to a fellow-countryman concerning a third fellow-countryman,
especially when that countryman, as a former pupil of Melancthon at Wittemberg, might himself
be under suspicion of heresy, and therefore of possible treason.

Be this as it may, one cannot but suspect some strain of truth in the story about the Inquisition;
for, whether or not Vesalius operated on Don Carlos, he had seen with his own eyes that miraculous
Virgin of Atocha at the bed's foot of the prince.  He had heard his recovery attributed, not
to the operation, but to the intercession of Fray, now Saint Diego; {12} and he must have had
his thoughts thereon, and may, in an unguarded moment, have spoken them.

For he was, be it always remembered, a Netherlander.  The crisis of his country was just at
hand.  Rebellion was inevitable, and, with rebellion, horrors unutterable; and, meanwhile,
Don Carlos had set his mad brain on having the command of the Netherlands.  In his rage, at
not having it, as all the world knows, he nearly killed Alva with his own hands, some two years
after.  If it be true that Don Carlos felt a debt of gratitude to Vesalius, he may (after his
wont) have poured out to him some wild confidence about the Netherlands, to have even heard
which would be a crime in Philip's eyes.  And if this be but a fancy, still Vesalius was, as
I just said, a Netherlander, and one of a brain and a spirit to which Philip's doings, and
the air of the Spanish court, must have been growing ever more and more intolerable.  Hundreds
of his country folk, perhaps men and women whom he had known, were being racked, burnt alive,
buried alive, at the bidding of a jocular ruffian, Peter Titelmann, the chief inquisitor. 
The "day of the maubrulez," and the wholesale massacre which followed it, had happened but
two years before; and, by all the signs of the times, these murders and miseries were certain
to increase. And why were all these poor wretches suffering the extremity of horror, but because
they would not believe in miraculous images, and bones of dead friars, and the rest of that
science of unreason and unfact, against which Vesalius had been fighting all his life, consciously
or not, by using reason and observing fact?  What wonder if, in some burst of noble indignation
and just contempt, he forgot a moment that he had sold his soul, and his love of science likewise,
to be a luxurious, yet uneasy, hanger-on at the tyrant's court; and spoke unadvisedly some
word worthy of a German man?

As to the story of his unhappy quarrels with his wife, there may be a grain of truth in it
likewise.  Vesalius's religion must have sat very lightly on him.  The man who had robbed churchyards
and gibbets from his youth was not likely to be much afraid of apparitions and demons.  He
had handled too many human bones to care much for those of saints.  He was probably, like his
friends of Basle, Montpellier, and Paris, somewhat of a heretic at heart, probably somewhat
of a pagan, while his lady, Anne van Hamme, was probably a strict Catholic, as her father,
being a councillor and master of the exchequer at Brussels, was bound to be; and freethinking
in the husband, crossed by superstition in the wife, may have caused in them that wretched
vie a part, that want of any true communion of soul, too common to this day in Catholic countries.

Be these things as they may--and the exact truth of them will now be never known--Vesalius
set out to Jerusalem in the spring of 1564.  On his way he visited his old friends at Venice
to see about his book against Fallopius.  The Venetian republic received the great philosopher
with open arms.  Fallopius was just dead; and the senate offered their guest the vacant chair
of anatomy.  He accepted it: but went on to the East.

He never occupied that chair; wrecked upon the Isle of Zante, as he was sailing back from Palestine,
he died miserably of fever and want, as thousands of pilgrims returning from the Holy Land
had died before him.  A goldsmith recognised him; buried him in a chapel of the Virgin; and
put up over him a simple stone, which remained till late years; and may remain, for aught I
know, even now.

So perished, in the prime of life, "a martyr to his love of science," to quote the words of
M. Burggraeve of Ghent, his able biographer and commentator, "the prodigious man, who created
a science at an epoch when everything was still an obstacle to his progress; a man whose whole
life was a long struggle of knowledge against ignorance, of truth against lies."

Plaudite: Exeat: with Rondelet and Buchanan.  And whensoever this poor foolish world needs
three such men, may God of His great mercy send them.

PARACELSUS {13}

I told you of Vesalius and Rondelet as specimens of the men who three hundred years ago were
founding the physical science of the present day, by patient investigation of facts.  But such
an age as this would naturally produce men of a very different stamp, men who could not imitate
their patience and humility; who were trying for royal roads to knowledge, and to the fame
and wealth which might be got out of knowledge; who meddled with vain dreams about the occult
sciences, alchemy, astrology, magic, the cabala, and so forth, who were reputed magicians,
courted and feared for awhile, and then, too often, died sad deaths.

Such had been, in the century before, the famous Dr. Faust--Faustus, who was said to have made
a compact with Satan--actually one of the inventors of printing--immortalised in Goethe's marvellous
poem.

Such, in the first half of the sixteenth century, was Cornelius Agrippa--a doctor of divinity
and a knight-at-arms; secret-service diplomatist to the Emperor Maximilian in Austria; astrologer,
though unwilling, to his daughter Margaret, Regent of the Low Countries; writer on the occult
sciences and of the famous "De Vanitate Scientiarum," and what not? who died miserably at the
age of forty-nine, accused of magic by the Dominican monks from whom he had rescued a poor
girl, who they were torturing on a charge of witchcraft; and by them hunted to death; nor to
death only, for they spread the fable--such as you may find in Delrio the Jesuit's "Disquisitions
on Magic" {14}--that his little pet black dog was a familiar spirit, as Butler has it in "Hudibras":

   Agrippa kept a Stygian pug
   I' the garb and habit of a dog--
   That was his taste; and the cur
   Read to th' occult philosopher,
   And taught him subtly to maintain
   All other sciences are vain.

Such also was Jerome Cardan, the Italian scholar and physician, the father of algebraic science
(you all recollect Cardan's rule,) believer in dreams, prognostics, astrology; who died, too,
miserably enough, in old age.

Cardan's sad life, and that of Cornelius Agrippa, you can, and ought to read for yourselves,
in two admirable biographies, as amusing as they are learned, by Professor Morley, of the London
University.  I have not chosen either of them as a subject for this lecture, because Mr. Morley
has so exhausted what is to be known about them, that I could tell you nothing which I had
not stolen from him.

But what shall I say of the most famous of these men--Paracelsus? whose name you surely know.
He too has been immortalised in a poem which you all ought to have read, one of Robert Browning's
earliest and one of his best creations.

I think we must accept as true Mr. Browning's interpretation of Paracelsus's character.  We
must believe that he was at first an honest and high-minded, as he was certainly a most gifted,
man; that he went forth into the world, with an intense sense of the worthlessness of the sham
knowledge of the pedants and quacks of the schools; an intense belief that some higher and
truer science might be discovered, by which diseases might be actually cured, and health, long
life, happiness, all but immortality, be conferred on man; an intense belief that he, Paracelsus,
was called and chosen by God to find out that great mystery, and be a benefactor to all future
ages.  That fixed idea might degenerate--did, alas! degenerate--into wild self-conceit, rash
contempt of the ancients, violent abuse of his opponents.  But there was more than this in
Paracelsus.  He had one idea to which, if he had kept true, his life would have been a happier
one--the firm belief that all pure science was a revelation from God; that it was not to be
obtained at second or third hand, by blindly adhering to the words of Galen or Hippocrates
or Aristotle, and putting them (as the scholastic philosophers round him did) in the place
of God: but by going straight to nature at first hand, and listening to what Bacon calls "the
voice of God revealed in facts." True and noble is the passage with which he begins his "Labyrinthus
Medicorum," one of his attacks on the false science of his day,

"The first and highest book of all healing," he says, "is called wisdom, and without that book
no man will carry out anything good or useful . . . And that book is God Himself.  For in Him
alone who hath created all things, the knowledge and principle of all things dwells . . . without
Him all is folly.  As the sun shines on us from above, so He must pour into us from above all
arts whatsoever.  Therefore the root of all learning and cognition is, that we should seek
first the kingdom of God--the kingdom of God in which all sciences are founded . . . If any
man think that nature is not founded on the kingdom of God, he knows nothing about it.  All
gifts," he repeats again and again, confused and clumsily (as is his wont), but with a true
earnestness, "are from God."

The true man of science, with Paracelsus, is he who seeks first the kingdom of God in facts,
investigating nature reverently, patiently, in faith believing that God, who understands His
own work best, will make him understand it likewise.  The false man of science is he who seeks
the kingdom of this world, who cares nothing about the real interpretation of facts: but is
content with such an interpretation as will earn him the good things of this world--the red
hat and gown, the ambling mule, the silk clothes, the partridges, capons, and pheasants, the
gold florins chinking in his palm.  At such pretenders Paracelsus sneered, at last only too
fiercely, not only as men whose knowledge consisted chiefly in wearing white gloves, but as
rogues, liars, villains, and every epithet which his very racy vocabulary, quickened (it is
to be feared) by wine and laudanum, could suggest.  With these he contrasts the true men of
science.  It is difficult for us now to understand how a man setting out in life with such
pure and noble views should descend at last (if indeed he did descend) to be a quack and a
conjuror--and die under the imputation that

   Bombastes kept a devil's bird
   Hid in the pommel of his sword,

and have, indeed, his very name, Bombast, used to this day as a synonym of loud, violent, and
empty talk.  To understand it at all, we must go back and think a little over these same occult
sciences which were believed in by thousands during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.

The reverence for classic antiquity, you must understand, which sprang up at the renaissance
in the fifteenth century, was as indiscriminating as it was earnest.  Men caught the trash
as well as the jewels.  They put the dreams of the Neoplatonists, Iamblicus, Porphyry, or Plotinus,
or Proclus, on the same level as the sound dialectic philosophy of Plato himself.  And these
Neoplatonists were all, more or less, believers in magic--Theurgy, as it was called--in the
power of charms and spells, in the occult virtues of herbs and gems, in the power of adepts
to evoke and command spirits, in the significance of dreams, in the influence of the stars
upon men's characters and destinies.  If the great and wise philosopher Iamblicus believed
such things, why might not the men of the sixteenth century?

And so grew up again in Europe a passion for what were called the Occult sciences.  It had
always been haunting the European imagination.  Mediaeval monks had long ago transformed the
poet Virgil into a great necromancer. And there were immense excuses for such a belief.  There
was a mass of collateral evidence that the occult sciences were true, which it was impossible
then to resist.  Races far more ancient, learned, civilised, than any Frenchman, German, Englishman,
or even Italian, in the fifteenth century had believed in these things.  The Moors, the best
physicians of the Middle Ages, had their heads full, as the "Arabian Nights" prove, of enchanters,
genii, peris, and what not?  The Jewish rabbis had their Cabala, which sprang up in Alexandria,
a system of philosophy founded on the mystic meaning of the words and the actual letters of
the text of Scripture, which some said was given by the angel Ragiel to Adam in Paradise, by
which Adam talked with angels, the sun and moon, summoned spirits, interpreted dreams, healed
and destroyed; and by that book of Ragiel, as it was called, Solomon became the great magician
and master of all the spirits and their hoarded treasures.

So strong, indeed, was the belief in the mysteries of the Cabala, that Reuchlin, the restorer
of Hebrew learning in Germany, and Pico di Mirandola, the greatest of Italian savants, accepted
them; and not only Pope Leo X. himself, but even statesmen and warriors received with delight
Reuchlin's cabalistic treatise, "De Verbo Mirifico," on the mystic word "Schemhamphorash"--that
hidden name of God, which whosoever can pronounce aright is, for the moment, lord of nature
and of all daemons.

Amulets, too, and talismans; the faith in them was exceeding ancient. Solomon had his seal,
by which he commanded all daemons; and there is a whole literature of curious nonsense, which
you may read if you will, about the Abraxas and other talismans of the Gnostics in Syria; and
another, of the secret virtues which were supposed to reside in gems: especially in the old
Roman and Greek gems, carved into intaglios with figures of heathen gods and goddesses.  Lapidaria,
or lists of these gems and their magical virtues, were not uncommon in the Middle Ages.  You
may read a great deal that is interesting about them at the end of Mr. King's book on gems.

Astrology too; though Pico di Mirandola might set himself against the rest of the world, few
were found daring enough to deny so ancient a science.  Luther and Melancthon merely followed
the regular tradition of public opinion when they admitted its truth.  It sprang probably from
the worship of the Seven Planets by the old Chaldees.  It was brought back from Babylon by
the Jews after the Captivity, and spread over all Europe--perhaps all Asia likewise.

The rich and mighty of the earth must needs have their nativities cast, and consult the stars;
and Cornelius Agrippa gave mortal offence to the Queen-Dowager of France (mother of Francis
I.) because, when she compelled him to consult the stars about Francis's chance of getting
out of his captivity in Spain after the battle of Pavia, he wrote and spoke his mind honestly
about such nonsense.

Even Newton seems to have hankered after it when young.  Among his MSS. in Lord Portsmouth's
library at Hurstbourne are whole folios of astrologic calculations.  It went on till the end
of the seventeenth century, and died out only when men had begun to test it, and all other
occult sciences, by experience, and induction founded thereon.

Countless students busied themselves over the transmutation of metals.  As for magic, necromancy,
pyromancy, geomancy, coscinomancy, and all the other mancies--there was then a whole literature
about them.  And the witch-burning inquisitors like Sprenger, Bodin, Delrio, and the rest,
believed as firmly in the magic powers of the poor wretches whom they tortured to death, as
did, in many cases, the poor wretches themselves.

Everyone, almost, believed in magic.  Take two cases.  Read the story which Benvenuto Cellini,
the sculptor, tells in his life (everyone should read it) of the magician whom he consults
in the Coliseum at Rome, and the figure which he sees as he walks back with the magician, jumping
from roof to roof along the tiles of the houses.

And listen to this story, which Mr. Froude has dug up in his researches. A Church commissioner
at Oxford, at the beginning of the Reformation, being unable to track an escaped heretic, "caused
a figure to be made by an expert in astronomy;" by which it was discovered that the poor wretch
had fled in a tawny coat and was making for the sea.  Conceive the respected head of your College--or
whoever he may be--in case you slept out all night without leave, going to a witch to discover
whether you had gone to London or to Huntingdon, and then writing solemnly to inform the Bishop
of Ely of his meritorious exertions!

In such a mad world as this was Paracelsus born.  The son of a Swiss physician, but of noble
blood, Philip Aureolus Theophrastus was his Christian name, Bombast von Hohenheim his surname,
which last word he turned, after the fashion of the times, into Paracelsus.  Born in 1493 at
Einsiedeln (the hermitage), in Schweiz, which is still a famous place of pilgrimage, he was
often called Eremita--the hermit.  Erasmus, in a letter still extant, but suspected not to
be genuine, addressed him by that name.

How he passed the first thirty-three years of his life it is hard to say. He used to boast
that he had wandered over all Europe, been in Sweden, Italy, in Constantinople, and perhaps
in the far East, with barber-surgeons, alchemists, magicians, haunting mines, and forges of
Sweden and Bohemia, especially those which the rich merchants of that day had in the Tyrol.

It was from that work, he said, that he learnt what he knew: from the study of nature and of
facts.  He had heard all the learned doctors and professors; he had read all their books, and
they could teach him nothing.  Medicine was his monarch, and no one else.  He declared that
there was more wisdom under his bald pate than in Aristotle and Galen, Hippocrates and Rhasis.
And fact seemed to be on his side.  He reappeared in Germany about 1525, and began working
wondrous cures.  He had brought back with him from the East an arcanum, a secret remedy, and
laudanum was its name.  He boasted, says one of his enemies, that he could raise the dead to
life with it; and so the event all but proved. Basle was then the university where free thought
and free creeds found their safest home; and hither OEcolampadius the reformer invited young
Paracelsus to lecture on medicine and natural science.

It would have been well for him, perhaps, had he never opened his lips. He might have done
good enough to his fellow-creatures by his own undoubted powers of healing.  He cured John
Frobenius, the printer, Erasmus's friend, at Basle, when the doctors were going to cut his
leg off.  His fame spread far and wide.  Round Basle and away into Alsace he was looked on,
even an enemy says, as a new AEsculapius.

But these were days in which in a university everyone was expected to talk and teach, and so
Paracelsus began lecturing; and then the weakness which was mingled with his strength showed
itself.  He began by burning openly the books of Galen and Avicenna, and declared that all
the old knowledge was useless.  Doctors and students alike must begin over again with him.
The dons were horrified.  To burn Galen and Avicenna was as bad as burning the Bible.  And
more horrified still were they when Paracelsus began lecturing, not in the time-honoured dog-Latin,
but in good racy German, which everyone could understand.  They shuddered under their red gowns
and hats.  If science was to be taught in German, farewell to the Galenists' formulas, and
their lucrative monopoly of learning.  Paracelsus was bold enough to say that he wished to
break up their monopoly; to spread a popular knowledge of medicine.  "How much," he wrote once,
"would I endure and suffer, to see every man his own shepherd--his own healer."  He laughed
to scorn their long prescriptions, used the simplest drugs, and declared Nature, after all,
to be the best physician--as a dog, he says, licks his wound well again without our help; or
as the broken rib of the ox heals of its own accord.

Such a man was not to be endured.  They hated him, he says, for the same reason that they hated
Luther, for the same reason that the Pharisees hated Christ.  He met their attacks with scorn,
rage, and language as coarse and violent as their own.  The coarseness and violence of those
days seem incredible to us now; and, indeed, Paracelsus, as he confessed himself, was, though
of gentle blood, rough and unpolished; and utterly, as one can see from his writings, unable
to give and take, to conciliate--perhaps to pardon.  He looked impatiently on these men who
were (not unreasonably) opposing novelties which they could not understand, as enemies of God,
who were balking him in his grand plan for regenerating science and alleviating the woes of
humanity, and he outraged their prejudices instead of soothing them.

Soon they had their revenge.  Ugly stories were whispered about. Oporinus, the printer, who
had lived with him for two years, and who left him, it is said, because he thought Paracelsus
concealed from him unfairly the secret of making laudanum, told how Paracelsus was neither
more nor less than a sot, who came drunk to his lectures, used to prime himself with wine before
going to his patients, and sat all night in pothouses swilling with the boors.

Men looked coldly on him--longed to be rid of him.  And they soon found an opportunity.  He
took in hand some Canon of the city from whom it was settled beforehand that he was to receive
a hundred florins.  The priest found himself cured so suddenly and easily that, by a strange
logic, he refused to pay the money, and went to the magistrates.  They supported him, and compelled
Paracelsus to take six florins instead of the hundred. He spoke his mind fiercely to them.
I believe, according to one story, he drew his long sword on the Canon.  His best friends told
him he must leave the place; and within two years, seemingly, after his first triumph at Basle,
he fled from it a wanderer and a beggar.

The rest of his life is a blank.  He is said to have recommenced his old wanderings about Europe,
studying the diseases of every country, and writing his books, which were none of them published
till after his death.  His enemies joyfully trampled on the fallen man.  He was a "dull rustic,
a monster, an atheist, a quack, a maker of gold, a magician." When he was drunk, one Wetter,
his servant, told Erastus (one of his enemies) that he used to offer to call up legions of
devils to prove his skill, while Wetter, in abject terror of his spells, entreated him to leave
the fiends alone--that he had sent his book by a fiend to the spirit of Galen in hell, and
challenged him to say which was the better system, his or Paracelsus', and what not?

His books were forbidden to be printed.  He himself was refused a hearing, and it was not till
after ten years of wandering that he found rest and protection in a little village of Carinthia.

Three years afterwards he died in the hospital of St. Sebastian at Salzburg, in the Tyrol.
His death was the signal for empirics and visionaries to foist on the public book after book
on occult philosophy, written in his name--of which you may see ten folios--not more than a
quarter, I believe, genuine.  And these foolish books, as much as anything, have helped to
keep up the popular prejudice against one who, in spite of all his faults was a true pioneer
of science. {15}  I believe (with those moderns who have tried to do him justice) that under
all his verbiage and confusion there was a vein of sound scientific, experimental common sense.

When he talks of astronomy as necessary to be known by a physician, it seems to me that he
laughs at astrology, properly so called; that is, that the stars influence the character and
destiny of man.  Mars, he says, did not make Nero cruel.  There would have been long-lived
men in the world if Saturn had never ascended the skies; and Helen would have been a wanton,
though Venus had never been created.  But he does believe that the heavenly bodies, and the
whole skies, have a physical influence on climate, and on the health of men.

He talks of alchemy, but he means by it, I think, only that sound science which we call chemistry,
and at which he worked, wandering, he says, among mines and forges, as a practical metallurgist.

He tells us--what sounds startling enough--that magic is the only preceptor which can teach
the art of healing; but he means, it seems to me, only an understanding of the invisible processes
of nature, in which sense an electrician or a biologist, a Faraday or a Darwin, would be a
magician; and when he compares medical magic to the Cabalistic science, of which I spoke just
now (and in which he seems to have believed), he only means, I think, that as the Cabala discovers
hidden meaning and virtues in the text of Scripture, so ought the man of science to find them
in the book of nature.  But this kind of talk, wrapt up too in the most confused style, or
rather no style at all, is quite enough to account for ignorant and envious people accusing
him of magic, saying that he had discovered the philosopher's stone, and the secret of Hermes
Trismegistus; that he must make gold, because, though he squandered all his money, he had always
money in hand; and that he kept a "devil's-bird," a familiar spirit, in the pommel of that
famous long sword of his, which he was only too ready to lug out on provocation--the said spirit,
Agoth by name, being probably only the laudanum bottle with which he worked so many wondrous
cures, and of which, to judge from his writings, he took only too freely himself.

But the charm of Paracelsus is in his humour, his mother-wit.  He was blamed for consorting
with boors in pot-houses; blamed for writing in racy German, instead of bad school-Latin: but
you can hardly read a chapter, either of his German or his dog-Latin, without finding many
a good thing--witty and weighty, though often not a little coarse.  He talks in parables. 
He draws illustrations, like Socrates of old, from the commonest and the oddest matters to
enforce the weightiest truths. "Fortune and misfortune," he says, for instance nobly enough,
"are not like snow and wind, they must be deduced and known from the secrets of nature.  Therefore
misfortune is ignorance, fortune is knowledge.  The man who walks out in the rain is not unfortunate
if he gets a ducking."

"Nature," he says again, "makes the text, and the medical man adds the gloss; but the two fit
each other no better than a dog does a bath;" and again, when he is arguing against the doctors
who hated chemistry--"Who hates a thing which has hurt nobody?  Will you complain of a dog
for biting you, if you lay hold of his tail?  Does the emperor send the thief to the gallows,
or the thing which he has stolen?  The thief, I think. Therefore science should not be despised
on account of some who know nothing about it."  You will say the reasoning is not very clear,
and indeed the passage, like too many more, smacks strongly of wine and laudanum.  But such
is his quaint racy style.  As humorous a man, it seems to me, as you shall meet with for many
a day; and where there is humour there is pretty sure to be imagination, tenderness, and depth
of heart.

As for his notions of what a man of science should be, the servant of God, and of Nature--which
is the work of God--using his powers not for money, not for ambition, but in love and charity,
as he says, for the good of his fellow-man--on that matter Paracelsus is always noble.  All
that Mr. Browning has conceived on that point, all the noble speeches which he has put into
Paracelsus's mouth, are true to his writings.  How can they be otherwise, if Mr. Browning set
them forth--a genius as accurate and penetrating as he is wise and pure?

But was Paracelsus a drunkard after all?

Gentlemen, what concern is that of yours or mine?  I have gone into the question, as Mr. Browning
did, cannot say, and don't care to say.

Oporinus, who slandered him so cruelly, recanted when Paracelsus was dead, and sang his praises--too
late.  But I do not read that he recanted the charge of drunkenness.  His defenders allow it,
only saying that it was the fault not of him alone, but of all Germans.  But if so, why was
he specially blamed for what certainly others did likewise?  I cannot but fear from his writings,
as well as from common report, that there was something wrong with the man.  I say only something.
Against his purity there never was a breath of suspicion.  He was said to care nothing for
women; and even that was made the subject of brutal jests and lies.  But it may have been that,
worn out with toil and poverty, he found comfort in that laudanum which he believed to be the
arcanum--the very elixir of life; that he got more and more into the habit of exciting his
imagination with the narcotic, and then, it may be, when the fit of depression followed, he
strung his nerves up again by wine.  It may have been so.  We have had, in the last generation,
an exactly similar case in a philosopher, now I trust in heaven, and to whose genius I owe
too much to mention his name here.

But that Paracelsus was a sot I cannot believe.  That face of his, as painted by the great
Tintoretto, is not the face of a drunkard, quack, bully, but of such a man as Browning has
conceived.  The great globular brain, the sharp delicate chin, is not that of a sot.  Nor are
those eyes, which gleam out from under the deep compressed brow, wild, intense, hungry, homeless,
defiant, and yet complaining, the eyes of a sot--but rather the eyes of a man who struggles
to tell a great secret, and cannot find words for it, and yet wonders why men cannot understand,
will not believe what seems to him as clear as day--a tragical face, as you well can see.

God keep us all from making our lives a tragedy by one great sin.  And now let us end this
sad story with the last words which Mr. Browning puts into the mouth of Paracelsus, dying in
the hospital at Salzburg, which have come literally true:

   Meanwhile, I have done well though not all well.
   As yet men cannot do without contempt;
   'Tis for their good; and therefore fit awhile
   That they reject the weak and scorn the false,
   Rather than praise the strong and true in me:
   But after, they will know me.  If I stoop
   Into a dark tremendous sea of cloud,
   It is but for a time.  I press God's lamp
   Close to my breast; its splendour, soon or late,
   Will pierce the gloom.  I shall emerge one day.

GEORGE BUCHANAN, SCHOLAR

The scholar, in the sixteenth century, was a far more important personage than now.  The supply
of learned men was very small, the demand for them very great.  During the whole of the fifteenth,
and a great part of the sixteenth century, the human mind turned more and more from the scholastic
philosophy of the Middle Ages to that of the Romans and the Greeks; and found more and more
in old Pagan Art an element which Monastic Art had not, and which was yet necessary for the
full satisfaction of their craving after the Beautiful.  At such a crisis of thought and taste,
it was natural that the classical scholar, the man who knew old Rome, and still more old Greece,
should usurp the place of the monk, as teacher of mankind; and that scholars should form, for
a while, a new and powerful aristocracy, limited and privileged, and all the more redoubtable,
because its power lay in intellect, and had been won by intellect alone.

Those who, whether poor or rich, did not fear the monk and priest, at least feared the "scholar,"
who held, so the vulgar believed, the keys of that magic lore by which the old necromancers
had built cities like Rome, and worked marvels of mechanical and chemical skill, which the
degenerate modern could never equal.

If the "scholar" stopped in a town, his hostess probably begged of him a charm against toothache
or rheumatism.  The penniless knight discoursed with him on alchemy, and the chances of retrieving
his fortune by the art of transmuting metals into gold.  The queen or bishop worried him in
private about casting their nativities, and finding their fates among the stars.  But the statesman,
who dealt with more practical matters, hired him as an advocate and rhetorician, who could
fight his master's enemies with the weapons of Demosthenes and Cicero.  Wherever the scholar's
steps were turned, he might be master of others, as long as he was master of himself.  The
complaints which he so often uttered concerning the cruelty of fortune, the fickleness of princes
and so forth, were probably no more just then than such complaints are now.  Then, as now,
he got his deserts; and the world bought him at his own price.  If he chose to sell himself
to this patron and to that, he was used and thrown away: if he chose to remain in honourable
independence, he was courted and feared.

Among the successful scholars of the sixteenth century, none surely is more notable than George
Buchanan.  The poor Scotch widow's son, by force of native wit, and, as I think, by force of
native worth, fights his way upward, through poverty and severest persecution, to become the
correspondent and friend of the greatest literary celebrities of the Continent, comparable,
in their opinion, to the best Latin poets of antiquity; the preceptor of princes; the counsellor
and spokesman of Scotch statesmen in the most dangerous of times; and leaves behind him political
treatises, which have influenced not only the history of his own country, but that of the civilised
world.

Such a success could not be attained without making enemies, perhaps without making mistakes.
But the more we study George Buchanan's history, the less we shall be inclined to hunt out
his failings, the more inclined to admire his worth.  A shrewd, sound-hearted, affectionate
man, with a strong love of right and scorn of wrong, and a humour withal which saved him--except
on really great occasions--from bitterness, and helped him to laugh where narrower natures
would have only snarled,--he is, in many respects, a type of those Lowland Scots, who long
preserved his jokes, genuine or reputed, as a common household book. {16}  A schoolmaster by
profession, and struggling for long years amid the temptations which, in those days, degraded
his class into cruel and sordid pedants, he rose from the mere pedagogue to be, in the best
sense of the word, a courtier: "One," says Daniel Heinsius, "who seemed not only born for a
court, but born to amend it.  He brought to his queen that at which she could not wonder enough.
For, by affecting a certain liberty in censuring morals, he avoided all offence, under the
cloak of simplicity."  Of him and his compeers, Turnebus, and Muretus, and their friend Andrea
Govea, Ronsard, the French court poet, said that they had nothing of the pedagogue about them
but the gown and cap.  "Austere in face, and rustic in his looks," says David Buchanan, "but
most polished in style and speech; and continually, even in serious conversation, jesting most
wittily."  "Rough-hewn, slovenly, and rude," says Peacham, in his "Compleat Gentleman," speaking
of him, probably, as he appeared in old age, "in his person, behaviour, and fashion; seldom
caring for a better outside than a rugge-gown girt close about him: yet his inside and conceipt
in poesie was most rich, and his sweetness and facilitie in verse most excellent."  A typical
Lowland Scot, as I said just now, he seems to have absorbed all the best culture which France
could afford him, without losing the strength, honesty, and humour which he inherited from
his Stirlingshire kindred.

The story of his life is easily traced.  When an old man, he himself wrote down the main events
of it, at the request of his friends; and his sketch has been filled out by commentators, if
not always favourable, at least erudite.  Born in 1506, at the Moss, in Killearn--where an
obelisk to his memory, so one reads, has been erected in this century--of a family "rather
ancient than rich," his father dead in the prime of manhood, his grandfather a spendthrift,
he and his seven brothers and sisters were brought up by a widowed mother, Agnes Heriot--of
whom one wishes to know more; for the rule that great sons have great mothers probably holds
good in her case.  George gave signs, while at the village school, of future scholarship; and
when he was only fourteen, his uncle James sent him to the University of Paris.  Those were
hard times; and the youths, or rather boys, who meant to become scholars, had a cruel life
of it, cast desperately out on the wide world to beg and starve, either into self-restraint
and success, or into ruin of body and soul. And a cruel life George had.  Within two years
he was down in a severe illness, his uncle dead, his supplies stopped; and the boy of sixteen
got home, he does not tell how.  Then he tried soldiering; and was with Albany's French Auxiliaries
at the ineffectual attack on Wark Castle. Marching back through deep snow, he got a fresh illness,
which kept him in bed all winter.  Then he and his brother were sent to St. Andrews, where
he got his B.A. at nineteen.  The next summer he went to France once more; and "fell," he says,
"into the flames of the Lutheran sect, which was then spreading far and wide."  Two years of
penury followed; and then three years of school-mastering in the College of St. Barbe, which
he has immortalised--at least, for the few who care to read modern Latin poetry--in his elegy
on "The Miseries of a Parisian Teacher of the Humanities."  The wretched regent-master, pale
and suffering, sits up all night preparing his lecture, biting his nails and thumping his desk;
and falls asleep for a few minutes, to start up at the sound of the four-o'clock bell, and
be in school by five, his Virgil in one hand, and his rod in the other, trying to do work on
his own account at old manuscripts, and bawling all the while at his wretched boys, who cheat
him, and pay each other to answer to truants' names.  The class is all wrong.  "One is barefoot,
another's shoe is burst, another cries, another writes home.  Then comes the rod, the sound
of blows, and howls; and the day passes in tears."  "Then mass, then another lesson, then more
blows; there is hardly time to eat."  I have no space to finish the picture of the stupid misery
which, Buchanan says, was ruining his intellect, while it starved his body.  However, happier
days came.  Gilbert Kennedy, Earl of Cassilis, who seems to have been a noble young gentleman,
took him as his tutor for the next five years; and with him he went back to Scotland.

But there his plain speaking got him, as it did more than once afterward, into trouble.  He
took it into his head to write, in imitation of Dunbar, a Latin poem, in which St. Francis
asks him in a dream to become a Gray Friar, and Buchanan answered in language which had the
unpleasant fault of being too clever, and--to judge from contemporary evidence--only too true.
The friars said nothing at first; but when King James made Buchanan tutor to one of his natural
sons, they, "men professing meekness, took the matter somewhat more angrily than befitted men
so pious in the opinion of the people."  So Buchanan himself puts it: but, to do the poor friars
justice, they must have been angels, not men, if they did not writhe somewhat under the scourge
which he had laid on them. To be told that there was hardly a place in heaven for monks, was
hard to hear and bear.  They accused him to the king of heresy; but not being then in favour
with James, they got no answer, and Buchanan was commanded to repeat the castigation.  Having
found out that the friars were not to be touched with impunity, he wrote, he says, a short
and ambiguous poem. But the king, who loved a joke, demanded something sharp and stinging,
and Buchanan obeyed by writing, but not publishing, "The Franciscans," a long satire, compared
to which the "Somnium" was bland and merciful.  The storm rose.  Cardinal Beaten, Buchanan
says, wanted to buy him of the king, and then, of course, burn him, as he had just burnt five
poor souls; so, knowing James's avarice, he fled to England, through freebooters and pestilence.

There he found, he says, "men of both factions being burned on the same day and in the same
fire"--a pardonable exaggeration--"by Henry VIII., in his old age more intent on his own safety
than on the purity of religion."  So to his beloved France he went again, to find his enemy
Beaten ambassador at Paris.  The capital was too hot to hold him; and he fled south to Bordeaux,
to Andrea Govea, the Portuguese principal of the College of Guienne.  As Professor of Latin
at Bordeaux, we find him presenting a Latin poem to Charles V.; and indulging that fancy of
his for Latin poetry which seems to us nowadays a childish pedantry, which was then--when Latin
was the vernacular tongue of all scholars--a serious, if not altogether a useful, pursuit.
Of his tragedies, so famous in their day--the "Baptist," the "Medea," the "Jephtha," and the
"Alcestis"--there is neither space nor need to speak here, save to notice the bold declamations
in the "Baptist" against tyranny and priestcraft; and to notice also that these tragedies gained
for the poor Scotsman, in the eyes of the best scholars of Europe, a credit amounting almost
to veneration.  When he returned to Paris, he found occupation at once; and, as his Scots biographers
love to record, "three of the most learned men in the world taught humanity in the same college,"
viz.  Turnebus, Muretus, and Buchanan.

Then followed a strange episode in his life.  A university had been founded at Coimbra, in
Portugal, and Andrea Govea had been invited to bring thither what French savants he could collect.
Buchanan went to Portugal with his brother Patrick, two more Scotsmen, Dempster and Ramsay,
and a goodly company of French scholars, whose names and histories may be read in the erudite
pages of Dr. Irving, went likewise. All prospered in the new Temple of the Muses for a year
or so.  Then its high-priest, Govea, died; and, by a peripeteia too common in those days and
countries, Buchanan and two of his friends migrated unwillingly from the Temple of the Muses
for that of Moloch, and found themselves in the Inquisition.

Buchanan, it seems, had said that St. Augustine was more of a Lutheran than a Catholic on the
question of the mass.  He and his friends had eaten flesh in Lent; which, he says, almost everyone
in Spain did.  But he was suspected, and with reason, as a heretic; the Gray Friars formed
but one brotherhood throughout Europe; and news among them travelled surely if not fast, so
that the story of the satire written in Scotland had reached Portugal.  The culprits were imprisoned,
examined, bullied--but not tortured--for a year and a half.  At the end of that time, the proofs
of heresy, it seems, were insufficient; but lest, says Buchanan with honest pride, "they should
get the reputation of having vainly tormented a man not altogether unknown," they sent him
for some months to a monastery, to be instructed by the monks.  "The men," he says, "were neither
inhuman nor bad, but utterly ignorant of religion;" and Buchanan solaced himself during the
intervals of their instructions, by beginning his Latin translation of the Psalms.

At last he got free, and begged leave to return to France; but in vain. And so, wearied out,
he got on board a Candian ship at Lisbon, and escaped to England.  But England, he says, during
the anarchy of Edward VI.'s reign, was not a land which suited him; and he returned to France,
to fulfil the hopes which he had expressed in his charming "Desiderium Lutitiae," and the still
more charming, because more simple, "Adventus in Galliam," in which he bids farewell, in most
melodious verse, to "the hungry moors of wretched Portugal, and her clods fertile in naught
but penury."

Some seven years succeeded of schoolmastering and verse-writing: the Latin paraphrase of the
Psalms; another of the "Alcestis" of Euripides; an Epithalamium on the marriage of poor Mary
Stuart, noble and sincere, however fantastic and pedantic, after the manner of the times; "Pomps,"
too, for her wedding, and for other public ceremonies, in which all the heathen gods and goddesses
figure; epigrams, panegyrics, satires, much of which latter productions he would have consigned
to the dust-heap in his old age, had not his too fond friends persuaded him to republish the
follies and coarsenesses of his youth.  He was now one of the most famous scholars in Europe,
and the intimate friend of all the great literary men.  Was he to go on to the end, die, and
no more?  Was he to sink into the mere pedant; or, if he could not do that, into the mere court
versifier?

The wars of religion saved him, as they saved many another noble soul, from that degradation.
The events of 1560-62 forced Buchanan, as they forced many a learned man besides, to choose
whether he would be a child of light or a child of darkness; whether he would be a dilettante
classicist, or a preacher--it might be a martyr--of the Gospel.  Buchanan may have left France
in "The Troubles" merely to enjoy in his own country elegant and learned repose.  He may have
fancied that he had found it, when he saw himself, in spite of his public profession of adherence
to the Reformed Kirk, reading Livy every afternoon with his exquisite young sovereign; master,
by her favour, of the temporalities of Crossraguel Abbey, and by the favour of Murray, Principal
of St. Leonard's College in St. Andrew's.  Perhaps he fancied at times that "to-morrow was
to be as to-day, and much more abundant;" that thenceforth he might read his folio, and write
his epigram, and joke his joke, as a lazy comfortable pluralist, taking his morning stroll
out to the corner where poor Wishart had been burned, above the blue sea and the yellow sands,
and looking up to the castle tower from whence his enemy Beaton's corpse had been hung out;
with the comfortable reflection that quieter times had come, and that whatever evil deeds Archbishop
Hamilton might dare, he would not dare to put the Principal of St. Leonard's into the "bottle
dungeon."

If such hopes ever crossed Geordie's keen fancy, they were disappointed suddenly and fearfully.
The fire which had been kindled in France was to reach to Scotland likewise.  "Revolutions
are not made with rose-water;" and the time was at hand when all good spirits in Scotland,
and George Buchanan among them, had to choose, once and for all, amid danger, confusion, terror,
whether they would serve God or Mammon; for to serve both would be soon impossible.

Which side, in that war of light and darkness, George Buchanan took, is notorious.  He saw
then, as others have seen since, that the two men in Scotland who were capable of being her
captains in the strife were Knox and Murray; and to them he gave in his allegiance heart and soul.

This is the critical epoch in Buchanan's life.  By his conduct to Queen Mary he must stand
or fall.  It is my belief that he will stand.  It is not my intention to enter into the details
of a matter so painful, so shocking, so prodigious; and now that that question is finally set
at rest, by the writings both of Mr. Froude and Mr. Burton, there is no need to allude to it
further, save where Buchanan's name is concerned.  One may now have every sympathy with Mary
Stuart; one may regard with awe a figure so stately, so tragic, in one sense so heroic,--for
she reminds one rather of the heroine of an old Greek tragedy, swept to her doom by some irresistible
fate, than of a being of our own flesh and blood, and of our modern and Christian times.  One
may sympathise with the great womanhood which charmed so many while she was alive; which has
charmed, in later years, so many noble spirits who have believed in her innocence, and have
doubtless been elevated and purified by their devotion to one who seemed to them an ideal being.
So far from regarding her as a hateful personage, one may feel oneself forbidden to hate a
woman whom God may have loved, and may have pardoned, to judge from the punishment so swift,
and yet so enduring, which He inflicted.  At least, he must so believe who holds that punishment
is a sign of mercy; that the most dreadful of all dooms is impunity.  Nay, more, those "Casket"
letters and sonnets may be a relief to the mind of one who believes in her guilt on other grounds;
a relief when one finds in them a tenderness, a sweetness, a delicacy, a magnificent self-sacrifice,
however hideously misplaced, which shows what a womanly heart was there; a heart which, joined
to that queenly brain, might have made her a blessing and a glory to Scotland, had not the
whole character been warped and ruinate from childhood, by an education so abominable, that
anyone who knows what words she must have heard, what scenes she must have beheld in France,
from her youth up, will wonder that she sinned so little: not that she sinned so much.  One
may feel, in a word, that there is every excuse for those who have asserted Mary's innocence,
because their own high-mindedness shrank from believing her guilty: but yet Buchanan, in his
own place and time, may have felt as deeply that he could do no otherwise than he did.

The charges against him, as all readers of Scotch literature know well, may be reduced to two
heads.  1st.  The letters and sonnets were forgeries.  Maitland of Lethington may have forged
the letters; Buchanan, according to some, the sonnets.  Whoever forged them, Buchanan made
use of them in his Detection, knowing them to be forged.  2nd.  Whether Mary was innocent or
not, Buchanan acted a base and ungrateful part in putting himself in the forefront amongst
her accusers.  He had been her tutor, her pensioner.  She had heaped him with favours; and,
after all, she was his queen, and a defenceless woman: and yet he returned her kindness, in
the hour of her fall, by invectives fit only for a rancorous and reckless advocate, determined
to force a verdict by the basest arts of oratory.

Now as to the Casket letters.  I should have thought they bore in themselves the best evidence
of being genuine.  I can add nothing to the arguments of Mr. Froude and Mr. Burton, save this:
that no one clever enough to be a forger would have put together documents so incoherent, and
so incomplete.  For the evidence of guilt which they contain is, after all, slight and indirect,
and, moreover, superfluous altogether; seeing that Mary's guilt was open and palpable, before
the supposed discovery of the letters, to every person at home and abroad who had any knowledge
of the facts.  As for the alleged inconsistency of the letters with proven facts: the answer
is, that whosoever wrote the letters would be more likely to know facts which were taking place
around them than any critic could be one hundred or three hundred years afterwards.  But if
these mistakes as to facts actually exist in them, they are only a fresh argument for their
authenticity.  Mary, writing in agony and confusion, might easily make a mistake: forgers would
only take too good care to make none.

But the strongest evidence in favour of the letters and sonnets, in spite of the arguments
of good Dr. Whittaker and other apologists for Mary, is to be found in their tone.  A forger
in those coarse days would have made Mary write in some Semiramis or Roxana vein, utterly alien
to the tenderness, the delicacy, the pitiful confusion of mind, the conscious weakness, the
imploring and most feminine trust which makes the letters, to those who--as I do--believe in
them, more pathetic than any fictitious sorrows which poets could invent.  More than one touch,
indeed, of utter self-abasement, in the second letter, is so unexpected, so subtle, and yet
so true to the heart of woman, that--as has been well said--if it was invented there must have
existed in Scotland an earlier Shakespeare; who yet has died without leaving any other sign,
for good or evil, of his dramatic genius.

As for the theory (totally unsupported) that Buchanan forged the poem usually called the "Sonnets;"
it is paying old Geordie's genius, however versatile it may have been, too high a compliment
to believe that he could have written both them and the Detection; while it is paying his shrewdness
too low a compliment to believe that he could have put into them, out of mere carelessness
or stupidity, the well-known line, which seems incompatible with the theory both of the letters
and of his own Detection; and which has ere now been brought forward as a fresh proof of Mary's
innocence.

And, as with the letters, so with the sonnets: their delicacy, their grace, their reticence,
are so many arguments against their having been forged by any Scot of the sixteenth century,
and least of all by one in whose character--whatever his other virtues may have been--delicacy
was by no means the strongest point.

As for the complaint that Buchanan was ungrateful to Mary, it must be said: That even if she,
and not Murray, had bestowed on him the temporalities of Crossraguel Abbey four years before,
it was merely fair pay for services fairly rendered; and I am not aware that payment, or even
favours, however gracious, bind any man's soul and conscience in questions of highest morality
and highest public importance.  And the importance of that question cannot be exaggerated.
At a moment when Scotland seemed struggling in death-throes of anarchy, civil and religious,
and was in danger of becoming a prey either to England or to France, if there could not be
formed out of the heart of her a people, steadfast, trusty, united, strong politically because
strong in the fear of God and the desire of righteousness--at such a moment as this, a crime
had been committed, the like of which had not been heard in Europe since the tragedy of Joan
of Naples.  All Europe stood aghast.  The honour of the Scottish nation was at stake.  More
than Mary or Bothwell were known to be implicated in the deed; and--as Buchanan puts it in
the opening of his "De Jure Regni"--"The fault of some few was charged upon all; and the common
hatred of a particular person did redound to the whole nation; so that even such as were remote
from any suspicion were inflamed by the infamy of men's crimes." {17}

To vindicate the national honour, and to punish the guilty, as well as to save themselves from
utter anarchy, the great majority of the Scotch nation had taken measures against Mary which
required explicit justification in the sight of Europe, as Buchanan frankly confesses in the
opening of his "De Jure Regni."  The chief authors of those measures had been summoned, perhaps
unwisely and unjustly, to answer for their conduct to the Queen of England.  Queen Elizabeth--a
fact which was notorious enough then, though it has been forgotten till the last few years--was
doing her utmost to shield Mary.  Buchanan was deputed, it seems, to speak out for the people
of Scotland; and certainly never people had an abler apologist.  If he spoke fiercely, savagely,
it must be remembered that he spoke of a fierce and savage matter; if he used--and it may be
abused--all the arts of oratory, it must be remembered that he was fighting for the honour,
and it may be for the national life, of his country, and striking--as men in such cases have
a right to strike--as hard as he could.  If he makes no secret of his indignation, and even
contempt, it must be remembered that indignation and contempt may well have been real with
him, while they were real with the soundest part of his countrymen; with that reforming middle
class, comparatively untainted by French profligacy, comparatively undebauched by feudal subservience,
which has been the leaven which has leavened the whole Scottish people in the last three centuries
with the elements of their greatness.  If, finally, he heaps up against the unhappy Queen charges
which Mr. Burton thinks incredible, it must be remembered that, as he well says, these charges
give the popular feeling about Queen Mary; and it must be remembered also, that that popular
feeling need not have been altogether unfounded.  Stories which are incredible, thank God,
in these milder days, were credible enough then, because, alas! they were so often true. Things
more ugly than any related of poor Mary were possible enough--as no one knew better than Buchanan--in
that very French court in which Mary had been brought up; things as ugly were possible in Scotland
then, and for at least a century later; and while we may hope that Buchanan has overstated
his case, we must not blame him too severely for yielding to a temptation common to all men
of genius when their creative power is roused to its highest energy by a great cause and a
great indignation.

And that the genius was there, no man can doubt; one cannot read that "hideously eloquent"
description of Kirk o' Field, which Mr. Burton has well chosen as a specimen of Buchanan's
style, without seeing that we are face to face with a genius of a very lofty order: not, indeed,
of the loftiest--for there is always in Buchanan's work, it seems to me, a want of unconsciousness,
and a want of tenderness--but still a genius worthy to be placed beside those ancient writers
from whom he took his manner. Whether or not we agree with his contemporaries, who say that
he equalled Virgil in Latin poetry, we may place him fairly as a prose writer by the side of
Demosthenes, Cicero, or Tacitus.  And so I pass from this painful subject; only quoting--if
I may be permitted to quote--Mr. Burton's wise and gentle verdict on the whole.  "Buchanan,"
he says, "though a zealous Protestant, had a good deal of the Catholic and sceptical spirit
of Erasmus, and an admiring eye for everything that was great and beautiful. Like the rest
of his countrymen, he bowed himself in presence of the lustre that surrounded the early career
of his mistress.  More than once he expressed his pride and reverence in the inspiration of
a genius deemed by his contemporaries to be worthy of the theme.  There is not, perhaps, to
be found elsewhere in literature so solemn a memorial of shipwrecked hopes, of a sunny opening
and a stormy end, as one finds in turning the leaves of the volume which contains the beautiful
epigram 'Nympha Caledoniae' in one part, the 'Detectio Mariae Reginae' in another; and this
contrast is, no doubt, a faithful parallel of the reaction in the popular mind.  This reaction
seems to have been general, and not limited to the Protestant party; for the conditions under
which it became almost a part of the creed of the Church of Rome to believe in her innocence
had not arisen."

If Buchanan, as some of his detractors have thought, raised himself by subserviency to the
intrigues of the Regent Murray, the best heads in Scotland seem to have been of a different
opinion.  The murder of Murray did not involve Buchanan's fall.  He had avenged it, as far
as pen could do it, by that "Admonition Direct to the Trew Lordis," in which he showed himself
as great a master of Scottish, as he was of Latin prose.  His satire of the "Chameleon," though
its publication was stopped by Maitland, must have been read in manuscript by many of those
same "True Lords;" and though there were nobler instincts in Maitland than any Buchanan gave
him credit for, the satire breathed an honest indignation against that wily turncoat's misgoings,
which could not but recommend the author to all honest men.  Therefore it was, I presume, and
not because he was a rogue, and a hired literary spadassin, that to the best heads in Scotland
he seemed so useful, it may be so worthy, a man, that he be provided with continually increasing
employment.  As tutor to James I.; as director, for a short time, of the chancery; as keeper
of the privy seal, and privy councillor; as one of the commissioners for codifying the laws,
and again--for in the semi-anarchic state of Scotland, government had to do everything in the
way of organisation--in the committee for promulgating a standard Latin grammar; in the committee
for reforming the University of St. Andrew's: in all these Buchanan's talents were again and
again called for; and always ready.  The value of his work, especially that for the reform
of St. Andrew's, must be judged by Scotsmen, rather than by an Englishman; but all that one
knows of it justifies Melville's sentence in the well-known passage in his memoirs, wherein
he describes the tutors and household of the young king.  "Mr. George was a Stoic philosopher,
who looked not far before him;" in plain words, a high-minded and right-minded man, bent on
doing the duty which lay nearest him.  The worst that can be said against him during these
times is, that his name appears with the sum of 100 pounds against it, as one of those "who
were to be entertained in Scotland by pensions out of England;" and Ruddiman, of course, comments
on the fact by saying that Buchanan "was at length to act under the threefold character of
malcontent, reformer, and pensioner:" but it gives no proof whatsoever that Buchanan ever received
any such bribe; and in the very month, seemingly, in which that list was written--10th March,
1579--Buchanan had given a proof to the world that he was not likely to be bribed or bought,
by publishing a book, as offensive probably to Queen Elizabeth as it was to his own royal pupil;
namely, his famous "De Jure Regni apud Scotos," the very primer, according to many great thinkers,
of constitutional liberty.  He dedicates that book to King James, "not only as his monitor,
but also as an importunate and bold exactor, which in these his tender and flexible years may
conduct him in safety past the rocks of flattery." He has complimented James already on his
abhorrence of flattery, "his inclination far above his years for undertaking all heroical and
noble attempts, his promptitude in obeying his instructors and governors, and all who give
him sound admonition, and his judgment and diligence in examining affairs, so that no man's
authority can have much weight with him unless it be confirmed by probable reasons."  Buchanan
may have thought that nine years of his stern rule had eradicated some of James's ill conditions;
the petulance which made him kill the Master of Mar's sparrow, in trying to wrest it out of
his hand; the carelessness with which--if the story told by Chytraeus, on the authority of
Buchanan's nephew, be true--James signed away his crown to Buchanan for fifteen days, and only
discovered his mistake by seeing Bachanan act in open court the character of King of Scots.
Buchanan had at last made him a scholar; he may have fancied that he had made him likewise
a manful man: yet he may have dreaded that, as James grew up, the old inclinations would return
in stronger and uglier shapes, and that flattery might be, as it was after all, the cause of
James's moral ruin.  He at least will be no flatterer.  He opens the dialogue which he sends
to the king, with a calm but distinct assertion of his mother's guilt, and a justification
of the conduct of men who were now most of them past helping Buchanan, for they were laid in
their graves; and then goes on to argue fairly, but to lay down firmly, in a sort of Socratic
dialogue, those very principles by loyalty to which the House of Hanover has reigned, and will
reign, over these realms.  So with his History of Scotland; later antiquarian researches have
destroyed the value of the earlier portions of it: but they have surely increased the value
of those later portions, in which Buchanan inserted so much which he had already spoken out
in his Detection of Mary.  In that book also liberavit animam suam; he spoke his mind fearless
of consequences, in the face of a king who he must have known--for Buchanan was no dullard--regarded
him with deep dislike, who might in a few years be able to work his ruin.

But those few years were not given to Buchanan.  He had all but done his work, and he hastened
to get it over before the night should come wherein no man can work.  One must be excused for
telling--one would not tell it in a book intended to be read only by Scotsmen, who know or
ought to know the tale already--how the two Melvilles and Buchanan's nephew Thomas went to
see him in Edinburgh, in September, 1581, hearing that he was ill, and his History still in
the press; and how they found the old sage, true to his schoolmaster's instincts, teaching
the Hornbook to his servant-lad; and how he told them that doing that was "better than stealing
sheep, or sitting idle, which was as bad," and showed them that dedication to James I., in
which he holds up to his imitation as a hero whose equal was hardly to be found in history,
that very King David whose liberality to the Romish Church provoked James's witticism that
"David was a sair saint for the crown."  Andrew Melville, so James Melville says, found fault
with the style.  Buchanan replied that he could do no more for thinking of another thing, which
was to die.  They then went to Arbuthnot's printing-house, and inspected the history, as far
as that terrible passage concerning Rizzio's burial, where Mary is represented as "laying the
miscreant almost in the arms of Maud de Valois, the late queen." Alarmed, and not without reason,
at such plain speaking, they stopped the press, and went back to Buchanan's house.  Buchanan
was in bed.  "He was going," he said, "the way of welfare."  They asked him to soften the passage;
the king might prohibit the whole work.  "Tell me, man," said Buchanan, "if I have told the
truth."  They could not, or would not, deny it.  "Then I will abide his feud, and all his kin's;
pray, pray to God for me, and let Him direct all."  "So," says Melville, "before the printing
of his chronicle was ended, this most learned, wise, and godly man ended his mortal life."

Camden has a hearsay story--written, it must be remembered, in James I.'s time--that Buchanan,
on his death-bed, repented of his harsh words against Queen Mary; and an old Lady Rosyth is
said to have said that when she was young a certain David Buchanan recollected hearing some
such words from George Buchanan's own mouth.  Those who will, may read what Ruddiman and Love
have said, and oversaid, on both sides of the question: whatever conclusion they come to, it
will probably not be that to which George Chalmers comes in his life of Ruddiman: that "Buchanan,
like other liars, who, by the repetition of falsehoods are induced to consider the fiction
as truth, had so often dwelt with complacency on the forgeries of his Detections, and the figments
of his History, that he at length regarded his fictions and his forgeries as most authentic facts."

At all events his fictions and his forgeries had not paid him in that coin which base men generally
consider the only coin worth having, namely, the good things of this life.  He left nothing
behind him--if at least Dr. Irving has rightly construed the "Testament Dative" which he gives
in his appendix--save arrears to the sum of 100 pounds of his Crossraguel pension.  We may
believe as we choose the story in Mackenzie's "Scotch Writers" that when he felt himself dying,
he asked his servant Young about the state of his funds, and finding he had not enough to bury
himself withal, ordered what he had to be given to the poor, and said that if they did not
choose to bury him they might let him lie where he was, or cast him in a ditch, the matter
was very little to him.  He was buried, it seems, at the expense of the city of Edinburgh,
in the Greyfriars' Churchyard--one says in a plain turf grave--among the marble monuments which
covered the bones of worse or meaner men; and whether or not the "Throughstone" which, "sunk
under the ground in the Greyfriars," was raised and cleaned by the Council of Edinburgh in
1701, was really George Buchanan's, the reigning powers troubled themselves little for several
generations where he lay.

For Buchanan's politics were too advanced for his age.  Not only Catholic Scotsmen, like Blackwood,
Winzet, and Ninian, but Protestants, like Sir Thomas Craig and Sir John Wemyss, could not stomach
the "De Jure Regni." They may have had some reason on their side.  In the then anarchic state
of Scotland, organisation and unity under a common head may have been more important than the
assertion of popular rights.  Be that as it may, in 1584, only two years after his death, the
Scots Parliament condemned his Dialogue and History as untrue, and commanded all possessors
of copies to deliver them up, that they might be purged of "the offensive and extraordinary
matters" which they contained.  The "De Jure Regni" was again prohibited in Scotland, in 1664,
even in manuscript; and in 1683, the whole of Buchanan's political works had the honour of
being burned by the University of Oxford, in company with those of Milton, Languet, and others,
as "pernicious books, and damnable doctrines, destructive to the sacred persons of Princes,
their state and government, and of all human society."  And thus the seed which Buchanan had
sown, and Milton had watered--for the allegation that Milton borrowed from Buchanan is probably
true, and equally honourable to both--lay trampled into the earth, and seemingly lifeless,
till it tillered out, and blossomed, and bore fruit to a good purpose, in the Revolution of 1688.

To Buchanan's clear head and stout heart, Scotland owes, as England owes likewise, much of
her modern liberty.  But Scotland's debt to him, it seems to me, is even greater on the count
of morality, public and private.  What the morality of the Scotch upper classes was like, in
Buchanan's early days, is too notorious; and there remains proof enough--in the writings, for
instance, of Sir David Lindsay--that the morality of the populace, which looked up to the nobles
as its example and its guide, was not a whit better.  As anarchy increased, immorality was
likely to increase likewise; and Scotland was in serious danger of falling into such a state
as that into which Poland fell, to its ruin, within a hundred and fifty years after; in which
the savagery of feudalism, without its order or its chivalry, would be varnished over by a
thin coating of French "civilisation," and, as in the case of Bothwell, the vices of the court
of Paris should be added to those of the Northern freebooter.  To deliver Scotland from that
ruin, it was needed that she should be united into one people, strong, not in mere political,
but in moral ideas; strong by the clear sense of right and wrong, by the belief in the government
and the judgments of a living God.  And the tone which Buchanan, like Knox, adopted concerning
the great crimes of their day, helped notably that national salvation.  It gathered together,
organised, strengthened, the scattered and wavering elements of public morality.  It assured
the hearts of all men who loved the right and hated the wrong; and taught a whole nation to
call acts by their just names, whoever might be the doers of them.  It appealed to the common
conscience of men.  It proclaimed a universal and God-given morality, a bar at which all, from
the lowest to the highest, must alike be judged.

The tone was stern: but there was need of sternness.  Moral life and death were in the balance.
If the Scots people were to be told that the crimes which roused their indignation were excusable,
or beyond punishment, or to be hushed up and slipped over in any way, there was an end of morality
among them.  Every man, from the greatest to the least, would go and do likewise, according
to his powers of evil.  That method was being tried in France, and in Spain likewise, during
those very years.  Notorious crimes were hushed up under pretence of loyalty; excused as political
necessities; smiled away as natural and pardonable weaknesses.  The result was the utter demoralisation,
both of France and Spain.  Knox and Buchanan, the one from the standpoint of an old Hebrew
prophet, the other rather from that of a Juvenal or a Tacitus, tried the other method, and
called acts by their just names, appealing alike to conscience and to God.  The result was
virtue and piety, and that manly independence of soul which is thought compatible with hearty
loyalty, in a country labouring under heavy disadvantages, long divided almost into two hostile
camps, two rival races.

And the good influence was soon manifest, not only in those who sided with Buchanan and his
friends, but in those who most opposed them.  The Roman Catholic preachers, who at first asserted
Mary's right to impurity while they allowed her guilt, grew silent for shame, and set themselves
to assert her entire innocence; while the Scots who have followed their example have, to their
honour, taken up the same ground.  They have fought Buchanan on the ground of fact, not on
the ground of morality: they have alleged--as they had a fair right to do--the probability
of intrigue and forgery in an age so profligate: the improbability that a Queen so gifted by
nature and by fortune, and confessedly for a long while so strong and so spotless, should as
it were by a sudden insanity have proved so untrue to herself.  Their noblest and purest sympathies
have been enlisted--and who can blame them?--in loyalty to a Queen, chivalry to a woman, pity
for the unfortunate and--as they conceived--the innocent; but whether they have been right
or wrong in their view of facts, the Scotch partisans of Mary have always--as far as I know--been
right in their view of morals; they have never deigned to admit Mary's guilt, and then to palliate
it by those sentimental, or rather sensual, theories of human nature, too common in a certain
school of French literature, too common, alas! in a certain school of modern English novels.
They have not said, "She did it; but after all, was the deed so very inexcusable?"  They have
said, "The deed was inexcusable: but she did not do it."  And so the Scotch admirers of Mary,
who have numbered among them many a pure and noble, as well as many a gifted spirit, have kept
at least themselves unstained; and have shown, whether consciously or not, that they too share
in that sturdy Scotch moral sense which has been so much strengthened--as I believe by the
plain speech of good old George Buchanan.

FOOTNOTES

{1}  This lecture was delivered in America in 1874.

{3}  On the Fiftieth Birthday of Agassiz.

{4}  This lecture was given in America in 1874.

{5}  This lecture was given in America in 1874.

{6}  This lecture and the two preceding ones, being published after the author's death, have
not had the benefit of his corrections.

{7}  A Life of Rondelet, by his pupil Laurent Joubert, is to be found appended to his works;
and with an account of his illness and death, by his cousin, Claude Formy, which is well worth
the perusal of any man, wise or foolish.  Many interesting details beside, I owe to the courtesy
of Professor Planchon, of Montpellier, author of a discourse on "Rondelet et vies Disciples,"
which appeared, with a learned and curious Appendix, in the "Montpellier Medical" for 1866.

{8}  This lecture was given at Cambridge in 1869.

{9}  This lecture was given at Cambridge in 1869.

{10}  I owe this account of Bloet's--which appears to me the only one trustworthy--to the courtesy
and erudition of Professor Henry Morley, who finds it quoted from Bloet's "Acroama," in the
"Observationum Medicarum Rariorum," lib. vii., of John Theodore Schenk.  Those who wish to
know several curious passages of Vesalius's life, which I have not inserted in this article,
would do well to consult one by Professor Morley, "Anatomy in Long Clothes," in "Fraser's Magazine"
for November, 1853.  May I express a hope, which I am sure will be shared by all who have read
Professor Morley's biographies of Jerome Carden and of Cornelius Agrippa, that he will find
leisure to return to the study of Vesalius's life; and will do for him what he has done for
the two just-mentioned writers?

{11}  Olivarez's "Relacion" is to be found in the Granvelle State Papers. For the general account
of Don Carlos's illness, and of the miraculous agencies by which his cure was said to have
been effected, the general reader should consult Miss Frere's "Biography of Elizabeth of Valois,"
vol. i. pp. 307-19.

{12}  In justice to poor Doctor Olivarez, it must be said that, while he allows all force to
the intercession of the Virgin and of Fray Diego, and of "many just persons," he cannot allow
that there was any "miracle properly so called," because the prince was cured according to
"natural order," and by "experimental remedies" of the physicians.

{13}  This lecture was given at Cambridge in 1869, and has not had the benefit of the author's
corrections for the press.

{14}  Delrio's book, a famous one in its day, was published about 1612.

{15}  For a true estimate of Paracelsus you must read "Fur Philippus Aureolus Theophrarstus
von Hohenheim," by that great German physician and savant, Professor Marx, of Gottiingen; also
a valuable article founded on Dr. Marx's views in the "Nouveau Biographie Universelle;" and
also--which is within the reach of all--Professor Maurice's article on Paracelsus in Vol. 
II. of his history of "Moral and Metaphysical Philosophy."  But the best key to Paracelsus
is to be found in his own works.

{16}  So says Dr. Irving, writing in 1817.  I have, however, tried in vain to get a sight of
this book.  I need not tell Scotch scholars how much I am indebted throughout this article
to Mr. David Irving's erudite second edition of Buchanan's Life.

{17}  From the quaint old translation of 1721, by "A Person of Honour of the Kingdom of Scotland."

