I am aware that, especially in the earlier pages, difficult subjects are treated in a manner
far too summary, but they require an exposition so full that it would destroy the original
form of the Lecture, while a slight expansion would do little to provide against misunderstandings.

                                                           A. C. B.

POETRY FOR POETRY'S SAKE

One who, after twenty years, is restored to the University where he was taught and first tried
to teach, and who has received at the hands of his Alma Mater an honour of which he never dreamed,
is tempted to speak both of himself and of her. But I remember that you have come to listen
to my thoughts about a great subject, and not to my feelings about myself; and, of Oxford,
who that holds this Professorship could dare to speak, when he recalls the exquisite verse
in which one of his predecessors described her beauty, and the prose in which he gently touched
on her illusions and protested that they were as nothing when set against her age-long warfare
with the Philistine? "I think it's the new preacher," said the driver. "Anyhow, we can easily
see." They watched the buckboard with the black horse and saw it turn in at the white cottage.

"My
guess was right, Mr. Hopkins," said the driver. "I haven't been in church for two years, but
I'm going to hear that fellow preach next Sunday, all right."

"Why don't you go to church?" said the older man, who by his dress and manner was apparently
some one of social importance.

"Oh, I dunno.

Since I left Oxford one change has taken place in its educational system which may be thought
to affect the Professorship of Poetry. A School of English Language and Literature has been
founded, and has attracted a fair number of candidates. Naturally I rejoice in this change,
knowing from experience the value of these studies; and knowing also from experience, if I
may speak boldly, how idle is that dream which flits about in Oxford and whispers that the
mastering of Old English, on the basis of Teutonic phonology, and the conquest of the worlds
opened by Chaucer and Shakespeare and Swift and Burke and twenty more, is a business too slight
and a discipline not severe enough for undergraduates. I should be glad to lighten their labours,
and, if it should seem advisable to those who can judge, I propose to give in one of the three
Terms of the year, in addition to my statutory lecture, a few others intended specially for
those who are reading for the School of English. I wish I could do more, but I resigned my
chair in Glasgow with a view to work of another kind, and I could not have parted from my students
there, to whom I am bound by ties of the most grateful affection, in order to take up similar
duties even in the University of Oxford.

The charming poem with which my predecessor opened his literary career, and his admirable contributions
to poetical history and criticism, prove that it would have been easy to him to devote his
lectures to the interpretation of particular poets and poems. I believe, however, that he thought
it better to confine himself chiefly to questions in Poetics or Aesthetics. I can well understand
his choice; but, partly because he made it, I propose to make another, and to discuss these
questions, if at all, only as they are illustrated by particular writers and works. Still in
an inaugural lecture it is customary to take some wider subject; and so I fear you may have
to-day to lament the truth of Addison's remark: 'There is nothing in nature so irksome as general
discourses, especially when they turn chiefly upon words.' Mine turns entirely upon words.

[Sidenote: POETRY]

The words 'Poetry for poetry's sake' recall the famous phrase 'Art for Art.' It is far from
my purpose to examine the possible meanings of that phrase, or all the questions it involves.
I propose to state briefly what I understand by 'Poetry for poetry's sake,' and then, after
guarding against one or two misapprehensions of the formula, to consider more fully a single
problem connected with it. And I must premise, without attempting to justify them, certain
explanations. We are to consider poetry in its essence, and apart from the flaws which in most
poems accompany their poetry. We are to include in the idea of poetry the metrical form, and
not to regard this as a mere accident or a mere vehicle. And, finally, poetry being poems,
we are to think of a poem as it actually exists; and, without aiming here at accuracy, we may
say that an actual poem is the succession of experiences--sounds, images, thoughts, emotions--through
which we pass when we are reading as poetically as we can. Of course this imaginative experience--if
I may use the phrase for brevity--differs with every reader and every time of reading: a poem
exists in innumerable degrees. But that insurmountable fact lies in the nature of things and
does not concern us now.

What then does the formula 'Poetry for poetry's sake' tell us about this experience? It says,
as I understand it, these things. First, this experience is an end in itself, is worth having
on its own account, has an intrinsic value. Next, its poetic value is this intrinsic worth
alone. Poetry may have also an ulterior value as a means to culture or religion; because it
conveys instruction, or softens the passions, or furthers a good cause; because it brings the
poet fame or money or a quiet conscience. So much the better: let it be valued for these reasons
too. But its ulterior worth neither is nor can directly determine its poetic worth as a satisfying
imaginative experience; and this is to be judged entirely from within. And to these two positions
the formula would add, though not of necessity, a third. The consideration of ulterior ends,
whether by the poet in the act of composing or by the reader in the act of experiencing, tends
to lower poetic value. It does so because it tends to change the nature of poetry by taking
it out of its own atmosphere. For its nature is to be not a part, nor yet a copy, of the real
world (as we commonly understand that phrase), but to be a world by itself, independent, complete,
autonomous; and to possess it fully you must enter that world, conform to its laws, and ignore
for the time the beliefs, aims, and particular conditions which belong to you in the other
world of reality.

[Sidenote: POETIC VALUE INTRINSIC]

Of the more serious misapprehensions to which these statements may give rise I will glance
only at one or two. The offensive consequences often drawn from the formula 'Art for Art' will
be found to attach not to the doctrine that Art is an end in itself, but to the doctrine that
Art is the whole or supreme end of human life. And as this latter doctrine, which seems to
me absurd, is in any case quite different from the former, its consequences fall outside my
subject. The formula 'Poetry is an end in itself' has nothing to say on the many questions
of moral judgement which arise from the fact that poetry has its place in a many-sided life.
For anything it says, the intrinsic value of poetry might be so small, and its ulterior effects
so mischievous, that it had better not exist. The formula only tells us that we must not place
in antithesis poetry and human good, for poetry is one kind of human good; and that we must
not determine the intrinsic value of this kind of good by direct reference to another. If we
do, we shall find ourselves maintaining what we did not expect. If poetic value lies in the
stimulation of religious feelings, Lead, kindly Light is no better a poem than many a tasteless
version of a Psalm: if in the excitement of patriotism, why is Scots, wha hae superior to We
don't want to fight? if in the mitigation of the passions, the Odes of Sappho will win but
little praise: if in instruction, Armstrong's Art of preserving Health should win much.

Again, our formula may be accused of cutting poetry away from its connexion with life. And
this accusation raises so huge a problem that I must ask leave to be dogmatic as well as brief.
There is plenty of connexion between life and poetry, but it is, so to say, a connexion underground.
The two may be called different forms of the same thing: one of them having (in the usual sense)
reality, but seldom fully satisfying imagination; while the other offers something which satisfies
imagination but has not (in the usual sense) full reality. They are parallel developments which
nowhere meet, or, if I may use incorrectly a word which will be useful later, they are analogues.
Hence we understand one by help of the other, and even, in a sense, care for one because of
the other; but hence also, poetry neither is life, nor, strictly speaking, a copy of it. Until
stage time he could be found at the Temperance House.

He rose quickly to go. Belle asked if he would, at his convenience, put the offer in writing, so that
they might be clear as to details, indicating whether it was understood to be by the year
and permanent, or for a time on approbation.

"I'll do that now," he replied. Taking the writing materials that she brought, he wrote and signed
the formal call, with the intimation that it was for one year, subject to renewal.

As soon as their caller was safely gone, Jim picked up Belle in his arms and, marching up and
down with her as if she had been a baby, he fairly gasped: "You are a wonder! You are a wonder!
If I had gone my way, where should I be now? A drunkard or a cowboy; maybe in jail; or, at best,
a doorkeeper in the Salvation Army. Oh, Belle, I swear I'll never pick a trail or open my mouth--never
do a thing--without first consulting you." And the elation of the moment exploded into a burst
of Irish humour. "Now, please ma'am, what am I to do?"

"What are we to do, you mean," retorted Belle. "Well, in view of the fact that we haven't got
the cash the folks here think we have, we must do something.

Twenty-five hundred dollars a year is an improvement on three hundred a year, and as there is no
other positive offer in sight, I vote for accepting."

"That settles it. What right has a worm like me to vote?"

"That's a poor metaphor, Jim; try again."

"All right! The mighty Captain of this warship accepts the advice of the insignificant pilot--who
happens to know the channel. How is that?"

"It can't be done, Jim. I may help the guiding, but without you I'd have nothing to guide. Each
of us gives his best to the combine--each is a half of the arch; not simply are we twice as strong
together, but twenty times as strong as we should be singly."

"Now for the call. Do you realize, Jim, that it means good-bye to the prairies, good-bye to
the hills, and good-bye to Midnight?"

Jim nodded and looked grave. Belle went on: "But it also means living the life that you long ago
elected to live--being a chosen instrument of good to bring blessings to those whose lives
are black with sorrow and despair. It means giving up all the physical pleasures you love so deeply
and rightly; but it also means following the Master. Which is it to be?"

"I know," he responded, "I know. But Belle, dear, I never had a moment of doubt when I had
to decide between Belle and Blazing Star; why should I hesitate now
when it's Midnight or Christ?"

So the letter was written and delivered forthwith at the Temperance Hotel. One week later Belle
and Jim were driving again toward Cedar Mountain, headed for the railway which was to take them
to Chicago. As they swung down the trail Belle looked out on the familiar objects and said:

"Here we are again at the beginning of a new chapter; and again it starts on the old Deadwood
trail."
CHAPTER LI

These Little Ones

It was a long but easy journey down
south to the Union Pacific, and finally east to Chicago. And when
the young couple, whom the passengers watched with much interest,
arrived at the great city, they found half a dozen men and women of
importance awaiting them at the Union Station, with more servants
to assist them than they had pieces of luggage. Mr. and Mrs. Hopkins,
with their own carriage, were in attendance to offer the hospitality
of their house to the Rev. James Hartigan and his bride. It was a
long drive to Englewood; but everything that kind friends, clear skies,
and human forethought could do to make it pleasant was fully done.
For the time being, they were installed in the Hopkins mansion--a
veritable palace--and for the first time Jim had the chance to learn
how the rich folk really live. While it was intensely interesting,
he was eager to see the field of his future work. Belle, however,
agreed with their host and hostess that it would be worth while to
see a little of Chicago first.

The stockyards are either fascinating
or intensely disgusting. The Hartigans had their fill of them in five
minutes. The Art Institute had not yet been built, but there were
museums and galleries and good music in many places. Lincoln Park
and the great rolling, gusty lake were pleasant to behold; but to
Jim, the biggest thing of all--the thing of which the buildings and
the crowds were mere manifestations--was the vast concentration of
human life, strife, and emotion--the throb and compulsion of this,
the one great heart of the West.

In the first place, then, let us take 'subject' in one particular sense; let us understand
by it that which we have in view when, looking at the title of a poem, we say that the poet
has chosen this or that for his subject. The subject, in this sense, so far as I can discover,
is generally something, real or imaginary, as it exists in the minds of fairly cultivated people.
The subject of Paradise Lost would be the story of the Fall as that story exists in the general
imagination of a Bible-reading people. The subject of Shelley's stanzas To a Skylark would
be the ideas which arise in the mind of an educated person when, without knowing the poem,
he hears the word 'skylark.' If the title of a poem conveys little or nothing to us, the 'subject'
appears to be either what we should gather by investigating the title in a dictionary or other
book of the kind, or else such a brief suggestion as might be offered by a person who had read
the poem, and who said, for example, that the subject of The Ancient Mariner was a sailor who
killed an albatross and suffered for his deed.

[Sidenote: VALUE NOT IN SUBJECT]

Now the subject, in this sense (and I intend to use the word in no other), is not, as such,
inside the poem, but outside it. The contents of the stanzas To a Skylark are not the ideas
suggested by the word 'skylark' to the average man; they belong to Shelley just as much as
the language does. The subject, therefore, is not the matter of the poem at all; and its opposite
is not the form of the poem, but the whole poem. The subject is one thing; the poem, matter
and form alike, another thing. This being so, it is surely obvious that the poetic value cannot
lie in the subject, but lies entirely in its opposite, the poem. How can the subject determine
the value when on one and the same subject poems may be written of all degrees of merit and
demerit; or when a perfect poem may be composed on a subject so slight as a pet sparrow, and,
if Macaulay may be trusted, a nearly worthless poem on a subject so stupendous as the omnipresence
of the Deity? The 'formalist' is here perfectly right. Nor is he insisting on something unimportant.
He is contending against our tendency to take the work of art as a mere copy or reminder of
something already in our heads, or at the best as a suggestion of some idea as little removed
as possible from the familiar. The sightseer who promenades a picture-gallery, remarking that
this portrait is so like his cousin, or that landscape the very image of his birthplace, or
who, after satisfying himself that one picture is about Elijah, passes on rejoicing to discover
the subject, and nothing but the subject, of the next--what is he but an extreme example of
this tendency? Well, but the very same tendency vitiates much of our criticism, much criticism
of Shakespeare, for example, which, with all its cleverness and partial truth, still shows
that the critic never passed from his own mind into Shakespeare's; and it may still be traced
even in so fine a critic as Coleridge, as when he dwarfs the sublime struggle of Hamlet into
the image of his own unhappy weakness. Hazlitt by no means escaped its influence. Only the
third of that great trio, Lamb, appears almost always to have rendered the conception of the
composer.

Again, it is surely true that we cannot determine beforehand what subjects are fit for Art,
or name any subject on which a good poem might not possibly be written. To divide subjects
into two groups, the beautiful or elevating, and the ugly or vicious, and to judge poems according
as their subjects belong to one of these groups or the other, is to fall into the same pit,
to confuse with our pre-conceptions the meaning of the poet. What the thing is in the poem
he is to be judged by, not by the thing as it was before he touched it; and how can we venture
to say beforehand that he cannot make a true poem out of something which to us was merely alluring
or dull or revolting? The question whether, having done so, he ought to publish his poem; whether
the thing in the poet's work will not be still confused by the incompetent Puritan or the incompetent
sensualist with the thing in his mind, does not touch this point; it is a further question,
one of ethics, not of art. No doubt the upholders of 'Art for art's sake' will generally be
in favour of the courageous course, of refusing to sacrifice the better or stronger part of
the public to the weaker or worse; but their maxim in no way binds them to this view. Dante
Rossetti suppressed one of the best of his sonnets, a sonnet chosen for admiration by Tennyson,
himself extremely sensitive about the moral effect of poetry; suppressed it, I believe, because
it was called fleshly. One may regret Rossetti's judgement and at the same time admire his
scrupulousness; but in any case he judged in his capacity of citizen, not in his capacity of
artist.

[Sidenote: SUBJECT NOT INDIFFERENT]

So far then the 'formalist' appears to be right. But he goes too far, I think, if he maintains
that the subject is indifferent and that all subjects are the same to poetry. And he does not
prove his point by observing that a good poem might be written on a pin's head, and a bad one
on the Fall of Man. That shows that the subject settles nothing, but not that it counts for
nothing. The Fall of Man is really a more favourable subject than a pin's head. The Fall of
Man, that is to say, offers opportunities of poetic effects wider in range and more penetrating
in appeal. And the truth is that such a subject, as it exists in the general imagination, has
some aesthetic value before the poet touches it. It is, as you may choose to call it, an inchoate
poem or the débris of a poem. It is not an abstract idea or a bare isolated fact, but an assemblage
of figures, scenes, actions, and events, which already appeal to emotional imagination; and
it is already in some degree organized and formed. In spite of this a bad poet would make a
bad poem on it; but then we should say he was unworthy of the subject. And we should not say
this if he wrote a bad poem on a pin's head. Conversely, a good poem on a pin's head would
almost certainly revolutionize its subject far more than a good poem on the Fall of Man. It
might transform its subject so completely that we should say, 'The subject may be a pin's head,
but the substance of the poem has very little to do with it.'

This brings us to another and different antithesis. Those figures, scenes, events, that form
part of the subject called the Fall of Man, are not the substance of Paradise Lost; but in
Paradise Lost there are figures, scenes, and events resembling them in some degree. These,
with much more of the same kind, may be described as its substance, and may then be contrasted
with the measured language of the poem, which will be called its form. Subject is the opposite
not of form but of the whole poem. Substance is within the poem, and its opposite, form, is
also within the poem. I am not criticizing this antithesis at present, but evidently it is
quite different from the other. It is practically the distinction used in the old-fashioned
criticism of epic and drama, and it flows down, not unsullied, from Aristotle. Addison, for
example, in examining Paradise Lost considers in order the fable, the characters, and the sentiments;
these will be the substance: then he considers the language, that is, the style and numbers;
this will be the form. In like manner, the substance or meaning of a lyric may be distinguished
from the form.

[Sidenote: SUBSTANCE AND FORM]

Now I believe it will be found that a large part of the controversy we are dealing with arises
from a confusion between these two distinctions of substance and form, and of subject and poem.
The extreme formalist lays his whole weight on the form because he thinks its opposite is the
mere subject. The general reader is angry, but makes the same mistake, and gives to the subject
praises that rightly belong to the substance[1]. I will read an example of what I mean. I can
only explain the following words of a good critic by supposing that for the moment he has fallen
into this confusion: 'The mere matter of all poetry--to wit, the appearances of nature and
the thoughts and feelings of men--being unalterable, it follows that the difference between
poet and poet will depend upon the manner of each in applying language, metre, rhyme, cadence,
and what not, to this invariable material.' What has become here of the substance of Paradise
Lost--the story, scenery, characters, sentiments as they are in the poem? They have vanished
clean away. Nothing is left but the form on one side, and on the other not even the subject,
but a supposed invariable material, the appearances of nature and the thoughts and feelings
of men. Is it surprising that the whole value should then be found in the form?

So far we have assumed that this antithesis of substance and form is valid, and that it always
has one meaning. In reality it has several, but we will leave it in its present shape, and
pass to the question of its validity. And this question we are compelled to raise, because
we have to deal with the two contentions that the poetic value lies wholly or mainly in the
substance, and that it lies wholly or mainly in the form. Now these contentions, whether false
or true, may seem at least to be clear; but we shall find, I think, that they are both of them
false, or both of them nonsense: false if they concern anything outside the poem, nonsense
if they apply to something in it. For what do they evidently imply? They imply that there are
in a poem two parts, factors, or components, a substance and a form; and that you can conceive
them distinctly and separately, so that when you are speaking of the one you are not speaking
of the other. Otherwise how can you ask the question, In which of them does the value lie?
But really in a poem, apart from defects, there are no such factors or components; and therefore
it is strictly nonsense to ask in which of them the value lies. And on the other hand, if the
substance and the form referred to are not in the poem, then both the contentions are false,
for its poetic value lies in itself.

[Sidenote: IDENTITY OF SUBSTANCE AND FORM]

What I mean is neither new nor mysterious; and it will be clear, I believe, to any one who
reads poetry poetically and who closely examines his experience. When you are reading a poem,
I would ask--not analysing it, and much less criticizing it, but allowing it, as it proceeds,
to make its full impression on you through the exertion of your re-creating imagination--do
you then apprehend and enjoy as one thing a certain meaning or substance, and as another thing
certain articulate sounds, and do you somehow compound these two? Surely you do not, any more
than you apprehend apart, when you see some one smile, those lines in the face which express
a feeling, and the feeling that the lines express. Just as there the lines and their meaning
are to you one thing, not two, so in poetry the meaning and the sounds are one: there is, if
I may put it so, a resonant meaning, or a meaning resonance. If you read the line, 'The sun
is warm, the sky is clear,' you do not experience separately the image of a warm sun and clear
sky, on the one side, and certain unintelligible rhythmical sounds on the other; nor yet do
you experience them together, side by side; but you experience the one in the other. And in
like manner when you are really reading Hamlet, the action and the characters are not something
which you conceive apart from the words; you apprehend them from point to point in the words.
Afterwards, no doubt, when you are out of the poetic experience, but remember it, you may by
analysis decompose this unity, and attend to a substance more or less isolated, and a form
more or less isolated. But these are things in your analytic head, not in the poem, which is
poetic experience. And if you want to have the poem again, you cannot find it by adding together
these two products of decomposition; you can only find it by passing back into poetic experience.
And then what you have again is no aggregate of factors, it is a unity in which you can no
more separate a substance and a form than you can separate living blood and the life in the
blood. This unity has, if you like, various 'aspects' or 'sides,' but they are not factors
or parts; if you try to examine one, you find it is also the other. Call them substance and
form if you please, but these are not the reciprocally exclusive substance and form to which
the two contentions must refer. They do not 'agree,' for they are not apart: they are one thing
from different points of view, and in that sense identical. And this identity of content and
form, you will say, is no accident; it is of the essence of poetry in so far as it is poetry,
and of all art in so far as it is art. Just as there is in music not sound on one side and
a meaning on the other, but expressive sound, and if you ask what is the meaning you can only
answer by pointing to the sounds; just as in painting there is not a meaning plus paint, but
a meaning in paint, or significant paint, and no man can really express the meaning in any
other way than in paint and in this paint; so in a poem the true content and the true form
neither exist nor can be imagined apart. When then you are asked whether the value of a poem
lies in a substance got by decomposing the poem and present, as such, only in reflective analysis,
or in a form arrived at and existing in the same way, you will answer, 'It lies neither in
one, nor in the other, nor in any addition of them, but in the poem, where they are not.' And
when you are told that you are talking a priori metaphysics, you will not mind. 'Metaphysics'
does not mean anything. It is only a term of abuse applied to the effort to look at facts instead
of repeating a priori fictions.

We have then, first, an antithesis of subject and poem. This is clear and valid; and the question
in which of them does the value lie is intelligible; and its answer is, In the poem. We have
next a distinction of substance and form. If the substance means ideas, images, and the like
taken alone, and the form means the measured language taken by itself, this is a possible distinction,
but it is a distinction of things not in the poem, and the value lies in neither of them. If
substance and form mean anything in the poem, then each is involved in the other, and the question
in which of them the value lies has no sense. No doubt you may say, speaking loosely and perilously,
that in this poet or poem the aspect of substance is the more noticeable, and in that the aspect
of form, and you may pursue interesting discussions on this basis: but no principle or ultimate
question of value is touched by them. And apart from that question, of course, I am not denying
the usefulness and necessity of the distinction. We cannot dispense with it. To consider separately
the action or the characters of a play, and separately its style or versification, is both
legitimate and valuable, so long as we remember what we are doing. But the true critic in speaking
of these apart never really thinks of them apart; the whole, the poetic experience, of which
they are but aspects, is always in his mind; and he is always aiming at a richer, truer, more
intense repetition of that experience. On the other hand, when the question of principle, of
poetic value, is raised, these aspects must fall apart into components, separately conceivable;
and then there arise two heresies, equally false, that the value lies in one of two things,
both of which are outside the poem where its value cannot lie.

[Sidenote: SUBSTANCE]

On the heresy of the separable substance a few additional words will suffice. This heresy is
seldom formulated, but perhaps some unconscious holder of it may object: 'Surely the action
and the characters of Hamlet are in the play; and surely I can retain these, though I have
forgotten all the words. I admit that I do not possess the whole poem, but I possess a part,
and the most important part.' And I would answer: 'If we are not concerned with any question
of principle, I accept all that you say except the last words, which do raise such a question.
Speaking loosely, I agree that the action and characters, as you perhaps conceive them, together
with a great deal more, are in the poem. Even then, however, you must not claim to possess
all of this kind that is in the poem; for in forgetting the words you must have lost innumerable
details of the action and the characters. Encourage them, don't turn any of them down; but don't
definitely accept any of them. Now promise, Jim, you won't accept any of them."

"I wouldn't dare," said Jim, "after this"--and he held up the local paper with a grin. "I'm in the
hands of my manager."

It was well for him that he agreed. Mrs. Collins was there to assist--beaming with pride. Uncle
Collins came late and looked bored and uncomfortable. Belle was in her glory. She was of that
delicate type which changes much with varying circumstance, and now she seemed radiantly beautiful.
All the guests that day agreed that they were far and away the handsomest couple that had
ever come to Deadwood, and surely they should have known, for all Deadwood came. The mayor came
because he felt a fatherly interest in the couple he had married; and besides, they were an
important accession to the population. "Hartigan," he began, "If I had your money I'd make a deal
with the Northern Pacific. I tell you their new president is a live wire. He's ready to close
on any good idea," etc., etc. The ministers came because they had heard of Dr. Hartigan's accomplishments
and wished to pay their respects; and Dr. Hooper, of the Congregationalists, said he would
be glad if Dr. Hartigan would occupy his pulpit the coming Sunday. The Rev. Dr. Mackenzie, of
the Presbyterian Church, offered his pulpit; and so did the Rev. Dr. Jowley, of the Evangelicals.
To all of these Jim made gracious and happy replies, deferring definite answer until he should
be able to consult his date book and complete certain other arrangements.

The Presbyterian also took the opportunity of privately whispering
to Dr. Hartigan that he, Dr. Mackenzie, had "just discovered a rare
business opportunity--a whole block of staked and patented gold claims
on the same lead as the 'Homestake'; the owner was compelled to sell
out owing to family troubles, and would take ten thousand dollars
cash for 49 per cent. of the stock--an absolute certainty of a million
within a year!

Dr. Mackenzie would turn over this unique and dazzling opportunity to Dr. Hartigan for the
modest sum of one thousand dollars, which was less than 10 per cent., if expenses were included...."
and so on, at much length.

The head of the Bar-Bell Ranch called because he had heard of the famous racer, Blazing Star,
that was bred in the Hartigan stables, and he would like Dr. Hartigan to visit him and see his
horses.

The insurance companies also were represented, and Bob Davidson--he declined at all times the
"Mr."--managed to get in a word privately to the effect that he hoped that the Reverend Hartigan
would make no business alliance until he had been to the Davidson office and seen the possibilities
of one or two little schemes that needed "only a very little capital to pay----"

The reception lasted three hours and the account of it in the paper
next day covered several columns. The impression it left on Jim was
pleasing, but confusing. What
is the gist of Pater's teaching about style, if it is not that in the end the one virtue of
style is truth or adequacy; that the word, phrase, sentence, should express perfectly the writer's
perception, feeling, image, or thought; so that, as we read a descriptive phrase of Keats's,
we exclaim, 'That is the thing itself'; so that, to quote Arnold, the words are 'symbols equivalent
with the thing symbolized,' or, in our technical language, a form identical with its content?
Hence in true poetry it is, in strictness, impossible to express the meaning in any but its
own words, or to change the words without changing the meaning. A translation of such poetry
is not really the old meaning in a fresh dress; it is a new product, something like the poem,
though, if one chooses to say so, more like it in the aspect of meaning than in the aspect of form.

No one who understands poetry, it seems to me, would dispute this, were it not that, falling
away from his experience, or misled by theory, he takes the word 'meaning' in a sense almost
ludicrously inapplicable to poetry. People say, for instance, 'steed' and 'horse' have the
same meaning; and in bad poetry they have, but not in poetry that is poetry.

    'Bring forth the horse!' The horse was brought:
    In truth he was a noble steed!

says Byron in Mazeppa. If the two words mean the same here, transpose them:

    'Bring forth the steed!' The steed was brought:
    In truth he was a noble horse!

and ask again if they mean the same. Or let me take a line certainly very free from 'poetic
diction':

    To be or not to be, that is the question.

You may say that this means the same as 'What is just now occupying my attention is the comparative
disadvantages of continuing to live or putting an end to myself.' And for practical purposes--the
purpose, for example, of a coroner--it does. But as the second version altogether misrepresents
the speaker at that moment of his existence, while the first does represent him, how can they
for any but a practical or logical purpose be said to have the same sense? Hamlet was well
able to 'unpack his heart with words,' but he will not unpack it with our paraphrases.

[Sidenote: VERSIFICATION]

These considerations apply equally to versification. If I take the famous line which describes
how the souls of the dead stood waiting by the river, imploring a passage from Charon:

    Tendebantque manus ripae ulterioris amore,

and if I translate it, 'and were stretching forth their hands in longing for the further bank,'
the charm of the original has fled. Why has it fled? Partly (but we have dealt with that) because
I have substituted for five words, and those the words of Virgil, twelve words, and those my
own. In some measure because I have turned into rhythmless prose a line of verse which, as
mere sound, has unusual beauty. But much more because in doing so I have also changed the meaning
of Virgil's line. What that meaning is I cannot say: Virgil has said it. But I can see this
much, that the translation conveys a far less vivid picture of the outstretched hands and of
their remaining outstretched, and a far less poignant sense of the distance of the shore and
the longing of the souls. And it does so partly because this picture and this sense are conveyed
not only by the obvious meaning of the words, but through the long-drawn sound of 'Tendebantque,'
through the time occupied by the five syllables and therefore by the idea of 'ulterioris,'
and through the identity of the long sound 'or' in the penultimate syllables of 'ulterioris
amore'--all this, and much more, apprehended not in this analytical fashion, nor as added to
the beauty of mere sound and to the obvious meaning, but in unity with them and so as expressive
of the poetic meaning of the whole.

It is always so in fine poetry. The value of versification, when it is indissolubly fused with
meaning, can hardly be exaggerated. The gift for feeling it, even more perhaps than the gift
for feeling the value of diction, is the specific gift for poetry, as distinguished from other
arts. But versification, taken, as far as possible, all by itself, has a very different worth.
Some aesthetic worth it has; how much, you may experience by reading poetry in a language of
which you do not understand a syllable. The pleasure is quite appreciable, but it is not great;
nor in actual poetic experience do you meet with it, as such, at all. For it is not added to
the pleasure of the meaning when you read poetry that you do understand: by some mystery the
music is then the music of the meaning, and the two are one. However fond of versification
you might be, you would tire very soon of reading verses in Chinese; and before long of reading
Virgil and Dante if you were ignorant of their languages. But take the music as it is in the
poem, and there is a marvellous change. Now

    It gives a very echo to the seat
    Where Love is throned;

or 'carries far into your heart,' almost like music itself, the sound

    Of old, unhappy, far-off things
        And battles long ago. I must think
that the writer is deceiving himself. For I could quite understand his
enthusiasm, if it were an enthusiasm for the music of the meaning; but
as for the music, 'quite independently of the meaning,' so far as I can
hear it thus (and I doubt if any one who knows English can quite do so),
I find it gives some pleasure, but only a trifling pleasure. And indeed
I venture to doubt whether, considered as mere sound, the words are at
all exceptionally beautiful, as Virgil's line certainly is. Whatever may
be the consequence, I would back against them, 'quite independently of
the meaning,' this once famous stanza:

    Where is Cupid's crimson motion,
      Billowy ecstasy of woe?
    Bear me straight, meandering ocean,
      Where the stagnant torrents flow.

[Sidenote: IMPERFECT UNITY]

When poetry answers to its idea and is purely or almost purely poetic, we find the identity
of form and content; and the degree of purity attained may be tested by the degree in which
we feel it hopeless to convey the effect of a poem or passage in any form but its own. Where
the notion of doing so is simply ludicrous, you have quintessential poetry. But a great part
even of good poetry, especially in long works, is of a mixed nature; and so we find in it no
more than a partial agreement of a form and substance which remain to some extent distinct.
This is so in many passages of Shakespeare (the greatest of poets when he chose, but not always
a conscientious poet); passages where something was wanted for the sake of the plot, but he
did not care about it or was hurried. The conception of the passage is then distinct from the
execution, and neither is inspired. This is so also, I think, wherever we can truly speak of
merely decorative effect. We seem to perceive that the poet had a truth or fact--philosophical,
agricultural, social--distinctly before him, and then, as we say, clothed it in metrical and
coloured language. Most argumentative, didactic, or satiric poems are partly of this kind;
and in imaginative poems anything which is really a mere 'conceit' is mere decoration. We often
deceive ourselves in this matter, for what we call decoration has often a new and genuinely
poetic content of its own; but wherever there is mere decoration, we judge the poetry to be
not wholly poetic. And so when Wordsworth inveighed against poetic diction, though he hurled
his darts rather wildly, what he was rightly aiming at was a phraseology, not the living body
of a new content, but the mere worn-out body of an old one.

In pure poetry it is otherwise. Pure poetry is not the decoration of a preconceived and clearly
defined matter: it springs from the creative impulse of a vague imaginative mass pressing for
development and definition. If the poet already knew exactly what he meant to say, why should
he write the poem? The poem would in fact already be written. For only its completion can reveal,
even to him, exactly what he wanted. When he began and while he was at work, he did not possess
his meaning; it possessed him. It was not a fully formed soul asking for a body: it was an
inchoate soul in the inchoate body of perhaps two or three vague ideas and a few scattered
phrases. The growing of this body into its full stature and perfect shape was the same thing
as the gradual self-definition of the meaning. And this is the reason why such poems strike
us as creations, not manufactures, and have the magical effect which mere decoration cannot
produce. This is also the reason why, if we insist on asking for the meaning of such a poem,
we can only be answered 'It means itself.'

[Sidenote: THE TWO HERESIES]

And so at last I may explain why I have troubled myself and you with what may seem an arid
controversy about mere words. It is not so. These heresies which would make poetry a compound
of two factors--a matter common to it with the merest prose, plus a poetic form, as the one
heresy says: a poetical substance plus a negligible form, as the other says--are not only untrue,
they are injurious to the dignity of poetry. In an age already inclined to shrink from those
higher realms where poetry touches religion and philosophy, the formalist heresy encourages
men to taste poetry as they would a fine wine, which has indeed an aesthetic value, but a small
one. And then the natural man, finding an empty form, hurls into it the matter of cheap pathos,
rancid sentiment, vulgar humour, bare lust, ravenous vanity--everything which, in Schiller's
phrase[3], the form should extirpate, but which no mere form can extirpate. And the other heresy--which
is indeed rather a practise than a creed--encourages us in the habit so dear to us of putting
our own thoughts or fancies into the place of the poet's creation. What he meant by Hamlet,
or the Ode to a Nightingale, or Abt Vogler, we say, is this or that which we knew already;
and so we lose what he had to tell us. But he meant what he said, and said what he meant.

Poetry in this matter is not, as good critics of painting and music often affirm, different
from the other arts; in all of them the content is one thing with the form. What Beethoven
meant by his symphony, or Turner by his picture, was not something which you can name, but
the picture and the symphony. Meaning they have, but what meaning can be uttered in no language
but their own: and we know this, though some strange delusion makes us think the meaning has
less worth, because we cannot put it into words. Well, it is just the same with poetry. But
because poetry is words, we vainly fancy that some other words than its own will express its
meaning. And they will do so no more--or, if you like to speak loosely, only a little more--than
words will express the meaning of the Dresden Madonna. Something a little like it they may
indeed express. And we may find analogues of the meaning of poetry outside it, which may help
us to appropriate it. The other arts, the best ideas of philosophy or religion, much that nature
and life offer us or force upon us, are akin to it. After that he had no doubt his pulpit eloquence would
open a way to secure an appointment.

Belle's idea was totally different. "No, Jim, that won't do. If we enter the town by the back door
we'll always be back-door folk. I propose to come in by the front way, and have a red carpet
and a triumphal arch for our entry. Don't do anything until I have tried a plan of mine. Meanwhile,
you look after Midnight."

Jim's curiosity was very large, but he
smiled and asked no questions, and Belle set out for a visit to Uncle
Collins. But we shall not find it fully if we look for something else.

[Sidenote: THE FURTHER MEANING OF POETRY]

And yet, when all is said, the question will still recur, though now in quite another sense,
What does poetry mean? This unique expression, which cannot be replaced by any other, still
seems to be trying to express something beyond itself. And this, we feel, is also what the
other arts, and religion, and philosophy are trying to express: and that is what impels us
to seek in vain to translate the one into the other. About the best poetry, and not only the
best, there floats an atmosphere of infinite suggestion. The poet speaks to us of one thing,
but in this one thing there seems to lurk the secret of all.

Those who are susceptible to this effect of poetry find it not only, perhaps not most, in the
ideals which she has sometimes described, but in a child's song by Christina Rossetti about
a mere crown of wind-flowers, and in tragedies like Lear, where the sun seems to have set for
ever. They hear this spirit murmuring its undertone through the Aeneid, and catch its voice
in the song of Keats's nightingale, and its light upon the figures on the Urn, and it pierces
them no less in Shelley's hopeless lament, O world, O life, O time, than in the rapturous ecstasy
of his Life of Life. This all-embracing perfection cannot be expressed in poetic words or words
of any kind, nor yet in music or in colour, but the suggestion of it is in much poetry, if
not all, and poetry has in this suggestion, this 'meaning,' a great part of its value. We do
it wrong, and we defeat our own purposes when we try to bend it to them:

    We do it wrong, being so majestical,
    To offer it the show of violence;
    For it is as the air invulnerable,
    And our vain blows malicious mockery.

It is a spirit. It comes we know not whence. But they did not understand his meaning and were
afraid to ask.

When they had reached Capernaum and were in the house, he asked them, "What were you arguing about on
the way?" But they made no reply, for they had been disputing on the way about which of them
was greatest. It does not matter which we employ, so long as we and others know what we mean.

[2] These remarks will hold good, mutatis mutandis, if by 'substance' is understood the 'moral'
or the 'idea' of a poem, although perhaps in one instance out of five thousand this maybe found
in so many words in the poem.

[3] Not that to Schiller 'form' meant mere style and versification.

