SOME PRIVATE VIEWS

By

JAMES PAYN

Author of 'High Spirits,' 'A Confidential Agent,' Etc.

A NEW EDITION

1881

London CHATTO AND WINDUS, PICCADILLY

        TO
   HORACE N. PYM
       THIS
Book is Dedicated
   BY HIS FRIEND

             THE AUTHOR

CONTENTS.

FROM 'THE NINETEENTH CENTURY' REVIEW.

THE MIDWAY INN                          1

THE CRITIC ON THE HEARTH               20

SHAM ADMIRATION IN LITERATURE          37

THE PINCH OF POVERTY                   59

THE LITERARY CALLING AND ITS FUTURE    72

STORY-TELLING                          96

PENNY FICTION                         116

FROM 'THE TIMES.'

HOTELS                                133

MAID-SERVANTS                         149

MEN-SERVANTS                          163

WHIST-PLAYERS                         173

RELATIONS                             182

INVALID LITERATURE                    192

WET HOLIDAYS                          201

TRAVELLING COMPANIONS                 211

THE MIDWAY INN.

'The hidden but the common thought of all.'

The thoughts I am about to set down are not my thoughts, for, as my friends say, I have given
up the practice of thinking, or it may be, as my enemies say, I never had it. They are the
thoughts of an acquaintance who thinks for me. I call him an acquaintance, though I pass as
much of my time with him as with my nearest and dearest; perhaps at the club, perhaps at the
office, perhaps in metaphysical discussion, perhaps at billiards--what does it matter? Thousands
of men in town have such acquaintances, in whose company they spend, by necessity or custom,
half the sum of their lives. It is not rational, doubtless; but then 'Consider, sir,' said
the great talking philosopher, 'should we become purely rational, how our friendships would
be cut off. We form many such with bad men because they have agreeable qualities, or may be
useful to us. We form many such by mistake, imagining people to be different from what they
really are.' And he goes on complacently to observe that we shall either have the satisfaction
of meeting these gentlemen in a future state, or be satisfied without meeting them.

For my part, I do not feel that the scheme of future happiness, which ought by rights to be
in preparation for me, will be at all interfered with by my not meeting again the man I have
in my. mind. To have seen him in the flesh is sufficient for me. In the spirit I cannot imagine
him; the consideration is too subtle; for, unlike the little man who had (for certain) a little
soul,' I don't believe he has a soul at all.

He is middle-aged, rich, lethargic, sententious, dogmatic, and, in short, the quintessence
of the commonplace. I need not say, therefore, that he is credited by the world with unlimited
common-sense. And for once the world is right. He has nothing-original about him, save so much
of sin as he may have inherited from our first parents; there is no more at the back of him
than at the back of a looking-glass--indeed less, for he has not a grain of quicksilver; but,
like the looking-glass, he reflects. Having nothing else to do, he hangs, as it were, on the
wall of the world, and mirrors it for me as it unconsciously passes by him--not, however, as
in a glass darkly, but with singular clearness. His vision is never disturbed by passion or
prejudice; he has no enthusiasm and no illusions. Nor do I believe he has ever had any. If
the noblest study of mankind is man, my friend has devoted himself to a high calling; the living
page of human life has been his favourite and indeed, for these many years, his only reading.
And for this he has had exceptional opportunities. Always a man of wealth and leisure, he has
never wasted himself in that superficial observation which is often the only harvest of foreign
travel. He despises it, and in relation to travellers, is wont to quote the famous parallel
of the copper wire, 'which grows the narrower by going further.' A confirmed stay-at-home,
he has mingled much in society of all sorts, and exercised a keen but quite unsympathetic observation.
His very reserve in company (though, when he catches you alone, he is a button-holder of great
tenacity) encourages free speech in others; they have no more reticence in his presence than
if he were the butler. He has belonged to no cliques, and thereby escaped the greatest peril
which can beset the student of human nature. A man of genius, indeed, in these days is almost
certain, sooner or later, to become the centre of a mutual admiration society; but the person
I have in my mind is no genius, nor anything like one, and he thanks Heaven for it. To an opinion
of his own he does not pretend, but his views upon the opinions of other people he believes
to be infallible. I have called him dogmatic, but that does not at all express the absolute
certainty with which he delivers judgment. 'I know no more,' he says, 'about the problems of
human life than you do' (taking me as an illustration of the lowest prevailing ignorance),
'but I know what everybody is thinking about them.' He is didactic, and therefore often dull,
and will eventually, no doubt, become one of the greatest bores in Great Britain. At present,
however, he is worth knowing; and I propose to myself to be his Boswell, and to introduce him--or,
at least, his views--to other people. I have entitled them the Midway Inn, partly from my own
inveterate habit of story-telling, but chiefly from an image of his own, by which he once described
to me, in his fine egotistic rolling style, the position he seemed to himself to occupy in
the world.

  When I was a boy, he said (which I don't believe he ever was), I
  had a long journey to take between home and school. Exactly midway
  there was a hill with an Inn upon it, at which we changed horses.
  It was a point to which I looked forward with very different
  feelings when going and returning. In the one case--for I hated
  school--it seemed to frown darkly on me, and from that spot the
  remainder of the way was dull and gloomy; in the other case, the
  sun seemed always glinting on it, and the rest of the road was as a
  fair avenue that leads to Paradise. The innkeeper received us with
  equal hospitality on both occasions, and it was quite evident did
  not care one farthing in which direction we were tending. He would
  stand in front of his house, jingling his money--our money--in
  his pockets, and watch us depart with the greatest serenity,
  whether we went east or west. I thought him at one time the most
  genial of Bonifaces (for it was his profession to wear a smile),
  and at another a mere mocker of human woe. When I grew up, I
  perceived that he was a philosopher. 

The eldest son George went to ship - went to America on the wide, wild world by sea another country,
to look there for the troubled mind the happiness that he not found, and "when would she - yes
she would ever see him again," Oh it's a big pain? losing a parent for a child heart in the bloom
of years - how much care how much sleepless nights did it until it grew and prospered, the
hopes were attached to the young being and flourished and traveled with him as faithfully
as each step was not guarded to protect the foot from impact and the uncertainty of the case,
how anxious every bad impression fought back, heart or mind could have poisoned. And now to reveal
all this in the world, its temptations, its dangers for the mind and body, all this revealing
and thrown to see the stormy waves of life - left to themselves, and their own, perhaps still too
weak force. How many secret tears will be shed because, as sad and sad as is often the child's future
in view of the unsuspecting father and mother - Health will collect and maintain it, and no loving
hand to be close to cultivate it and him the sweat from the hot, glowing face to dry out their
false seduction, gold flashing Networks to eject him, and no true voice in warning his side
on us - North and lack perhaps, in bitter grief to him loads, and no one be there to bring him help,
and the Unfortunate consolation and support - mother and father are far, far from the beloved,
his action does not pass over to them - their comfort and Hülfswort not back him.

And such a farewell then - death does not insist much harder on the
fortune Thor, and the Awareness of the divorced and still protected
to know in cool earth on which the faithful tended flower germinate
is often less bitter than this voluntary death - of progress over
the sea, in a strange, unknown world - perhaps as no return like that,
and without any comforting sense of security.

The distinguishing feature is there still better, far better off than those who remained, his
world is now free and open there, every hour out there, every mile path brings him new, unknown,
and rejects the view only at the one Painful too. He is also responsible for himself and his luggage,
his whole future is given to it in one hour in their own hands - an unusual business until
now - and foreign landscape, strange scenes change so quickly past him, that a portion of each
image of the old pain away it goes. Even the thought of the Forsaken does not have the Bitter,
bitter for him, as it has for them if they intend to be, and with conjectures to torture as
it now goes to him what he is doing what he does, where he stays now.
 A popular artist once drew a picture of them: 'The
  Plains of Heaven' it was called, and the painter's name was Martin.
  If he was to do so now, the public (who are vulgar) would exclaim
  'Betty Martin.' Not that they disbelieve in it, but that the
  attractions of the place are dying out, like those of Bath and
  Cheltenham.

  Of course some blame attaches to the divines themselves that things
  have come to such a pass. 'I protest,' says a great philosopher,
  'that I never enter a church, but the man in the pulpit talks so
  unlike a man, as though he had never known what human joys or
  sorrows are--so carefully avoids every subject of interest save
  one, and paints that in colours at once so misty and so
  meretricious--that I say to myself, I will never sit under him
  again.' This may, of course, be only an ingenious excuse of his for
  not going to church; but there is really something in it. The
  angels, with their harps, on clouds, are now presented to the eyes,
  even of faith, in vain; they are still appreciated on canvas by an
  old master, but to become one of them is no longer the common
  aspiration. There is a suspicion, partly owing, doubtless, to the
  modern talk about the dignity and even the divinity of Labour, that
  they ought to be doing something else than (as the American poet
  puts it with characteristic ii reverence) 'loafing about the
  throne;' that we ourselves, with no ear perhaps for music, and with
  little voice (alas!) for praise, should take no pleasure in such
  avocations. It is not the sceptics--though their influence is
  getting to be considerable--who have wrought this change, but the
  conditions of modern life. Notwithstanding the cheerful 'returns'
  as to pauperism, and the glowing speeches of our Chancellors of the
  Exchequer, these conditions are far harder, among the thinking
  classes, than they were. The question 'Is Life worth Living?' is
  one that concerns philosophers and metaphysicians, and not the
  persons I have in my mind at all; but the question, 'Do I wish to
  be out of it?' is one that is getting answered very widely--and in
  the affirmative. This was certainly not the case in the days of our
  grand-sires. This may not have been the best
  of all possible worlds to them, but none of them wished to exchange
  it, save at the proper time, and for the proper place. Thanks to
  overwork, and still more to over-worry, it is not so now. There are
  many prosperous persons in rude health, of course, who will ask (with
  a virtuous resolution that is sometimes to be deplored), 'Do you
  suppose then that I wish to cut my throat?' I certainly do not.
  Do not let us talk of cutting throats; though, mind you, the
  average of suicides, so admirably preserved by the Registrar-General
  and other painstaking persons, is not entirely to be depended upon.
  You should hear the doctors at my Inn (in the intervals of their
  abuse of their professional brethren) discourse upon this topic--on
  that overdose of chloral which poor B. took, and on that injudicious
  self-application of chloroform which carried off poor C. With the
  law in such a barbarous state in relation to self-destruction, and
  taking into account the feelings of relatives, there was, of course,
  only one way of wording the certificate, but--and then they shake
  their heads as only doctors can, and help themselves to port, though
  they know it is poison to them.

  It is an old joke that annuitants live for ever, but no annuity
  ever had the effect of prolonging life which the present assurance
  companies have. How many a time, I wonder, in these later years,
  has a hand been stayed, with a pistol or 'a cup of cold poison' in
  it, by the thought, 'If I do this, my family will lose the money I
  am insured for, besides the premiums.' This feeling is altogether
  different from that which causes Jeannette and Jeannot in their
  Paris attic to light their charcoal fire, stop up the chinks with
  their love-letters, and die (very disreputably) 'clasped in one
  another's arms, and silent in a last embrace.' There is not one
  halfpenny's worth of sentiment about it in the Englishman's case,
  nor are any such thoughts bred in his brain while youth is in him.
  It is in our midway days, with old age touching us here and there,
  as autumn 'lays its fiery finger on the leaves' and withers them,
  that we first think of it. When the weight of anxiety and care is
  growing on us, while the shoulders are becoming bowed (not in
  resignation, but in weakness) which have to bear it; when our pains
  are more and more constant, our pleasures few and fading, and when
  whatever happens, we know, must needs be for the worse--then it is
  that the praise of the silver hair and length of days becomes a
  mockery indeed. The attempt to paint it
  so is well-meaning, no doubt, 'the vacant chaff well meant for
  grain;' and it is touching to see how men generally (knowing that
  they themselves have to go through with it) are wont to portray it
  in cheerful colours.

  A modern philosopher even goes so far as to say that our memories
  in old age are always grateful to us. Our pleasures are remembered,
  but our pains are forgotten; 'if we try to recall a physical pain,'
  she writes (for it is a female), 'we find it to be impossible,'
  From which I gather only this for certain, that that woman never
  had the gout.

  The folks who come my way, indeed, seem to remember their physical
  ailments very distinctly, to judge by the way they talk of them;
  and are exceedingly apprehensive of their recurrence. Nay, it is
  curious to see how some old men will resent the compliments of
  their juniors on their state of health or appearance. 'Stuff and
  nonsense!' cried old Sam Rogers, grimly; 'I tell you there is no
  such thing as a fine old man.' In a humbler walk of life I remember
  to have heard a similar but more touching reply. It was upon the
  great centenarian question raised by Mr. Thorns. An old woman in a
  workhouse, said to be a hundred years of age, was sent for by the
  Board of Guardians, to decide the point by her personal testimony.
  One can imagine the half-dozen portly prosperous figures, and the
  contrast their appearance offered to that of the bent and withered
  crone. 'Now, Betty,' said the chairman with unctuous patronage,
  'you look hale and hearty enough, yet they tell me that you are a
  hundred years old; is this really true?' 'God Almighty knows, sir,'
  was her reply, 'but I feel a thousand.'

  And there are so many people nowadays who 'feel a thousand.'

  It is for this reason that the gift of old age is unwished for, and
  the prospect of future life without encouragement. It is the modern
  conviction that there will be some kind of work in it; and even
  though what we shall be set to do may be 'wrought with tumult of
  acclaim,' we have had enough of work. What follows, almost as a
  matter of course, is that the thought of possible extinction has
  lost its terrors. Heaven and its glories may have still their
  charms for those who are not wearied out with toil in this life;
  but the slave draws for himself a far other picture of home. His is
  no passionate cry to be admitted into the eternal city; he murmurs
  sullenly, 'Let me rest.'

  It was a favourite taunt with the sceptics of old--those Early
  Fathers of infidelity, who used to occupy themselves so laboriously
  with scraping at the rind of the Christian Faith--that until the
  Cross arose men were not afraid of Death. But that arrow has lost
  its barb. The Fear of Death, even among professing Christians, is
  now comparatively rare; I do not mean merely among dying men--in
  whom those who have had acquaintance with deathbeds tell us they
  see it scarcely ever--but with the quick and hale. Even with very
  ignorant persons, the idea that things may be a great deal worse
  for us hereafter than even at present is not generally entertained
  as respects themselves. A clergyman who was attending a sick man in
  his parish expressed a hope to the wife that she took occasion to
  remind her husband of his spiritual condition. 'Oh yes, sir,' she
  replied, 'many and many a time have I woke him up o' nights, and
  cried, "John, John, you little know the torments as is preparing
  for you."' But the good woman, it seems, was not disturbed by any
  such dire imaginings upon her own account.

  Higher in the social scale, the apprehension of a Gehenna, or at
  all events of such a one as our forefathers almost universally
  believed in, is rapidly dying out. The mathematician tells us that
  even as a question of numbers, 'about one in ten, my good sir, by
  the most favourable computations,' the thing is incredible; the
  philanthropist inquires indignantly, 'Is the city Arab then, who
  grows to be thief and felon as naturally as a tree puts forth its
  leaves, to be damned in both worlds?' and I notice that even the
  clergy who come my way, and take their weak glass of negus while
  the coach changes horses, no longer insist upon the point, but, at
  the worst, 'faintly trust the larger hope.'

  Notwithstanding these comparatively cheerful views upon a subject
  so important to all passengers on life's highway, the general
  feeling is, as I have said, one of profound dissatisfaction; the
  good old notion that whatever is is right, is fast disappearing;
  and in its place there is a doubt--rarely expressed except among
  the philosophers, with whom, as I have said, I have nothing to
  do--a secret, harassing, and unwelcome doubt respecting the divine
  government of the world. It is a question which the very
  philosophers are not likely to settle even among themselves, but it
  has become very obtrusive and important. Men raise their eyebrows
  and shrug their shoulders when it is alluded to, instead, as of
  old, of pulverising the audacious questioner on the spot, or even
  (as would have happened at a later date) putting him into Coventry;
  they have no opinion to offer upon the subject, or at all events do
  not wish to talk about it. But it is no longer, be it observed,
  'bad form' in a general way to do so; it is only that the topic is
  personally distasteful.

  The once famous advocate of analogy threw a bitter seed among
  mankind when he suggested, in all innocence, and merely for the
  sake of his own argument, that as the innocent suffered for the
  guilty in this world, so it might be in the world to come; and it
  is bearing bitter fruit. To feel aweary at the Midway Inn is bad
  enough; but to be journeying to no home, and perhaps even to some
  harsher school than we yet wot of, is indeed a depressing
  reflection.

  Hence it comes, I think, or partly hence, that there is now no fun
  in the world. Wit we have, and an abundance of grim humour, which
  evokes anything but mirth. Nothing would astonish us in the Midway
  Inn so much as a peal of laughter. A great writer (though it must
  be confessed scarcely an amusing one), who has recently reached his
  journey's end, used to describe his animal spirits depreciatingly,
  as being at the best but vegetable spirits. And that is now the way
  with us all. When Charles Dickens died, it was confidently stated
  in a great literary journal that his loss, so far from affecting
  'the gaiety of nations,' would scarcely be felt at all; the power
  of rousing tears and laughter being (I suppose the writer thought)
  so very common. That prophecy has been by no means fulfilled. But,
  what is far worse than there being no humorous writers amongst us,
  the faculty of appreciating even the old ones is dying out. There
  is no such thing as high spirits anywhere. It is observable, too,
  how very much public entertainments have increased of late--a tacit
  acknowledgment of dulness at home--while, instead of the lively, if
  somewhat boisterous, talk of our fathers, we have drawing-room
  dissertations on art, and dandy drivel about blue china.

  There is one pleasure only that takes more and more root amongst
  us, and never seems to fail, and that is making money. To hear the
  passengers at the Midway Inn discourse upon this topic, you would
  think they were all commercial travellers. It is most curious how
  the desire for pecuniary gain has infected even the idlest, who of
  course take the shortest cut to it by way of the race-course. I see
  young gentlemen, blond and beardless, telling the darkest secrets
  to one another, affecting, one would think, the fate of Europe, but
  which in reality relate to the state of the fetlock of the brother
  to Boanerges. Their earnestness (which is reserved for this
  enthralling topic) is quite appalling. In their elders one has long
  been accustomed to it, but these young people should really know
  better. The interest excited in society by 'scratchings' has never
  been equalled since the time of the Cock Lane ghost. If men would
  only 'lose their money and look pleasant' without talking about it,
  I shouldn't mind; but they will make it a subject of
  conversation, as though everyone who liked his glass of wine should
  converse upon 'the vintages.' One looks for it in business people
  and forgives it; but everyone is now for business.

  The reverence that used to belong to Death is now only paid to it
  in the case of immensely rich persons, whose wealth is spoken of
  with bated breath. 'He died, sir, worth two millions; a very warm
  man.' If you happen to say, though with all reasonable probability
  and even with Holy Writ to back you, 'He is probably warmer by this
  time,' you are looked upon as a Communist. What the man was is
  nothing, what he made is everything. It is the gold alone that we
  now value: the temple that might have sanctified the gold is of no
  account. This worship of mere wealth has, it is true, this
  advantage over the old adoration of birth, that something may
  possibly be got out of it; to cringe and fawn upon the people that
  have blue blood is manifestly futile, since the peculiarity is not
  communicable, but it is hoped that, by being shaken up in the same
  social bag with millionaires, something may be attained by what is
  technically called the 'sweating' process. So far as I have
  observed, however, the results are small, while the operation is to
  the last degree disagreeable.

  What is very significant of this new sort of golden age is that a
  literature of its own has arisen, though of an anomalous kind. It
  is presided over by a sort of male Miss Kilmansegge, who is also a
  model of propriety. It is as though the dragon that guarded the
  apples of Hesperides should be a dragon of virtue. Under the
  pretence of extolling prudence and perseverance, he paints
  money-making as the highest good, and calls it thrift; and the
  popularity of this class of book is enormous. The heroes are all
  'self-made' men who come to town with that proverbial half-crown
  which has the faculty of accumulation that used to be confined to
  snowballs. Like the daughters of the horse-leech, their cry is
  'Give, give,' only instead of blood they want money; and I need
  hardly say they get it from other people's pockets. Love and
  friendship are names that have lost their meaning, if they ever
  had any, with these gentry. They remind one of the miser of old who
  could not hear a large sum of money mentioned without an acceleration
  of the action of the heart; and perhaps that is the use of their
  hearts, which, otherwise, like that of the spleen in other people,
  must be only a subject of vague conjecture. They live abhorred and
  die respected; leaving all their heaped-up wealth to some charitable
  institution, the secretary of which levants with it eventually to
  the United States.

  This last catastrophe, however, is not mentioned in these
  biographies, the subjects of which are held up as patterns of
  wisdom and prudence for the rising generation. I shall have left
  the Midway Inn, thank Heaven, for a residence of smaller
  dimensions, before it has grown up. Conceive an England inhabited
  by self-made men!

  Has it ever struck you how gloomy is the poetry of the present day?
  This is not perhaps of very much consequence, since everybody has a
  great deal too much to do to permit them to read it; but how full
  of sighs, and groans, and passionate bewailings it is! And also how
  deuced difficult! It is almost as inarticulate as an Æolian harp,
  and quite as melancholy. There are one or two exceptions, of
  course, as in the case of Mr. Calverley and Mr. Locker; but even
  the latter is careful to insist upon the fact that, like those who
  have gone before us, we must all quit Piccadilly. 'At present,' as
  dear Charles Lamb writes, 'we have the advantage of them;' but
  there is no one to remind us of that now, nor is it, as I have
  said, the general opinion that it is an advantage.

  It is this prevailing gloom, I think, which accounts for the
  enormous and increasing popularity of fiction. Observe how
  story-telling creeps into the very newspapers (along with their
  professional fibbing); and, even in the magazines, how it lies down
  side by side with 'burning questions,' like the weaned child
  putting its hand into the cockatrice's den. For your sake, my good
  fellow, who write stories [here my friend glowered at me
  compassionately], I am glad of it; but the fact is of melancholy
  significance. It means that people are glad to find themselves
  'anywhere, anywhere, out of the world,' and (I must be allowed to
  add) they are generally gratified, for anything less like real life
  than what some novelists portray it is difficult to imagine.

[Here he stared at me so exceedingly hard, that anyone with a less heavenly temper, or who
had no material reasons for putting up with it, would have taken his remark as personal, and
gone away.]

  Another cause of the absence of good fellowship amongst us (he went
  on) is the growth of education. It sticks like a fungus to
  everybody, and though, it is fair to say, mostly outside, does a
  great deal of mischief. The scholastic interest has become so
  powerful that nobody dares speak a word against it; but the fact
  is, men are educated far beyond their wits. You can't fill any cup
  beyond what it will hold, and the little cups are exceedingly
  numerous. Boys are now crammed (with information) like turkeys (but
  unfortunately not killed at Christmas), and when they grow up there
  is absolutely no room in them for a joke. The prigs that frequent
  my Midway Inn are as the sands in its hour-glass, only with no
  chance, alas! of their running out. The wisdom of our ancestors
  limited education, and very wisely, to the three R's; that is all
  that is necessary for the great mass of mankind: whereas the pick
  of them, with those clamping irons well stuck to their heels, will
  win their way to the topmost peaks of knowledge.

  At the very best--that is to say when it produces anything--what
  does the most costly education in this country produce in ordinary
  minds but the deplorable habit of classical quotation? If it could
  teach them to think--but that is a subject, my dear friend, into
  which you will scarcly follow me.

[I could have knocked his head off if he had not been so exceptionally stout and strong, and
as it was, I took up my hat to go, when a thought struck me.]

'Among your valuable remarks upon the ideas entertained by society at present, you have said
nothing, my dear sir, about the ladies.'

'I never speak of anything,' he replied with dignity, 'which I do not thoroughly understand.
Man I do know--down to his boots; but woman'--here he sighed and hesitated--'no; I don't know
nearly so much of her.'

THE CRITIC ON THE HEARTH.

It has often struck me that the relation of two important members of the social body to one
another has never been sufficiently considered, or treated of, so far as I know, either by
the philosopher or the poet. I allude to that which exists between the omnibus driver and his
conductor. Cultivating literature as I do upon a little oatmeal, and driving, when in a position
to be driven at all, in that humble vehicle, the 'bus, I have had, perhaps, exceptional opportunities
for observing their mutual position and behaviour; and it is very peculiar. When the 'bus is
empty, these persons are sympathetic and friendly to one another, almost to tenderness; but
when there is much traffic, a tone of severity is observable upon the side of the conductor.
'What are yer a-driving on for just as a party's getting in? Will nothing suit but to break
a party's neck?' 'Wake up, will yer? or do yer want that ere Bayswater to pass us?' are inquiries
he will make in the most peremptory manner. Or he will concentrate contempt in the laconic
but withering observation: 'Now then, stoopid!'

When we consider that the driver is after all the driver--that the 'bus is under his guidance
and management, and may be said pro tem, to be his own--indeed, in case of collision or other
serious extremity, he calls it so: 'What the infernal regions are yer banging into my 'bus
for?' etc., etc.,--I say, this being his exalted position, the injurious language of the man
on the step is, to say the least of it, disrespectful.

On the other hand, it is the conductor who fills the 'bus, and even entices into it, by lures
and wiles, persons who are not voluntarily going his way at all. It is he who advertises its
presence to the passers-by, and spares neither lung nor limb in attracting passengers. If the
driver is lord and king, yet the conductor has a good deal to do with the administration: just
as the Mikado of Japan, who sits above the thunder and is almost divine, is understood to be
assisted and even 'conducted' by the Tycoon. The connection between those potentates is perhaps
the most exact reproduction of that between the 'bus driver and his cad; but even in England
there is a pretty close parallel to it in the mutual relation of the author and the professional
critic.

While the former is in his spring-time, the analogy is indeed almost complete. For example,
however much he may have plagiarised, the book does belong to the author: he calls it, with
pardonable pride (and especially if anyone runs it down), 'my book.' He has written it, and
probably paid pretty handsomely for getting it published. Even the right of translation, if
you will look at the bottom of the title-page, is somewhat superfluously reserved to him. Yet
nothing can exceed the patronage which he suffers at the hands of the critic, and is compelled
to submit to in sullen silence. When the book-trade is slack--that is, in the summer season--the
pair get on together pretty amicably. 'This book,' says the critic, 'may be taken down to the
seaside, and lounged over not unprofitably;' or, 'Readers may do worse than peruse this unpretending
little volume of fugitive verse;' or even, 'We hail this new aspirant to the laurels of Apollo.'
But in the thick of the publishing season, and when books pour into the reviewer by the cartful,
nothing can exceed the violence, and indeed sometimes the virulence, of his language. That
'Now then, stoopid!' of the 'bus conductor pales beside the lightnings of his scorn.

'Among the lovers of sensation, it is possible that some persons may be found with tastes so
utterly vitiated as to derive pleasure from this monstrous production.' I cull these flowers
of speech from a wreath placed by a critic of the Slasher on my own early brow. Ye gods, how
I hated him! How I pursued him with more than Corsican vengeance; traduced him in public and
private; and only when I had thrust my knife (metaphorically) into his detested carcase, discovered
I had been attacking the wrong man. It is a lesson I have never forgotten; and I pray you,
my younger brothers of the pen, to lay it to heart. Believe rather that your unfriendly critic,
like the bee who is fabled to sting and die, has perished after his attempt on your reputation;
and let the tomb be his asylum. For even supposing you get the right sow by the ear--or rather,
the wild boar with the 'raging tooth'--what can it profit you? It is not like that difference
of opinion between yourself and twelve of your fellow-countrymen which may have such fatal
results. You are not an Adonis (except in outward form, perhaps), that you can be ripped up
with his tusk. His hard words do not break your bones. If they are uncalled for, their cruelty,
believe me, can hurt only your vanity. While it is just possible--though indeed in your case
in the very highest degree improbable--that the gentleman may have been right.

In the good old times we are told that a buffet from the hand of an Edinburgh or Quarterly
Reviewer would lay a young author dead at his feet. If it was so, he must have been naturally
very deficient in vitality. It certainly did not kill Byron, though it was a knock-down blow;
he rose from that combat from earth, like Antæus, all the stronger for it. The story of its
having killed Keats, though embalmed in verse, is apocryphal; and if such blows were not fatal
in those times, still less so are they nowadays. On the other hand, if authors are difficult
to slay, it is infinitely harder work to give them life by what the doctors term 'artificial
respiration'--puffing. The amount of breath expended in the days of 'the Quarterlies' in this
hopeless task would have moved windmills. Not a single favourite of those critics--selected,
that is, from favouritism, and apart from merit--now survives. They failed even to obtain immortality
for the writers in whom there was really something of genius, but whom they extolled beyond
their deserts. Their pet idol, for example, was Samuel Rogers. And who reads Rogers's poems
now? We remember something about them, and that is all; they are very literally 'Pleasures
of Memory.'

And if these things are true of the past, how much more so are they of the present! I venture
to think, in spite of some voices to the contrary, that criticism is much more honest than
it used to be: certainly less influenced by political feeling, and by the interests of publishing
houses; more temperate, if not more judicious, and--in the higher literary organs, at least--unswayed
by personal prejudice. But the result of even the most favourable notices upon a book is now
but small. I can remember when a review in the Times was calculated by the 'Row' to sell an
entire edition. Those halcyon days--if halcyon days they were--are over. People read books
for themselves now; judge for themselves; and buy only when they are absolutely compelled,
and cannot get them from the libraries. In the case of an author who has already secured a
public, it is indeed extraordinary what little effect reviews, either good or bad, have upon
his circulation. Those who like his works continue to read them, no matter what evil is written
of them; and those who don't like them are not to be persuaded (alas!) to change their minds,
though his latest effort should be described as though it had dropped from the heavens. I could
give some statistics upon this point not a little surprising, but statistics involve comparisons--which
are odious. As for fiction, its success depends more upon what Mrs. Brown says to Mrs. Jones
as to the necessity of getting that charming book from the library while there is yet time,
than on all the reviews in Christendom. "Good night, George - wake us early not too late tomorrow
you that we still can do a good journey. "

George kissed her warmly and asked her to be brave and good, and father
and mother joy - much to bring joy, for he himself would go away now,
and the parents would be so very sad.

"Good night, George," said the father when the children had gone to bed, and all except him, the
room had left, "have no fear that you verschläfst the mail tomorrow, I wake up already on the
right time - good night, my son. Come, come, not themselves catch to, and make me the heart is not heavy
with the times - but George, for God's will is what You? - Be a man
- Well - as long as the women had told me almost pulled the trigger
and the heart - It must be noted it's not so, otherwise they melt
completely - "

"My dear - dear father," George sobbed on his neck. "

"My good, good son," whispered the priest, kissing the child's forehead,
and now myself at heart and moves taken - "remain good - so good to
stay as you are - I can tell you do nothing better - God in my heart
and yourself, and - your parents Image, the blessing follows you in
all your ways.

"

"My father!"

"So my son - now good night and pray to your Creator for giving us tomorrow in the heavy Parting strengthens
- good night my George - good night.

"

Quietly, he freed himself from the son of arms, kissed him again, and then left quickly the
room. George, however, remained long, long minutes sitting on the chair where he left his father,
his face in his hands concealing.

"Good night," he finally whispered softly, barely audible, when all
was quiet in the house already, and gone to sleep - "Good night and
God bless you dear ones and me, but not possible I would live through
the terrible hour of parting again, not 'I want you Father, you mother
the pain, the bitter grief for the second time.

It's over - all over, and even a few hours and the home itself is a beautiful dream only in the
Memory depth. So then set to work, "he was established and determined," and whether the heart
wants to break it, 'with' is my motto now, through darkness to light - through ".

And with the laid muttered between clenched teeth, saying he stood up, and opening his bedroom, he
threw off his coat, face and neck and bathed in cool water. Then, when he the fire raged through
him, deleted something, he grabbed the small bag night with, for it carefully on the washstand
extensive articles, dressed again, the overcoat buttoned up to the neck, for the night was cold, and
after the excitement gehabten him shivering limbs, and looking around
the room his eye fell on the, under the Mirror standing, chosen for
him Rosenstock.

He quickly hid it in the large pocket opened his overcoat, then the window into the garden and
from there through the churchyard led to the highway, and swung to the Fensterbret.

! "Ade" he whispered, "Goodbye to You dear, dear house, goodbye -
God keep His hand on you, and protect the loved one - bye bye, "And
from the Bret jumping down into the garden.

                                He hurried through it, jumped lightly over the churchyard wall, which
he as a child, countless Times on climbs, and then walked slowly and
sadly his lonely dark road along.

* * * * *

Yet he rose the sun is not on the eastern slope spruce, and greeted the dawning days precisely
the dormant earth, when the mother raised her from her bed, the girl
woke that But fire in the kitchen do to keep the coffee ready, and
then called the man, son to say goodbye.

Pastor Donner had but located only in restless sleep - the idea let him rest and worry not,
and how he often went from bad dream up, blow with a sink back stitch
through the heart, that it was just a dream, who oppress and torture.

He got up, dressed, and while the mother out in the kitchen saw a son to prepare quick breakfast,
the father went back to wake him.

! "George," he said as he opened the door that led into the son of Appeal - "George - it is
Time - Holy God, "he interrupted but quickly and frightened as it
is empty the room, the bed was untouched and no trace of the child
- "holy, merciful God - he is gone.

"And as he also set out to grasp, and the woman, the child, the last Moments to make it difficult
not more, by his own weakness, but it hit the impact too hard - too unexpected. At that moment
the mother entered the room, and looked like the Father to be shocked
by the door, turned away and hid her face in her hands.

"My son - my child," she stammered, in which it by twitching idea
of ​​what happened, the her like a sudden blow to the heart hit -
"where is - where's George," But the father put it on? the breast,
and her forehead, on which his hot tears fell, kissing, "he whispered
softly:

"He wanted to save us the pain of parting, Louise - he's
gone."

!

                                "Departure," whispered the woman - hardly sum up the meaning of the
words, and broke into the unconscious Arms of her husband together.

* * * * *

Outside Waldenhayn, though still belonging to the same parish, and close to the border running
down the wood stand up here, a small, already half-ruined house, once a forest of stately Forstgehülfen
inhabited, but not been used more, and a cheap, actually to abort, was sold. The Man Who bought
it but had also formerly been in manorial services, and then the Metzger-driven craft, and
his wild and dissolute life, however, was not his business To promote even go forward. He also seemed
no real desire to receive regular work to have married, then, when he all he called his, brought
by a girl from manorial estate, which had left the service there and from the Lord himself, a
distance sum got, and bought with the money just the small building uninhabitable, he nevertheless
moved, and now allegedly fed the cattle trade. He took the country over and over, and bought
and sold cattle, even more, he wandered about in the inns where he drank and played, and had
the worst reputation in the country, can have a human being without but that the police could
get the slightest grip on him. But the ordinary people withdrew from him, no one liked dealing
with him or his wife have, and on the Way to his home grown grass,
who leads a particular business is not there, it entered never.

So had the "black Steffen," as he was in the land of his dark hair and appearance sake six
years in the little house used to him and his wife, except for the child to them in the marriage
brought three other born.

In recent times, it appeared another suspect against him, that he in fact under the hand of
poachers inlets, and - if perhaps not even wild, but buy the Stolen and a place for.

It is certain that not all the meat he brought to market, have been fattened in the stall, and
as now does once, and, not so very long ago, a Forstgehülfe, in exercising its Duty, was shot
dead, the supervision of the black Steffen, but it was the one not to collar could run so
hot and this last so intolerable that he had a few times with the forest officials searched the
inn and found armed, and his last from the rule, after long forbearance practiced, the order was served
on the Demolition then just acquired house of which was one way to
be a more bricks to clear, and to take or to leave as it pleases him,
run-in his residence, against him Actions for where to take different,
from the first of next month.

Steffen today was an exception, spent the whole day at home, and had some of his clothes, and helped
the women gathered and packed into a knapsack. The children but few paid attention, they were
accustomed that the father was often away, and then more and more
sometimes even eight days stayed away before they saw him again, or
even of he heard.

Ask where he went, they were never allowed.

His father, incidentally, was sullen as ever today - he said almost
nothing, but drank often the bottle, which was first disclosed in
the room, and which also accounts for the mother twice poured, and
then continued to the youngest child, and took it on his lap and kissed
her.

"Why do you cry, Mama," said the second child, a boy of just over five years - "has Someone
you 'done leads to suffering? "

"Because she's a fool," growled the father, who had heard the question, and now a angry look
after the woman shot - "I thought we could have chatted enough about it now and the matter would "settled."

"Well
- I say no word against," replied the woman - "it - it comes over
One only sometimes so - then it gets better - it's all but now even
otherwise, " they sat still and heavy with the hinseufzend added.

Steffen said nothing on but sent soon after, under any pretext, the
children off together into the garden, and then said, as he was alone
with the woman looked sullen and gloomy.

"You whine and whine, and the bellows will still make last alert and anxious to Your Heulerei
- you can eat it here, stay here, I have nothing against it; can
You's not, then be reasonable and do right now no stupid jokes - there
were a Fun when we drew up, and you know best what he would do after
us.

"

The woman had grown lean and full, with very small hands and feet had also once have been in
previous years, really beautiful, and even more than the traces was it would have been like this,
they just get something done to it. But all in their Externals they went, if not downright slovenly,
but neglected, the disordered hair were a broken, outlaw Schildpatkamm and abraded by a black
Velvet ribbon in the front was a large bronze brooch with a spurious Turquise held; in her ears
hung too long spurious enamelled earrings that helped to had to give her modest and simple in their
neighbors called the "Jule proud," and the dress made of good material and under the new section
was unausgebesserte cracks and traces of fat in stripes and spots, the bad flashing to the wrong
attire fit.

Even in the eyes themselves were rather cool, unfeminine, but now
that a more powerful Feeling was gone, only because sometimes, when
the harsh words, it flashed on to the man, and then the lips moved,
a separate fixed train of defiance and anger.

"I've done enough for you to desire me to go with you and the kids leave behind," said they then
less time - "if my heart's contracts while you were worse like an
animal, you wanted to defend it to me.

The wolf can not desert his brood, and we want continued - "

"The wolf also has to live outside, and milk for the boys - who gives
us's" hissed the Man between the teeth by zusammgebissenen - "we could
krepiren here in the nest, no Cat mewed therefore in the whole district.

"

"I know, I know," said the woman, "and that's the only thing I am glad that we they now play a trick
- the rags. And they will cry and complain - but they still have to feed them, which helps no
God.

One's suffering does indeed always these poor guys who still know nothing of the world and understand,
so leave alone - If I could take only the most recent - "she added softly.

"Let me just can not get back to the old drivel," cried the man dark and angry - "I thought that
we had discussed over and enough and thoughtful, and would agree."

"Consider not," but said the woman, his eyebrows pulling together firmly - "if I like this started
You got me hit more rough and scolded, and had your will in how for everything else. I know that
I am not one of those points, but - mother remains Mother, and - 's is always an ugly, unnatural
thing. "

! 'Shut up, "said the man over his head and throwing over -" unnatural - of course is he not,
however, that the barns are full around, and the rich, the rabble With fists full of money
thrown out the window while we are here, dry bread to eat away, and
not even always get - this beautiful naturalness "

"If you do not only the foolish with the -"

! "Shut up," growled the man but surly - "I should probably show me
catch and leave, now that I was imprisoned in the penitentiary and
metal chips - God damn me, I shot more the whole gang over the pile,
one by one - are you ready with your things?

"

can it "go away" - "Yes, said" the woman quietly and involuntarily
shuddered.

"We do but wait until it is dark," said Steffen after small pause, "better is better, and Maertens
down the road does not immediately know that we proceed are both together, poke his nose ahead
of time, he is to me so even a few Crawling up here, where he was doing nothing. "

? "But if they miss us now but before the time," said nachgehn the woman, "and our tracks; if it's
bad now, after it gets angry first, and we should then only with the same bag and abziehn Pack.
"

»In House's work, eh? - No, for a while I hold it to us already by the heels, and risk that they
find us, it also does not have. Where we come to the Railway, I am known, and have have sometimes
bought cattle as if they know just my name, and if we go away, I let an old hat to me and the
yellow cloth from you at the bottom of the deep Water hole under
the alders.

Once someone is missing here in the area, and search always first, and the mayor has not the
brightest bulb in the village, which is suspended as easily. Until they have fished for a while
downstream, we are hopefully on the road, and if not at, but above
the water.

But now I want to once again go down to fetch Maertens and flour; but today it is the ordinary
day, and no one comes here after so easy, you take however, before
the children, and instruire them how they should behave.

"

Picking up his cap and put Steffen hands in his pockets, and sauntered
slowly down the hill to the next, a quarter of an hour away at home,
while the woman the children called in to eat, the youngest, a little
sweet girl and a half years, on the lap increased, and thus quietly
and quietly sat in the corner.

The sun was near its setting, however, and his father came after about an hour when it was
now completely dark back - the mother was still sitting with the child on the Lap, which was
sleeping with her, and held it tightly clasped in itself.

"So Jules, it's time," said the man, his work jacket and throwing
off his coat attractive, "Albertine knows what she has done?"

The woman was trembling all over, but she answered not a word, stood
up, kissed the child she wore on her arm and placed it in his crib
- a box in the corner of Room stood.

"Albertine," she said to the elders, and turned from the dark burning oil lamp, Steffen had been
on the oven, suggesting that the daughter she not now in the real look dead pale features should
- I'll go with the father on today evening for a while - Karl I have
yet to bring to bed - tomorrow morning we should not be there in time,
so - So drawn to the children Give them to eat - the Brodschrank is
open, and milk is under the floorboard in the bowl - you fit me that
the little passed Nothing - you - you 're a big girl. "

"And I am
not going tomorrow to the door until we are not back," said Steffen,
"how I just got one week down there, here's a mad dog running around.
The best thing is you think to be the front door that he does not
comes. "

The woman had about three years while the girls, however,
even the somnolent, was taken off and down in his crib - and the boy,
Carl, was sitting on the bench at the window, still on his Supper
waiting. But he was also surprised it to parents who have never been
so late in the evening were gone, and probably never or only rarely
do so friendly with them had spoken. Those whose calling it is to depict human
nature in fiction are especially subject to this weakness; they do not give themselves the
trouble to study new characters, or at first hand, as of old; they sit at home and receive
the congratulations of Society without paying due attention to that somewhat changeful lady,
and they draw upon their memory, or their imagination, instead of studying from the life. Otherwise,
when they do not give way to that temptation of indolence which arises from competence and
success, there is no reason why their reputation should suffer, since, though they may lack
the vigour or high spirits of those who would push them from their stools, their experience
and knowledge of the world are always on the increase.

As to the argument with regard to posterity which is so popular with the Critic on the Hearth,
I am afraid he has no greater respect for the opinion of posterity himself than for that of
his possible great-great-granddaughter. Indeed, he only uses it as being a weapon the blow
of which it is impossible to parry, and with the object of being personally offensive. It is,
moreover, noteworthy that his position, which is sometimes taken up by persons of far greater
intelligence, is inconsistent with itself. The praisers of posterity are also always the praisers
of the past; it is only the present which is in their eyes contemptible. Yet to the next generation
this present will be their past, and, however valueless may be the verdict of today, how much
more so, by the most obvious analogy, will be that of to-morrow. It is probable, indeed, though
it is difficult to believe it, that the Critics on the Hearth of the generation to come will
make themselves even more ridiculous than their immediate predecessors.

SHAM ADMIRATION IN LITERATURE.

In all highly civilised communities Pretence is prominent, and sooner or later invades the
regions of Literature. In the beginning, this is not altogether to be reprobated; it is the
rude homage which Ignorance, conscious of its disgrace, offers to Learning; but after awhile,
Pretence becomes systematised, gathers strength from numbers and impunity, and rears its head
in such a manner as to suggest it has some body and substance belonging to it. In England,
literary pretence is more universal than elsewhere from our method of education. When young
gentlemen from ten to sixteen are set to study poetry (a subject for which not one in a hundred
has the least taste or capability even when he reads it in his own language) in Greek and Latin
authors, it is only a natural consequence that their views upon it should be slightly artificial.
The youth who objected to the alphabet that it seemed hardly worth while to have gone through
so much to have acquired so little, was exceptionally sagacious; the more ordinary lad conceives
that what has cost him so much time and trouble, and entailed so many pains and penalties,
must needs have something in it, though it has never met his eye. Hence arises our public opinion
upon the ancient classics, which I am afraid is somewhat different from (what painters term)
the private view. If you take the ordinary admirer of Æschylus, for example--not the scholar,
but the man who has had what he believes to be 'a liberal education'--and appeal to his opinion
upon some passage in a British dramatist, say Shakespeare, it is ten to one that he shows not
only ignorance of the author (the odds are twenty to one about that), but utter inability to
grasp the point in question; it is too deep for him, and, especially, too subtle. If you are
cruel enough to press him, he will unconsciously betray the fact that he has never felt a line
of poetry in his life. He honestly believes that the 'Seven against Thebes' is one of the greatest
works that ever were written, just as a child believes the same of the 'Seven Champions of
Christendom.' A great wit once observed, when bored by the praises of a man who spoke six languages,
that he had known a man to speak a dozen, and yet not say a word worth hearing in any one of
them. The humour of the remark, as sometimes happens, has caused its wisdom to be underrated;
for the fact is that, in very many cases, all the intelligence of which a mind is capable is
expended upon the mere acquisition of a foreign tongue. As to getting anything out of it in
the way of ideas, and especially of poetical ones, that is almost never attained. There are,
indeed, many who have a special facility for languages, but in their case (with a few exceptions)
one may say without uncharity that the acquisition of ideas is not their object, though if
they did acquire them they would probably be new ones. The majority of us, however, have much
difficulty in surmounting the obstacle of an alien tongue; and when we have done so we are
naturally inclined to overrate the advantages thus attained. Everyone knows the poor creature
who quotes French on all occasions with a certain stress on the accent, designed to arouse
a doubt in his hearers as to whether he was not actually born in Paris. He, of course, is a
low specimen of the class in question, but almost all of us derive a certain intellectual gratification
from the mastery of another language, and as we gradually attain to it, whenever we find a
meaning we are apt to mistake it for a beauty.[1] Nay, I am convinced that many admire this
or that (even) British poet from the fact that here and there his meaning has gleamed upon
them with all the charm that accompanies unexpectedness.

    [1] Since the above was written, my attention has been called to
    the following remark of De Quincey: 'As must ever be the case with
    readers not sufficiently masters of a language to bring the true
    pretensions of a work to any test of feeling, they are for ever
    mistaking for some pleasure conferred by the writer, what is, in
    fact, the pleasure naturally attached to the sense of a difficulty
    overcome.'

Since classical learning is compulsory with us, this bastard admiration is much more often
excited with respect to the Greek and Latin poets. Men may not only go through the whole curriculum
of a university education, but take high honours in it, without the least intellectual advantage
beyond the acquisition of a few quotations. This is not, of course (good heavens!), because
the classics have nothing to teach us in the way of poetical ideas, but simply because to the
ordinary mind the acquisition of a poetical idea is very difficult, and when conveyed in a
foreign language is impossible. If the same student had given the same time--a monstrous thought,
of course, but not impracticable--to the cultivation of Shakespeare and the old dramatists,
or even to the more modern English poets and thinkers, he would certainly have got more out
of them, though he would have missed the delicate suggestiveness of the Greek aorist, and the
exquisite subtleties of the particle de. Having acquired these last, however, and not for nothing,
it is not surprising that he should esteem them very highly, and, being unable to popularise
them at dinner-parties and the like, he falls back upon praise of the classics generally.

Such are the circumstances which, more particularly in this country, have led to a well-nigh
universal habit of literary lying--of a pretence of admiration for certain works of which in
reality we know very little, and for which, if we knew more, we should perhaps care even less.

There are certain books which are standard, and as it were planted in the British soil, before
which the great majority of us bow the knee and doff the cap with a reverence that, in its
ignorance, reminds one of fetish worship, and, in its affectation, of the passion for High
Art. The works without which, we are told at book auctions, 'no gentleman's library can be
considered complete,' are especially the objects of this adoration. The 'Rambler,' for example,
is one of them. I was once shut up for a week of snowstorms in a mountain inn, with the 'Rambler'
and one other publication. The latter was a Shepherd's Guide, with illustrations of the way
in which sheep are marked by their various owners for the purpose of identification: 'Cropped
near ear, upper key bitted far, a pop on the head and another at the tail head, ritted, and
with two red strokes down both shoulders,' etc. It was monotonous, but I confess that there
were times when I felt it some comfort in having that picture-book to fall back upon, to alternate
with the 'Rambler.'

The essay, like port wine, I have noticed, requires age for its due appreciation. Leigh Hunt's
'Indicator' comprises some admirable essays, but the general public have not a word to say
for them; it may be urged that that is because they had not read the 'Indicator' But why then
do they praise the 'Rambler' and Montaigne? That comforting word, 'Mesopotamia,' which has
been so often alluded to in religious matters, has many a parallel in profane literature.

A good deal of this mock worship is of course due to abject cowardice. A man who says he doesn't
like the 'Rambler,' runs, with some folks, the risk of being thought a fool; but he is sure
to be thought that, for something or another, under any circumstances; and, at all events,
why should he not content himself, when the 'Rambler' is belauded, with holding his tongue
and smiling acquiescence? It must be conceded that there are a few persons who really have
read the 'Rambler,' a work, of course, I am merely using as a type of its class. In their young
days it was used as a schoolbook, and thought necessary as a part of polite education; and
as they have read little or nothing since, it is only reasonable that they should stick to
their colours. Indeed, the French satirist's boast that he could predicate the views of any
man with regard to both worlds, if he were only supplied with the simple data of his age and
his income, is quite true in the general with regard to literary taste. Given the age of the
ordinary individual--that is to say of the gentleman 'fond of books, but who has really no
time for reading'--and it is easy enough to guess his literary idols. They are the gods of
his youth, and, whether he has been 'suckled in a creed outworn' or not, he knows no other.
These persons, however, rarely give their opinion about literary matters, except on compulsion;
they are harmless and truthful. The tendency of society in general, on the other hand, is not
only to praise the 'Rambler' which they have not read, but to express a noble scorn for those
who have read it and don't like it.

I remember, as a young man, being greatly struck by the independence of character exhibited
by Miss Bronte in a certain confession she made in respect to Miss Austen's novels. It was
at a period when everybody professed to adore them, and especially the great-guns of literature.
Walter Scott thought more highly of the genius of the author of 'Mansfield Park' even than
of that of his favourite, Miss Edgeworth. Macaulay speaks of her as though she were the Eclipse
of novelists--'first, and the rest nowhere'--though his opinion, it is true, lost something
of its force from the contempt he expressed for 'the rest,' among whom were some much better
ones. Dr. Whewell, a very different type of mind, had 'Mansfield Park,' I believe, read to
him on his death-bed. And, indeed, up to the present date, some highly-cultured persons of
my acquaintance take the same view. They may be very possibly right, but that is no reason
why the people who have never read Miss Austen's novels--and very few have--should ape the
fashion. Now, the authoress of 'Jane Eyre' did not derive much pleasure from the perusal of
the works of the other Jane. 'I know it's very wrong,' she modestly said, 'but the fact is
I can't read them. They have not got story enough in them to engage my attention. I don't want
my blood curdled, but I like it stirred. Miss Austen strikes me as milk-and-watery, and, to
say truth, as dull.'

This opinion she has, in effect, repeated in her published writings, but I had only heard her
verbal expression of it; and I admired her courage. If she had been a man, struggling, as she
then was, for a position in literature, she would not have dared to say half as much. For,
what is very curious, the advocates of the classic authors--those I mean whom antiquity has
more or less hallowed--instead of pitying those unhappy wights who confess their want of appreciation
of them, fly at them with bludgeons, and dance upon their prostrate bodies with clogs.

    'For who would rush on a benighted man,
    And give him two black eyes for being blind?'

inquires the poet. I answer, 'lots of people,' and especially those who worship the pagan divinities
of literature. The same thing happens--but their fury is more excusable, because they have
less natural intelligence--with the lovers of music. Instead of being sorry for the poor folks
who have 'no ear,' and whom 'a little music in the evening' bores to extremity, they overwhelm
them with reproaches for what is in fact a natural infirmity. 'You Goth! you Vandal!' they
exclaim, 'how contemptible is the creature who has no music in his soul!' Which is really very
rude. Even persons who are not musical have their feelings. 'Hath not a Jew ears?'--that is
to say, though they have 'no ear,' they understand what is abusive language and resent it.

I am not saying one word against established reputations in literature. The very fact of their
being established (even the 'Rambler,' for example, has its merits) is in their favour; and,
indeed, some of the works I shall refer to are masterpieces. My objection is to the sham admiration
of them, which does their authors no good (for their circulation is now of no consequence to
them), and is injurious not only to modern writers (who are generally made the subject of base
comparison), but especially to the utterers of this false coin themselves. One cannot tell
falsehoods, even about one's views in literature, without injury to one's morals, yet to 'tell
the truth and shame the devil' is easy, as it would seem, compared with telling the truth and
defying the critics.

I have alluded to the intrepidity of Miss Bronte in this matter; and, curiously enough, it
is women who have the most courage in the expression of their literary opinions. It may be
said, of course, that this is due to the audacity of ignorance, and a well-known line may be
quoted (for some people, as I have said, are rude) in which certain angels (who are not women)
are represented as being afraid to tread in certain places. But I am speaking of women who
are great readers. Miss Martineau once confessed to me that she could see no beauties in 'Tom
Jones.' 'Of course,' she said, 'the coarseness disgusts me, but apart from that, I see no sort
of merit in it.' 'What?' I replied, 'no humour, no knowledge of human life?' 'No; to me it
is a wearisome book.'

I disagreed with her very much upon that point, and do so still; yet, apart from the coarseness
(which does not disgust everybody, let me tell you), there is a good deal of tedious reading
in 'Tom Jones.' At all events that expression of opinion from such lips strikes me as noteworthy.

It may here be said that there are many English authors of old date, some of whose beauties
are unintelligible except to those who are acquainted with the classics; and 'Tom Jones' is
one of them. Many of the introductions to the chapters, not to mention a certain travestie
of an Homeric battle, must needs be as wearisome to those who are not scholars, as the spectacle
of a burlesque is to those who have not seen the original play. This is still more the case
with our old poets, especially Milton. I very much doubt, in spite of the universal chorus
to the contrary, whether 'Lycidas' is much admired by readers who are only acquainted with
English literature; I am quite sure it never touched their hearts as, for example, 'In Memoriam'
does.

I once beheld a young lady of great literary taste, and of exquisite sensibility, torn to pieces
(figuratively) and trampled upon by a great scholar for venturing to make a comparison between
those two poems. Its invocation to the Muses, and the general classical air which pervades
it, had destroyed for her the pathos of 'Lycidas,' whereas to her antagonist those very imperfections
appeared to enhance its beauty. I did not interfere, because the wretch was her husband, and
it would have been worse for her if I had, but my sympathies were entirely with her. Her sad
fate--for the massacre took place in public--would, I was well aware, have the effect of making
people lie worse than ever about Milton. On that same evening, while some folks were talking
about Mr. Morris's 'Earthly Paradise,' I heard a scornful voice exclaim, 'Oh! give ME "Paradise
Lost,"' and with that gentleman I did have it out. I promptly subjected him to cross-examination,
and drove him to that extremity that he was compelled to admit he had never read a word of
Milton for forty years, and even then only in extracts from 'Enfield's Speaker.'

With Shakespeare--though there is a good deal of lying about him--the case is different, and
especially with elderly people; for 'in their day,' as they pathetically term it, Shakespeare
was played everywhere, and everyone went to the play. They do not read him, but they recollect
him; they are well acquainted with his beauties--that is, with the better known of them--and
can quote him with manifest appreciation. They are, intellectually, in a position much superior
to that of a fashionable lady of my acquaintance who informed me that her daughters were going
to the theatre that night to see Shakespeare's 'Turning of the Screw.'

The writer who has done most, without I suppose intending it, to promote hypocrisy in literature
is Macaulay. His 'every schoolboy knows' has frightened thousands into pretending to know authors
with whom they have not even a bowing acquaintance. It is amazing that a man who had read so
much should have written so contemptuously of those who have read but little; one would have
thought that the consciousness of superiority would have forbidden such insolence, or that
his reading would have been extensive enough to teach him at least how little he had read of
what there was to read; since he read some things--works of imagination and humour, for example--to
such very little purpose, he might really have bragged a little less. One feels quite grateful
to Macaulay, however, for avowing his belief that he was the only man who had read through
the 'Faery Queen;' since that exonerates everybody--I do not say from reading it, because the
supposition is preposterous--but from the necessity of pretending to have read it. The pleasure
derived from that poem to most minds is, I am convinced, analogous to that already spoken of
as being imparted by a foreign author: namely, the satisfaction at finding it--in places--intelligible.
For the few who possess the poetic faculty it has great beauties, but I observe, from the extracts
that appear in Poetic Selections and the like, that the most tedious and even the most monstrous
passages are those which are generally offered for admiration. The case of Spenser in this
respect--which does not stand alone in ancient English literature--has a curious parallel in
art, where people are positively found to go into ecstasies over a distorted limb or a ludicrous
inversion of perspective, simply because it is the work of an old master, who knew no better,
or followed the fashion of his time.

Leigh Hunt read the 'Faery Queen,' by-the-bye, as almost everything else that has been written
in the English tongue, and even Macaulay alludes with rare commendation to his 'catholic taste.'
Of all authors indeed, and probably of all readers, Leigh Hunt had the keenest eye for merit
and the warmest appreciation of it wherever found. He was actively engaged in politics, yet
was never blind to the genius of an adversary; blameless himself in morals, he could admire
the wit of Wycherley; and a freethinker in religion, he could see both wisdom and beauty in
the divines. Moreover, it is immensely to his credit that this universal knowledge, instead
of puffing him up, only moved him to impart it, and that next to the pleasure he took in books
was that he derived from teaching others to take pleasure in them. Witness his 'Wit and Humour'
and his 'Imagination and Fancy,' to my mind the greatest treasures in the way of handbooks
that have ever been offered to students of English literature, and the completest antidotes
to pretence in it. How many a time, as a boy, have I pondered over this or that passage in
the originals, from Shakespeare to Suckling, and then compared it with the italicised lines
in his two volumes, to see whether I had hit upon the beauties; and how often, alas! I hit
upon the blots![2]

    [2] I remember (when 'I was but a little tiny boy') I thought that
    'the fringed curtains of thine eye advance,' addressed by Prospero
    to Miranda, must needs be a very fine line; imagine then my
    confusion, on referring for corroboration to my 'guide,
    philosopher, and friend,' as he truly was, to find this passage:
    'Why Shakespeare should have condescended to the elaborate
    nothingness, not to say nonsense, of this metaphor (for what is
    meant by "advancing curtains"?) I cannot conceive. That is to say,
    if he did condescend: for it looks very like the interpolation of
    some pompous declamatory player. Pope has put it into his
    Treatise on the Bathos.'

It is curious that Leigh Hunt, whose style has been so severely handled (and, it must be owned,
not without some justice) for its affectations, should have been so genuine (although always
generous) in his criticisms. It was nothing to him whether an author was old or new; nor did
he shrink from any literary comparison between two writers when he thought it appropriate (and
he was generally right), notwithstanding all the age and authority that might be at the back
of one of them. Thackeray, by the way, a very different writer and thinker, had this same outspoken
honesty in the expression of his literary taste. In speaking of the hero of Cooper's five good
novels--Leather-Stocking, Hawkeye, etc.--he remarks with quite a noble simplicity: 'I think
he is better than any of Scott's lot.'

It is a 'far cry' from the 'Faery Queen' to 'Childe Harold,' which, reckoning by years, is
still a modern poem; yet I wonder how many persons under thirty--even of those who term it
'magnificent'--have ever read 'Childe Harold.' At one time it was only people under thirty
who had read it; for poetry to the ordinary reader is the poetry that was popular in his youth--'no
other is genuine.'

    'A dreary, weary poem called the Excursion,
    Written in a manner which is my aversion,'

is a couplet the frankness of which has always recommended itself to me (though I like the
'Excursion'); but, except for the rhyme, it has a fatal facility of application to other long
poems. Heaven forbid that I should 'with shadowed hint confuse' the faith in a British classic;
but, ye gods, how men have gaped (in private) over 'Childe Harold!'

'Gil Blas,' though not a native classic, is included in the articles of the British literary
faith; not as a matter of pious opinion, but de fide; a necessity of intellectual salvation.
I remember an interview I once had with a boy of letters concerning this immortal work; he
is a well-known writer now, but at the time I speak of he was only budding and sprouting in
the magazines--a lad of promise, no doubt, but given, if not to kick against authority, to
question it, and, what was worse, to question me about it, in an embarrassing manner. The natural
affability of my disposition had caused him, I suppose, to treat me as his Father Confessor
in literature; and one of the sins of omission he confided to me was in connection with the
divine Le Sage.

'I say--about "Gil Blas," you know--Bias [a great critic of that day] was saying last night
that if he were to be imprisoned for life with only one book to read he would choose the Bible
or "Gil Blas."'

'It is very gratifying to me,' said I, wishing to evade my young friend, and also because I
had no love for Bias, 'that he should have selected the Bible, even as an alternative; and
all the more so, since I should never have expected it of him.'

'Yes, papa' (that was what the young dog was wont to call me, though he was no son of mine--far
from it); 'but about "Gil Blas"? Is it really the next best book? And after he had read it--say
ten times--would he not have been rather sorry that he had not chosen--well, Shakespeare, for
instance?'

The picture of Bias with a long white beard, the growth of twenty years, reading that tattered
copy of 'Gil Blas' in his cell, almost affected me to tears; but I made shift to answer gravely:
'Bias is a professional critic; and persons of that class are apt to be a little dogmatic and
given to exaggeration. But "Gil Blas" is a great work. As a picture of the seamy side of human
life--of its vices and its weaknesses at least--it is unrivalled. The archbishop----'

'Oh! I know that archbishop--well,' interrupted my young tormentor. 'I sometimes think, if
it hadn't been for that archbishop, we should never perhaps have heard of "Gil Blas."'

'Tchut, tchut!' said I; 'you talk like a child.'

'But to read it all through, papa--three times, ten times, for all one's life? Poor Mr. Bias!'

'It is a matter of opinion, my dear boy,' I said. 'Bias has this great advantage over you in
literary matters, that he knows what he is talking about; and if he was quite sure----'

'Oh! but he was not quite sure: he was rather doubtful, he said, about one of the books.'

'Not the Bible, I do hope?' said I fervently.

'No, about the other. He was not quite sure but that, instead of "Gil Blas," he ought to have
selected "Don Quixote." Now really that seems to me worse than "Gil Blas."

'You mean less excellent,' I rejoined; 'you are too young to appreciate the full signification
of "Don Quixote."'

The scoundrel murmured, 'Do you mean to tell me people read it when they are old?' But I pretended
not to hear him. 'We do not all of us,' I went on, 'know what is good for us. Sancho Panza's
physician----'

'Oh! I know that physician--well, papa. I sometimes think, if it had not been for that physician,
perhaps----'

'Hush!' I exclaimed authoritatively; 'let us have no flippancy, I beg.' And so, with a dead
lift as it were, I got rid of him. He left the room muttering, 'But to read it through--three
times, ten times, for all one's life?' And I was obliged to confess to myself that such a prolonged
course of study, even of 'Don Quixote,' would have been wearisome.

Rabelais is another article of our literary faith, that is certainly subscribed to much more
often than believed in. In a certain poem of Mr. Browning's (I call it the Burial of the Book,
since the Latin name he has given it is unpronounceable, even if it were possible to recollect
it), charmingly humorous, and which is also remarkable for impersonating an inanimate object
in verse as Dickens does in prose, there occur these lines:

    'Then I went indoors, brought out a loaf,
      Half a cheese and a bottle of Chablis,
    Lay on the grass, and forgot the oaf
      Over a jolly chapter of Rabelais.'

Yet I have known some wonder to be expressed (confidentially) as to where he found the 'jolly
chapter,' and the looking for the beauties of Rabelais to be likened to searching in a huge
dung-heap for a few heads of asparagus.

I have no quarrel with Bias and Company (though they stick at nothing, and will presently say
that I don't care for these books myself), but I venture to think that they are wrong in making
dogmas of what are, after all, but matters of literary taste; it is their vehemence and exaggeration
which drive the weak to take refuge in falsehood.

A good woman in the country once complained of her stepson, 'He will not love his learning,
though I beats him with a jack-chain;' and from the application of similar aids to instruction,
the same result takes place in London. Only here we dissemble and pretend to love it. It is
partly in consequence of this that works, not only of acknowledged but genuine excellence,
such as those I have been careful to select, are, though so universally praised, so little
read. The poor student attempts them, but failing--from many causes no doubt, but also sometimes
from the fact of their not being there--to find those unrivalled beauties which he has been
led to expect in every sentence, he stops short, where he would otherwise have gone on. He
says to himself, 'I have been deceived,' or 'I must be a born fool;' whereas he is wrong in
both suppositions. I am convinced that the want of popularity of Walter Scott among the rising
generation is partly due to this extravagant laudation; and I am much mistaken if another great
author, more recently deceased, will not in a few years be added to the ranks of those who
are more praised than read from the same cause.

The habit of mere adhesion to received opinion in any matter is most mischievous, for it strikes
at the root of independence of thought; and in literature it tends to make the public taste
mechanical. It is very seldom that what is called the verdict of posterity (absurdly enough,
for are not we posterity?) is ever reversed; but it has chanced to happen in a certain case
quite lately. The production of 'The Iron Chest' upon the stage has once more brought into
fashion 'Caleb Williams.' Now that is a work, though by no means belonging to the same rank
as those to which I have referred, which has a fine old crusted reputation. Time has hallowed
it. The great world of readers (who have never read it) used to echo the remark of Bias and
Company, that this and that modern work of fiction reminded them--though at an immense distance,
of course--of Godwin's masterpiece. I remember Le Fanu's 'Uncle Silas,' for example (from some
similarity, more fanciful perhaps than real, in the isolation of its hero), being thus compared
with it. Now 'Caleb Williams' is founded on a very fine conception--one that could only have
occurred, perhaps, to a man of genius; the first part of it is well worked out, but towards
the middle it grows feeble, and it ends in tediousness and drivel; whereas 'Uncle Silas' is
good and strong from first to last. Le Fanu has never been so popular as, in my humble judgment,
he deserves to be, but of course modern readers were better acquainted with him than with Godwin.
Yet nine out of ten were always heard repeating this cuckoo cry about the latter's superiority,
until the 'Iron Chest' came out, and Fashion induced them to read Godwin for themselves; which
has very properly changed their opinion.

I remember, in my own case, that, from that reverence for authority which I hope I share with
my neighbours, I used to speak of 'Headlong Hall' and 'Crotchet Castle'--both great favourites
of our fore-fathers--with much respect, until one wet day in the country I found myself shut
up with them. I won't say what I suffered; better judges of literature than myself admire them
still, I know. I will only remark that I don't admire them. I don't say they are the dullest
novels ever printed, because that would be invidious, and might do wrong to works of even greater
pretensions; but to my mind they are dull.

When Dr. Johnson is free to confess that he does not admire Gray's 'Elegy,' and Macaulay to
avow that he sees little to praise in Dickens and Wordsworth, why should not humbler folks
have the courage of their own opinions? They cannot possibly be more wrong than Johnson and
Macaulay were, and it is surely better to be honest, though it may expose one to some ridicule,
than to lie. The more we agree with the verdict of the generations before us on these matters,
the more, it is quite true, we are likely to be right; but the agreement should be an honest
one. At present very extensive domains in literature are, as it were, enclosed and denied to
the public in respect to any free expression of their opinion. 'They are splendid, they are
faultless,' cries the general voice, but the general eye has not beheld them. Nothing, of course,
could be more futile than that, with every new generation, our old authors who have won their
fame should be arraigned anew at the bar of public criticism; but, on the other hand, there
is no reason why the mouths of us poor moderns should be muzzled, and still less that we 'should
praise with alien lips.'

'Until Caldecott's charming illustrations of it made me laugh so much,' said a young lady to
me the other day, 'I confess--though I know it's very stupid of me--I never saw much fun in
"John Gilpin."' She evidently expected a reproof, and when I whispered in her ear, 'Nor I,'
her lovely features assumed a look of positive enfranchisement.

'But am I right?' she inquired.

'You are certainly right, my dear young lady,' said I, 'not to pretend admiration where you
don't feel it; as to liking "John Gilpin," that is a matter of taste. It has, of course, simplicity
to recommend it; but in my own case, though I'm fond of fun, it has never evoked a smile. It
has always seemed to me like one of Mr. Joe Miller's stories put into tedious verse.'

I really almost thought (and hoped) that that young lady would have kissed me.

'Papa always says it is a free country,' she exclaimed, 'but I never felt it to be the case
before this moment.'

For years this beautiful and accomplished creature had locked this awful secret in her innocent
breast--that she didn't see much fun in 'John Gilpin.' 'You have given me courage,' she said,
'to confess something else. Mr. Caldecott has just been illustrating in the same charming manner
Goldsmith's "Elegy on a Mad Dog," and--I'm very sorry--but I never laughed at that before,
either. I have pretended to laugh, you know,' she added, hastily and apologetically, 'hundreds
of times.'

'I don't doubt it,' I replied; 'this is not such a free country as your father supposes.'

'But am I right?'

'I say nothing about "right,"' I answered, 'except that everybody has a right to his own opinion.
For my part, however, I think the 'Mad Dog' better than 'John Gilpin' only because it is shorter.'

Whether I was wrong or right in the matter is of no consequence even to myself; the affection
and gratitude of that young creature would more than repay me for a much greater mistake, if
mistake it is. She protests that I have emancipated her from slavery. She has since talked
to me about all sorts of authors, from Sir Philip Sidney to Washington Irving, in a way that
would make some people's blood run cold; but it has no such effect upon me--quite the reverse.
Of Irving she naïvely remarks that his strokes of humour seem to her to owe much of their success
to the rarity of their occurrence; the flashes of fun are spread over pages of dulness, which
enhance them, just as a dark night is propitious to fireworks, or the atmosphere of the House
cf Commons, or of a Court of Law, to a joke. She is often in error, no doubt, but how bright
and wholesome such talk is as compared with the platitudes and commonplaces which one hears
on all sides in connection with literature!

As a rule, I suppose, even people in society ('the drawing-rooms and the clubs') are not absolutely
base and yet one would really think so, to judge by the fear that is entertained by them of
being natural. It is not everyone, of course, who has an opinion of his own upon any subject,
far less on that of literature, but everyone can abstain from expressing an opinion that is
not his own. If one has no voice, what possible compensation can there be in becoming an echo?
No one, I conclude, would wish to see literature discoursed about in the same pinchbeck and
affected style as are painting and music;[3] yet that is what will happen if this prolific
weed of sham admiration is permitted to attain its full growth.

    [3] The slang of art-talk has reached the 'young men' in the
    furniture warehouses. A friend of mine was recommended a sideboard
    the other day as not being a Chippendale, but as 'having a
    Chippendale feeling in it.'

THE PINCH OF POVERTY.

In these days of reduction of rents, or of total abstinence from rent-paying, it is, I am told,
the correct thing to be 'a little pressed for money.' It is a sign of connection with the landed
interest (like the banker's ejaculation in 'Middlemarch') and suggests family acres, and entails,
and a position in the county. (In which case I know a good many people who are landlords on
a very extensive scale, and have made allowances for their tenants the generosity of which
may be described as Quixotic.) But as a general rule, and in times less exceptionally hard,
though Shakespeare tells us 'How apt the poor are to be proud,' they are not proud of being poor.

'Poverty,' says the greatest of English divines, 'is indeed despised and makes men contemptible;
it exposes a man to the influences of evil persons, and leaves a man defenceless; it is always
suspected; its stories are accounted lies, and all its counsels follies; it puts a man from
all employment; it makes a man's discourses tedious and his society troublesome. This is the
worst of it.' Even so poverty seems pretty bad, but, begging Dr. Jeremy Taylor's pardon, what
he has stated is by no means 'the worst of it.' To be in want of food at any time, and of firing
in winter time, is ever so much worse than the inconveniences he enumerates; and to see those
we love--delicate women and children perhaps--in want, is worse still. The fact is, the excellent
bishop probably never knew what it was to go without his meals, but took them 'reg'lar' (as
Mrs. Gamp took her Brighton ale) as bishops generally do. Moreover, since his day, Luxury has
so universally increased, and the value of Intelligence has become so well recognised (by the
publishers) that even philosophers, who profess to despise such things, have plenty to eat,
and good of its kind too. Hence it happens that, from all we hear to the contrary from the
greatest thinkers, the deprivation of food is a small thing: indeed, as compared with the great
spiritual struggles of noble minds, and the doubts that beset them as to the supreme government
of the universe, it seems hardly worth mentioning.

In old times, when folks were not so 'cultured,' starvation was thought more of. It is quite
curious, indeed, to contrast the high-flying morality of the present day (when no one is permitted,
either by Evolutionist or Ritualist, however dire may be his necessity, so much as to jar his
conscience) with the shocking laxity of the Holy Scriptures. 'Men do not despise a thief if
he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry,' says Solomon, after which stretch of charity,
strange to say, he goes on to speak of marital infidelity in terms that, considering the number
of wives he had himself, strike one as severe.

It is certain, indeed, that the sacred writers were apt to make great allowances for people
with empty stomachs, and though I am well aware that the present profane ones think this very
reprehensible, I venture to agree with the sacred writers. The sharpest tooth of poverty is
felt, after all, in the bite of hunger. A very amusing and graphic writer once described his
experience of a whole night passed in the streets; the exhaustion, the pain, the intolerable
weariness of it, were set forth in a very striking manner; the sketch was called 'The Key of
the Street,' and was thought by many, as Browning puts it, to be 'the true Dickens.' But what
are even the pangs of sleeplessness and fatigue compared with those of want? Of course there
have been fanatics who have fasted many days; but they have been supported by the prospect
of spiritual reward. I confess I reserve my pity for those who have no such golden dreams,
and who fast perforce. It is exceedingly difficult for mere worldlings--such as most of us
are--not to eat, if it is possible, when we are hungry. I have known a great social philosopher
who flattered himself that he was giving his sons an experience of High Thinking and Low Living
by restricting their pocket-money to two shillings a day, out of which it was understood they
were to find their own meals. I don't know whether the spirit in their case was willing, but
the flesh was decidedly weak, for one of them, on this very moderate allowance, used to contrive
to always have a pint of dry champagne with his luncheon. The fact is, that of the iron grip
of poverty, people in general, by no means excepting those who have written about it, have
had very little experience; whereas of the pinch of it a good many people know something. It
is the object of this paper--and the question should be an interesting one, considering how
much it is talked about--to inquire briefly where it lies.

It is quite extraordinary how very various are the opinions entertained on this point, and,
before sifting them, one must be careful in the first place to eliminate from our inquiry the
cases of that considerable class of persons who pinch themselves. For, however severely they
do it, they may stop when they like and the pain is cured. There is all the difference in the
world between pulling one's own tooth out, and even the best and kindest of dentists doing
it for one. How gingerly one goes to work, and how often it strikes one that the tooth is a
good tooth, that it has been a fast friend to us for ever so many years and never 'fallen out'
before, and that after all it had better stop where it is!

To the truly benevolent mind, indeed, nothing is more satisfactory than to hear of a miser
denying himself the necessaries of life a little too far and ridding us of his presence altogether.
Our confidence in the average virtue of humanity assures us that his place will be supplied
by a better man. The details of his penurious habits, the comfortless room, the scanty bedding,
the cheese-rinds on his table, and the fat banking-book under his thin bolster, only inspire
disgust: if he were pinched to death he did it himself, and so much the better for the world
in general and his heir in particular.

Again, the people who have a thousand a year, and who try to persuade the world that they have
two thousand, suffer a good deal of inconvenience, but it can't be called the pinch of poverty.
They may put limits to their washing-bills, which persons of cleanlier habits would consider
unpleasantly narrow; they may eat cold mutton in private for five days a week in order to eat
turtle and venison in public (and with the air of eating them every day) on the sixth; and
they may immure themselves in their back rooms in London throughout the autumn in order to
persuade folks that they are still at Trouville, where for ten days they did really reside
and in splendour; but all their stint and self-incarceration, so far from awakening pity, only
fill us with contempt. I am afraid that even the complaining tones of our City friend who tells
us that in consequence of 'the present unsettled state of the markets' he has been obliged
to make 'great retrenchments'--which it seems on inquiry consist in putting down one of his
carriages and keeping three horses instead of six--fail to draw the sympathising tear. Indeed,
to a poor man this pretence of suffering on the part of the rich is perhaps even more offensive
than their boasts of their prosperity.

On the other hand, when the rich become really poor their case is hard indeed; though, strange
to say, we hear little of it. It is like drowning; there is a feeble cry, a little ineffectual
assistance from the bystanders, and then they go under. It is not a question of pinch with
them; they have fallen into the gaping mouth of ruin, and it has devoured them. If we ever
see them again, it is in the second generation as waiters (upon Providence), or governesses,
and we say, 'Why, dear me, that was Bullion's son (or daughter), wasn't it?' using the past
tense, as if they were dead. 'I remember him when he lived in Eaton Square.' This class of
cases rarely comes under the head of 'genteel poverty.' They were at the top, and hey presto!
by some malignant stroke of fate they are at the bottom; and there they stick.

I don't believe in bachelors ever experiencing the pinch of poverty; I have heard them complaining
of it at the club, while ordering Medina oysters instead of Natives, but, after all, what does
it signify even if they were reduced to cockles? They have no appearances to keep up, and if
they cannot earn enough to support themselves they must be poor creatures indeed.

It is the large families of moderate income, who are delicate, and have delicate tastes, that
feel the twinge: and especially the poor girls. I remember a man, with little care for his
personal appearance, of small means but with a very rich sense of humour, describing to me
his experiences when staying at a certain ducal house in the country, where his feelings must
have been very similar to those of Christopher Sly. In particular he drew a charming picture
of the magnificent attendant who in the morning would put out his clothes for him, which had
not been made by Mr. Poole, nor very recently by anybody. The contempt which he well understood
his Grace's gentleman must have felt for him afforded him genuine enjoyment. But with young
ladies, in a similar position, matters are very different; they have rarely a sense of humour,
and certainly none strong enough to counteract the force of a personal humiliation. I have
known some very charming ones, compelled to dress on a very small allowance, who, in certain
mansions where they have been occasionally guests, have been afraid to put their boots outside
their door, because they were not of the newest, and have trembled when the officious lady's-maid
has meddled with their scanty wardrobe. A philosopher may think nothing of this, but, considering
the tender skin of the sufferer, it may be fairly called a pinch.

In the investigation of this interesting subject, I have had a good deal of conversation with
young ladies, who have given me the fullest information, and in a manner so charming, that,
if it were common in witnesses generally, it would make Blue-Books very pretty reading.

'I consider it to be "a pinch,"' says one, 'when I am obliged to put on black mittens on occasions
when I know other girls will have long white kid gloves.' I must confess I have a prejudice
myself against mittens; they are, so to speak, 'gritty' to touch; so that the pinch, if it
be one, experienced by the wearer, is shared by her ungloved friends. The same thing may be
said of that drawing-room fire which is lit so late in the season for economical reasons, and
so late in the day at all times: the pinch is felt as much by the visitors as by the members
of the household. These things, however, are mere nips, and may be placed in the same category
with the hardships complained of by my friend Quiverfull's second boy. 'I don't mind having
papa's clothes cut up for me,' he says, 'but what I do think hard is getting Bob's clothes'
(Bob being his elder brother), 'which have been papa's first; however, I am in great hopes
that I am out-growing Bob.'

A much more severe example of the pinch of poverty than these is to be found in railway travelling;
no lady of any sense or spirit objects to travel by the second, or even the third class, if
her means do not justify her going by the first. But when she meets with richer friends upon
the platform, and parts with them to journey in the same compartment with their man-servant,
she suffers as acutely as though, when the guard slams the door of the carriage with the vehemence
proportioned to its humble rank, her tender hand had been crushed in it. Of course it is very
foolish of her; but it demands democratic opinions, such as almost no woman of birth and breeding
possesses, not to feel that pinch. Her knowledge that it is also hard upon the man-servant,
who has never sat in her presence before, but only stooped over her shoulder with ''Ock, miss,'
serves but to increase her pain.

A great philosopher has stated that the worst evil of poverty is, that it makes folks ridiculous;
by which, I hope, he only means that, as in the above case, it places them in incongruous positions.
The man, or woman, who derives amusement from the lack of means of a fellow-creature, would
jeer at a natural deformity, be cruel to children, and insult old age. Such people should be
whipped and then hanged. Nevertheless there are certain little pinches of poverty so slight,
that they tickle almost as much as they hurt the victim. A lady once told me (interrupting
herself, however, with pleasant bursts of merriment) that as a young girl her allowance was
so small that when she went out to spend the evening at a friend's, her promised pleasure was
darkened by the presentiment (always fulfilled) that the cabman was sure to charge her more
than the proper fare. The extra expense was really of consequence to her, but she never dared
dispute it, because of the presence of the footman who opened the door.

Some young ladies--quite as lady-like as any who roll in chariots--cannot even afford a cab.
'What I call the pinch of poverty,' observed an example of this class, 'is the waiting for
omnibus after omnibus on a wet afternoon and finding them all full.'

'But surely,' I replied with gallantry, 'any man would have given up his seat to you?'

She shook her head with a smile that had very little fun in it. 'People in omnibuses,' she
said, 'don't give up their seats to others.' Nor, I am bound to confess, do they do so elsewhere;
if I had been in their place, perhaps I should have been equally selfish; though I do think
I should have made an effort, in this instance at least, to make room for her close beside me.[4]

    [4] There is, however, some danger in this. I remember reading of
    some highly respectable old gentleman in the City who thus
    accommodated on a wet day a very nice young woman in humble
    circumstances. She was as full of apologies as of rainwater, and
    he of good-natured rejoinders, intended to put her at her ease; so
    that he became, in a Platonic and paternal way, quite friendly
    with her by the time she arrived at her destination--which
    happened to be his own door. She turned out to be his new cook,
    which was afterwards very embarrassing.

A young governess whom some wicked fairy endowed at her birth with the sensitiveness often
denied to princesses, has assured me that her journeys by railway have sometimes been rendered
miserable by the thought that she had not even a few pence to spare for the porter who would
presently shoulder her little box on to the roof of her cab.

It is people of this class, much more than those beneath them, who are shut out from all amusements.
The mechanic goes to the play and to the music-hall, and occasionally takes his 'old girl,'
as he calls his wife, and even 'a kid' or two, to the Crystal Palace. But those I have in my
mind have no such relaxation from compulsory duty and importunate care. 'I know it's very foolish,
but I feel it sometimes to be a pinch,' says one of these ill-fated ones, 'to see them all
[the daughters of her employer] going to the play, or the opera, while I am expected to be
satisfied with a private view of their pretty dresses.' No doubt it is the sense of comparison
(especially with the female) that sharpens the sting of poverty. It is not, however, through
envy that the 'prosperity of fools destroys us,' so much as the knowledge of its unnecessariness
and waste. When a mother has a sick child who needs sea air, which she cannot afford to give
it, the consciousness that her neighbour's family (the head of which perhaps is a most successful
financier and market-rigger) are going to the Isle of Wight for three months, though there
is nothing at all the matter with them, is an added bitterness. How often it is said (no doubt
with some well-intentioned idea of consolation) that after all money cannot buy life! I remember
a curious instance to the contrary of this. In the old days of sailing-packets a country gentleman
embarked for Ireland, and when a few miles from land broke a bloodvessel through seasickness.
A doctor on board pronounced that he would certainly die before the completion of the voyage
if it was continued; whereupon the sick man's friends consulted with the captain, who convoked
the passengers, and persuaded them to accept compensation in proportion to their needs for
allowing the vessel to be put back; which was accordingly done.

One of the most popular fictions of our time was even written with this very moral, that life
is unpurchasable. Yet nothing is more certain than that life is often lost through want of
money--that is, of the obvious means to save it. In such a case how truly has it been written
that 'the destruction of the poor is their poverty'! This, however, is scarcely a pinch, but,
to those who have hearts to feel it, a wrench that 'divides asunder the joints and the marrow.'

A nobler example, because a less personal one, of the pinch of poverty, is when it prevents
the accomplishment of some cherished scheme for the benefit of the human race. I have felt
such a one myself when in extreme youth I was unable, from a miserable absence of means, to
publish a certain poem in several cantos. That the world may not have been much better for
it if I had had the means does not affect the question. It is easy to be incredulous. Henry
VII. of England did not believe in the expectations of Columbus, and suffered for it, and his
case may have been similar to that of the seven publishers to whom I applied in vain.

A man with an invention on which he has spent his life, but has no means to get it developed
for the good of humanity--or even patented for himself--must feel the pinch of poverty very
acutely.

To sum up the matter, the longer I live, the more I am convinced that the general view in respect
to material means is a false one. That great riches are a misfortune is quite true; the effect
of them in the moral sense (with here and there a glorious exception, however) is deplorable:
a shower of gold falling continuously upon any body (or soul) is as the waters of a petrifying
spring. But, on the other hand, the occasional and precarious dripping of coppers has by no
means a genial effect. If the one recipient becomes hard as the nether millstone, the other
(just as after constant 'pinching' a limb becomes insensible) grows callous, and also (though
it seems like a contradiction in terms) sometimes acquires a certain dreadful suppleness. Nothing
is more monstrous than the generally received opinion with respect to a moderate competence;
that 'fatal gift,' as it is called, which encourages idleness in youth by doing away with the
necessity for exertion. I never hear the same people inveighing against great inheritances,
which are much more open to such objections. The fact is, if a young man is naturally indolent,
the spur of necessity will drive him but a very little way, while the having enough to live
upon is often the means of preserving his self-respect. One constantly hears what humiliating
things men will do for money, whereas the truth is that they do them for the want of it. It
is not the temptation which induces them, but the pinch. One of the sharpest pinches of poverty
to some minds must be their inability (because of their dependency on him and that of others
upon them) to tell a man what they think of him.

Riches and poverty are of course but relative terms; but the happiest material position in
which a man can be placed is that of 'means with a margin.' Then, however small his income
may be, however it may behove him to 'cut and contrive,' as the housekeepers call it, he does
not feel the pinch of poverty. I have known a rich man say to an acquaintance of this class,
'My good friend, if you only knew how very small are the pleasures my money gives me which
you yourself cannot purchase!' And for once it was not one of those cheap and empty consolations
which the wealthy are so ready to bestow upon their less fortunate fellow-creatures. Dives
was, in that instance, quite right in his remark; only we must remember he was not speaking
to Lazarus. 'A dinner of herbs where love is,' is doubtless quite sufficient for us; only there
must be enough of it, and the herbs should be nicely cooked in an omelette.

THE LITERARY CALLING AND ITS FUTURE.

One would think that in writing about literary men and matters there would be no difficulty
in finding a title for one's essay, or that any embarrassment which might arise would be from
excess of material. I find this, however, far from being the case. 'Men of Letters,' for example,
is a heading too classical and pretentious. I do indeed remember its being used in these modern
days by the sub-editor of a country paper, who, having quarrelled with his proprietor, and
reduced him to silence by a violent kick in the abdomen, thus addressed him: 'I leave you and
your dirty work for ever, and start to-night for London, to take up my proper position as a
Man of Letters.' But this gentleman's case (and I hope that of his proprietor) was an exceptional
one. The term in general is too ambitious and suggestive of the author of 'Cato,' for my humble
purpose. 'Literature as a Profession,' again, is open to objection on the question of fact.
The professions do not admit literature into their brotherhood. 'Literature, Science, and Art'
are all spoken of in the lump, and rather contemptuously (like 'reading, writing, and arithmetic'),
and have no settled position whatever. In a book of precedence, however--a charming class of
work, and much more full of humour than the peerage--I recently found indicated for the first
time the relative place of Literature in the social scale. After a long list of Eminent Personages
and Notables, the mere perusal of which was calculated to bring the flush of pride into my
British cheek, I found at the very bottom these remarkable words, 'Burgesses, Literary Persons,
and others.' Lest haughtiness should still have any place in the breasts of these penultimates
of the human race, the order was repeated in the same delightful volume in still plainer fashion,
'Burgesses, Literary Persons, etc.' It is something, of course, to take precedence--in going
down to dinner, for example--even of an et cetera; but who are Burgesses? I have a dreadful
suspicion they are not gentlemen. Are they ladies? Did I ever meet a Burgess, I wonder, coming
through the rye? At all events, after so authoritative a statement of its social position,
I feel that to speak of Literature as a profession would be an hyperbole.

On the other hand, 'The Literary Calling' is not a title that satisfies me. For the word 'calling'
implies a certain fitness; in the religious sense it has even more significance; and it cannot
be denied that there are a good many persons who devote--well, at least, their time to literature,
who can hardly be said to have 'a call' in that direction, nor even so much as a whisper. At
the same time I will venture to observe, notwithstanding a great deal of high-sounding twaddle
talked and written to the contrary, that it is not necessary for a man to feel any miraculous
or even extraordinary attraction to this pursuit to succeed in it very tolerably. I remember
a now distinguished personage (in another line) who had written a very successful work, expressing
his opinion to me that unless a certain divine afflatus animated a man, he should never take
up his pen to address the public. The writing for pay, he added (he had at least £5,000 a year
of his own), was the degradation of literature. As I had written about a dozen books myself
at the time, and most decidedly with an eye to profit, and had never experienced much afflatus,
this remark discouraged me very much. However, as the gentleman in question did essay another
volume, which was so absolute and distinct a failure that he promptly took up another line
of business (far above that of Burgesses), it is probable he altered his views.

Nature of course is the best guide in the matter of choosing a pursuit. When she says 'This
is your line, stick to it,' she seldom or never makes a mistake. But, on the other hand, her
speech must be addressed to mature ears. For my part, I do not much believe in the predilections
of boyhood. I was never so simple as to wish to go to sea, but I do remember (when between
seven and eight) having a passionate longing to become a merchant. I had no notion, however,
of the preliminary stages; the high stool in the close street; luncheon at a counter, standing
(I liked to have my meals good, plentiful, often, and in comfort, even then); and imprisonment
at the office on the eves of mail nights till the large hours p.m. Even the full fruition of
such aspirations--the large waistcoat beginning to 'point,' (as it soon does in merchants),
heavy watchchain, and cheerful conviction of the coming scarcity of necessaries for everybody
else, would have failed to please. The sort of merchant I wanted to be was never found in 'Post
Office Directory,' but in the 'Arabian Nights,' trading to Bussorah, chiefly in pearls and
diamonds. When the Paterfamiliases of my acquaintance instance certain stenches and messes
which their Toms and Harrys make with chemicals all over their house, as a proof of 'their
natural turn for engineering,' I say, 'Very likely,' or 'A capital thing,' but I think of that
early attraction of my own towards Bussorah. The young gentlemen never dream of what I once
heard described, in brief, as the real business life of a scientific apprentice: 'To lie on
your back with a candle in your hand, while another fellow knocks nails into a boiler.'

Boys have rarely any special aptitude for anything practical beyond punching each others' heads,
or (and these are the clever ones) for keeping their own heads unpunched. As a rule, in short,
Nature is not demonstrative as respects our professional future.

It must nevertheless be conceded that if the boy is ever father to the man in this respect,
it is in connection with literature. Also, however prosaic their works are fated to be, it
is curious that the aspirants for the profession below Burgesses always begin with Poetry.
Even Harriet Martineau wrote verses in early life bad enough to comfort the soul of any respectable
parent. The approach to the Temple of Literary Fame is almost always through double gates--couplets.
And yet I have known youthful poets, apparently bound for Paternoster Row, bolt off the course
in a year or two, to the delight of their friends, and become, of their own free will, drysalters.

There is so much talk about the 'indications of immortality in early childhood' (of a very
different kind from those referred to by Wordsworth), and it is so much the habit of biographers
to use magnifiers when their subject is small, that it needs some courage to avow my belief
that the tastes of boys have very little significance. A clever boy can be trained to almost
anything, and an ordinary boy will not do one thing much better than another. With the Geniuses
I will allow (for the sake of peace and quietness) that Nature is all-powerful, but with nine
hundred and ninety-nine out of a thousand of us, Second Nature, Use, is the true mistress;
and what will doubtless strike some people as almost paradoxical, but is nevertheless a fact,
Literature is the calling in which she has the greatest sway.

It is the fashion with that enormous class of people who don't know what they are talking about,
and who take up cuckoo-cries, to speak contemptuously of modern literature, by which they mean
(for they are acquainted with little else) periodical literature. However small may be its
merits, it is at all events ten times as good as ancient periodical literature used to be.
A very much better authority than myself on such a subject has lately informed us that the
majority of the old essays in the Edinburgh Review, at the very time when it was supposed to
be most 'trenchant,' 'masterly,' 'exhaustive,' and a number of other splendid epithets, are
so dull and weak and ignorant, that it is impossible that they or their congeners would now
find acceptance in any periodical of repute. And with regard to all other classes of old magazine
literature, this verdict is certainly most just.

Let us take what most people suppose to be 'the extreme case,' Magazine Poetry. Of course there
is to-day a great deal of rant and twaddle published under the name of verse in magazines;
yet I could point to scores and scores of poems that have thus appeared during the last ten
years,[5] which half a century ago would have made--and deservedly have made--a high reputation
for their authors. Such phrases as 'universal necessity for practical exertion,' 'prosaic character
of the age,' etc., are, of course, common enough; but those who are acquainted with such matters
will, I am sure, corroborate my assertion that there was never so much good poetry in our general
literature as exists at present. Persons of intelligence do not look for such things perhaps,
and certainly not in magazines, while persons of 'culture' are too much occupied with old china
and high art; but to humble folks, who take an interest in their fellow-creatures, it is very
pleasant to observe what high thoughts, and how poetically expressed, are now to be found about
our feet, and, as it were, in the literary gutter. I don't compare these writers with Byrons
and Shelleys; I don't speak of them as born poets at all. On the contrary, my argument is that
second nature (cultivation, opportunities of publication, etc.) has made them what they are;
and it is immensely creditable to her.

    [5] I take up a half-yearly volume of a magazine (price 1-1/2d.
    weekly) addressed to the middle classes, and find in it, at
    haphazard, the five following pieces, the authors of which are
    anonymous:

      AGATHA.

      'From under the shade of her simple straw hat
        She smiles at you, only a little shamefaced:
      Her gold-tinted hair m a long-braided plait
        Reaches on either side down to her waist.
      Her rosy complexion, a soft pink and white,
        Except where the white has been warmed by the sun,
      Is glowing with health and an eager delight,
        As she pauses to speak to you after her run.

      'See with what freedom, what beautiful ease,
        She leaps over hollows and mounds in berrace;
      Hear how she joyously laughs when the breeze
        Tosses her hat off, and blows in her face!
      It's only a play-gown of homeliest cotton
        She wears, that her finer silk dress may be saved;
      And happily, too, she has wholly forgotten
        The nurse and her charge to be better behaved.

      'Must a time come when this child's way of caring
        For only the present enjoyment shall pass;
      When she'll learn to take thought of the dress that she's wearing,
        And grow rather fond of consulting the glass?
      Well, never mind; nothing really can change her;
        Fair childhood will grow to as fair maidenhood;
      Her unselfish, sweet nature is safe from all danger;
        I know she will always be charming and good.

      'For when she takes care of a still younger brother,
        You see her stop short in the midst of her mirth,
      Gravely and tenderly playing the mother:
        Can there be anything fairer on earth?
      So proud of her charge she appears, so delighted;
        Of all her perfections (indeed, they're a host),
      This loving attention to others, united
        With naive self-unconsciousness, charms me the most.

      'What hearts that unthinkingly under short jackets
        Are beating to-day in a wonderful wise
      About racing, or jumping, or cricket, or rackets,
        One day will beat at a smile from those eyes!
      Ah, how I envy the one that shall win her,
        And see that sweet smile no ill-humour shall damp,
      Shining across the spread table at dinner,
        Or cheerfully bright in the light of the lamp.

      'Ah, little fairy! a very short while,
        Just once or twice, in a brief country stay,
      I saw you; but when will your innocent smile
        That I keep in my mem'ry have faded away?
      For when, in the midst of my trouble and doubt,
        I remember your face with its laughter and light,
      It's as if on a sudden the sun had shone out,
        And scattered the shadow, and made the world bright.'

      CHARTREUSE.

      (Liqueur.)

      'Who could refuse
      Green-eyed Chartieuse?
      Liquor for heretics,
      Turks, Christians, or Jews
      For beggar or queen,
      For monk or for dean;

      Ripened and mellow
      (The green, not the yellow),
      Give it its dues,
      Gay little fellow,
      Dressed up in green!
      I love thee too well, O
      Laughing Chartreuse!

      'O the delicate hues
      That thrill through the green!
      Colours which Greuze
      Would die to have seen!
      With thee would De Musset
      Sweeten his muse;
      Use, not abuse,
      Bright little fellow!
      (The green, not the yellow.)
      O the taste and the smell! O
      Never refuse
      A kiss on the lips from
      Jealous Chartreuse!'

      THE LIFE-LEDGER.

      'Our sufferings we reckon o'er
        With skill minute and formal;
      The cheerful ease that fills the score
        We treat as merely normal.
      Our list of ills, how full, how great!
        We mourn our lot should fall so;
      I wonder, do we calculate
        Our happinesses also?

      'Were it not best to keep account
        Of all days, if of any?
      Perhaps the dark ones might amount
        To not so very many.
      Men's looks are nigh as often gay
        As sad, or even solemn:
      Behold, my entry for to-day
        Is in the "happy" column.'

      OCTOBER.

      'The year grows old; summer's wild crown of roses
        Has fallen and faded in the woodland ways;
      On all the earth a tranquil light reposes,
            Through the still dreamy days.

      'The dew lies heavy in the early morn,
         On grass and mosses sparkling crystal-fair;
      And shining threads of gossamer are borne
            Floating upon the air,

      'Across the leaf-strewn lanes, from bough to bough
         Like tissue woven in a fairy loom;
      And crimson-berried bryony garlands glow
            Through the leaf-tangled gloom.

      'The woods are still, but for the sudden fall
         Of cupless acorns dropping to the ground,
      Or rabbit plunging through the fern-stems tall,
            Half-startled by the sound.

      'And from the garden lawn comes, soft and clear,
         The robin's warble from the leafless spray,
      The low sweet Angelus of the dying year,
            Passing in light away.'

      PROSPERITY.

      'I doubt if the maxims the Stoic adduces
         Be true in the main, when they state
      That our nature's improved by adversity's uses,
         And spoilt by a happier fate.

      'The heart that is tried by misfortune and pain,
         Self-reliance and patience may learn;
      Yet worn by long waiting and wishing in vain,
         It often grows callous and stern.

      'But the heart that is softened by ease and contentment,
         Feels warmly and kindly t'wards all;
      And its charity, roused by no moody resentment,
         Embraces alike great and small.

      'So, although in the season of rain-storms and showers,
         The tree may strike deeper its roots,
      It needs the warm brightness of sunshiny hours
         To ripen the blossoms and fruits.'

    Observe, not only the genuine merit of these five pieces, but the
    variety in the tones of thought: then compare them with similar
    productions of the days, say, of the once famous L.E.L.

And what holds good of verse holds infinitely better in respect to prose. The enormous improvement
in our prose writers (I am not speaking of geniuses, remember, but of the generality), and
their great superiority over writers of the same class half a century ago, is mainly due to
use. Sir Walter Scott, who, like most men of genuine power, had great generosity, once observed
to a brother author, 'You and I came just in the nick of time.' He foresaw the formidable competition
that was about to take place, though he had no cause to fear it. I think in these days he would
have had cause; not that I disbelieve in his genius, but that I venture to think he diffused
it over too large an area. In such cases genius is overpassed by the talent which husbands
its resources; in other words, Nature succumbs to second nature, as the wife in the patriarchal
days (when she grew patriarchal) succumbed to the handmaid. And after all, though we talk so
glibly about genius, and profess to feel, though we cannot express, in what it differs from
talent, are we quite so sure about this as we would fain persuade ourselves? At all events,
it cannot surely be contended that a man of genius always writes like one; and when he does
not, his work is often inferior to the first-rate production of a man of talent. For my own
part, I am not sure whether (with the exception, perhaps, of the highest gifts of song) the
whole distinction is not fanciful.

We are ready enough in ordinary matters to allow that 'practice makes perfect,' and the limit
of that principle is yet to be found. Moreover, the vast importance of exclusive application
is almost unknown. We see it, indeed, in men of science and in lawyers, but without recognition;
nay, socially, it is even quoted against them. The mathematician may be very eminent, but we
find him dry; the lawyer may be at the head of his profession, but we find him dull; and it
is observed on all sides how very little great A and great B, notwithstanding the high position
they have earned for themselves in their calling, know of matters out of their own line. On
the other hand, the man of whom it was said that 'science was his forte and omniscience his
foible,' has left no enduring monument behind him; and so it must always be with mortals who
have only fifty years of thought allotted to them at the very most, and who diffuse it. Everyone
admits the value of application, but very few are aware how its force is wasted by diffusion:
it is like a volatile essence in a bottle without a cork. When, on the other hand, it is concentrated--you
may call it 'narrowed' if you please--there is hardly anything within its own sphere of action
of which it is not capable. So many high motives (though also some mean ones) prompt us to
make broad the bases of education, that any proposal to contract them must needs be thankless
and unpopular; but it is certain that, among the upper classes at least, the reason why so
many men are unable to make their way in the world, is because, thanks to a too liberal education,
they are Jacks of all trades and masters of none; and even as Jacks they cut a very poor figure.

How large and varied is the educational bill of fare set before every young gentleman in Great
Britain; and to judge by the mental stamina it affords him in most cases, what a waste of good
food it is! The dishes are so numerous and so quickly changed, that he has no time to decide
on which he likes best. Like an industrious flea, rather than a bee, he hops from flower to
flower in the educational garden, without one penny-worth of honey to show for it. And then--though
I feel how degrading it is to allude to so vulgar a matter--how high is the price of admission
to the feast in question! Its purveyors do not pretend to have filled his stomach, but only
to have put him in the way of filling it for himself, whereas, unhappily, Paterfamilias discovers
that that is the very thing that they have not done. His young Hopeful at twenty-one is almost
as unable to run alone as when he first entered the nursery. To discourse airily upon the beauties
of classical education, and on the social advantages of acquiring 'the tone' at a public school
at whatever cost, is an agreeable exercise of the intelligence; but such arguments have been
taken too seriously, and the result is that our young gentlemen are incapable of gaining their
own living. It is not only that 'all the gates are thronged with suitors, all the markets overflow,'
but even when the candidates are so fortunate as to attain admittance, they are still a burden
upon their fathers for years, from having had no especial preparation for the work they have
to do. Folks who can afford to spend £250 a year on their sons at Eton or Harrow, and to add
another fifty or two for their support at the universities, do not feel this; but those who
have done it without affording it--i.e., by cutting and contriving, if not by pinching and
saving--feel their position very bitterly. There are hundreds of clever young men who are now
living at home and doing nothing--or work that pays nothing, and even costs something for doing
it--who might be earning very tolerable incomes by their pen if they only knew how, and had
not wasted their young wits on Greek plays and Latin verses; nor do I find that the attractions
of such objects of study are permanent, or afford the least solace to these young gentlemen
in their enforced leisure.

The idea of bringing young people up to Literature is doubtless calculated to raise the eyebrows
almost as much as the suggestion of bringing them up to the Stage. The notions of Paterfamilias
in this respect are very much what they were fifty years ago. 'What! put my boy in Grub Street?
I would rather see him in his coffin.' In his mind's eye he beholds Savage on his bunk and
Chatterton on his deathbed. He does not know that there are many hundreds of persons of both
sexes who have found out this vocation for themselves, and are diligently pursuing it--under
circumstances of quite unnecessary difficulty--to their material advantage. He is unaware that
the conditions of literature in England have been as completely changed within a single generation
as those of locomotion.

There are, it is true, at present no great prizes in literature such as are offered by the
learned professions, but there are quite as many small ones--competences; while, on the other
hand, it is not so much of a lottery. It is not necessary to marry an attorney's daughter,
or a bishop's, to get on in it. The calling, as it is termed (I know not why, for it is often
heavy enough), of 'light literature' is in such contempt, through ignorance on the one hand,
and arrogance on the other, that one is almost afraid in such a connection to speak of merit;
yet merit, or, at all events, aptitude with diligence, is certain of success in it. A great
deal has been said about editors being blind to the worth of unknown authors; but if so, they
must be also blind (and this I have never heard said of them) to their own interests. It would
be just as reasonable to accuse a recruiting sergeant of passing by the stout six-feet fellows
who wish to enlist with him, and for each of whom--directly or indirectly--he receives head-money.
It is possible, of course, that one particular sergeant may be drunken, or careless of his
own interests, but in that case the literary recruit has only to apply next door. The opportunities
for action in the field of literature are now so very numerous that it is impossible that any
able volunteer should be long shut out of it; and I have observed that the complaints about
want of employment come almost solely from those unfit for service. Nay, in the ranks of the
literaryarmy there are very many who should have been excluded. Few, if any, are there through
favour; but the fact is, the work to be done is so extensive and so varied, that there is not
a sufficiency of good candidates to do it. And of what is called 'skilled labour' among them
there is scarcely any.

The question 'What can you do?' put by an editor to an aspirant, generally astonishes him very
much. The aspirant is ready to do anything, he says, which the other will please to suggest.
'But what is your line in literature? What can you do best--not tragedies in blank verse, I
hope?' Perhaps the aspirant here hangs his head; he has written tragedies. In which case there
is good hope for him, because it shows a natural bent. But he generally replies that he has
written nothing as yet except that essay on the genius of Cicero (at which the editor has already
shaken his head), and that defence of Mary Queen of Scots. Or perhaps he has written some translations
of Horace, which he is surprised to find not a novelty; or some considerations upon the value
of a feudal system. At four-and-twenty, in short, he is but an overgrown schoolboy. He has
been taught, indeed, to acquire knowledge of a certain sort, but not the habit of acquiring;
he has been taught to observe nothing; he is ignorant upon all the subjects that interest his
fellow-creatures, and in his new ambition is like one who endeavours to attract an audience
without having anything to tell them. He knows some Latin, a little Greek, a very little French,
and a very very little of what are called the English classics. He has read a few recent novels
perhaps, but of modern English literature, and of that (to him at least) most important branch
of it, English journalism, he knows nothing. His views and opinions are those of a public school,
which are by no means in accordance with those of the great world of readers; or he is full
of the class prejudices imbibed at college. In short, he may be as vigorous as a Zulu, with
the materials of a first-rate soldier in him, but his arms are only a club and an assegai,
and are of no service. Why should he not be fitted out in early life with literary weapons
of precision, and taught the use of them?

I say, again, that poor Paterfamilias looking hopelessly about him, like Quintus Curtius in
the riddle, for 'a nice opening for a young man,' is totally ignorant of the opportunities,
if not for fame and fortune, at least for competency and comfort, that Literature now offers
to a clever lad. He looks round him; he sees the Church leading nowhere, with much greater
certainty of expense than income, and demanding a huge sum for what is irreverently termed
'gate money;' he sees the Bar, with its high road leading indeed to the woolsack, but with
a hundred by-ways leading nowhere in particular, and full of turnpikes--legal tutors, legal
fees, rents of chambers, etc.--which he has to defray; he sees Physic, at which Materfamilias
sniffs and turns her nose up. 'Her Jack, with such agreeable manners, to become a saw-bones!
Never!' He sees the army, and thinks, since Jack has such great abilities, it seems a pity
to give him a red coat, which costs also considerably more than a black one; And how is Jack
to live upon his pay?

After all, indeed, however prettily one puts it, the question is with him, not so much 'What
is my Jack to be?' as 'How is my Jack to live?' To one who has any gift of humour there are
few things more amusing than to observe how this vulgar, but really rather important inquiry,
is ignored by those who take the subject of modern education in hand. They are chiefly schoolmasters,
who are not so deep in their books but that they can spare a glance or two in the direction
of their banker's account; or fellows of colleges who have no children, and therefore never
feel the difficulties of supporting them. Heaven forbid that so humble an individual as myself
should question their wisdom, or say anything about them that should seem to smack of irreverence;
but I do believe that (with one or two exceptions I have in my mind) the system they have introduced
among us is the Greatest Humbug in the universe. In the meantime poor Paterfamilias (who is
the last man, they flatter themselves, to find this out) stands with his hands (and very little
else) in his pockets, regarding his clever offspring, and wondering what he shall do with him.
He remembers to have read about a man on his deathbed, who calls his children about him and
thanks God, though he has left them nothing to live upon, he has given them a good education,
and tries to extract comfort from the reminiscence. That he has spent money enough upon Jack's
education is certain; something between two or three thousand pounds in all at least, the interest
of which, it strikes him, would be very convenient just now to keep him. But unfortunately
the principal is gone and Jack isn't.

Now suppose--for one may suppose anything, however ridiculous--he had spent two or three hundred
pounds at the very most, and brought him up to the Calling of Literature. He believes, perhaps,
that it is only geniuses that succeed in it (in which case I know more geniuses than I had
any idea of), and he doesn't think Jack a genius, though Jack's mother does. Or, as is more
probable, he regards it as a hand-to-mouth calling, which to-day gives its disciples a five-pound
note, and to-morrow five pence. He calls to mind a saying about Literature being a good stick,
but not a good crutch--an excellent auxiliary, but no permanent support; but he forgets the
all-important fact that the remark was made half a century ago.

Poor blind Paterfamilias--shall I couch you? If the operation is successful, I am sure you
will thank me for it; but, on the other hand, I foresee I shall incur the greatest enmities.
Should I encourage clever Jack, and, what is worse, a thousand Jacks who are not clever, to
enter upon this vocation, what will editors say to me? I shall have to go about, perhaps, guarded
with two policemen with revolvers, like an Irish gentleman on his landed estate. 'Is not the
flood of rubbish to which we are already subjected,' I hear them crying, 'bad enough, without
your pulling up the sluices of universal stupidity?' My suggestion, however, is intended to
benefit them by clearing away the rubbish, and inducing a clearer and deeper stream for the
turning of their mills. At the same time I confess that the lessening of Paterfamilias's difficulties
is my main object. What I would open his eyes to is the fact that a calling, of the advantages
of which he has no knowledge, does present itself to clever Jack, which will cost him nothing
but pens, ink, and paper to enter upon, and in which, if he has been well trained for it, he
will surely be successful, since so many succeed in it without any training at all. Why should
not clever Jack have this in view as much as the ignes fatui of woolsacks and mitres? If it
has no lord chancellorships, it has plenty of county court appointments; if it has no bishoprics,
it has plenty of benefices--and really, as times go, some pretty fat ones.

On your breakfast-table, good Paterfamilias, there lies, every morning, a newspaper, and on
Saturday perhaps there are two or three. When you go out in the street, you are pestered to
buy half a score more of them. In your club reading-room there are a hundred different journals.
When you travel by the railway you see at every station a provincial newspaper of more or less
extensive circulation. Has it never struck you that to supply these publications with their
leading articles, there must be an immense staff of persons called journalists, professing
every description of opinion, and advocating every conceivable policy? And do you suppose these
gentry only get £70 a year for their work, like a curate; or £60, like a sub-lieutenant; or
that they have to pay three times those sums for the privilege of belonging to the press, as
a barrister does for belonging to his inn? Again, in London at least, there are as many magazines
as newspapers, containing every kind of literature, the very contributors of which are so numerous,
that they form a public of themselves. That seems at the first blush to militate against my
suggestion, but though contributors are so common, and upon the whole so good--indeed, considering
the conditions under which they labour, so wonderfully good--they are not (I have heard editors
say) so good as they might be, supposing (for example) they knew a little of science, history,
politics, English literature, and especially of the art of composition, before they volunteered
their services. At present the ranks of journalistic and periodical literature are largely
recruited from the failures in other professions. The bright young barrister who can't get
a brief takes to literature as a calling, just as the man who has 'gone a cropper' in the army
takes to the wine-trade. And what æons of time, and what millions of money, have been wasted
in the meanwhile!

The announcement written on the gates of all the recognised professions in England is the same
that would-be travellers read on the faces of the passengers on the underground railway after
office hours: 'Our number is complete, and our room is limited.' In literature, on the contrary,
though its vehicles may seem as tightly packed, substitution can be effected. There may be
persons travelling on that line in the first-class who ought to be in the third, and indeed
have no reasonable pretext for being there at all. And if clever Jack could show his ticket,
he would turn them out of it.

Again, so far from the space being limited, it is continually enlarging, and that out of all
proportion to those who have tickets. We hear from its enemies that the Church is doomed, and
from its friends that it is in danger; there is a small but energetic party who are bent on
reducing the Army, and even on doing away with it; nay, so wicked and presumptuous has human
nature grown, that mutterings are heard and menaces uttered against the delay and exactions
of the Law itself; whereas Literature has no foes, and is enlarging its boundaries in all directions.
It is all 'a-growing and a-blowing,' as the peripatetic gardeners say of their plants; but,
unlike their wares, it has its roots deep in the soil and is an evergreen. Its promise is golden,
and its prospects are boundless for every class of writer.

In some excellent articles on Modern Literature in Blackwood's Magazine the other day, this
subject was touched upon with respect to fiction, and might well have filled a greater space,
for the growth of that description of literature of late years is simply marvellous. Curiously
enough, though France originated the feuilleton, it was from America and our own colonies that
England seems to have taken the idea of publishing novels in newspapers. It was a common practice
in Australia long before we adopted it; and, what is also curious, it was first acclimatised
among us by our provincial papers. The custom is rapidly gaining ground in London, but in the
country there is now scarcely any newspaper of repute which does not enlist the aid of fiction
to attract its readers. Many of them are contented with very poor stuff, for which they pay
a proportional price; but others club together with other newspapers--the operation has even
received the technical term of 'forming a syndicate'--and are thereby enabled to secure the
services of popular authors; while the newspapers thus arranged for are published at a good
distance from one another, so as not to interfere with each other's circulation. Country journals,
which are not so ambitious, instead of using an inferior article, will often purchase the 'serial
right,' as it is called, of stories which have already appeared elsewhere, or have passed through
the circulating libraries. Nay, the novelist who has established a reputation has many more
strings to his bow: his novel, thus published in the country newspapers, also appears coincidently
in the same serial shape in Australia, Canada, and other British colonies, leaving the three-volume
form and the cheap editions 'to the good.' And what is true of fiction is in a less degree
true of other kinds of literature. Travels are 'gutted,' and form articles in magazines, illustrated
by the original plates; lectures, after having served their primary purpose, are published
in a similar manner; even scientific works now appear first in the magazines which are devoted
to science before performing their mission of 'popularising' their subject.

When speaking of the growth of readers, I have purposely not mentioned America. For the present
the absence of copyright there is destroying both author and publisher; but the wheels of justice,
though tardy, are making way there. In a few years that great continent of readers will be
legitimately added to the audience of the English author, and those that have stolen will steal
no more.

Nor, in our own country, must we fail to take notice of the establishment of School Boards.
A generation hence we shall have a reading public almost as numerous as in America; even the
very lowest classes will have acquired a certain culture which will beget demands both for
journalists and 'literary persons.' The harvest will be plenteous indeed, but unless my advice
be followed in some shape or another, the labourers will be comparatively few and superlatively
inadequate.

I am well aware how mischievous, as well as troublesome, would be the encouragement of mediocrity;
and in stating these promising facts I have no such purpose in my mind. On the contrary, there
is an immense amount of mediocrity already in literature, which I think my proposition of training
up 'clever Jack' to that calling would discourage. I have no expectation of establishing a
manufactory for genius--and indeed, for reasons it is not necessary to specify, I would not
do it if I could. But whereas all kinds of 'culture' have been recommended to the youth of
Great Britain (and certainly with no limit as to the expense of acquisition), the cultivation
of such natural faculties as imagination and humour (for example) has never been suggested.
The possibility of such a thing will doubtless be denied. I am quite certain, however, that
they are capable of great development, and that they may be brought to attain, if not perfection,
at all events a high degree of excellence. The proof, to those who choose to look for it, is
plain enough even as matters stand. Use and opportunity are already producing scores of examples
of it; if supplemented by early education they might surely produce still more.

There is so great and general a prejudice against special studies, that I must humbly conclude
there is something in it. On the other hand, I know a large number of highly--that is broadly--educated
persons, who are desperately dull. 'But would they have been less dull,' it may be asked, 'if
they were also ignorant?' Yes, I believe they would. They have swallowed too much for digestions
naturally weak; they have become inert, conceited, oppressive to themselves and others--Prigs.
And I think that even clever young people suffer in a less degree from the same cause. Some
one has written, 'Information is always useful.' This reminds me of the married lady, fond
of bargains, who once bought a door-plate at a sale with 'Mr. Wilkins' on it. Her own name
was Jones, but the doorplate was very cheap, and her husband, she argued, might die, and then
she might marry a man of the name of Wilkins. 'Depend upon it, everything comes in useful,'
she said, 'if you only keep it long enough.'

This is what I venture to doubt. I have myself purchased several door-plates (quite as burthensome,
but not so cheap as that good lady's), which have been of no sort of use to me, and are still
on hand.

STORY-TELLING.

The most popular of English authors has given us an account of what within his experience (and
it was a large one) was the impression among the public at large of the manner in which his
work was done. They pictured him, he says,

  as a radiant personage whose whole time is devoted to idleness and
  pastime; who keeps a prolific mind in a sort of corn-sieve and lightly
  shakes a bushel of it out sometimes in an odd half-hour after
  breakfast. It would amaze their incredulity beyond all measure to
  be told that such elements as patience, study, punctuality,
  determination, self-denial, training of mind and body, hours of
  application and seclusion to produce what they read in seconds,
  enter in such a career ... correction and recorrection in the blotted
  manuscript; consideration; new observations; the patient massing of
  many reflections, experiences, and imaginings for one minute purpose;
  and the patient separation from the heap of all the fragments that
  will unite to serve it--these would be unicorns and griffins to
  them--fables altogether.

And as it was, a quarter of a century ago, when those words were written, so it is now: the
phrase of 'light literature' as applied to fiction having once been invented, has stuck, with
a vengeance, to those who profess it.

Yet to 'make the thing that is not as the thing that is' is not (though it may seem to be the
same thing) so easy as lying.

Among a host of letters received in connection with an article published in the Nineteenth
Century, entitled 'The Literary Calling and its Future,' and which testify in a remarkable
manner to the pressing need (therein alluded to) of some remunerative vocation among the so-called
educated classes, there are many which are obviously written under the impression that Dogberry's
view of writing coming 'by nature' is especially true of the writing of fiction. Because I
ventured to hint that the study of Greek was not essential to the calling of a story-teller,
or of a contributor to the periodicals, or even of a journalist, these gentlemen seem to jump
to the conclusion that the less they know of anything the better. Nay, some of them, discarding
all theories (in the fashion that Mr. Carlyle's heroes are wont to discard all formulas), proceed
to the practical with quite an indecent rapidity; they treat my modest hints for their instruction
as so much verbiage, and myself as a mere convenient channel for the publication of their lucubrations.
'You talk of a genuine literary talent being always appreciated by editors,' they write (if
not in so many words by implication); 'well, here is an admirable specimen of it (enclosed),
and if your remarks are worth a farthing you will get it published for us, somewhere or another,
instanter, and hand us over the cheque for it. Nor are even these the most unreasonable of
my correspondents; for a few, with many acknowledgments for my kindness in having provided
a lucrative profession for them, announce their intention of throwing up their present less
congenial callings, and coming up to London (one very literally from the Land's End) to live
upon it, or, that failing (as there is considerable reason to expect it will), upon me.

With some of these correspondents, however, it is impossible (independent of their needs) not
to feel an earnest sympathy; they have evidently not only aspirations, but considerable mental
gifts, though these have unhappily been cultivated to such little purpose for the object they
have in view that they might almost as well have been left untilled. In spite of what I ventured
to urge respecting the advantage of knowing 'science, history, politics, English literature,
and the art of composition,' they 'don't see why' they shouldn't get on without them. Especially
with those who aspire to write fiction (which, by its intrinsic attractiveness no less than
by the promise it affords of golden grain, tempts the majority), it is quite pitiful to note
how they cling to that notion of 'the corn-sieve,' and cannot be persuaded that story-telling
requires an apprenticeship like any other calling. They flatter themselves that they can weave
plots as the spider spins his thread from (what let us delicately term) his inner consciousness,
and fondly hope that intuition will supply the place of experience. Some of them, with a simplicity
that recalls the days of Dick Whittington, think that 'coming up to London' is the essential
step to this line of business, as though the provinces contained no fellow-creatures worthy
to be depicted by their pen, or as though, in the metropolis, Society would at once exhibit
itself to them without concealment, as fashionable beauties bare themselves to the photographers.

This is, of course, the laughable side of the affair, but, to me at least, it has also a serious
one; for, to my considerable embarrassment and distress, I find that my well-meaning attempt
to point out the advantages of literature as a profession has received a much too free translation,
and implanted in many minds hopes that are not only sanguine but Utopian.

For what was written in the essay alluded to I have nothing to reproach myself with, for I
told no more than the truth. Nor does the unsettlement of certain young gentleman's futures
(since by their own showing they were to the last degree unstable to begin with) affect me
so much as their parents and guardians appear to expect; but I am sorry to have shaken however
undesignedly, the 'pillars of domestic peace' in any case, and desirous to make all the reparation
in my power. I regret most heartily that I am unable to place all literary aspirants in places
of emolument and permanency out of hand; but really (with the exception perhaps of the Universal
Provider in Westbourne Grove) this is hardly to be expected of any man. The gentleman who raised
the devil, and was compelled to furnish occupation for him, affords in fact the only appropriate
parallel to my unhappy case. 'If you can do nothing to provide my son with another place,'
writes one indignant Paterfamilias, 'at least you owe it to him' (as if I, and not Nature herself,
had made the lad dissatisfied with his high stool in a solicitor's office!) 'to give him some
practical hints by which he may become a successful writer of fiction.'

One would really think that this individual imagined story-telling to be a sort of sleight-of-hand
trick, and that all that is necessary to the attainment of the art is to learn 'how it's done.'
I should not like to say that I have known any members of my own profession who are 'no conjurors,'
but it is certainly not by conjuring that they have succeeded in it.

'You talk of the art of composition,' writes, on the other hand, another angry correspondent,
'as though it were one of the exact sciences; you might just as well advise your "clever Jack"
to study the art of playing the violin.' So that one portion of the public appears to consider
the calling of literature mechanical, while another holds it to be a soft of divine instinct!

Since the interest in this subject proves to be so wide-spread, I trust it will not be thought
presumptuous in me to offer my own humble experience in this matter for what it is worth. To
the public at large a card of admission to my poor manufactory of fiction--a 'very one-horse
affair,' as an American gentleman, with whom I had a little difficulty concerning copyright,
once described it--may not afford the same satisfaction as a ticket for the private view of
the Royal Academy; but the stings of conscience urge me to make to Paterfamilias what amends
in the way of 'practical hints' lie in my power, for the wrong I have done to his offspring;
and I therefore venture to address to those whom it may concern, and to those only, a few words
on the Art of Story-telling.

The chief essential for this line of business, yet one that is much disregarded by many young
writers, is the having a story to tell. It is a common supposition that the story will come
if you only sit down with a pen in your hand and wait long enough--a parallel case to that
which assigns one cow's tail as the measure of distance between this planet and the moon. It
is no use 'throwing off' a few brilliant ideas at the commencement, if they are only to be
'passages that lead to nothing;' you must have distinctly in your mind at first what you intend
to say at last. 'Let it be granted,' says a great writer (though not one distinguished in fiction),
'that a straight line be drawn from any one point to any other point;' only you must have the
'other point' to begin with, or you can't draw the line. So far from being 'straight,' it goes
wabbling aimlessly about like a wire fastened at one end and not at the other, which may dazzle,
but cannot sustain; or rather what it does sustain is so exceedingly minute, that it reminds
one of the minnow which the inexperienced angler flatters himself he has caught, but which
the fisherman has in fact previously put on his hook for bait.

This class of writer is not altogether unconscious of the absence of dramatic interest in his
composition. He writes to his editor (I have read a thousand such letters): 'It has been my
aim, in the enclosed contribution, to steer clear of the faults of the sensational school of
fiction, and I have designedly abstained from stimulating the unwholesome taste for excitement.'
In which high moral purpose he has undoubtedly succeeded; but, unhappily, in nothing else.
It is quite true that some writers of fiction neglect 'story' almost entirely, but then they
are perhaps the greatest writers of all. Their genius is so transcendent that they can afford
to dispense with 'plot;' their humour, their pathos, and their delineation of human nature
are amply sufficient, without any such meretricious attraction; whereas our too ambitious young
friend is in the position of the needy knife-grinder, who has not only no story to tell, but
in lieu of it only holds up his coat and breeches 'torn in the scuffle'--the evidence of his
desperate and ineffectual struggles with literary composition. I have known such an aspirant
to instance Miss Gaskell's 'Cranford' as a parallel to the backboneless flesh-and-bloodless
creation of his own immature fancy, and to recommend the acceptance of the latter upon the
ground of their common rejection of startling plot and dramatic situation. The two compositions
have certainly that in common; and the flawless diamond has some things, such as mere sharpness
and smoothness, in common with the broken beer-bottle.

Many young authors of the class I have in my mind, while more modest as respects their own
merits, are even still less so as regards their expectations from others. 'If you will kindly
furnish me with a subject,' so runs a letter now before me, 'I am sure I could do very well;
my difficulty is that I never can think of anything to write about. Would you be so good as
to oblige me with a plot for a novel?' It would have been infinitely more reasonable of course,
and much cheaper, for me to grant it, if the applicant had made a request for my watch and
chain;[6] but the marvel is that folks should feel any attraction towards a calling for which
Nature has denied them even the raw materials. It is true that there are some great talkers
who have manifestly nothing to say, but they don't ask their hearers to supply them with a
topic of conversation in order to be set agoing.

    [6] To compare small things with great, I remember Sir Walter
    Scott being thus applied to for some philanthropic object.
    'Money,' said the applicant, who had some part proprietorship in a
    literary miscellany, 'I don't ask for, since I know you have many
    claims upon your purse; but would you write us a little paper
    gratuitously for the "Keepsake"?'

'My great difficulty,' the would-be writer of fiction often says, 'is how to begin;' whereas
in fact the difficulty arises rather from his not knowing how to end. Before undertaking the
management of a train, however short, it is absolutely necessary to know its destination. Nothing
is more common than to hear it said that an author 'does not know where to stop;' but how much
more deplorable is the position of the passengers when there is no terminus whatsoever! They
feel their carriage 'slowing,' and put their heads expectantly out of window, but there is
no platform--no station. When they took their tickets, they understood that they were 'booked
through' to the dénouement, and certainly had no idea of having been brought so far merely
to admire the scenery, for which only a very few care the least about.

As a rule, anyone who can tell a good story can write one, so there really need be no mistake
about his qualification; such a man will be careful not to be wearisome, and to keep his point,
or his catastrophe, well in hand. Only, in writing, there is necessarily greater art. There
expansion is of course absolutely necessary; but this is not to be done, like spreading gold
leaf, by flattening out good material. That is 'padding,' a device as dangerous as it is unworthy;
it is much better to make your story a pollard--to cut it down to a mere anecdote--than to
get it lost in a forest of verbiage. No line of it, however seemingly discursive, should be
aimless, but should have some relation to the matter in hand; and if you find the story interesting
to yourself notwithstanding that you know the end of it, it will certainly interest the reader.

The manner in which a good story grows under the hand is so remarkable, that no tropic vegetation
can show the like of it. For, consider, when you have got your germ--the mere idea, not half
a dozen lines perhaps--which is to form your plot, how small a thing it is compared with, say,
the thousand pages which it has to occupy in the three-volume novel! Yet to the story-teller
the germ is everything. When I was a very young man--a quarter of a century ago, alas!--and
had very little experience in these matters, I was reading on a coachbox (for I read everywhere
in those days) an account of some gigantic trees; one of them was described as sound outside,
but within, for many feet, a mass of rottenness and decay. If a boy should climb up birdsnesting
into the fork of it, thought I, he might go down feet first and hands overhead, and never be
heard of again. How inexplicable too, as well as melancholy, such a disappearance would be!
Then, 'as when a great thought strikes along the brain and flushes all the cheek,' it struck
me what an appropriate end it would be--with fear (lest he should turn up again) instead of
hope for the fulcrum to move the reader--for a bad character of a novel. Before I had left
the coachbox I had thought out 'Lost Sir Massingberd.'

The character was drawn from life, but unfortunately from hearsay; he had flourished--to the
great terror of his neighbours--two generations before me, so that I had to be indebted to
others for his portraiture, which was a great disadvantage. It was necessary that the lost
man should be an immense scoundrel to prevent pity being excited by the catastrophe, and at
that time I did not know any very wicked people. The book was a successful one, but it needs
no critic to point out how much better the story might have been told. 

Second chapter

Mulberry in the Betversammlung.

The auction was over, farm and livestock belonged to the young girls for years, despite that
out process, and all the buyers who had come from the land, to arise to the horses, and all
this had now like a beautiful dream in the hands of even wegschwinden see, were at first somewhat
taken aback and uncomfortable there, and knew not quite what a face it should make it so.
Namely that the Backwoodsmen Such a threat, as the braided one guy so smart in his dreams
to make true could it not one of them doubted; of Poland was not a thousand grave step of there
away, a bloody sign, and a land buy the owner would never dare allowed to take possession,
would have been only a Geldverschleudern, such as the New-York Lawyer for his loss now experienced.

were
allowed to "Under the circumstances we do not offer," she said as
the one of them to the other, "The old man was right - you can but
the sick woman and the child's house not wegkaufen under foot, and
put them in the woods? - At least I do not want that to my conscience.

"

"I do not," cried another, "the poor child, what a pretty girl once is - and how pale she looked.
"

"With quality can one do with me all," said a third, "and a good word
refers a good place - the people were smart enough that they do not
really threatened.

"

"She knew very well that they did not help," cried the first again, "what do they do when we bought
the house? but that's better and a hundred dollars is not me so sweet, as it has got the girl.
"

Mulberry was a quiet but highly attentive audience of the whole was, and so interests him the
most peculiar trial, but he wondered just whether he better his own benefit now also preserve
a bit, and bring about pushing his cart should the Assembly with a few forceful words are blunt your
knives and other needs to recall it's in memory when the Backwoodsmen suddenly all back to their
Horses went, threw the reins of the branches, jumped into the saddles and wild with a Hupih,
according to the abutting dogs followed, but even now, after a direction in the Forest blew
into it. Only the ancient Rose More was left with Jack Owen, and went with the in the house
where she closed the door behind him, and for a time it remained. After quite a long while
Jack Owen came back alone, and the friendly Scheer grinder patting on the shoulder, he said,
laughing:

"Now how did you like our Arkansas auction?"

"Good," replied Mulberry dry, "and if you once again a farm for a similar have to give away price
- "

"Then you know a buyer," laughed the hunter, "believe it well - but will the town lord even after
their horses, so we do because the poor animals here also their freedom
give; today or tomorrow they will not yet needed.

And then a stranger, if you will is right, we go to Camp # meeting
# across, not far from here in that direction; would be the case already
in motion, you could hear people shouting, even here.

"

"Shouting to hear?" Zacchaeus asked in surprise.

"Will's been with appearance," said the hunter quietly offered for sale were brought here and
expectorant with, by the quarter horses purchased or acquired the
Hobbeln or ropes, their Front legs held together, that animals released
back into the forest, and usual could run in pastures, "and now comes,
take your cart, and follow me along the way, one of leading down to
the fence, and if you do not want to pray there, I can work you pretty
sure promise.

       "

* * * * *

What a life it here in the middle of the otherwise silent forest; dispelled as the birds anxiously
in the branches over and over, flew and chirped and called, like the deer, where the other had his
Äsungsplatz undisturbed, as he is now slowly and familiar as always on his move came, quickly
threw up his handsome head, the enemy of braising air to it and moved alarmingly fled back into
its wilderness.

As the horses so joyfully neighing and stamping the ground and the green grass around the small forest
clearing was trampled on all sides, and how that pushed and shoved each other and waved, by a colorful
cheerful crowd that gathered here from all ends of the County.

A portion of the people of Little Rock was also there, the fact that coming from the auction, preferred
to this day had to spend here, and tomorrow morning to return to the city. But this seemed to represent
the least, came not from religion here, but only because of the unpleasant curiosity, and were seen
by the priests the least liked. No, the Backwoodsmen and especially their wives and daughters were
the main core of the Assembly; they flocked from all sides, the women in the saddle - and when
it no Saddle was - their little bundle of clothes in front of him on horseback, the men with
rifle and knife on the side as always. And warehouses have been opened by individuals in the surrounding
woods, with bark ceiling or roof, while others brought over with the other hand, ordinary tents, which
they alone designated for such purpose.

Here, men were at work to fell a tree, and from the to split the severed pieces of short planks
quickly to a safe rain gear, there was Firewood beaten and dragged, or branches were cut off, to this
a volatile make shelter from sun and rain, but everywhere there was life and activity.

And as the fires flared up all around and the seething boiler, up the blue smoke airy Sun swirled
in the green rustling treetops, and industrious female figures with large, misshapen Bonnets
on the head - the same protection against sun, such as kitchen fire grant - so hard to the pots
and pans and boiling abolished.

The women also had the most interest at such meeting # # Camp, and when the man at home had little
thought go out into the forest to look for the horses, they let him not rest, and had thousands
and thousands of reasons why they, at least this once, under likely to miss any condition the pious
congregation.

First, harm to the horses the bit of movement at all - they were,
besides, as long not needed, and # # Marys colt quite lame lumbar
become all too many of calm.

Then preached secondly, this time surely the venerable Mr. Sweetlip - and what a cute Voice
had and how soft and one to the hearts öhlich he said - who would have as unmoved may remain.

And
then the other venerable Mr. Hott chunks, as it said the pagans and
infidels, as the evil enemy, aka Beelzebub # # to body and pushed
and struck him off the field.

And then they had not seen the neighbors in such a long time forever
- my God, here in Forest, they came together so to nobody, and if
Bill Norton and Sally Ann truly promised would, they could indeed
find only there.

And the two new dresses that are woven into Susan the last six months and even sewn, as it would
have to show or wear it, but not in the house such as the spinning wheel; and they had not at least
once before the "priestly ordination receive"?

The poor women of the woods in this respect are really bad way, in the smallest least important
town, even in the single house, the only road to a committed is, can the girl get dressed nice and
tasty, and has the satisfaction of that she had seen at least, and is admired because it is
often love, gorgeous figures those of lean growth, the noble countenance
and, with very rare exceptions almost irreproachable cleanliness makes
its own magic, in the forest but in the real forest, cut off from
all contact with the outside world, where there are the poor girls
and women show their clothes show and they have the same, with a "roll-hard
blocks" or "# Quilting frolic?

# "how often does that happen, and when it happens, is as rare then dance afterwards - Once,
twice all year and still do in the summer.

Such opportunities, however they use it's also best, and what any of it the young girl can not come
to such a party without at least yet another bring your dress, sometimes three and four, which
can be changed during the dance.

Far better opportunity to do this is but in any case a # # Camp meeting, which not only single
evening and at best a night of lasts, how such a festival, but often three and four days in
a row away, while the young people from throughout the neighborhood get this opportunity to see
each other, to chat with each other - And more than this many a spark from these Betversammlungen
from eye and heart over and flown over, and has fired to life - at
least bound, besides, had the young men there still occur and honest,
could not drink, curse and swear and could often only with the help
of them, however, forcibly poured into the heart of religion enter
the path that led to the love of the elect.

In a word, it's too colorful for such Betversammlungen, and then only when the mind still comes
through the crowds, passing the stranger listening often and desires.

Mulberry place for now but not the least extraordinary, that so many people had gathered at
a square, he was once a wilderness, he noticed, because it from a wilderness, despite the
letztverbrachten night, even still not a legal term had. The fire saw whole mind from among the
green trees, and the amount of Mounted promised him ample profit. Only a large wooden structure, he
noticed the side of the square, on the edge of the small forest clearing, and even found a huge
Oak stand, and right and left had a few small fences, with the foliage and fragrant Herbs were
distributed like a stray.

For the cattle they seemed not determined because lay round about the fire, and the horses were
allowed to have children because not in the inner Circle.

Mulberry thought but did not think to worry about the use of some head - Maybe they served for
sleeping places, maybe not, what did it matter to him. After a volatile overview of the distribution
of the different groups, he pushed his cart, without being concerned more about its former
leader, in the middle of the circle into it, began suddenly a loud and piercing voice, but of
course in English, his goods, Arts and properties to advertise, and had a few minutes later,
the satisfaction of the large crowd around half of the Assembly to see him. Mulberry was, in
fact, for this Forest dwellers an object, he was a character as they do not often drawn around
there, even under the Yankee Pedlars. Even his whole appearance, the really striking similarity
to an orang-utang, the wonderful eloquence of the stranger, with its dry Humor that they often enraptured
to loud laughter, all this was new to them, and perhaps even the
uncertainty in whether the minister expected every moment with this
explosion louder Happiness in agreement, it would perhaps condemn
or even increased, the stimulus.

Mulberry, however, had already begun his office grinder, and knife were brought to him so many;
that he could hardly resist her, and he got enough orders, there five, over there eight miles
perhaps, an old pair of scissors to put back into state or, as he also developed herein, anzulöthen
a thimble, a new ceiling.

He was tirelessly, coarse against the men who laughed at him, tender against women and girls
who giggled about him and his wheel whirred and hissed, while his tongue went much faster than the
wheel

"The venerable Mr. Sweetlip" - a joyful murmur ran through the whole assembly, and women are
particularly crowded, now on quickly and diligently by the Scheer
grinder, while love their little faces that have laughed for a few
minutes so heartily, and so happy in the blue wonderful world looked
out, even a serious, almost mournful expression accepted.

All prejudice arte around the pious man, and Mulberry was left alone with his cart in the Middle.

Mr.
Sweetlip was the friendliness of himself, and he talked to Allen, had an encouraging each or
caution, or disapproving friendly compliments, spoke of the harvest and the Weather, run away
from stray cattle and sheep - in the spiritual meaning of the word - And then sighed heavily and
often very sad when he thought of the sin of the people which came into the world and unfortunately
also bring back was.

Mr. Sweetlip was a true soul of a man.

Serious and rigorous, in gloomy silence joined the other ministers, Mr. Hott chunks on, and
when the two with a sword of the Lord would be able to compare, it
was Sweetlip the back, Hott chunks but the cutting and tip in all
its sharpness and hardness fine steel.

If Sweetlip with a gentle tongue to his audience, however, tore their mental wounds, but Hineinträufelte
oil, and it seemed at times to keep even a sin, even the hell All the good properties to deny,
so Hott went after him and threw chunks of vinegar and pepper, and salt into it shook gently
sleeping sinners from their unconscious state on, and described them with a triumphant smile and
glowing colors of a terrible Abyss, where they should have lain dormant, and if they do not
immediately pull saw, were but it anxious and despondent, and stretched
out his hand for the venerable man, she to save.

Mr. Sweetlip had opened the way to the "# # meeting" and to be welcomed, and rose and rose to this effect
in the high, pulpit-like frame, which was built under the oak. From here he established a
fairly long speech, without further special content, to the Assembly, exhorted them to raise their
eyes and hearts and hands to God and ask him to enlighten them in their current joyful meeting
to strengthen the good, and the lost Sheep may lead back to his flock
here for their convenience, as with clear blunt words suggested, which
were attached two penning and filled with soft straw.

Mulberry really believed in the beginning that he was doing with this thing joke, the earnest and
melancholy But man did not look like a joke, and tears were already in many of his beautiful
eyes Listeners.

In order to ensure its but he squeezed by the worshipers, his Carts themselves on leaving, slow
to the point where his old friend Jack Owen dark and silent, leaning on an oak tree and listen to the
speech did.

"Can you tell me friend," he was talking to this quiet, "what the pious gentleman up there with
the two pens means, and whether the stand there just a figure, or "in the" heat of the conversation
may are really needed? I have no real idea of ​​something like that, and would I like to teach.
"

"It concerns me is not much better, stranger," said the backwoodsman, sighing - "I have also no
real idea of ​​the nature and activities of the people, but this
much is certain that they Fenz and pens as you want to call them,
today or tomorrow do when the Lord up above the community has prepared,
and the other gentleman with the long dark face only in the ordinary
been shot and power is - if not today, tomorrow you can see the course,
"!

"And that is so famous preacher?" Asked mulberry little surprised because the outside of the people
him the impression was not made -

"The gentle man who speaks up there now," said Jack with a slightly wry smile, was " even last
year, a tailor in Little Rock, when suddenly came the Spirit upon him, as they call it, and he
began to preach. He said a "soft handover" as the women, and only when he starts talking, they
cry out of sheer emotion and grief already. The other is a Yankee, and was formerly a Pedlar,
as they call us the "wandering shopkeeper" - cheating world with its Yankee-watches and other
junk he for sale around the country, led and - was religious at one time, was a sell-out with its
clocks, of which the Women were on it like mad to buy one to, as she said, the devil also a
to rescue souls, and also began to preach. The two are now the most popular Speakers, we have heard
here, and have the other circuit-rider if not quite weggebissen, yet so pushed into the shadows,
that they can hardly see her. Your collections also fall - at least the main thing - always
most abundant, and for its mild Purposes, they take money and money's
worth, deer and Racoonfelle, tallow, honey and bear fat.

But now fit, "he continued, waving his head added to the pulpit -" now comes Mr. Hott chunks
d'ran - it will be a hot day, as it cuts a terrible gloomy face. "

Jack shouldered as he spoke the last words, his rifle, turned away from the pious man, and walked
slowly into the forest, while Mr. Hott chunks but began to thunder from the pulpit, and with
shining eyes and in the beginning but still fairly quiet, but again the growing voice trembling
audience tore the gates down the resulted in the depths of hell. With wild gestures and rolling
his eyes, he covered it all Horrors to which the unbelievers hear
down there, the pigeons do not, the blind, the did not want to see,
waited, and his speech he ran from the burning hot in a wild excitement
trembling lips.

Mulberry, as he would otherwise relating to such matters did was funny, but suddenly infinitely
Alerted urged, so far the propriety do was, forward, not a word to lose from the sermon, and it
betrayed a devotion, a joy that even several times the attention of the minister himself drew
on him and left him well pleased to dwell. The one was a tailor, and the other shopkeepers have
been enough of the spirit - the spirit came had to obey the body! - The above sermon continued,
mulberry she heard but not more, his external ear was apparently open, however, listened to
his inner chaos of Speculations, which developed in the brain of
the practical Scheer grinder, and he completed his "idea box" with
an enormous amount of plans and ideas.

Thus came the evening approached, this day was more a preparation for the morrow's battle was,
Mr. Hott the Brocken the devil and his accomplices had announced, his "warrior" as he called
the pious and believers, were prepared and dedicated to the serious
Battle, and the next sun should cast their setting beams on the fighter,
the would be to the glory of the Lord emerged victorious from the
fight and wrestling. One would think that, instead
of being as unlike real life as stories professing to deal with it can be, they were photographs
of it, and that the writers, as in the following instance, had always the fear of the law of
libel before their eyes:

  We must now request our readers to accompany us into an obscure cul
  de sac opening into a narrow street branching off Holborn. For many
  reasons we do not choose to be more precise as to locality.

Of course in this cul de sac is a Private Inquiry Office, with a detective in it. But in defining
even him the novelist gives himself no trouble to arouse excitement in his readers: they have
paid their penny for the history of this interesting person, and, that being done, they may
read about him or not, as they please. One would really think that the author of the story
was also the proprietor of the periodical.

  Those who desire (he says) to make the acquaintance of this somewhat
  remarkable person have only to step with us into the little dusky room
  where he is seated, and we shall have much pleasure in introducing
  him to their notice.

--A sentence which has certainly the air of saying, 'You may be introduced to him, or you may
let it alone.'

The coolness with which everything is said and done in penny fiction is indeed most remarkable,
and should greatly recommend it to that respectable class who have a horror of 'sensation.'
In a story, for example, that purports to describe University life (and is as much like it
as the camel produced from the German professor's self-consciousness must have been to a real
camel) there is an underplot of an amazing kind. The wicked undergraduate, notwithstanding
that he has the advantage of being a baronet, is foiled in his attempt to win the affections
of a young woman in humble life, and the virtuous hero of the story recommends her to the consideration
of his negro servant:

  'Talk to her, Monday,' whispered Jack, 'and see if she loves you.'

  For a short time Monday and Ada were in close conversation.

  Then Monday uttered a cry like a war-whoop.

  'It am come all right, sare. Missy Ada says she not really care for
  Sir Sydney, and she will be my little wife,' he said.

  'I congratulate you, Monday,' answered Jack.

  In half an hour more they arrived at the house of John Radford,
  plumber and glazier, who was Ada's father.

  Mr. and Mrs. Radford and their two sons received their daughter and
  her companions with that unstudied civility which contrasts so
  favourably with the stuck-up ceremony of many in a higher position.
  They were not prejudiced against Monday on account of his dark skin.

  It was enough for them that he was the man of Ada's choice.

  Mrs. Radford even went so far as to say, 'Well, for a coloured
  gentleman, he is very handsome and quite nice mannered, though I think
  Ada's been a little sly in telling us nothing about her engagement to
  the last.'

  They did not know all.

  Nor was it advisable that they should.

Still they knew something--for example, that their new son-in-law was a black man, which one
would have thought might have struck them as phenomenal. They take it, however, quite quietly
and as a matter of course. Now, surely, even among plumbers and glaziers, it must be thought
as strange for one's daughter to marry a black man as a lord. Yet, out of this dramatic situation
the author makes nothing at all, but treats it as coolly as his dramatis personae do themselves.
Now my notion would have been to make the bridegroom a black lord, and then to portray, with
admirable skill, the conflicting emotions of his mother-in-law, disgusted on the one hand by
his colour, attracted on the other by his rank. But 'sensation' is evidently out of the line
of the penny novelist: he gives his facts, which are certainly remarkable, then leaves both
his characters and his readers to draw their own conclusions.

The total absence of local scenery from these half hundred romances is also curious, and becomes
so very marked when the novelists are so imprudent as to take their dramatis personae out of
England, that one can't help wondering whether these gentlemen have ever been in foreign parts
themselves, or even read about them. Here is the conclusion of a romance which leaves nothing
to be desired in the way of brevity, but is unquestionably a little abrupt and vague:

  A year has passed away, and we are far from England and the English
  climate.

Whither 'we' have gone the author does not say, nor even indicate the hemisphere. It will be
imagined, perhaps, that we shall find out where we are by the indication of the flora and fauna.

  A lady and gentleman before the dawn of day have been climbing up an
  arid road in the direction of a dark ridge.

Observe, again, the ingenious vagueness of the description: an 'arid road' which may mean Siberia,
and a 'dark ridge' which may mean the Himalayas.

  The dawn suddenly comes upon them in all its glory. Birds twittered in
  their willow gorges, and it was a very glorious day. Arthur and Emily
  had passed the night at the ranche, and he had now taken her up to
  look at the mine which at all events had introduced them. He had
  previously taken her to see his mother's grave, the mother whom he had
  so loved. The mine after some delay proved more prosperous than ever.
  It was not sold, but is the 'appanage' of the younger sons of the
  house of Dacres.

With the exception of the 'ranche,' it will be remarked that there is not one word in the foregoing
description to fix locality. The mine and the ranche together seem indeed to suggest South
America. But--I ask for information--do birds twitter there in willow gorges? Younger sons
of noble families proverbially come off second best in this country, but if one of them found
his only 'appanage' was a mine, he would surely with some justice make a remonstrance.

The readers of this class of fiction will not have Dumas at any price--or, at all events, not
at a penny. Mr. Collins tells us how 'Monte Christo' was once spread before them, and how they
turned from that gorgeous feast with indifference, and fell back upon their tripe and onions--their
nameless authors. But some of those who write for them have adopted one peculiarity of Dumas.
The short jerky sentences which disfigure the 'Three Musketeers,' and indeed all that great
novelist's works, are very frequent with them, which induces me to believe that they are paid
by the line.

On the other hand, some affect fashionable description and conversation which are drawn out
in 'passages that lead to nothing' of an amazing length.

  'Where have I been,' replied Clyde with a carelessness which was half
  forced 'Oh, I have been over to Higham to see the dame.'

  'Ah, yes,' said Sir Edward, 'and how is the poor old creature?'

  'Quite well,' said Clyde, as he sat down and took up the menu of the
  elaborate dinner. 'Quite well, she sent her best respects,' he added,
  but he said nothing of the lodger, pretty Miss Mary Westlake.

  And when, a moment afterwards, the door opened and Grace came flowing
  in with her lithe noiseless step, dressed in one of Worth's
  masterpieces, a wonder of amber, satin, and antique lace, he raised
  his eyes and looked at her with an earnest scrutiny--so earnest that
  she paused with her hand on his chair, and met his eyes with a
  questioning glance.

  'Do you like my new dress?' she said with a calm smile.

  'Your dress?' he said. 'Yes, yes, it is very pretty, very.' But to
  himself he added, 'Yes, they are alike, strangely alike.'

Which last remark may be applied with justice to the conversations of all our novelists. There
appears no necessity for their commencement, no reason for their continuance, no object in
their conclusion; the reader finds himself in a forest of verbiage from which he is extricated
only at the end of the chapter, which is always, however, 'to be continued.'

It is true that these story-tellers for the million generally keep 'a gallop for the avenue'
(an incident of a more or less exciting kind to finish up with), but it is so brief and unsatisfactory
that it hardly rises to a canter; the author never seems to get into his stride. The following
is a fair example:

  But before we let the curtain fall, we must glance for a moment at
  another picture--a sad and painful one. In one of those retreats,
  worse than a living tomb, where reside those whose reason is dead,
  though their bodies still live, is a small spare cell. The sole
  occupant is a woman, young and very beautiful. Sometimes she is quiet
  and gentle as a child; sometimes her fits of frenzy are frightful to
  witness; but the only word she utters is 'Revenge,' and on her hand
  she always wears a plain gold band with a cross of black pearls.

This conclusion, which I chanced upon before I read the tale which preceded it, naturally interested
me immensely. Here, thought I, is at last an exciting story; I shall now find one of those
literary prizes in hopes, perhaps, of hitting upon which the penny public endures so many blanks.
I was quite prepared to have my blood curdled; my lips were ready for a full draught of gore;
yet, I give you my word, there was nothing in the whole story worse than a bankruptcy.

This is what makes the success of penny fiction so remarkable; there is nothing whatever in
the way of dramatic interest to account for it; nor of impropriety either. Like the lady friend
of Dr. Johnson, who congratulated him that there were no improper words in his dictionary,
and received from that unconciliatory sage the reply, 'You have been looking for them, have
you?' I have carefully searched my fifty samples of penny fiction for something wrong, and
have not found it. It is as pure as milk, or, at all events, as milk-and-water. Unlike the
Minerva Press, too, it does not deal with eminent persons: wicked peers are rare; fraud is
usually confined within what may be called its natural limits--the lawyer's office; the attention
paid to the heroines not only by their heroes, but by their unsuccessful and objectionable
rivals, is generally of the most honourable kind; and platitude and dulness hold undisputed sway.

In one or two of these periodicals there is indeed an example of the mediaeval melodrama; but
'Ralpho the Mysterious' is by no means thrilling. Indeed, when I remember that 'Ivanhoe' was
once published in a penny journal and proved a total failure, and then contemplate the popularity
of 'Ralpho,' I am more at sea as to what it is that attracts the million than ever.

  'Noble youth,' cried the King as he embraced Ralpho, 'to you we must
  entrust the training of our cavalry. I hold here the list which has
  been made out of the troops which will come at the signal. To certain
  of our nobles we have entrusted certain of our corps d'armée, but
  unto you, Ralpho, we must entrust our horse, for in that service you
  can display that wonderful dexterity with the sword which has made
  your name so famous.'

  'Sire,' cried our hero, as he dropped on one knee and took the King's
  hand, pressing it to his lips, 'thou hast indeed honoured me by such
  a reward, but I cannot accept it.'

  'How!' cried the King; 'hast thou so soon tired of my service?'

  'Not so, sire. To serve you I would shed the last drop of my blood.
  But if I were to accept this command, I should cease to do the
  service for the cause which now it has pleased you to say I have
  done. No, sire, let me remain the guardian of my King--his secret
  agent. I, with my sword alone, will defend my country and my King.'

  'Be not rash, Ralpho; already hast thou done more than any man
  ever did before. Run no more danger.'

  'Sire, if I have served you, grant my request. Let it be as I have
  said.'

  'It shall be so, mysterious youth. Thou shalt be my secret agent.
  Take this ring, and wear it for my sake; and, hark ye, gentlemen,
  when Ralpho shows that ring, obey him as if he were ourselves.'

  'We will,' cried the nobles.

  Then the King took the Star of St. Stanislaus, and fixed it on our
  hero's breast.

Now, to my mind, though his preferring to be 'a secret agent' to becoming a generalissimo of
the Polish cavalry is as modest as it is original, Ralpho is too 'goody-goody' to be called
'the Mysterious.' He reminds me, too, in his way of mixing chivalry with self-interest, of
those enterprising officers in fighting regiments who send in applications for their own V.C.s
while their comrades remain in modest expectation of them.

I am inclined to think, however, from the following advertisement, that some author has been
recently piling up the virtues of his hero too strongly for the very delicate stomachs of the
penny public, who, it is evident, resent superlatives of all kinds, and are commonplace and
conventional to the marrow of their bones: 'T.B. TIMMINS is informed that he cannot be promised
another story like "Mandragora," since, in deciding the contents of our journal, the tastes
of readers have to be considered whose interest cannot be aroused by the impossible deeds of
impossible creatures.' Alas! I wish from my heart I knew what 'deeds' or 'creatures' do arouse
the interest of this (to me) inexplicable public; for though I have before me the stories they
obviously take delight in, why they do so I cannot tell.

At the 'Answers to Correspondents,' indeed, which form a leading feature in most of these penny
journals, one may exclaim, with the colonel in 'Woodstock,' when, after many ghosts, he grapples
with Wildrake: 'Thou at least art palpable.' Here we have the real readers, asking questions
upon matters that concern them, and from these we shall surely get at the back of their minds.
But it is unfortunately not so certain that these 'Answers to Correspondents' are not themselves
fictions, like all the rest--only invented by the editor instead of the author, and coming
in handy to fill up a vacant page. It is, to my mind, incredible that a public so every way
different from that of the Mechanic's Institute, and to whom mere information is likely to
be anything but attractive, should be genuinely solicitous to learn that 'Needles were first
made in England in Cheapside, in the reign of Queen Mary, by a negro from Spain;' or that 'The
family name of the Duke of Norfolk is Howard, although the younger members of it call themselves
Talbot.'

Even the remonstrance of 'Our Correspondence Editor' with a gentleman who wishes to learn 'How
to manufacture dynamite' seems to me artificial; as though the idea of saying a few words in
season against explosive compounds had occurred to him, without any particular opportunity
having really offered itself for the expression of his views.

There are, however, one or two advertisements decidedly genuine, and which prove that the readers
of penny fiction are not so immersed in romance but that they have their eyes open to the main
chance and their material responsibilities. 'ANXIOUS TO KNOW,' for example, is informed that
'The widow, unless otherwise decreed, keeps possession of furniture on her marriage, and the
daughter cannot claim it;' while SKIBBS is assured that 'After such a lapse of time there will
be no danger of a warrant being issued for leaving his wife and family chargeable to the parish.'

As when Mr. Wilkie Collins made his first voyage of discovery into these unknown latitudes,
the penny journals are largely used for forming matrimonial engagements, and for adjudicating
upon all questions of propriety in connection with the affections. 'It is just bordering on
folly,' 'NANCY BLAKE' is informed, 'to marry a man six years your junior.' In answer to an
inquiry from 'LOVING OLIVIA' whether 'an engaged gentleman is at liberty to go to a theatre
without taking his young lady with him,' she is told 'Yes; but we imagine he would not often
do so.'

Some tender questions are mixed up with others of a more practical sort. 'LADY HILDA' is informed
that 'it is very seldom children are born healthy whose father has married before he is three-and-twenty;
that long engagements are not only unnecessary but injurious; and that washing the head will
remove the scurf.' 'LEONE' is assured that 'it is not necessary to be married in two churches,
one being quite sufficient;' that 'there is no truth in the saying that it is unlucky to marry
a person of the same complexion;' and that 'a gentle aperient will remove nettle-rash.'

'VIRGINIE' (who, by the way, should surely be VIRGINIUS) is thus tenderly sympathised with:

'It does seem rather hard that you should be deprived of all opportunity of having a tête-à-tête
with your betrothed, owing to her being obliged to entertain other company, although there
are others of the family who can do so; still, as her mother insists upon it, and will not
let you enjoy the society of her daughter uninterrupted, you might resort to a little harmless
strategy, and whenever your stated evenings for calling are broken in on that way, ask the
young lady to take a walk with you, or go to a place of amusement. She can then excuse herself
to her friends without a breach of etiquette, and you can enjoy your tête-à-tête undisturbed.'

The photographs of lady correspondents which are received by the editors of most of these journals
are apparently very numerous, and, if we may believe their description of them, all ravishingly
beautiful. It is no wonder they receive many applications of the following nature:

'CLYDE, a rising young doctor, twenty-two, fair, with a nice house and servants; being tired
of bachelor life, wishes to receive the carte-de-visite of a dark, fascinating young lady,
of from seventeen to twenty years of age; no money essential, but good birth indispensable.
She must be fond of music and children, and very loving and affectionate.'

Another doctor:

'Twenty-nine, of a loving and amiable disposition, and who has at present an income of £120
a year, is desirous to make an immediate engagement with a lady about his own age, who must
be possessed of a little money, so that by their united efforts he may soon become a member
of a lucrative and honourable profession.'

How the 'united efforts' of two young people, however enthusiastic, can make a man an M.D.
or an M.R.C.S. (except that love conquers all things) is more than one can understand. The
last advertisement I shall quote affects me nearly, for it is from an eminent member of my
own profession:

'ALEXIS, a popular author in the prime of life, of an affectionate disposition, and fond of
home, and the extent and pressing nature of whose work have prevented him from mixing much
in society, would be glad to correspond with a young lady not above thirty. She must be of
a pleasing appearance, amiable, intelligent, and domestic.'

If it is with the readers of penny fiction that Alexis has established his popularity, I would
like to know how he did it, and who he is. To discover this last is, however, an impossibility.
These novelists all write anonymously, nor do their works ever appear before the public in
another guise. There is sometimes a melancholy pretence to the contrary put forth in the 'Answers
to Correspondents.' 'PHOENIX,' for example, is informed that 'The story about which he inquires
will not be published in book form at the time he mentions.' But the fact is it will never
be so published at all. It has been written, like all its congeners, for the unknown millions
and for no one else.

Some years ago, in a certain great literary organ, it was stated of one of these penny journals
(which has not forgotten to advertise the eulogy) that 'its novels, are equal to the best works
of fiction to be got at the circulating libraries.' The critic who so expressed himself must
have done so in a moment of hilarity which I trust was not produced by liquor; for 'the best
works of fiction to be got at the circulating libraries' obviously include those of George
Eliot, Trollope, Reade, Black, and Blackmore, while the novels I am discussing are inferior
to the worst. They are as crude and ineffective in their pictures of domestic life as they
are deficient in dramatic incident; they are vapid, they are dull. Indeed, the total absence
of humour, and even of the least attempt at it, is most remarkable. There is now and then a
description of the playing of some practical joke, such as tying two Chinamen's tails together,
the effect of the relation of which is melancholy in the extreme, but there is no approach
to fun in the whole penny library. And yet it attracts, it is calculated, four millions of
readers--a fact which makes my mouth water like that of Tantalus.

When Mr. Wilkie Collins wrote of the Unknown Public it is clear he was still hopeful of them.
He thought it 'a question of time' only. 'The largest audience,' he says, 'for periodical literature
in this age of periodicals must obey the universal law of progress, and sooner or later learn
to discriminate. When that period comes the readers who rank by millions will be the readers
who give the widest reputations, who return the richest rewards, and who will therefore command
the services of the best writers of their time.' This prophecy has, curiously enough, been
fulfilled in a different direction from that anticipated by him who uttered it. The penny papers--that
is, the provincial penny newspapers--do now, under the syndicate system, command the services
of our most eminent novel writers; but Penny Fiction proper--that is to say, the fiction published
in the penny literary journals--is just where it was a quarter of a century ago.

With the opportunity of comparison afforded to its readers one would say this would be impossible,
but as a matter of fact, the opportunity is not offered. The readers of Penny Fiction do not
read newspapers; political events do not interest them, nor even social events, unless they
are of the class described in the Police News, which, I remark--and the fact is not without
significance--does not need to add fiction to its varied attractions.

But who, it will be asked, are the public who don't read newspapers, and whose mental calibre
is such that they require to be told by a correspondence editor that 'any number over the two
thousand will certainly be in the three thousand'?

I believe, though the vendors of the commodity in question profess to be unable to give any
information on the matter, that the majority are female domestic servants.

As to what attracts them in their favourite literature, that is a much more knotty question.
My own theory is that, just as Mr. Tupper achieved his immense popularity by never going over
the heads of his readers, and showing that poetry was, after all, not such a difficult thing
to be understood, so the writers of Penny Fiction, in clothing very conventional thoughts in
rather high-faluting English, have found the secret of success. Each reader says to himself
(or herself), 'That is my thought, which I would have myself expressed in those identical words,
if I had only known how.

HOTELS.

The desire for cheap holidays--as concerns going a long distance for little money--is no doubt
very general, but it is not universal. It demands, like the bicycle, both youth and vigour.
In mature years, not only because we are more fastidious, but because we are less robust, the
element of cheapness, though always agreeable, is subsidiary to that of comfort. For my own
part, if the chance were offered me to travel night and day for forty-eight hours anywhere--though
it was to the Elysian Fields--and that in a Pullman car, and for nothing, I would rather go
to Southend at my own expense from Saturday to Monday. Suppose the former journey to be commenced
by a Channel passage and continued in a third-class carriage, I would rather stop at home.
Or if, in addition to the other discomforts, I am to be a unit among 100 excursionists, with
a coupon that insures my being lodged on the sixth floor everywhere, I had rather take a month's
quiet holiday in London at the House of Detention.

These things are matters of taste; but it is certain that a very large number of people, who,
like myself, are neither rich nor in a position which justifies them in giving themselves airs,
consider quiet, comfort, and the absence of petty cares the most essential conditions of a
holiday. These views necessitate some expense and generally limit the excursions of those who
entertain them to their native land; but, on the other hand, they have their advantages. They
give one, for example, a great experience in the matter of hotels.

As I idly flutter the yellow leaves of the advertisements of inns in 'Bradshaw,' they call
up pictures in my mind quite undreamt of by the proprietors. I have been a sojourner in almost
all of these which are described as 'situated in picturesque localities.' They are all--it
is in print and must be true--'first-class' hotels; they have most of them 'unrivalled accommodation;'
not a few of them have been 'patronised by Royalty,' and one of them even by 'the Rothschilds.'
These last, of course, are great caravanserais, with 'magnificent ladies' drawing-rooms' and
'replete' (a word that seems to have taken service with the licensed victuallers) 'with every
luxury.' They make up (a term unfortunately suggestive of transformation) hundreds of beds;
they have equipages and 'night chamberlains;' 'On y parle français;' 'Man spricht Deutsch.'
Of some of these there is quite a little biography, beginning with the year of their establishment
and narrating their happy union with other agreeable premises, like a brick and mortar novel.
I remember them well: their 'romantic surroundings' or 'their exclusive privilege of meeting
trains upon the platform;' their accurate resemblance to 'a gentleman's own house' (with 'a
reception-room 80 feet by 90 feet'); their 'douche and spray baths;' their 'unexceptionable
tariff;' and even their having undergone those 'extensive alterations,' through which I also
underwent something, which they did not allow for in the bill.

These hotels are all more or less satisfactory as to appearance; furnished, not, indeed, with
such taste, nor so lavishly, as their rivals on the Continent, but handsomely enough; they
are much cleaner than foreign inns; and if their reference to 'every sanitary improvement which
science can suggest' is a little tall, even for an advertisement, one never has cause to shudder
as happens in some places in France proper and in Brittany everywhere. Mulberry got three invitations to
various fire, he took all three, and with clever time division also verwerthete. After lunch and a brief
rest period, with the clock approached about three in the afternoon, began the sermon's new
- but now another with a spirit.

The Reverend Mr. Sweetlip made this afternoon the beginning, and the Assembly, as if the People
had already had an idea how the mind would seem today, was more numerous
than ever, mulberry was sitting in the front row.

With soft, melting voice began the venerable Mr. Sweetlip his attention on listening Audience
to describe the places on earth where the poor weak man seduction circumferential, to coax him
from the path of goodness, and he showed them the wages they in this world even for a godly
life, but also much larger yet another in a World would have expected: in this world by their
peaceful, contented conscience that they the chest with an infinite pleasure and happiness
fill (and he himself led to this for example, like him, since he turned his heart to the sky,
in a veritable sea of Bliss swim) and in those where God and the Savior them an enviable fate
prepare would, so here they stood against the sinful earthly pleasures, and their eyes only after the
what would be taught of God. Here again he was in a closer and more visual description this
one-time salvation, as he thought they were, one, and described his audience with more fervent
and vivid colors, becoming the paradise where they will forever and
ever top of the circle of angels in the clouds sit and sing Hallelujah
would.

Mulberry quickly looked at his neighbor to the left, because they suddenly began to to moan,
closed his eyes, his head tossed to and fro, and is about as gebehrdete, as if expecting an
attack of cramps. The thought of his grinders Scheer small medicine which he led in the cart
with him, to ammonia and Hofmann'sche Drops of rubbing in mustard alcohol and other horrible
means, and before he was yet to could get a right decision, his neighbor also started on the
right, similar Utter sounds anywhere in front and behind him, and right and left, it started
to ache and groan, and the exclamation - "Oh # Loooord - glory - glory - happy - happy - blessed
Jesus! # "Were in all directions out loud, and came in the form of violence to some extent emitted
sighs of days. Only until the end of the sermon, in a long prayer ended, calmed the worshipers,
and the women kept their handkerchiefs in front of the Eyes and wept as if they happened the biggest
heartache in the world and not the former Salvation would be portrayed.

Silent

silence followed, as Mr. Hott chunks climbed now, after the venerable Brother Sweetlip lowered
into the pulpit, overlooked by one, over the masses wandering dark menacing look, the Assembly, and
suddenly exclaimed, erected to full height and the right arm of the stretching, in a thundering
voice:

"Brothers and sisters - fellow citizens - fellow Christians - sinner
- worthless, miserable, wretched Sinner - the day of vengeance is
at hand "!

Oh Loooooord "cried a fellow sister in mulberries side, but now found that these different exclamation not
a physical infirmity, but rather an intellectual Perfection, a susceptibility of the heart
for the higher, should be attributed. Mr. Hott chunks However, a break was made, as if to give his
audience time to think about think this proclamation, and began, after he had taken out his
handkerchief and had geschneuzt carefully, with a voice and an expression of his preaching, as if
he had said in any conversation about indifferent - "I think we are
that Afternoon get rain.

"

"The venerable Mr. Sweetlip, my dear brother, and hard-working employees in the vineyard of Lord,
you have, dear brothers and sisters, the pleasures of Elysium described,
he has You glowing with vibrant colors, such as the higher spheres
of sacred overheard, places of the blessed presented, where the good
will one day come. Nor, alas! is security
always to be attained by making one's salad for one's self. For supposing even that the lettuce
is fresh and white, and not manifestly a cabbage that is pretending to be a lettuce, how about
the oil? Charles Dickens used to say that he could always tell the character of an inn from
its cruets; if they were dirty and neglected, all was bad. The cruets are now clean enough
in all hotels of pretension; but alas for that bottle which should contain (and perhaps did
at some remote period contain) the oil of Lucca! On the fingers of one hand I could count all
the hotels in England which have not given me bad oil. Whether it was never good, or whether
it has gone bad, I leave to those philosophers who investigate the origin of evil. I only know
that it tastes as hair-oil smells. As to the soups, they are no worse than they used to be,
and no better; there is soup and there is hotel soup.

'Gravy soup, fried sole, entrée, leg of mutton, and apple tart' used to be the unambitious
menu of the old-fashioned inn. The entrée was terrible, but the fish, meat, and sweet were
excellent. I will say nothing of the entrées now; I am not in a position to say anything, for
not being of a sanguine temperament, and having but a few years to live, I do not venture upon
them. But it is undeniable that our bill of fare is greatly more varied than it used to be,
and that the way in which the table is arranged is much more attractive. At the great hotels
in the neighbourhood of London where rich, or at all events prodigal people, go to dine in
the summer months, this is especially the case. All these establishments affect fine dinners,
yet how seldom it is they give you good ones! Their wines, though monstrously dear, are very
fair; indeed, of the champagnes at least you may make certain by looking at the corks; but
the food! How many of their fancifully named dishes might be included under the common title,
Fiasco!

It was once suggested to a decayed man of fashion that an excellent profession for him to take
up would be the proprietorship of an hotel of this class. 'You know what is really worth eating,'
said an influential friend of his, 'and these caterers for your own class evidently don't;
if you will undertake the management of the Mammoth (naming an inn of very high repute), I
will furnish the funds.' But the man of fashion, who had spent his all with very little to
show for it, had at least acquired some knowledge of his fellow-creatures. 'I am deeply obliged
to you,' he said, 'but were I to accept your offer I should only lose your money. There are
but a very few people in the world who know a good dinner when it is set before them; and a
very large class (including all the ladies, who are only solicitous about its looking good)
do not care whether it is good or bad. In private life if a dinner consists of many courses,
is given at a fine house, and is presumably expensive, nineteen-twentieths of those who sit
down to it are satisfied. The twentieth alone says to himself, 'How much better I should have
dined at home!' I have been at scores and scores of great dinner-parties where the very plates
were cold and nobody but myself has observed it.'

I have no doubt the gentleman of fashion was right; delicate cooking would be entirely thrown
away upon the general palate. The fair sex, the young, the hungry, the easy-going, the ignorant--how
large a majority of the 'frequenters' of hotels do these classes embrace! And it must also
be remarked that to cook food (except whitebait) delicately in large quantities is a very difficult
operation indeed.

Upon the whole, I think, our large hotels, 'arranged on the Continental system,' are well adapted
for those who frequent them, and they show a readiness to adopt improvements. An immense number
of well-to-do people go to Brighton, to Scarborough, and scores of other places to get a change
and fresh air, but also to find the same amusements to which they have been accustomed in London;
and, on the whole, they get what they want without paying very much too much for it. But what
drives many quiet folks abroad is their disinclination to meet with all this gaiety and public
life; they do not mind it so much when it is mixed with the foreign element, and they are also
under the impression that picturesque scenery is a peculiarity of the Continent. I believe
that more English people have visited Switzerland than have seen the Lake District and the
Channel Islands, and very many more than have travelled in North Devon and Cornwall. The chief
reason of their abstinence in this respect is, however, their dread of the want of 'accommodation.'
To the last two counties, with the exception of some towns, such as Ilfracombe, approachable
by sea, or a direct railway route, folks never go in crowds, and never will go. It is true
there are no mammoth hotels to be found there; but for picturesque situation and a certain
homely comfort, that takes one not only into another world, but another generation, there is
nothing equal to certain little inns in these out-of-the-way places. In Wales also, and even
in the Isle of Wight, there are perfect bowers of bliss of this description, still undesecrated
by the excursionist. Not ten years ago, in a part of North Devon which shall be nameless, I
came, with my wife and daughter, upon an inn of this description. We were all enraptured with
the exquisite beauty of its situation, and were so imprudent as to express, in the presence
of the landlady, our wish to live and die there. 'Well, indeed, sir,' she said, 'I am delighted
to see you, but I hope you are not going to stay very long.' 'My dear madam,' I remonstrated,
aghast at this remark, 'are we, then, such very objectionable-looking persons?' 'Bless your
heart, no, sir, it isn't that; but the fact is, we have only room for three, and if parties
come and come, and always find us full (through your being here, you know), they will think
it is no use coming, and we shall lose our custom.' We did stay on, however, a pretty long
time--it was a place of ineffable beauty, such as one parts from almost with tears--and when
on our departure I asked for my bill, the landlady said, 'Dear me, sir, would you kindly tell
me what day you come upon, for I ha' lost my account of it?' The life we led at that inn was
purely pastoral; the clotted cream was of that consistency that it was meat and drink in one;
but although the fare was homely, it was good of its kind, and admirably cooked. There was
fresh fish every day--for we were too far from railways for that Gargantuan ogre, 'the London
market,' to deprive us of it--and tender fowls, and jams of all kinds such as no money could buy.

The landlady had a genius for making what she called 'conserves,' and every cupboard in the
queer little house was filled with them. In the sitting-room was a quantity of old china and
knick-knacks, brought by the sailors of the place from foreign lands; the linen was white as
snow, and smelt of lavender. Outside the inn was a sea that stretched to Newfoundland, and
cliffs that caught the sunset--such scenery as is not surpassed by that of the Tyrol (though,
of course, in a very different line), and be sure I was afraid of no comparison between our
'Travellers' Rest' and any Tyrolean inn. It is noteworthy that this hostelry of ours was so
peculiarly and picturesquely placed that it could only be approached on foot, which reminds
me of another place of entertainment for man, but not for beast.

In appearance, 'The Strangers' Welcome' (as I will take leave to term it) is more ambitious
than 'The Rest,' but it is of the same simple type. In some respects it is even more primitive;
no sign hangs over its door, nor is any other symbol of its vocation visible, 'Liberty,' not
'License,' as one may say without much metaphor, being its motto. It is on an island, so insignificant
in extent that horse exercise is impossible on it. What it lacks in superficial area is more
than made up, however, in its stupendous height. From the 'Welcome,' though it lies in a dell,
one looks down perhaps a hundred sheer feet upon the ocean. Its solemn murmur, even in calm,
always reaches the place, and when in storm, its spray. As one watches it from the lawn among
the fuchsias, one scarcely knows which mood becomes it best. The fuchsias grow against our
walls and tap at our window-panes in the morning as though they were roses; they even make
their homes in the rocks, like the conies. The island is a very garden of fuchsias, tall as
trees; and there are no other trees. The 'Welcome' itself is a sort of farmhouse without the
farm; there is a goat or two and a donkey to be seen about it, which would account for the
milk having an alien flavour, if it had one. But the 'Welcome' has excellent milk, so that
there must be some cows somewhere. From the cliff-top you may see Alderney, for our inn is
among the Channel Islands. When a storm comes you must stop where you are; for until the last
waves of it have ceased there is no approach to us from the world without. To the stranger
it seems probable at such seasons that the little place will burst up from below, for beneath
it are caverns innumerable, filled with furious waves like sea monsters roaring for our lives.
The sea, in short, has honeycombed it, and renews her vows to be its ruin with every gale.
Yet the 'Welcome' lasts our time, and will last that of many generations, who will continue,
however, doubtless to believe that the sublimities of Nature are unattainable short of Switzerland.

My memory now transports me to a mountain district in the north, but on this side of the border;
and here, again, the inn is signless, and has no appearance of an inn at all. It is situated
on the last of a great chain of hills, with lakes among them. It has lawns and shrubberies,
but few flowers; Nature frowns on every hand, even in sunshine, when the waterfalls flow like
silver, and the crags are decked with diamonds. There are no 'trencher-scraping, napkin-carrying,'
waiters in the house, but country damsels attend upon you, and a motherly dame, their mistress,
expresses her hope every morning that you have slept well. If you have not, it is the fault
of your conscience: you have had a poet's recipe for it, for you have been 'within the hearing
of a hundred streams' all night. Will you go up the Fells, or will you row on the Lake? These
are your simple alternatives; there is no brass band, no promenade, no pier, no anything that
the vulgar like. Yet once a week at least a great spectacle can be promised you without crossing
the inn threshold (indeed, when the promise is kept it is better to be on the right side of
it)--a thunder-storm among the hills. The arrangements for lighting the place, of which you
may have complained, not without reason, are then in perfection, and the silence is broken
with a vengeance. It is difficult to imagine the grandeurs of a sham-fight--a battle without
corpses--but here you have them. First the musketry, then the guns, with the explosion of the
powder-magazine--repeated about forty times by the mountain echoes--at the end of it. When
all is over you sit down to such a supper as Lucullus would have given a year of life for,
and which, in all probability--for he had no prudence--would have shortened it for him. At
the 'Retreat,' as it is called, among other native delicacies, they give you fresh char cooked
to a turn. I like to think that this was the fish that Monte Christo had sent him in a tank
to Paris on the occasion of a certain banquet; but all the wealth of the Indies could not have
accomplished that; the char (in spite of its name) does not travel.

One more reminiscence of country inns; and, though I have more of them in the picture-gallery
of my memory, I have done. I conjure up an ivy-covered dwelling, long roofed but low, and sheltered
by a lofty hill. Its situation is quite solitary, and, save for the cry of the seagull, there
reigns about it an unbroken silence. It is on the very highway of the world, but the road is
noiseless, for it is the sea. From the windows, all day long, we can watch the ships pass by
that carry the pilgrims of the earth, for their freight is chiefly human. It is here 'the first
ray glitters on the sail that brings our friends up from the under world, and the last falls
on that which sinks with all we love below the verge.' Even at night there is no cessation
to this coming and going; only, a red light or a white, and the distant strokes of a paddle-wheel
in the hush of the moonless void are then the sole signs of all this motion. What hopes and
fears contend in unseen hearts under those moving stars! Is it nothing to have the opportunity
to watch them from the ivied porch of the 'Outlook,' and to welcome the thoughts they arouse
within us? On land, too, there are stars, not made in heaven, but their shining is intermittent.
As I lie in my bed I can see the great revolving light on the farthest point of rock that juts
to sea. 

There began a difficult period, especially for its poor woman who bared in all, with the child
went to meet the urgent necessity. Distress but does not teach to pray alone, but more still
working, and determined to make bow by nothing, but the fate to offer firm and defiant brow, ran
Eltrich, with very different hopes for America come, and as other steps have failed to look
around in the city work, work as has happened, hard or easy to earn just bread for himself and
his family. After some Effort he succeeded in this - he was first on a flat boat to unload the
cargo engaged, with a dollar the day, as it was finished, the work took on another and their
existence was at least assured.
 But those to whom the happiness
of their fellow-creatures is intolerable can withdraw themselves at these seasons to the neighbouring
Downs and Bays, and on their return they will find peace with folded wing sitting as before
on the 'Outlook's' flagstaff.

Such are the inns which I have known, and there are hundreds in beautiful England like them.
On its rivers in particular there are many charming little inns, but, to say truth, although
the gentlemen-fishermen are as quiet as mice (from their habits of caution in their calling),
the disciples of the oar are noisy; they get up too early and go to bed too late, and are too
much addicted to melody. Moreover, these houses of entertainment often carry the principle
of home production to excess: their native fare is excellent; but, spring mattresses not growing
in the neighbourhood, the stuffing of the beds is supplied, to judge by results, from the turnip-field.
For the purpose for which they are intended, however, these little hostels are well fitted
and have a river charm that is indescribable.

I could speak, too, of excellent hotels set in the grounds of ruined castles or abbeys; but
the attractions of the latter interfere with the repose of the visitor. Moreover, it has been
my chief object, while admitting the merits of the Crown (and) Imperial, to paint the lily--to
point out the violet half hid from the eye. It seems to me a pity that so many persons should
leave their native land and spend their money among foreigners through ignorance of the quiet
resting-places that await them at home. I have in no way exaggerated their merits, but it must
be confessed that they have one serious drawback, which, however, only affects bachelors; if
Paterfamilias is troubled by it he ought to be ashamed of himself. I allude to the happy couples
on their honeymoon whom one is wont to meet with in these retired bowers. It is aggravating,
no doubt, to see how Angelina and Edwin devote themselves to one another without the slightest
regard for the feelings of the solitary stranger. The poor creature has no wish, of course,
to thrust his company upon them, still he would like to have his existence acknowledged; and
they ignore it. They have not a word to throw to him, nor even a glance. Then there are certain
endearments, delightful, no doubt, to those who exchange them, but which to the spectator are
distraction. What I would recommend to the bachelor as a remedy is a wife of his own. The good
Mussulman's idea of future happiness is a perpetual honeymoon; and these little Paradises are
the very places to spend it in. The customs of our own country forbid the agreeable variety
which has such charms for the Faithful; but, even as it is, I have seen in these pleasant inns
a great deal of human happiness, such as to the sober lover of his species only adds to their
attraction.

MAID-SERVANTS.

It is a common thing to hear the remark expressed by much-tried mistresses that servants are
not 'reasonable beings.' The observation may either have been provoked by the misbehaviour
of some particular domestic, or by the injudicious defence of the class by one of the male
sex. For the gentlemen have more to urge in favour of our domestics than the ladies have, and,
as the latter maintain, for a very obvious reason--'they have much less to do with them.' The
statement is cynical, but correct. What they committed what they sinned, they had
suffered badly - had regretted deeply, and how, as if the forces are only just still obeys to
reach the point here was the death of a welcome my dear friend, came to her, to redeem them
from their suffering.

Curious and courageously made by the stay of the two men's house, forced the remaining Villagers
now approaching little by little, and reputation. "The proud Jule - the proud Jule is dead in
the house, "the small room quickly filled with a part of the band, but the Deathly still stood
shy and timid.

Above her pastor but clasped his hands thunder and said in a low, deep voice full of emotion:

"God
in his mercy on your Vaterhuld, you poor lost child - you have difficulty sinned - and terribly
difficult, but also much, have suffered much, and grief and regret
their Features with sharp furrows dug in your face.

It was your poor soul! "

And decreasing his hat, which samples all the rest followed quickly
and shy, he prayed quietly and fervently gathered on the sinner.

10th chapter

The red dragon at Heilingen.

Conclusion.

In the red kites in Heilingen today there was a busy, busy lives; waiter ran and fell down by
themselves, tables were moved, chairs worn, spread tablecloths, and baskets of bottled drinks
and dragged as if a regiment to be supplied to should.

In the garden, decorated with a mass of wreaths and flowers and garlands, was focused nor individual
workers with fresh sand strewn course of the fallen leaves and to clean the branches of the embellishing,
and a small, recently whipped and all stained with fresh flowers and draped tent, a number
were wide bulbous awaiting beer kegs with taps inserted complacent,
only the hand that would turn on them, their foaming, strong wet donate.

The

path down which led down from Zurschtel, was a beggar on a crutch so limp. It was otherwise a broad-shouldered,
powerful build, but with sunken cheeks and hollow lying Eyes, the
left leg wrapped in old rags rather thick towels and rags, and the
left side of his face also connected with a dirty cloth.

When he
reached the garden gate, he stopped and looked into it, but entered
the garden itself not, and looked quietly and carefully over to the
house. Surely, in the curriculum of the village school, something else beside
the catechism ought to have been included; yet, of the things they were certain to be set to
do--the merest first principles of domestic service--they had been taught nothing; and in learning
them at our expense they cost us ten times their wages.

It may be said, indeed, that when you employ a young girl who has never been out to service
before, you secure honesty, chastity, and sobriety, and must not look for the artificial virtues;
but, unhappily, things are not very much better when you engage an experienced hand. The lady
of the house should not, of course, expect too much (in these days she must be of a very sanguine
temperament if she falls into that error); she will think it necessary to warn the new arrival--although
she 'knows her place' and is 'a thorough housemaid'--that a velvet pile carpet, for example,
should not be brushed backwards. But on more obvious matters she will probably leave the 'thorough
housemaid' to her own devices, the result of which is that the boards beside the stair-carpets
are washed with soda the first morning, which takes the dirt off effectually--and the paint
also. An hour or two before she was caught at this, she has, perhaps, utterly spoilt a polished
grate or two by rubbing them with scouring paper instead of emery powder.

Paterfamilias feels these things when he has to pay the bill, but his wife feels them in the
meantime, and it is more than is to be expected of human nature that she can welcome cordially
such an addition to her household. A prejudice against the girl springs up in her mind, which
is very promptly responded to, and the mutual respect that ought to grow up between them is
nipped in the bud. I am sorry to say that good housewives are almost always opposed to having
servants well educated; they think that 'knowledge puffs up,' blows them above their places,
and encourages a taste for light literature which is opposed to the arts of brushing and cleaning.
What the 'higher education' of domestic servants is to be under the School Boards I know not;
but I hope they will not imagine, as the Universities do, that their duty is only to teach
their pupils how to educate themselves. I confess I agree with the housewives, that, for young
persons intended for service, reading, writing, and arithmetic, with the use of the scrubbing
and hearth brushes, are far preferable acquirements to those of the same three great principles
with the use of the globes. Whether there are any handbooks in existence, other than cookery
books, to teach the duties of servants I know not; but, even if there are, servants will never
read them of their own free will. Not one in a hundred has a sufficiently strong desire to
improve herself for that. They must be taught like children, and when they are children, if
any good is to come of it.

It is to me astounding, and certainly makes me very suspicious of the advocates of women's
rights, that they have done little or nothing in this direction. Why should not some of that
immense energy which is now expended on platforms be directed into this less ambitious but
more natural channel? There are tens of thousands of persons of their own sex, not indeed out
of employment, but who are obtaining employment on false pretences, who would do so honestly
enough if they had had but a little early training. Unfortunately, the ladies of the platform
do not in general stoop to such small things as domestic matters; they do not care about mere
comfort, they even perhaps resent it because it is so dear to tyrannous man. If they would
only turn their attention to the education of their humbler sisters, they would win over all
their enemies and put to shame the cynic who has associated Man's Lefts with Women's Rights.

The only School for Servants I am acquainted with sent us the worst we ever had, and if it
had not been for the very handsome fee it charged both us and her for our mutual introduction,
I should not have recognised it as an educational establishment at all.

It will naturally be said by men (not by their wives, for they know better), 'But surely self-interest
will cause a servant to qualify herself for a place, since, having done so, she will command
better wages.' This is the mistake of the political economists, who, right enough in the importance
they attach to self-interest, gravely err in supposing it to be always of a material kind.
They start with the idea that everybody wants to make as much money as possible. So they do;
but with a large majority this desire is subordinate to the wish for leisure and enjoyment.
Trades unionism, with all its faults, is founded on this important fact in human nature--that
many of us prefer narrow means, with comparative leisure, to affluence with toil. That this
notion, if universal, would destroy good work of all kinds and make perfection impossible,
is beside the question, or certainly never enters into the minds of those chiefly concerned
in the matter. 'A good day's work for a good day's wage' is a fine sentiment; but 'half a day's
work for half a day's wage' suits some people even better; while 'half a day's work for a good
day's wage' suits them better still. In old times the sense of 'service being no inheritance'
begat habits of good conduct as well as thrift, for in most well-conducted households, servants'
wages were made proportionate to their length of service. But nowadays a lady's promise of
raising a servant's wages every year is quite superfluous, since it is ten to one against her
keeping her for the first twelve months. It is no wonder, then, that while the conviction of
service being of a temporary character is, at least, as strong as ever, the course of conduct
it now suggests is to make as much as possible out of it while it lasts, in the way of perquisites,
etc. With our cooks, especially, it is not too much to say that wages are often a secondary
object as compared with the opportunity of making a purse for themselves; and the recognised
privilege of selling the dripping affords cover for a multitude of petty delinquencies which
if not positive thefts have a strong family resemblance to them.

Before leaving the subject of short terms of service, it should be noted that the modern servant
openly avows her love of change. An excellent mistress, and a very kind one, has told me that
housemaids and kitchenmaids have given her warning again and again for no other cause than
this. They have avowed themselves quite happy and contented in their place, but they want 'fresh
woods and pastures new.' When Jack Mytton was reminded by his lawyer that a certain estate
he was about to sell had been in his family for 500 years, he replied, 'Then it's high time
it should go out of it;' and the same reflection occurs to our Janes and Bessies. They have
been in their present situation a year perhaps, or two at most--indeed, two years is considered
in the world below stairs the extreme point for any person of spirit to remain under one roof--and
it is high time they should leave it. One would naturally think that, in the case of young
women at all events, they would be slow to exchange even a moderately comfortable place for
a home among strangers; that they would bear the ills they know of, even if ills exist, rather
than venture on those of which they know nothing; but this is far from being the case. Nor
do they even quit their place in order 'to better themselves.' They have absolutely no reason
except the love of change. Behaviour of this sort naturally gives some colour to the remark
already quoted that servants are not 'reasonable beings.' I was almost a convert to that opinion
myself when, on one occasion, having asked a female domestic to be good enough to put my boots
on the tree, she literally obeyed my order. She hung all my boots on the tree in the garden,
and it was very wet weather. But to young persons who come from the country everything is pardonable--except
'temper.'

The growth of this parasite in both town and country is, however, quite alarming. Little as
mistresses dare to say to the disadvantage of servants when leaving their employment, no matter
for what reason, they do sometimes remark of them that their temper is 'uncertain.' When this
happens and the fact is communicated to Jane or Betsy by the lady to whom they have proposed
themselves, they have one invariable method of self-defence: 'Temper, mum? Well, I 'ave my
faults, I daresay, but not that; all as knows me knows my temper is 'eavenly. But the fact
is, mum, Mrs. Jones [her late mistress] was a bit flighty.' And she touches her forehead, and
even sometimes winks, to indicate aberration of the intellect. A really good-tempered servant
is now rare; and there are very few who will bear 'speaking to' when their work is neglected
or ill-done.

What, however, always puts them in the highest good humour is an expensive breakage. When Susan
comes to say, 'Oh, please, mum, I've 'ad a haccident with the pier glass,' her face is wreathed
in smiles. To a mistress who cannot relieve her feelings by strong language, as a man would
do, this behaviour is very aggravating. If servants do not actually delight in these misfortunes,
I am afraid not one in twenty shows the least consideration for her employer's purse. It is
charitable to say, when Thomas or Jane leaves the gas burning all night, or the sun-blinds
out in the pouring rain, that they have 'no head;' but it is my experience that they are very
careful, and, indeed, take quite extraordinary precautions, with respect to their own property.
I am afraid that the true reason of the waste and extravagance among servants is that they
have no attachment to their employers, and of course it is less troublesome to be lavish than
to be economical. All the education in the world cannot make selfish persons unselfish; but
it can surely implant in them some sense of duty. At present, so long as a servant is not absolutely
dishonest, her conscience rarely troubles her. This is especially the case with our cooks,
who also--that 'dripping' question making their path so slippery--draw the line between honesty
and its contrary very fine indeed.

Moreover, they know less of what they pretend to know than any other class of servant. The
proof of this is in the fact that not one in a hundred of them will cook you a dinner on trial.
I have often said to a cook, 'Your character is satisfactory enough in other respects; but,
before engaging you, will you show what you can do by sending up one good dinner, for which
I will pay you at the ordinary rate--namely, half-a-guinea?' She won't do it; she says she
can cook for a prince, and affects to be hurt at the proposition. The consequence is that for
a month, at least, we are slowly poisoned. Once only I hired a cook who accepted these terms.
I am bound to say she sent us up a most excellent dinner, but when I sent for her to pay the
half-guinea she was dead drunk on the kitchen floor. She had taken a bottle of port wine and
one of stout while serving up that entertainment, and afterwards confessed that during her
arduous duties she required 'constant support.' Again, it is by no means unusual for cooks
to succeed to admiration for a week and then to begin to spoil everything, the proverb respecting
a 'new broom' applying, curiously enough, even more to them than to the 'housemaids.'

These observations are no doubt severe, but they are not unjust; nor do I for a moment imply
that servants are always to blame, and never mistresses. There are faults on both sides. Ladies
often show themselves as 'unreasonable' as their female domestics. For example, although very
solicitous for the settlement of their own daughters in life, they often do not give sufficient
opportunities for their maid-servants to find husbands. A girl in service is quite as anxious
to get a husband as her young mistresses, and, indeed, it is of much more consequence for her
to do so. She sees her youth slipping away from her in a place where no 'followers' are allowed,
and it is no wonder that she 'wants a change.' She has a right to have her holidays and her
'Sundays out,' and it is the mistress's duty not only to grant them, but to make some inquiry
as to how she spends them. Many ladies who go to church with much regularity never take the
smallest interest in the moral conduct of those to whom they stand, morally if not legally,
in loco parentis, and who may, perhaps, have no other adviser.

Mistresses of all ranks, too, show a lamentable want of principle in the matter of character-giving.
It wants, no doubt, a certain strength of mind to write the truth. 'The girl is going, thank
Heaven,' they say to themselves, and they are glad to get rid of her, without a row, at the
easy price of a small falsehood. They lay the flattering unction to their souls that they are
concealing certain facts in order 'not to stand in the way of the poor girl's future.' What
they are really doing is an act of selfishness, cruel as regards the lady who is trusting to
their word, and baneful as regards the public good. It is the good characters which make the
bad servants. In a certain primitive district of England, where ministers are 'called' from
parish to parish, one of the churchwardens of X complained to the churchwardens of Y that his
late importation from the Y pulpit was not very satisfactory. 'And yet,' he said, 'you all
cracked him up enormously.' 'Yes,' replied the churchwarden of Y, 'and you will have to crack
him up too before you get rid of him.'

Now, it is only ignorance which causes ladies to believe that there is any necessity to 'crack
up' the character of a servant. They are not obliged (though, of course, if the servant has
behaved well it would be infamous to withhold it) to give her any character at all, and they
may state the most unpleasant truth (if they are quite certain of the fact and can prove it)
without the least fear of an action for libel. The law does not punish them for telling the
truth about their servants, and in another matter also it is more just than it is supposed
to be. There is a superstition among servants that when leaving their situations before their
time is out they have a right to claim board wages, and that even when dismissed for gross
misconduct they have a right to their ordinary wages for the remainder of the month; but these
are mere popular errors. The only case with which I am acquainted where neither of these dues
was demanded was rather a curious one. A widow lady advertised for a cook and a housemaid,
and procured them by the first cast of her net. They came together with an open avowal of their
previous acquaintanceship; they were attached to one another, they said, and did not wish to
be in separate service, and wages were not so much an object to them as opportunities of friendship.
The lady, who had an element of romance in her, was touched with this expression of sentiment;
it was also a great convenience to her to be so quickly suited; and, their characters being
good, she engaged them. They had come from a house of much greater pretensions than her own,
and had taken higher wages, which might have attracted her suspicions; but she had very little
work for them to do, and she concluded that 'an easy place' had had its attractions for them.
Her servants were well treated and well fed, and were allowed to see their friends; but she
objected to evening visits, and required the back door to be locked and the key placed in her
possession at nine o'clock every evening. If the front door was opened she could hear it from
every part of her modest residence (and, being very nervous, she used often to fancy that it
opened when it did not), while a wire for the use of the policeman connected the ground-floor
with an alarm bell in her own room in case of fire or other contingency. The two servants had
been six days with her when this alarm bell was pealed one night with great violence. She looked
out of window, and beheld a cab laden with luggage standing at her door. She expected nobody;
but whoever had come was more welcome than 'thieves' or 'fire,' and she went up to the maid's
room to bid them answer the door. She found to her great astonishment--for it was two in the
morning--the apartment empty, and while she was there the alarm-bell sounded again with increased
fury. Looking over the balusters, she perceived a light in the hall and inquired who was there.
'Well, it's us two,' returned the cook, 'we're just agoin, so good-bye. It ain't at all the
sort o' place for us, and you ain't the sort o' missis.' Then there was a shout of laughter,
the front door was opened and slammed to, and the cab drove off with its tenants, leaving their
mistress to her lonely meditations. The two friends had come on trial, it seemed, and had had
enough of it.

That they made no claim for wages of any kind seems quite curious when one considers what sort
of servants, and in what sort of circumstances, do demand them. And, as a rule, masters and
mistresses give in to the extortion. Yet the law is on their side, nor have they any reason
to complain of it in other respects. The improvement that is needed is in themselves, and in
their relations to those in their employment. He
would certainly have been far more surprised to learn that if he had the same However, without
handles and chipped up cup from which he drank with him on the same Ships of Germany would first come
over. The food, especially the hot coffee did, however, his attention too much to claim, for now
about anything Another troubling, and again and again had to Jenny fill the cup.

"Jenny," as Jack said after a long pause in which his views seriously and thoughtfully about the
small Space were curved - because the gold in his dish had very different memories awakened,
"is if the house afterwards announced for sale, you will have to offer, Heart. "

"I, Mr. Owen?" Said the poor child, smiling sadly, "You dear God, what should I probably offer,
you know quite well that we have nothing in the wide world. "

"Have you no money, Jenny?"

Said Jack, her half surprised but very friendly intuiting - Nothing, not a little bit? "

"A little bit, oh yes," smiled the girl good-naturedly - "for a quarter of a dollar in silver,
the front of my grandmother has been a long long time.

"

"Now you see well, darling," laughed the hunter, "that you're richer
than you do yourself? the is quite enough.

"

"A quarter of a dollar, I said Mr. Owen."

"Yes, and moreover, in silver."

"But what shall I do with it?"

»Buy Now the farm and the cattle - all Arkansas you can not get for
sure."

The girl turned slowly from a rising tear to suppress, because the
joke That hurt her, but Jack, who was not hurt, got up, went to her,
put his Hand on her shoulder and said kindly -

"It's no joke, Jenny,
you must provide certain with, or even more, you must make a start.
Are you afraid when I'm in? "

"No, Mr. Owen said the girl warmly
-" but I just do not understand - "

"Will that already know everything
yet - what time we have now?"

"Nearly eleven clock, for the sun."

"All
weather, it is not too much to miss, at eleven begins the auction
- if I'll call you come to me also.

When this happens, however, both master and mistress should agree to the arrangement, or at
all events be both informed that it has been made. Only last autumn a lady friend of mine adopted
it in the absence of her husband abroad, and forgot to apprise him of it by letter. He arrived
home late at night, and, letting himself in with a latch-key, took the strange man for a burglar,
and was almost the death of him by strangulation before he could explain that he was the new
butler.

No woman can bring up a luncheon or dinner tray for a dozen people twice a day without sooner
or later coming to grief with it. And here it is appropriate to say that in places where there
is much heavy work it is only reasonable that wages should be higher than where the work is
light. Whereas, upon such irrational grounds is our whole system of domestic service built,
that this is hardly ever taken into consideration. Since the servant is told beforehand what
he or she will have to do, it is taken for granted that the conditions are acceptable to them;
whereas, the fact is that the capability of performing their duties is the very last thing
to enter their minds. They cannot afford to remain 'out of a situation,' and therefore take
the first that offers itself as a stopgap, with no more intention of permanently remaining
there than a European who accepts an appointment in Turkey, and with the same object--namely,
to make as much as possible out of the Turks in the meantime.

In the case of a man-servant, especially in London, no written character should ever be held
sufficient. A personal interview with his late master or mistress is indispensable. This gives
a little trouble, no doubt, on both sides; but those who grudge it, for such a purpose, must
indeed be grossly selfish, and when they engage a ticket-of-leave man for their butler get
no worse than they deserve. One of the best butlers, however, I ever knew was a ticket-of-leave
man--engaged on the faith of a written character, which was, of course, a forged one, and who
remained with his employer no less than eighteen months. If his speculations on the turf had
been successful, he might have parted with him the best of friends, and perhaps have purchased
a residence in the same square; but something went wrong with the brother to Bucephalus, whom
he had backed for the Derby, and the poor man had to dispose of the whole of his master's family
plate to pay his own debts of honour and defray his travelling expenses--probably to some considerable
distance, as the police could never hear of him. The risk in taking a butler without a personal
guarantee of at least his honesty and sobriety can indeed hardly be exaggerated. If a clever
fellow, his influence over his fellow-servants of the other sex is very great, and it is a
recognised maxim of the class never 'to tell upon one another' so long as they remain good
friends. I have heard an experienced housewife say there is nothing she dreads so much as an
unbroken harmony below stairs; like silence in the nursery, it is ominous of all sorts of mischief.

Of course, the ticket-of-leave man was an extreme case; but it is certain that some butlers
who are not thieves are always treading on the very confines of roguery. They are like trustees
who, though they will not touch the principal entrusted to them, not only omit to put it out
to the best advantage, but will sometimes even pocket a portion of the interest 'for their
trouble.' I remember reading a curious case of this sort. A gentleman who had been with his
family in Switzerland for nine months was met by a London acquaintance on his return, who expressed
his regret at his having been in trouble at home. 'Nay, I have been in no trouble,' he replied,
'and, indeed, none of us have been at home.' 'But a month ago when I was passing down your
street I surely saw a funeral standing at your door?' Nor had his eyes deceived him. The butler
in charge had let the house for a couple of months, and but for his singular ill-luck in one
of his tenants happening to die during their temporary occupation of it, he would have pocketed
the rent (minus the money requisite to keep the maids' mouths shut) and his master would have
been none the wiser. It is said that it is only when we have lost a friend that we come to
value him at his true worth; and it is certain that it is only when one's butler has left us
and the tongues of his fellow-servants are loosened that we come to learn his demerits--the
difference between his real character and his written one. If he is a rogue, his evil influence
remains behind him, and, next to the maidservants, it is the page who suffers most from it.
He becomes--poor little fellow!--almost by necessity an accessory to his delinquencies, plays
pilot-fish to the other's shark, and himself grows up to swell the host of bad servants and
that army of martyrs their masters and mistresses.

A common cause of a butler's ruin, and for which he is much to be pitied, is his having married
unfortunately. I had once a good servant whom I was very loth to lose, but whose departure
became necessary from his constantly being visited by a wife in advanced stages of intoxication.
Housewives generally prefer a married man for their servant, for reasons that are not inscrutable.
I do not wish to differ from such good authorities. But though I have no objection to my butler
being married, I do object to maintain his wife, which, if he be on good terms with the cook,
there is a strong probability of my having to do. As to his own eating, Heaven forbid that
I should grudge it to him; but it is curious and utterly subversive of all medical dogma that
both men-servants and maidservants, who take, of course, comparatively little exercise, should,
nevertheless, contrive to eat more apiece for dinner than two average Alpine climbers. Four
meals a day, and three of them meat meals, is their usual rate of sustenance, and the food
must not only be frequent and plentiful, but very good. It is a gratifying proof of the rapid
influence of civilisation that the daughter of a farm-labourer, accustomed at home to consider
bacon a treat and beef a windfall, will, after a month's experience of her London place, decline
to eat cold meat of any kind, reject salt butter as 'not fit for a Christian,' and become quite
a connoisseur as to the strength of bitter ale. Indeed, two of our present female domestics
are 'recommended' to drink claret because beer makes them bilious. I do not mind giving them
claret, but I think it hard that under such circumstances I should have had a butler give me
warning because the female domestics are 'not select enough.' My own impression is, though
I scarcely like to mention it, because he was a married man, that he considered them too plain.

The reasons, or at all events the professed reasons, which servants give for leaving their
situations are sometimes very curious. One man left a family of my acquaintance because he
said he was interfered with by the young ladies. 'Good gracious, what do you mean?' inquired
his mistress. Her daughters, it appears, were accustomed to arrange the flowers for the dinner-table,
whereas, as he imagined, he had a peculiar gift for that kind of decoration himself.

On the other hand, it is sometimes difficult for a sensitive master or mistress to give the
true reason for their parting with a servant. A friend of mine had a footman who, through trick,
or some defect in his respiratory organs, used to blow like a grampus, and indeed more like
a whale, while waiting at table. It was not a vice, of course, but it was very objectionable,
and guests who were bald especially objected to it. My friend consulted with his butler, who
admitted that 'John did blow like a pauper' (meaning, as I suppose, a porpoise), and undertook
to break the subject to him. It is quite common to find candidates for service very deaf, and
if they contrive to pass their 'entrance examination' (for which no doubt they sharpen their
faculties), they stay with you for a month at least with an excellent excuse for making it
a holiday, since, whatever you tell them to do they cannot hear and do not do it, or do something
else which they like better. Mistresses who are silent about moral disqualifications are much
more so, of course, about physical ones, and have no scruples in ridding themselves of a deaf man.

The worst class of men-servants, perhaps, are those who are said to 'require a master;' which
means that when he happens to be not at home they neglect everything. A friend of mine who
happened to take a week's holiday, alone, discovered on his return that his family might almost
as well have had no servant at all as the man he left with them; he was generally out, and
when at home had not even troubled himself to answer the drawing-room bell. Some men-servants
are always running out; they have 'just stepped round the corner,' they say, 'to post a letter;'
which in nine cases out of ten means to have a dram at the public-house. The servants who 'require
a master' sometimes retain their situation with a very selfish one by devoting themselves to
his service at the expense of the rest of the family. 'John suits me very well,' he says, 'and
thoroughly understands his duties,' which in this case means the length of the master's foot.

On the other hand, there are some men-servants who, one would think, ought to belong to the
other sex, so utterly ignorant they are of that branch of their duty which they call 'valeting.'
A lady blessed with a scientific husband, who certainly did not take much notice whether he
was 'valeted' or not, once complained to his man of his neglect in this particular. 'When your
master comes in, William, you should look after him, and see to his hat and coat, and pay him
little attentions.' So the next time the man of science came in he was not a little surprised
by William (who, it is fair to say, came from the country) running up and taking his hat off
his head, like some highly-trained retriever. Happy the master to whom a worse thing has never
happened at the hands of his retainer!

The main thing to be dreaded in men-servants--next to downright dishonesty--is, of course,
intoxication. If a man has been long in one's service and gets drunk for once and away, it
may well be forgiven him; but when your new servant gets drunk, wait till he is sober enough
to receive his wages, and then dismiss him--if you can. Not long ago I had occasion to discharge
a butler for habitual intoxication; he was never quite drunk, but also never quite sober; he
was a sot. I made him fetch a cab, and saw his luggage put upon it, and I tendered him his
month's wages. But he refused to leave the house without board wages. Of course, I declined
to pay him any such thing; and, as he persisted in leaning against the dining-room door murmuring
at intervals, 'I wants my board wages,' I sent for a policeman. 'Be so good,' I said,' as to
turn this drunken person out of my house.' 'I daren't do it, sir,' was the reply; 'that would
be to exceed my duty.' 'Then, why are you here?' 'I am here, sir, to see that you turn the
man out yourself without using unnecessary violence.' 'The man' was six feet high and as stout
as a beer-barrel. I could no more have moved him than Skiddaw, and he knew it. 'I stays here,'
he chanted in his maudlin way, 'till I gets my board wages.' Fortunately, two Oxford undergraduates
happened to be in the house, to whom I mentioned my difficulty, and I shall not easily forget
the delighted promptitude with which they seized upon the offender and 'ran him out' into the
street. He fled down the area steps at once with a celerity that convinced me he was accustomed
to being turned out of houses, and tried to obtain re-admission at the back-door. It was fortunately
locked, but when I said to the policeman, 'Now, please to remove that man,' he answered, 'No,
sir; that would be to exceed my duty; he is still upon your premises and a member of your household.'
As it was raining heavily, the delinquent, though sympathised with by a great crowd round the
area railings, presently got tired of his position and went away. But supposing my young Oxford
friends had not been in the house and he had fallen upon me (a little man) in the act of expulsion;
or supposing I had been a widow lady with no protector, would that too faithful retainer have
remained in my establishment for ever?

I have purposely addressed myself to that large class of the community only who are said 'to
keep a man-servant'--that is, one man, assisted, perhaps, by a page. Those who keep butler,
footman, coachman, grooms, and valets are comparatively few in number, and know nothing of
the inconveniences which their less wealthy fellow-countrymen endure. In large establishments,
if William is drunk, John is sober, and the work is done for the rich man by somebody; especially,
too, if William is drunk, there are John and Thomas to turn him out of the house and have done
with him. But it is certain that the lower Ten Thousand are not in a satisfactory condition
as respects their men-servants; hardly more so, in fact, than the Hundred Thousand are in regard
to their maids. The men-servants, however, are not so ignorant of their duties as are the latter,
and if only their masters would have the courage to tell the truth when giving them their 'characters,'
there would be a great improvement in them. Against the masters themselves (unlike the mistresses)
I have never heard much complaint. Most of them object to be 'bothered' and 'troubled,' and
are willing enough to put everything into their man's hands, including the key of the Cellar,
if only they could trust him; but at present, alas! this is a very large 'If.'

WHIST-PLAYERS.

If cards are the Devil's books, Whist is the édition de luxe of them. Whist-playing is one
of the few vices of the upper classes that has not in time descended to the lower, with whom
the ingenious and attractive game of 'All Fours' has always held its own against it. I have
known but two men not belonging to the upper ten thousand who played well at whist. One was
a well-known jockey in the South of England, who was also, by the way, an admirable billiard-player.
He called himself an amateur, but those who played with him used to complain that his proceedings
were even ultra-professional. On the Turf men are almost as equal as they are under it, and
this ornament of the pigskin would on certain occasions (race meetings) take his place at the
card-table with some who were very literally his betters, while others who had more self-respect
contented themselves with backing him. The other example I have in my mind was an ancient Cumberland
yeoman, who, having lost the use of his limbs in middle life from having been tossed by a bull,
pursued the science under considerable difficulties. A sort of card-rack (such as Psycho uses
at the Egyptian Hall) was placed in front of him, and behind him stood his little granddaughter
who played the cards for him by verbal direction. Both these men played a very good game of
the old-fashioned kind, for though the jockey used subtleties, they were not of the Clay or
Cavendish sort. The asking for trumps was a device unknown to him, though there were folks
who whispered he would take them under certain circumstances without asking, and of the leading
of the penultimate with five in the suit it could be said of him, for once, that he was as
innocent as a babe.

Of course, many persons join the 'upper ten' who come from the lower twenty (or even thirty),
and it need not be said that they are by no means inferior in sagacity to their new acquaintances;
yet they rarely make first-rate players. Whist, like the classics, must be learnt young for
any excellence to be attained in it. Of this Metternich was a striking example. If benevolent
Nature ever intended a man for a whist-player one would have supposed that she had done so
in his case, but had been baffled by some malign Destiny which had degraded him to that class
by whom, in conjunction with Kings, it was fondly believed, previously to the recent general
election, that 'the world was governed.' Until late in life he never took to whist, when he
grew wildly fond of it, and played incessantly, till it is said a certain memorable event took
place which caused him never to touch a card again. The story goes that, rapt in the enjoyment
of the game, he suffered a special messenger to wait for hours, to whom if he had given his
attention more promptly a massacre of many hundred persons would have been prevented. Humanity
may drop a tear, but whist had nothing to regret in the circumstance; for in Metternich it
did not lose a good player, and, what redeems his intelligence, he knew it. 'I learnt my whist
too late,' he would say, with more pathos and solemnity, perhaps, than he would have used when
speaking of more momentous matters of omission.

He must be a wise man indeed who, being an habitual whist-player, is aware that he is a bad
one. In games of pure skill, such as chess, and, in a less degree, billiards, a man must be
a fool who deceives himself upon such a point; but in whist there is a sufficient amount of
chance to enable him to preserve his self-complacency for some time--let us say, his lifetime.
If he loses, he ascribes it to his 'infernal luck,' which always fills his hands with twos
and threes; and if he wins, though it is by a succession of four by honours as long as the
string of four-in-hands when the Coaching Club meets in Hyde Park, he ascribes it to his skill.
'If I hadn't played trumps just when I did,' he modestly observes to his partner, 'all would
have been over with us;' though the result would have been exactly the same had he played blindfold.
To an observer of human nature, who is not himself a loser 'on the day,' there are few things
more charming than the genial, gentle self-approval of two players of this class who have just
defeated two experts, and proved, to their own satisfaction, that if fortune gives them 'a
fair chance' or 'something like equal cards,' as they term the conditions of their late performance,
they can play as well as other people.

Of course, the term 'good-play' is a relative one; the player who wins applause in the drawing-room
is often thought but little of in places where the rigour of the game is observed; and the
'good, steady player' of the University Clubs is not a star of the first magnitude at the Portland.
The best players used to be men of mature years; they are now the middle-aged, who, with sufficient
practical experience, have derived their skill in early life from the best books. 'It is difficult
to teach an old dog new tricks,' and for the most part the old dogs despise them. When I hear
my partner boast that he is 'none of your book-players,' I smile courteously, and tremble.
I know what will become of him and me if fortune does not give him his 'fair chance,' and I
seek comfort from the calculation which tells me it is two to one against my cutting with him
again. How marvellous it is, when one comes to consider the matter, that a man should decline
to receive instruction on a technical subject from those who have eminently distinguished themselves
in it, and have systematised for the benefit of others the results of the experience of a lifetime!
With books or no books, it is quite true, however, that some men, otherwise of great intelligence,
can never be taught whist; they may have had every opportunity of learning it--have been born,
as it were, with the ace of spades in their mouth instead of a silver spoon--but the gift of
understanding is denied them; and though it is ungallant to say so, I have never known a lady
to play whist well. 

A packet boat to sail to Liverpool was completed, he went on board - by no Soldegg had been given
track, and leather man he picked up, and the contract, the boats to monitor seemed to have sought
equally unsuccessful. Meier had in any case only a lie quickly devised to bring his own skin
to safety.

At eleven clock by appointment should Ledermann, of the prosecutor of a new warrant get to the
criminals, Hopfgarten meet again on the steam boat load, the more to counsel there, and this
shot, however, in a fever of excitement, with the painful Arm in a sling, back and forth from
the landing, only once, and always in vain, a trace to find the wanted
person.

Across the river across from "Algiers," the other side, came over
and put a large steamer from landing on.

  The front
  of the boiler deck
  he was wearing, as usual, a small sign at the the name of the place
of his destination and time of departure indicated.

It was the:

CHIKASAW for Little Rock. Exit Clock ten!

The Chikasaw in Algiers had taken freight for Arkansas and now at
New-Orleans-landing applied again, any passengers for Arkansas, or
the intermediate courts, were already made by the newspapers point
out to take on board.

The bell it rang, heralding rapid departure, and the smoke swirled thick and black in the pure
clear air up.

"To Little Rock" - Hopfgarten there was a stab through the heart properly, as he called las. If Soldegg
today really intended to leave New Orleans, so nothing was more likely but that he would go
back to the West.

In any case, here was the possibility of him Find and pulling his hat down over his forehead, that
from on board, top of the cabin, no one could see his face, he strode across the narrow plank to the
deck, rising to up the boiler deck to survey the assembled passengers.

Henkel was not among them, but still not ruled out the possibility that he might just expect
only the actual departure of the boat would be to go on board and decided to Hopfgarten, In any case,
until the planks would be recruited to stay in the cabin.

Restless here and outgoing, he kept constantly up in the vicinity of the boiler decks of where
he had a clear view on the Levee and landing, and particularly the plank of Boat kept himself
in the eye, without being conspicuously present themselves. It was this no, enter unseen by him.

A lot of passengers came when the bell rang for the second approach; men with suitcases on the
shoulders and hat in hand, or travel bags under his arm, emigrants
in Germany, with two of her heavy, huge, wooden, brightly painted
box welding In view of their being, and left in fear of dragging on
the levees - the women children on the back and arms.

Also, a transport Altenburger farmers, in their national dress, walked down to the boat, embark for
the Far West, and the Americans, who to see almost all of costumes of the world get in trouble
and not a big stand, remained watched the people, and laughed at the strange clothes.

Then came a whole troop of black-clad men with hats and white cravats
breiträndigen, goods accompanied by two carts, which led her luggage
down the levees and on the boat.

There were certainly priests and Hopfgarten turned to the clerk standing next to him or accountant
of the boat with the question of whether he knew who were the masters, and where they were in
such abundance.

"Ah merely laughed Methodist preacher," this - "a flock, we week ago have moved from Little
Rock down with him.

They are mostly circuit-rider from the west, the here to a Protestant meeting, effective Maas
common rules against to consult Antichrist, as they said to ourselves, have come down, and
now again go back to their posts. It is a pleasure trip for the men to which they previously course, an
efficient "pious collection have made". "

The priests, eleven in number, however, came on board and the boiler
deck stairs up to the Cabin.

Hopfgarten remained standing at the door, and saw them one pass by his side. It were mostly blank
faces, single but with mischievous eyes, and sharp Trains, the German had no interest in them,
and just wanted his attention again turn to the levee, as a chaplain him with a slow, unctuous
Nod saluted, and walked past him and the cabin.

Hopfgarten looked
at him surprised and astonished at, the man was but a very decent,
brown, long coat of fine cloth, a snow-white neck tie, bare waxed
boots breiträndigen and a black felt hat, like the others, but the
face was not to denied, and, once seen, not to forget. The only modicum of reason that underlies it is the fact that
the play of some men becomes demoralised by ill-fortune, and may, possibly, be improved by
success. Yet the belief in this absurdity is universal, and bids fair to be eternal. 'If I
am not in a draught, and my chair is comfortable, you may put me anywhere,' is a remark I have
heard but once, and the effect of it on the company was much the same as if in the House of
Convocation some reverend gentleman had announced his acceptance of the religious programme
of M. Comte.

With the few exceptions I have mentioned, whist-players not only stop very far short of excellence
in the game, but very soon reach their tether. I cannot say of any man that he has gone on
improving for years; his mark is fixed, and he knows it--though he is exceptionally sagacious
if he knows where it is drawn as respects others--and there he stays till he begins to deteriorate.
The first warning of decadence is the loss of memory, after which it is a question of time
(and good sense) when he shall withdraw from the ranks of the fighting men and become a mere
spectator of the combat. It was said by a great gambler that the next pleasure in life to that
of winning was that of losing; and to the real lover of whist, the next pleasure to that of
playing a good game is that of looking on at one.

Whist has been extolled, and justly, upon many accounts; but the peculiar advantage of the
game is, perhaps, that it utilises socially many persons who would not otherwise be attractive.
Unless a player is positively disagreeable, he is as good to play whist with as a conversational
Crichton. Moreover, though the poet has hinted of the evanescent character of 'friendships
made in wine,' such is not the case with those made at whist. The phrase, 'my friend and partner,'
used by a well-known lady in fiction, in speaking of another lady, is one that is particularly
applicable to this social science, and holds good, as it does, alas, in no other case, even
when the partner becomes an adversary.

RELATIONS.

It is a favourite utterance of a much 'put-upon' Paterfamilias of my acquaintance, when he
finds his family more than usually too much for him, and cynically confesses his own shortcomings,
that 'children cannot be too particular in their choice of their parents, or begin their education
too early.'

But not only are children a necessity--that is, if the world of men and women is to be kept
going, concerning the advantage of which there seems, however, just now, to be some doubt,--but
when they have arrived, they cannot, except in very early life, be easily got rid of. In this
respect they differ from the relations whose case I am about to consider, and also possess
a certain claim upon us over and above the mere tie of blood, since we are responsible for
their existence. The obligation on the other side is, I venture to think, a little exaggerated.
If there is such a thing as natural piety, which, even in these days, few are found to deny,
it is the reverence, it is true, with which children regard their parents; but their moral
indebtedness to them as the authors of their being is open to doubt. That theory, indeed, appears
to be founded upon false premises; for, unless in the case of an ancestral estate, I am not
aware that the existence of children is much premeditated. On the contrary, their arrival is
often looked upon, from pecuniary reasons, with much apprehension, or, at best, till they do
arrive, they may be described, in common phrase, as 'neither born nor thought of.' I am a father
myself, but I wish to be fair and to take a just view of matters. If a mother leaves her child
on a doorstep, for example, the filial bond can hardly be expected to be very strong. In such
a case, indeed, the infant seems to me to have a very distinct grievance against its female
parent, and to be under no very overwhelming obligation to its father. 'Handsome is as handsome
does' is a principle that applies to all relations of life, including the nearest; and if duty
never absolutely ceases to exist, it is, at all events, greatly moulded by circumstances.

Patriotism, for instance, is very commendable, but your country must be worth something to
make you love it. It is next to impossible that an inhabitant of Monaco, for example, should
be patriotic. He can at most be only parochial. The love of one's mother is probably the purest
and noblest of all human affections; but some people's mothers are habitual drunkards, and
others professional thieves. Even filial reverence, it is plain, must stop somewhere. That
is one of the objections which, with all humility, I feel to the religion of M. Comte. The
worship of my grandmother would be impossible to me, unless I had reason to believe her to
have been a respectable person. Her relationship, unless I had had the advantage of her personal
acquaintance, would weigh I fear, but little with me, and that of my great-grandmother nothing
at all. The whole notion of ancestry--unless one's ancestors have been distinguished people--seems
to me ridiculous. If they have not been distinguished people--folks, that is, of whom some
record has been preserved--how is one to know that they have been worthy persons, whose mission
has been to increase the sum of human happiness? If, on the other hand, they have been only
notorious, and done their best to decrease it, I should be most heartily ashamed of them. The
pride of birth from this point of view--which seems to me a very reasonable one--is not only
absurd, but often very reprehensible. We may be exulting, by proxy, in successful immorality,
or even crime. Our boastfulness of our progenitors is necessarily in most cases very vague,
because we know so little about them. When we come to the particular, the record stops very
short indeed--generally at one's grandmother, who, by the way, plays a part in the dream-drama
of ancestry little superior to that of that 'rank outsider,' a mother-in-law. 'Tell that to
your grandmother' is a phrase that certainly did not originate in reverence; and even when
that lady is proverbially alluded to in a complimentary sense, her intelligence is only eulogised
in connection with the 'sucking of eggs.'

It so happens that I have quite a considerable line of ancestors myself, but only one of them
ever distinguished himself, and that (he was an Attorney-General) in a doubtful way; and I
confess I don't take the slightest interest in them. I prefer the pleasant companion with whom
I came up in the train yesterday, and whose name I forgot to ask, to the whole lot of them.

And if I don't care about ancestors on canvas (for their pictures, of course, are all we have
seen of them), I have good cause to be offended with them on paper. My favourite biographies--such
as that of Walter Scott, for example--are disfigured by them. When men sit down to write a
great man's life, why should they weary us with an epitome of that of his grandfather and grandmother?
Of course, the book has to be a certain length. No one is more sensible than myself of the
difficulty of providing 'copy' sufficient for two octavo volumes; but I do think biographers
should confine themselves to two generations. For my part, I could do with one, but there is
the favourite theory of a great man's inheriting his greatness from the maternal parent, which
I am well aware cannot be dispensed with. - Why, "said Menzel -" if you check that buys something, one should also is' ​​what
ordinary purchase. I had my way, things always more difficult presented with the purchase,
and thought that you only go as long about the world and his money would go away. If you can
settle right here on the spot, the so much more comfortable. "

"In a way, I would like to bring to your attention, gentlemen, what you do not miss yes allowed, "said
Mr. Weigel -" namely the same here your billets to proceed into the interior, where you always want
to solve.

"From New York?" Menzel said in surprise.

"Yes, probably from New York or Philadelphia or wherever your destination is."

Yes but can we get here? "Asked Mueller.

"Of course you can that," smiled Mr. Weigel, "and that's just the enormous advantage of our present
compound, which continues the emigrants from the door of his old
home, the authorities of that new sets, though he once reaching into
his pocket, and more needs to be paid, than what he has paid the same
from the beginning.

That's also just traveling now so cheap, that with one glance is able to see All the costs, the extra
expenditure fall away completely. "

"That would certainly be a blessing," said Mueller, of the "a few
months ago a brother over"

"The extra spending otherwise eat the most money" - was gone.

"Whether they eat it, sir, if they eat it," said Mr. Weigel, again happily rubbing his hands.

"And
where can you get the tickets, then?" Asked Menzel.

"With me here,
of course," said Mr. Weigel - "all for me."

"And then apply over
there?"

"Now it goes without saying," laughed the friendly agent,
"I would yes you but do not sell otherwise.

A well-known wit was once in company with one of the Cavendishes, who had lately been to America,
and was recounting his experiences. 'These Republican people have such funny names,' he said.
'I met there a man of the name of Birdseye.' 'Well, and is not that just as good as Cavendish?'
replied the wit, who was also a smoker. But the remark was not appreciated.

Ancestral people do not, as a rule, appreciate wit; but, on the other hand, it must be admitted
that this is not a defect peculiar to them alone. I once knew a man of letters who, though
he had risen to wealth and eminence, was of humble descent, and had a weakness for avoiding
allusion to it. His daughter married a man of good birth, but whose literary talents were not
of a high order. This gentleman wrote a letter applying for a certain Government appointment,
and expressed a wish for his father-in-law's opinion upon the composition. 'It's a very bad
letter,' was the frank criticism the other made upon it. 'The writing is bad, the spelling
is indifferent, the style is abominable. Good heavens! where are your relatives and antecedents?'
'If it comes to that,' was the reply, 'where are yours? For I never hear you speak about them.'
Nor did he ever hear him, for his father-in-law never spoke another word to him.

Nothing, of course, can be more contemptible than to neglect one's poor relations on account
of their poverty; but it is very doubtful whether the sum of human happiness is increased by
our having so much respect for the mere tie of kindred, unaccompanied by merit. Other things
being equal, it is obviously natural that one's near relatives should be the best of friends.
But other things are not always equal. Indeed, a certain high authority (which looks on both
sides of most questions) admits as much. 'There is a friend,' it says, 'that sticketh closer
than a brother. The connection, with its consequences, is somewhat similar to a partnership
in commercial life. If partners pull together, and are sympathetic, nothing can be more delightful
than such an arrangement. The tie of business clenches the tie of social attraction. For myself,
I am not commercial; but I envy the old firm of Beaumont and Fletcher, and the modern one of
Erckmann and Chatrian. But if the members of the firm do not pull together? Then, surely the
bond between them is most deplorable, and a divorce a vinculo should be obtained as soon as
possible.

One of the greatest mistakes--and there are many--that we fall into from a too ready acknowledgment
of the tie of kindred is the obligation we feel under to consort with relations with whom we
have nothing in common. You may take such persons to the waters of affection, but you cannot
make them drink; and the more you see of them the less they are likely to agree with you. Not
once, nor twice, but fifty times, in a life experience that is becoming protracted, I have
seen this forcible bringing together of incongruous elements, and the result has been always
unfortunate. I say 'forcible,' because it has been rarely voluntary; now and then a strong,
though, I venture to think, a mistaken sense of duty may lead a man to seek the society of
one with whom he has nothing in common save the bond of race; but for the most part they are
obeying the wishes of another--the sacred injunction, perhaps, of a parent on his death-bed.
'Be good friends,' he murmurs, 'my children,' not reflecting, in that supreme and farewell
hour, how little things, such as prejudice, difference of political or religious opinions,
conflicting interests, and the like, affect us while we are in this world, and how perilous
it is to attempt to link like with unlike. I am quite certain that when relations do not, in
common phrase, 'get on well with one another,' the best chance of their remaining friends is
for them to keep apart. This is gradually becoming recognised by 'the common sense of most,'
as we see by the falling-off in those family gatherings at Christmas, which only too often
partook of the character of that assembly which met under the roof of Mr, Pecksniff, with the
disastrous result with which we are all acquainted.

The more distant the tie of blood, the less reason, of course, there is to consider it; yet
it is strange to see how even sensible men will welcome the Good-for-nothing, who chance to
be 'of kin' to them, to the exclusion of the Worthy, who lack that adventitious claim. The
effect of this is an absolute immorality, since it offers a premium to unpleasant people, while
it heavily handicaps those who desire to make themselves agreeable. To give a particular example
of this, though upon a large scale, I might cite Scotland, where, making allowance for the
absence of that University system, which in England is so strong a social tie, there are undoubtedly
fewer friendships, in comparison, than there are with us; this I have no hesitation in attributing
to clanship--the exaggeration of the family tie--which substitutes nearness for dearness, and
places a tenth cousin above the most charming of companions, who labours under the disadvantage
of being 'nae kin.'

Again, what is more common than to hear it said, in apology for some manifestly ill-conditioned
and offensive person, that he is 'good to his family'? The praise is probably only so far deserved
that he does not beat his wife nor starve his children; but, supposing even he treated them
as he should do, and, moreover, entertained his ten-times removed cousins to dinner every Sunday,
what is that to me who do not enjoy his unenviable hospitality? Let his cousins speak well
of him by all means; but let the rest of the world speak as they find. I protest against the
theory that the social virtues should limit themselves to the home circle, and still more,
that they should extend to the distant branches of it to the exclusion of the world at large.

Of Howard, the philanthropist, it is said--and, I notice, said with a certain cynical pleasure--that,
notwithstanding his universal benevolence, he behaved with severity ta his own son. I have
not that intimate acquaintance with the circumstances which, to judge by the confidence of
their assertions, his traducers possess, but I should be slow to believe, in the case of such
a father, that the son did not deserve all he got, or was not forgiven even to the seventy
times seventh offence. There is, however, no little want of reason in the ordinary acceptation
of the term, 'loving forgiveness.' He must be a very morose man who does not forgive a personal
injury, especially when there has been an expression of repentance for it; but there are offences
which, quite independently of their personal sting, manifest in the offender a cruel or bad
heart, and 'loving forgiveness' is in that case no more to be expected than that we should
take a serpent who has already stung us to our bosom. 'It is his nature to,' as the poet expresses
it, and if that serpent is my relative it is my misfortune, and by no means impresses me with
a sense of obligation. Indeed, in the case of an offensive relation, so far from his having
any claim to my consideration, it seems to me I have a very substantial grievance in the fact
of his existence, and that he owes me reparation for it.

It is perhaps from a natural reaction, and is a sort of unconscious protest against the preposterous
claims of kinship, that our connections by marriage are so freely criticised, and, to say truth,
held in contempt. No one enjoins us to love our wife's relations, indeed, our own kindred are
generally dead against them, and especially against her mother, to whom the poor woman very
naturally clings. This is as unreasonable in the way of prejudice, as the other line of conduct
is in the way of favouritism. It is, in short, my humble opinion that, if everyone stood upon
his or her own merits, and was treated accordingly, this world of ours would be the better
for it; and of this I am quite sure--it would have fewer disagreeable people in it. I am neither
so patriotic nor so thorough-going as the American citizen, who, during the late Civil War,
came to President Lincoln, and nobly offered to sacrifice on the altar of freedom 'all his
able-bodied relations;' but I think that most of us would be benefited if they were weeded
out a bit.

INVALID LITERATURE.

It has always struck me as a breach of faith in Charles Lamb to have published the fact that
dear, 'rigorous' Mrs. Battle's favourite suit was Hearts: and is in my eyes, notwithstanding
Mr. Carlyle's posthumous outburst, the only blot on his character. His own confession, though
tendered with a blush, that there is such a thing as sick whist stands on totally different
grounds; it is not a relaxation of principle, but an acknowledgment of a weakness common to
human nature. One of the most advanced thinkers and men of science of our time has frankly
admitted that his theological views are considerably modified by the state of his health; and
if one's ideas on futurity are thus affected, it is no wonder that things of this world wear
a different appearance when viewed from a sick bed. It is not difficult to imagine that whist,
for example, played on the counterpane by three good Samaritans, to while away the hours for
an afflicted friend, differs from the game when played on a club card-table. Common humanity
prevents our saying what we think of the play of an invalid who may be enjoying his last rubber;
and if the ace of trumps is found under his pillow, we only smile and hope it will not occur again.

On the other hand, literary taste would, one would think, be the last thing to vary with our
physical condition; yet those who have had long illnesses know better, and will, I am sure,
bear me out in the assertion that there are such things as sick books. I do not, of course,
speak of devotional works. I am picturing the poor man when he is getting well after a long
bout of illness; his mind clear, but inert; his limbs painless, but so languid that they hardly
seem to belong to him; and when he regards their attenuated proportions with the same sort
of feeble interest that is evoked by eggshell china--they are not useful, still it would be
a pity if they broke.

Then it is that one feels a loathing of the strong meats of literature, and a liking for its
milk diet. As to metaphysics, one has had enough and to spare of them when one was delirious;
while the 'Fairy Tales of Science' do not strike one just then as being quite so fairylike
as the poet represents them. As to science, indeed, there is but one thing clear to us, namely,
that the theory of evolution is a mistake; for though one's getting better at all is undoubtedly
a proof of the survival of the fittest, we are well convinced that we have retrograded from
what we were. It would puzzle Darwin himself to fix our position exactly, but though we lack
the tenacity, and especially the colour, of the sea-anemone, we seem to be there or thereabouts
in the scale of humanity. When last prostrated by rheumatic fever, or its remedies, I remember,
indeed, to have been inclined to mathematics. When very ill I had suffered agonies in my dreams
from the persecutions of an impossible quantity, and perhaps the association of ideas suggested,
as I slowly gathered strength, a little problem in statics. It had been taught me by my dear
tutor at Cambridge, whom undergraduates have long ceased to trouble, as a proof of the pathos
that dwells in figures; and I kept repeating it to myself, with the letters all misplaced,
till I became exhausted by tears and emotion.

As a general rule, however, even mathematics fail to interest the convalescent. 'Man delights
not him; no, nor woman neither;' but Literature, if light in the hand, and always provided
that he has his back to the window, is a pleasure to him only next to that of his new found
appetite and his first chicken. His taste 'has suffered a sick change,' but that by no means
implies it has deteriorated.  On the contrary, his critical faculty has fled (which is surely
an immense advantage), while he has recovered much of that power of appreciation which rarely
abides with us to maturity. He is not on the outlook for mistakes, slips of style, anachronisms;
he derives no pleasure from the discovery of spots in the sun, but is content to bask in the
rays of it. He does not necessarily return to the favourites of his youth, though he has a
tendency that way, but the shackles of convention have slipped away from him with his flesh,
and he reads what he likes, and not what he has been told he ought to like. He has been so
long removed from public opinion, that, like a shipwrecked crew in an open boat, it has ceased
to affect him; only, instead of taking to cannibalism, he takes to what is nice. As his physical
appetite is fastidious, so his mental palate has a relish only for titbits. If ever there was
a time for a reasonable being to 'dip' into books, or to enjoy 'half-hours with the best authors,'
this is it; but weak as the patient is, he commonly declines to have his tastes dictated to;
perhaps there is an unpleasant association in his mind, arising from Brand and Liebig, with
all 'extracts;' but, at all events, those literary compilations oppress and bewilder him; he
objects to the extraordinary fertility of 'Ibid,' an author whose identity he cannot quite
call to mind, and prefers to choose for himself.

Biography is out of the question. Long before he has got through that account of the hero's
great grandmother, from whom he inherited his talents, which is, it seems, indispensable to
such works, he yawns, and devoutly wishing, notwithstanding its fatal consequences to the fourth
generation, that that old woman had never been born, falls into fitful slumber.

Travels are in the same condemnation; he has not the patience to watch the traveller taking
leave of his family at Pimlico, or to follow his cab as he drives through the streets to the
railway station, or to share the discomforts of his cabin--all necessary, no doubt, to his
eventual arrival in Abyssinia, but hardly necessary to be described. Moreover, the convalescent
has probably travelled a good deal on his own account during the last few weeks, for the bed
of fever carries one hither and thither with the velocity, though not the ease, of the enchanted
carpet in the 'Arabian Nights.' The desire of the sick man is to escape from himself and all
recent experiences.

He thinks he will try a little History. Alison? No, certainly not Alison. 'They will be proposing
Lingard next,' he murmurs, and the little irritation caused by the well-meant suggestion throws
him back for the next six hours. Presently he tries Macaulay, whom some flatterer has fulsomely
called 'as good as a novel,' but, though the trial of Warren Hastings gives him a fillip, the
rout of Sedgemoor does away with the effect of it, and, happening upon the character of Halifax,
he suffers a severe relapse. As a bedfellow, Macaulay is too declamatory, though, at the same
time, strange to say, he does not always succeed in keeping one awake. To the sick man Carlyle
is preferable; not his 'Frederick,' of course, and still less his 'Sartor Resartus,' which
has become a nightmare, without head or tail, but his 'French Revolution.' One lies and watches
the amazing spectacle without effort, as though it were represented on the stage. The sea of
blood rolls before our eyes, the roar of the mob sounds in our ears; we are carried along with
the unhappy Louis to the very frontier, and just on the verge of escape are seized and brought
back--King Coach--with him to Paris, in a cold perspiration.

Some people, when in health and of a sane mind (Mr. Matthew Arnold one knows of, and there
may be others), take great delight in 'Paradise Regained;' all we venture to say is that in
sickness it does not suggest its title. It is said that barley-water goes well with everything;
if so, the epic is the exception which proves the rule. Milton is tedious after rheumatic fever,
Spencer is worse. He cannot read Keats's 'Nightingale,' but for quite another reason. What
arouses 'thoughts too deep for tears' in the hale and strong is to the sick as the sinking
for an artesian well. 'The Chelsea Waterworks,' as Mr. Samuel Weller observed of Mr. Job Trotter
(at a time when the metropolitan water supply would seem to have been more satisfactory than
at present), 'are nothing to him.' On the other hand, Shelley's 'Skylark,' and the 'Dramatic
Fragments' of Browning, are as cordials to the invalid, while the poems of Walter Scott are
like breezes from the mountains and the sea. In that admirable essay, 'Life in the Sick-room,'
the authoress justly remarks, speaking of the advantage of objectivity in sick books, 'Nothing
can be better in this view than Macaulay's "Lays," which carry us at full speed out of ourselves.'

But it is not always that the invalid can read the poets at all; like Mrs. Wititterley, his
nerves are too delicately strung for the touch of the muse. His chief enjoyment lies in fiction,
to the producers of which he can never feel too grateful. I remember, on one occasion when
I was very reduced indeed, taking up 'Northanger Abbey,' and reading, with almost the same
gusto as though I had been a novelist myself, Miss Austen's defence of her profession. 'When
pain and anguish wring the brow,' we all know who is the comforter; but next to her, and when
the brow is getting a little better, we welcome the novelist.

With our face aslant on the pillow, we once more make acquaintance with the characters that
have been the delight of our youth, and find they delight us still, but with a difference.
The animal spirits of Smollett and Fielding are a little too much for us; there is not sympathy
enough in them for our own condition; they seem to have been fellows who were never ill. Perhaps
'Humphrey Clinker,' though it drags at the end, and the political disquisitions are intolerable,
is the funniest book that ever was written; but the faculty of appreciation for it is not now
in us. We turn with relief to Scott, though not to 'Scott's Works,' in the sense in which the
phrase is generally used, as though they were a foundry from which everything is issued of
the same workmanship and excellence; whereas there is as much difference between them as there
was in her Majesty's ships of old between the gallant seventy-four and the crazy troopship.
The invalid, however, as I have said, is far from critical; he only knows what he likes. Judged
by this fastidious standard, he finds 'Waverley' somewhat wearisome, and, as to the first part
of it in particular, wonders, not that the Great Unknown should have kept it in his desk for
years as a comparative failure, but that he should have ever taken it from that repository. Our brave police laws hold even
after all every man for a scoundrel, until it not enough certificates dargethan added that -
"against him came to nothing Gravír yet known."

"And what happens to the poor, poor girl?" Marie asked each almost simultaneously and Anna - "Dear
God, here in the strange city, alone, without resources, without
friends, how terrible would it be there when they may look raw lips
first vernähme terrible news.

"

"Yesterday evening," Mr. Keller said, somewhat embarrassed, "the whole thing really came to us as
soon and surprising, that we are not the least time to retain superiority, and we - we gave
opposite her only a few pennies and sent them to the lions, here to stay because, so they do
not in town for her brother früge, and the same terrible story in
the first quarter of an hour mightest know, this morning I wanted
to come here and see yourself what could be done - "

"And now? - She knows what happened?

"asked the professor compassionate folding hands - Mr. Keller shrugged
and said:

"She's gone -"

"Away? - Where "the women shouted.

was "No one I provide information on last night it arrived right there,
and rejected because of her poor but appearance in the servants' hall,
and there they must be unhappy As her name, maybe asking for her brother
and the same terrible have experienced, for she was even letting her
pack down, run out into the night and And fog - and not returned.

"

"Good heavens," said Anna, "if they did only not evil."

"I'm right at the leather man and then taken to the police to make
them aware," Keller said a little sheepishly, "will also still own
my best to do poor thing find again, but - I really do not know where
to look for the really, for she knows not only people in the city.

"

"And earlier in her brother's lodging? - "

"Did no one saw - I was there."

"Were you already - in the churchyard" asked "him now, so here is
quiet and Marie."

"Truly, I really had not thought of," Keller said quickly, pushing
back his chair, "The possibility is there, and I will not miss a moment
longer - maybe it is still not too late.

"

"And you tell us answer?"

"As soon as I know something definite about it - but - but what then start with her? - Here in
, the city will not, "said Keller, the door-handle in his hand,"
and even I think her weak body to gross hand not suitable.

"

"Perhaps also lends itself to the sister in the same house is a way
out," said Anna suddenly "Do it for the brother to so much good if
he really suffered innocently.

Yesterday Clara afternoon, complained to me her sorrow that her maid, very happy with it , and
go along the previously promised her firm, have suddenly become another
meaningless if the and now Heilingen refused to leave.

Clara is so seelensgut, they would certainly all do only what is in their power to make you forget
the poor child the bitter loss.

"But will the girls themselves are fit?" Said Keller.

                                "Why not," cried but now Marie - "Bring the arms come out, once you
find them, and do not take it with Henkel's, Papa certainly find a
way out.

"
"I can take anyone more children -" Yes, Dad said a way out, "but
the professor You should really know so much now, because we are men
enough. "

"Oh, if she wants to go at all," said Keller, the passage
"Let's get together here already, and if they want to use Miss Ms
Anna Henkel for her, were it fortunate for the be poor girl, torn
from the local to them as dull as quick again. But now, farewell -
a long time since I did not lose more time, and I hope you soon bring
good messages. "

* * * * *

Actuar Ledermann had received the night
a violent fever, and at the other Morning at his office to be excused. The Persians have another name for it--'the grandmother of all buckets.'
I was once in Wastdale with a dean of the Church of England, respectable, sedate, and a D.D.
It had poured for days without ceasing; the roads were under water, the passes were impassable,
the mountains invisible; there was nothing to be seen but waterfalls, and those in the wrong
place; there was no literature; the dean's guide-books were exhausted, and his Bible, it is
but charitable and reasonable to suppose, he knew by heart. As for me, I had found three tourists
who could play at whist, and was comparatively independent of the elements; but that poor ecclesiastic!
For the first few days he occupied himself in remonstrating against our playing cards by daylight;
but on the fourth morning, when we sat down to them immediately after breakfast, he began to
take an enforced interest in our proceedings. Like a dove above the dovecot, he circled for
an hour or two about the table--a deal one, such as thimble-riggers use, borrowed, under protest,
from his own humble bedroom--and then, with a murmurous coo about the weather showing no signs
of clearing up, he took a hand. Constant dropping--and it was much worse than dropping--will
wear away a stone, and it is my belief if it had gone on much longer his reverence would have
played on Sunday.

The spectacle that the roads of the district present at such a time is most melancholy. Everyone
is in a closed car--a cross between a bathing machine and that convenient vehicle which carries
both corpse and mourners; all the windows seem made of bottle glass, a phenomenon produced
by the flattening of the noses of imprisoned tourists; and nothing shines except an occasional
traveller in oilskin. In such seasons, indeed, oilskin (lined with patience) is your only wear.
Ordinary waterproofs in such a climate become mere blotting paper, and with the best of them,
without leggings and headgear to match, the poor Londoner might, I do not say just as well
be in London (for that is his aspiration all day long), but just as well go to bed at once,
and stop there. 'But why does he not go home?' it may be asked: a question to which there are
several answers. In the first place (for one must take the average in such cases) because he
is a fool. Secondly, like the rest of the well-to-do world, he has suffered the summer, wherein
warmth and sunshine are really to be had, to slip by, and has only the fag end of it in which
to take holiday. It is now or never--or at all events now or next year--with him. All his friends,
too, are out of town, flattening their noses against window panes; his club is under repair,
his house in brown holland, his servants on board wages. Like the young gentleman in Locksley
Hall, he is so absolutely at the end of his resources, that an 'angry fancy' is all that is
left to him. Of course, under its influence he sits down and writes to the Times; but, if the
humblest of its correspondents may venture to say so without offence, even that does not help
him much. That suicides increase in wet autumns is notorious; but that murders should in these
sequestered vales maintain the even tenor of their way is a feather in the cap of human nature.
In lodgings, where the pent-up tourist has no one but his wife and family to speak to, where
Dick and Tom will romp in his only sitting-room, and Eliza Jane practises all day on the crazy
piano, this forbearance is especially creditable.

Even in hotels, however, there is great temptation. On the north-eastern coast, in particular,
when the weather has, as the phrase goes, 'broken up,' and the sky and sea have both become
one durable drab, the best of women grow irritable, the men morose. At the table d'hôte, which
even the most exclusive are driven to frequent for company, as sheep huddle together in storm,
Dislike ripens to Hate with frightful rapidity. Our neighbour, who always--for it seems always--gets
the last of the mushrooms at breakfast, or finishes the oyster sauce at dinner before our very
eyes, we are very far, indeed, from loving as ourselves. Our vis-à-vis, the man on his honeymoon,
is even still more offensive. We resent his happiness, which is apparently uninfluenced by
the state of the weather, and our wife wonders what he could have seen in that chit of a girl
to attract his attention. To ourselves she seems a great deal too good for him, and in our
rare intervals of human feeling we regard her with the tenderest commiseration. The importance
attached to meals, and the time we take over them, have no parallel save among the Esquimaux.
The least incident that happens in the hotel is of more moment to us than the overthrow of
Empires. The whispered news that a fellow guest has been taken seriously ill, and that a medical
consultation has been held upon the case, is a matter to be deplored, of course, but one which
is not without its consolations. 'Who is it? What is it? Nothing catching I do hope?' (this
last uttered with genuine anxiety) are questions that are heard on every side. The general
impression is that some lovely young lady of fashion on the drawing-room floor has been seized
with pains in her limbs--and no wonder--from exposure to the elements. Her mother comes down
every morning and selects dainties for the sick-room from the public breakfast table; those
who are near enough to do so inquire in dulcet tones, 'How is your invalid this morning?' The
reply is, 'Better, much better,' which somehow falls short of expectation. Even the most giddy
and frivolous of girls has no excuse for frightening people for nothing.

At luncheon one day a very fat, strong boy makes his appearance, and is supplied with soup.
All his neighbours who have no soup are wild with envy, though they are well acquainted with
that soup at dinner, and know that it is bad. 'What is the meaning of it? Why this favouritism?'
we inquire of the waiter furiously. 'Well, you see, sir, he is better now; but that is the
invalid.' The delicate, attractive creature we have pictured to ourselves with pains in her
limbs turns out, after all, to be a hulking schoolboy, probably bilious from over-eating. The
public indignation is excessive, while the subject of it, quite unconscious of the fact, has
another plate of soup.

The wild weather out of doors is not, of course, confined to the land, and the sea would be
a fine sight if it was not invisible. The waves, indeed, are so high that the fishing-boats
which have remained out all night are often warned off, or, as it is locally termed, 'burned
off,' from the harbour bar. A tar barrel is lighted for this purpose on the headland, and it
is the only thing which the eternal rain cannot utterly squelch and extinguish. Occasionally
we venture down upon the pier to see the boats make the harbour, which, not a little to our
disappointment, they never fail to do. There are huge buttresses of stone against the pier-head,
behind which the new comer imagines he may crouch in perfect safety, till the third wave comes
in and convinces him to the contrary. No one ever dreams of 'burning' him off--giving him one
word of warning of that unpleasant contingency; for to behold a fellow creature more drenched
and dripping than ourselves is very soothing. As to the dangers of maritime life, we are all
agreed that they are greatly overrated; and some sceptics even go so far as to suggest that
the skeleton ship, half embedded in the sands, which so impresses visitors in fine weather,
is not a genuine wreck at all, but has been placed there by the Town Corporation to delude
the public.

Now and then we splash down to the quay to see a few million of herrings sold at four shillings
a hundred, which will presently induce philanthropic fishmongers in London to advertise 'a
glut this morning,' and to retail them at threepence apiece. At rare intervals we explore the
dripping town. It is amazing what a fascination the small picture-shops, to which at home we
should never give a glance, afford us; even the frontispieces to popular music have unwonted
attractions; while the pottery-shops, full of ware made from clay 'peculiar to the locality,'
are only too seductive to our wives, who purchase largely what they believe to be great bargains,
till they find on their return home the identical articles in Oxford Street, at half the price.
In London we never visit the British Museum itself, unless to escort some country cousin, but
at Barecliff-on-Sea, in wet weather, the miserable little local Institute, with its specimens
of strata, its calf with two heads in spirits, and its petrified toad, is an irresistible temptation.
The great event of the day, however, is the wading down to the railway-station (which is in
a quagmire) to meet the express train which brings more victims, 'unconscious of their doom,'
to Barecliff, and who evidently flatter themselves that the pouring rain is an exceptional
phenomenon; it also brings the London newspapers, for which we fight and struggle (the demand
being greatly in excess of the supply) and think ourselves fortunate if we secure a supplement.
It is true there is a Times in the smoking-room of the hotel, but it is always engaged five
deep, is the cause of terrible quarrels, and every afternoon we expect to see it imbrued in gore.

In the evening, when one does not mind the wet so much--'its tooth is not so keen because it
is not seen'--there are dissipations at 'the Rooms by the Sea.' Amateur charitable concerts
are given there, in which it is whispered that this and that lady at the table d'hôte will
take part, who become public characters and objects of immense interest in consequence. Thither,
too, come 'the inimitable Jones,' from the Edgware Road Music Hall, with his 'unrivalled répertoire
of comic songs;' the Spring Board Family, who have been 'pronounced by the general consensus
of the medical faculty in London to be unique,' as having neither joints nor backbone; and
Herr von Deft, 'who will repeat the same astounding performances which have electrified the
reigning families of Europe.' The serious people (for whom 'the glee-singers of Mesopotamia'
are also suspected of dropping a line) are angled for by white-cravatted lecturers, who enhance
their statistics of conversion by the exhibition of poisoned arrows, and of clubs, on which,
with the microscope, may be detected the hairs of missionary martyrs. In fine weather, of course,
these attractions would be advertised in vain; but the fact is, our whole community has been
reduced by the cruelty of the elements to a sort of second childhood; the rain which permeates
everything is softening our brain.

This is only too evident from the conversation in the hotel porch where the men meet every
morning to discuss the topic of the day--the weather. A sullen gloom pervades them--the first
symptom of mental aberration. Those, on the other hand, who express their opinion that it 'really
seems to be clearing a little' are in more advanced stages. We who are less afflicted shake
our heads, and murmur painfully, but also with a considerable touch of contempt, 'Poor fellows!'

The piano in the ladies' drawing-room is always going, but it excites no soothing influence;
there is an impression in the hotel that the performers are foreigners, and should be discouraged.
But there is one instrument hanging in the hall on which everyone plays, native or alien, and
every note is discord. It is the barometer. People talk of the delicacy of scientific instruments;
if they are right, the shocks which that barometer survives proves it to be an exception. Batter
it as we may, and do, the faithful needle, with a determination worthy of a better cause, maintains
its position at 'Much Rain.' The manager is appealed to vehemently, coarsely; he shrugs his
shoulders, protests with humility that he cannot help the weather, or affirms it is unprecedented--which
we do not believe. What have you in it for there in your truck? "

Forest edged not to praise his wares, and pulling out the various
boxes and drawers, he laid the eyes of the now closed ranks around
him herd the glories of to-do family who, brought here from the cities
of the East, should delight the heart of the Western prairies.

A lot of money that people had now turn to but not this kind of good, some were really necessarily
needed and had to be done, and was the man once in the rather distant
city, he's never in life could choose as the woman and the Pedlar
therefore remain accessible to women welcome guests.

A number of little things, however, had been selected and paid for, and although the Pedlar asked
the woman wants to bring the quarters for the night in hood, but they did not hear nothing. They
had to offer, nothing big, and for quarters for the night they could
not take money, That would not - "but as for me," she added, the Pedlar
is always sharper and attentive viewing, "I should have thought that
we had seen each other before?"

"Would certainly possible," laughed forest, 'I pull' was a few year, the cross and Queer about
the country - here I am still not yet come. "

"It was not here," said the woman, it's more and more comprehensively in the eye, "it was down
still water, just as we arrived - Jesus, Henry, look, this is not the man who gave me the half-dollar
to buy milk for the children? "

"Are you the people who were sitting down there in New Orleans on the levee and no bread and
no Work had?

"Asked but now the forest itself really surprised," all weather, then you have But you worked out
hard in the short term. "

"You see it, it is he," cried the woman, quickly and sincerely Forest's
hand moving, "if only people knew "how I have longed to see you again,
and thank you to be able to.

"

"Oh, Shut up," said Wald, defensively, "no fuss makes use of the Läpperei - I want ' I would have
done more. "

"I think's you," said the man now, the Jew's hand reaching and tough oppressive, "You have the heart
in the right place, just where it's belongs."
"You know not but what you have helped us at that time," she said
with tears in his eyes, the woman as she thought back to the hard
times, "the rest of us could have helped us but the smallest cried
for milk, and I had not a drop more for the poor worm. Look now at
the boy, what a strong boy became the, who knows whether he herumtummelte
now there so if your not then we stood. Dear God Almighty, You may
forgive me the sin, but I would rather jump into the water with him
as not so sad, so sad I was at heart, because so does no one cared
about us, and it all People just seemed to be quite indifferent to
whether we are spoiled because the river bank or not. A long voyage is the most terrible trial to which friendship can be subjected.
It is like the old sentence of pressing to death, 'as much as he can bear, and more.' It is
doubtful, for example, whether friendship has ever survived a voyage to Australia. I have sometimes
asked a man whether he knew So-and-So, who hails, like himself, from Melbourne, and he has
replied, 'We came over in the same ship'--'Only that, and nothing more,' as the poet puts it;
but his tone has an unmistakable significance, and one perceives at once that the topic had
better not be pursued.

A very dear friend of mine once proposed that we should go round the world together; he offered
to pay all my expenses, and painted the expedition in rose-colour. But I had the good sense
to decline the proposal. I felt I should lose my friend. Even yachting is a very dangerous
pastime in this respect, especially when the vessel is becalmed. In that case, like the sea
itself, one's friend soon becomes a pond. Conceive, then, what it must be to go round the world
with him! Is it possible, both being human, that we can still love one another when we have
got to Japan, for instance? And then we have to come back together! How frightful must be that
moment when he tells us the same story he told at starting, and we feel that he has come to
the end of his tether, and is going to tell all his stories over again! This is why it so often
happens that only one of two friends returns from any long voyage they have undertaken together.
What has become of the other? A question that one should never put to the survivor. It is certain
that great travellers, and especially those who travel by sea, have a very different code of
morals from that which they conform to at home. Human life is not so sacred to them. Perhaps
it is in this respect that travel is said to enlarge the mind. That it does not sharpen it,
however, whatever it may do for the temper, is tolerably certain. In their habits travellers
are singularly conventional. They are compelled, of course, to suffer certain inconveniences,
but they endure others, and most serious ones, quite unnecessarily, merely because it is the
custom so to do. In crossing the Atlantic, for example, a man of means will submit to be shut
up in a close cupboard for ten days with an utter stranger, though by paying double fare he
can get a cabin to himself. This arises from no desire for economy, but simply because he does
not think for himself; other travellers do the like, and he follows their example. Yet what
money could recompense him for occupying for the same time on land a double-bedded room--not
to say a mere china closet--with a man of whom he knows nothing except that he is subject to
chronic sickness? A pleasant sort of travelling companion indeed, yet, strange to say, the
commonest of all. Where there is a slender purse this terrible state of things (supposing travel
under such circumstances to be compatible with pleasure at all, which, for my part, I cannot
imagine) is not a matter of choice; but where it can be avoided why is it undergone?

There is nothing that convinces me of the folly of mankind so much as those advertisements
we see in the summer months with respect to travelling companions, from volunteers of both
sexes: 'Wanted, a travelling companion for a few months on the Continent, etc. The highest
references will be required.' The idea of going with a stranger upon a tour of pleasure must
surely originate in Hanwell, and the adventurer may think himself fortunate if it does not
end in Broadmoor. References, indeed! Who can answer for a fellow-creature's temper, patience,
unselfishness, during such an ordeal as a protracted tour? No one who has not travelled with
him already; and one may be tolerably certain his certificate does not come from that quarter.
It is true some people are married to strangers by advertisement; but their companionship,
as I am given to understand, does not generally last for months, or anything like it.

Imagine two people, as utterly unknown to one another, except by letter (and 'references'),
as the x and y of an equation, meeting for the first time at the railway-station! With what
tremors must each regard the other! What a relief it must be to X. to find that Y. is at least
a white man; on the other hand, it must rather dash his hopes, if they are set on pedestrianism,
to find that his compagnon de voyage has a wooden leg. Yet what are his mere colour and limbs
compared with his temperament and disposition? If one did not know the frightful risks one's
fellow-creatures incur every day for little pleasure and less profit, one would certainly say
these people must be mad.

But if instead of X. and Y., it is even A. and B., men who have known one another for years,
and in every relation but as fellow-travellers, there is risk enough in such a venture. One
night, after dinner at the club, they agree with effusion to take their autumn trip together;
they are warm with wine and with the remembrance of their college friendship--which extended
perhaps, when they afterwards come to think about it, a very little way. I feel but not to the door, you have to eat enough -
at least we are tomorrow evening at the time back - and eight 'on my little ones Tine - is a reasonably
good girl - you are big enough. And - if they ask us to should, so just say we would have gone
into the woods and come right back - but it will probably No one ask, '- she sat silent, and how
to add their own peace of mind.

She looked around the room if they have not forgotten - but her pack was hiding out at the door,
the man packed his haversack had also hidden outside and had now taken. Her eyes glanced only
briefly the small room, and adhered then on the bed of the youngest child - she could not resist,
and joined again to the sleeping child.

"You go out Tine, and get a few pieces of wood in, as long as I'm still here, that You can make coffee
in the morning - as long as I stay with the children, "she continued slowly and without looking
at the oldest girl here, added. This was, in a wild and almost fearful 've Kissed the woman now
the small, already softly slumbering Line, and then raised the Last out of its box, on the
rosy lips pressed his own mouth in wild violence, until it screamed. The tears - the mother could
not deny completely in the moment - You ran it down her cheeks full and heavy, and only when
the elders with the Wood heard back, she laid the child calmed down slightly again on his
bed, and kissed the boy, the tears started to rise also in the eyes. He knew not, quite why,
and just maybe because he saw his mother cry, 'was he so hurt and
soft at heart.

"But mother, what you is just this evening?" Said the girl, which the extraordinary movement the
same could escape impossible - "what did you just you and the Father"?

"Bah

- his father was nasty to me, and we have quarreled us," said the
mother, the face Turning away from the child.

A sharp whistle from
outside her struck her ear, and she drove startled into the air. If there is a friend that sticketh
closer than a brother, it is the Travelling Companion who is dependent upon you for interpretation.
It is needless to say that under these circumstances the glass of Friendship falls from 'Set
Fair' to 'Stormy' with much rapidity. After A's fourth quarrel with a waiter about half a franc,
B. calls him a 'mean hound,' and takes the opportunity of returning to his native land with
a French count, who speaks perfect English, and robs him of his watch and chain and the contents
of his pocket-book on board the steamer. A. and B. meet one another daily at the club for years
afterwards, but without recognition.

Their case, of course, is an extreme one; but that of C. and D. is almost as bad. They are
men of prudence, and persuade E. to go with them, as a makeweight. 'If we should ever disagree,'
they say, 'as to what is to be done--which, however, is to the last degree improbable--the
majority of votes shall carry it'--an arrangement which only delays the inevitable event--

    'Three little nigger boys went the world to view,
    The third was left in Calais, and then there were two.'

They find the makeweight intolerable before they have crossed the Channel, and, having agreed
to cut their cable from him, are from that moment never in the same mind about anything else.
It is a modern version of the three brigands who stole the Communion plate. C. and D. push
E. over the precipice, and C. stabs D. at a supper for which D. has purveyed poisoned wine.

The only way to secure a really eligible travelling companion is to try him first in short
swallow-flights, or rather pigeon-flights, from home. Take your bird with you for a few days'
outing near home; then, if he proves pleasant, for a week's tour in Cornwall; then for ten
days in Scotland, where, if you meet with the usual weather, and he still keeps his temper
and politeness, you may trust yourself to him anywhere. Out of twenty failures there will,
perhaps, be one success. In this manner I have discovered in time, in my dearest and nearest
friends, the most undreamt of vices. One man, F., hitherto much respected as a Chancery barrister,
has, as it has turned out, been intended by nature for a professional pedestrian. His true
calling is to walk 'laps' round the Agricultural Hall or at Lillie Bridge, with nothing on
to speak of save a handkerchief round his forehead. 'Let us walk' is his one cry as soon as
he becomes a travelling companion. And he is not content to do this when he arrives at any
place of interest, but insists upon walking there--perhaps along a dusty road, or over turnip-fields.
I like walking myself in moderation--say a mile out and a mile in; but not, certainly not,
twenty miles at a stretch, and at a speed which precludes conversation. This class of travelling
companion is very dangerous. If he does not get his walking he becomes malignant. My barrister,
at least, being denied the opportunity of drawing out marriage-settlements, conveying land,
or otherwise plundering the community, took to practical jokes. Having a suspicion of his pedestrian
powers, from the extreme length of his legs, I took G. with us, a man whom I could trust in
that respect, and who fancied he had heart complaint. G. and I took our exercise alone together
in a fly. One day we took a long drive--four miles or more--to a well-known bay. The vehicle
could not get down to the sea, so we descended on foot, leaving it at the top of the cliff,
with the strictest orders to the man not to stir till we came back. When we returned the fly
was gone. How we reached our hotel, Heaven knows! but we did arrive there, in the last stage
of exhaustion. The driver of the carriage, whom we met next day, informed us that a gentleman
had been thrown from his horse on the cliff-top and had broken his leg, and that, under the
circumstances, he had ventured to disobey our instructions and take the poor fellow home. Years
afterwards I discovered that nothing of the kind had happened, but that the fiendish F. had
given the driver a sovereign to play that trick upon us. F. is a judge now, and has been lately
trying election cases. I wonder what he thinks of himself when he rebukes offenders for the
heinous crime of bribery!

Again, I always thought H. a pleasant fellow till we went together to Cornwall. He had gone
through the first ordeal of a few days nearer home to my satisfaction, but at Penzance he broke
out. He was so dreadfully particular about his food that nothing satisfied him--not even pilchards
three times a day; and the way he went on at the waiters is not to be described by a decent
pen. The attendant at Penzance was not, I am bound to say, a good waiter. He said, though he
habitually put his thumb in every dish, he 'hadn't quite got his hand in,' and was not used
to the business.' 'Used! you know nothing about it!' exclaimed H., viciously. Then the poor
fellow burst into tears. 'Pray be patient with me, good gentlemen,' he murmured. 'I do my best;
but until last Wednesday as ever was I was a pork-butcher.' One cannot stand a travelling companion
who makes the waiters cry.

The worst kind of fellow-traveller is one who, to use his own scientific phrase for his complaint,
suffers from 'disorganisation of the nervous centres.' At home his little weaknesses do not
strike you. You may not be on the spot when he flies across Piccadilly Circus, pursued, as
he fancies, by a Brompton omnibus which has not yet reached St. James's Church, and is moving
at a snail's pace; you may not have been with him on that occasion when, in his eagerness to
be in time for the 'Flying Dutchman,' he arrives at Paddington an hour before it starts, and
is put into the parliamentary train which is shunted at Slough to let the 'Dutchman' pass;
but when you come to travel with him you know what 'nerves' are to your cost. On the other
hand, this is the easiest kind of travelling companion to get rid of; for you have only to
feign a sore throat, with feverish symptoms, and off he flies on the wings of terror, leaving
you, as he thinks--if he has a thought except for his nervous centres--to the tender mercies
of a foreign doctor, to hireling nurses, and to a grave in the strangers' cemetery.

THE END.

