The Rosary

BY

Florence L. Barclay

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

       I   ENTER--THE DUCHESS
      II   INTRODUCES THE HONOURABLE JANE
     III   THE SURPRISE PACKET
      IV   JANE VOLUNTEERS
       V   CONFIDENCES
      VI   THE VEIL IS LIFTED
     VII   GARTH FINDS HIS ROSARY
    VIII   ADDED PEARLS
      IX   LADY INGLEBY'S HOUSE PARTY
       X   THE REVELATION
      XI   GARTH FINDS THE CROSS
     XII   THE DOCTOR'S PRESCRIPTION
    XIII   THE ANSWER OF THE SPHINX
     XIV   IN DERYCK'S SAFE CONTROL
      XV   THE CONSULTATION
     XVI   THE DOCTOR FINDS A WAY
    XVII   ENTER--NURSE ROSEMARY
   XVIII   THE NAPOLEON OF THE MOORS
     XIX   THE VOICE IN THE DARKNESS.
      XX   JANE REPORTS PROGRESS
     XXI   HARD ON THE SECRETARY
    XXII   DR. ROB TO THE RESCUE
   XXIII   THE ONLY WAY
    XXIV   THE MAN'S POINT OF VIEW
     XXV   THE DOCTOR'S DIAGNOSIS
    XXVI   HEARTS MEET IN SIGHTLESS LAND
   XXVII   THE EYES GARTH TRUSTED
  XXVIII   IN THE STUDIO
    XXIX   JANE LOOKS INTO LOVES MIRROR
     XXX   "THE LADY PORTRAYED" The
    birds are not compelled
   to face the wind while
  they are sailing, but by changing the position
   of the wings a little they can
    go in whatever direction they wish,
   much as a boy changes his direction
  in skating by leaning a little to one side
 or the other.

Some birds are very skillful at this kind of sailing, and can even
remain stationary in the air for some minutes when there is a strong
wind; and they do this without flapping their wings at all.



The old stone house, solid, substantial, and unadorned, suggested unlimited spaciousness and
comfort within; and was redeemed from positive ugliness without, by the fine ivy, magnolia
trees, and wistaria, of many years' growth, climbing its plain face, and now covering it with
a mantle of soft green, large white blooms, and a cascade of purple blossom.

A terrace ran the full length of the house, bounded at one end by a large conservatory, at
the other by an aviary. Wide stone steps, at intervals, led down from the terrace on to the
soft springy turf of the lawn. Beyond--the wide park; clumps of old trees, haunted by shy brown
deer; and, through the trees, fitful gleams of the river, a narrow silver ribbon, winding gracefully
in and out between long grass, buttercups, and cow-daisies.

The sun-dial pointed to four o'clock.

The birds were having their hour of silence. Not a trill sounded from among the softly moving
leaves, not a chirp, not a twitter. The stillness seemed almost oppressive. The one brilliant
spot of colour in the landscape was a large scarlet macaw, asleep on his stand under the cedar.

At last came the sound of an opening door. A quaint old figure stepped out on to the terrace,
walked its entire length to the right, and disappeared into the rose-garden. The Duchess of
Meldrum had gone to cut her roses.

She wore an ancient straw hat, of the early-Victorian shape known as "mushroom," tied with
black ribbons beneath her portly chin; a loose brown holland coat; a very short tweed skirt,
and Engadine "gouties." She had on some very old gauntlet gloves, and carried a wooden basket
and a huge pair of scissors.

A wag had once remarked that if you met her Grace of Meldrum returning from gardening or feeding
her poultry, and were in a charitable frame of mind, you would very likely give her sixpence.
But, after you had thus drawn her attention to yourself and she looked at you, Sir Walter Raleigh's
cloak would not be in it! Your one possible course would be to collapse into the mud, and let
the ducal "gouties" trample on you. This the duchess would do with gusto; then accept your
apologies with good nature; and keep your sixpence, to show when she told the story.

The duchess lived alone; that is to say, she had no desire for the perpetual companionship
of any of her own kith and kin, nor for the constant smiles and flattery of a paid companion.
Her pale daughter, whom she had systematically snubbed, had married; her handsome son, whom
she had adored and spoiled, had prematurely died, before the death, a few years since, of Thomas,
fifth Duke of Meldrum. He had come to a sudden and, as the duchess often remarked, very suitable
end; for, on his sixty-second birthday, clad in all the splendours of his hunting scarlet,
top hat, and buff corduroy breeches, the mare he was mercilessly putting at an impossible fence
suddenly refused, and Thomas, Duke of Meldrum, shot into a field of turnips; pitched upon his
head, and spoke no more.

This sudden cessation of his noisy and fiery life meant a complete transformation in the entourage
of the duchess. Hitherto she had had to tolerate the boon companions, congenial to himself,
with whom he chose to fill the house; or to invite those of her own friends to whom she could
explain Thomas, and who suffered Thomas gladly, out of friendship for her, and enjoyment of
lovely Overdene. But even then the duchess had no pleasure in her parties; for, quaint rough
diamond though she herself might appear, the bluest of blue blood ran in her veins; and, though
her manner had the off-hand abruptness and disregard of other people's feelings not unfrequently
found in old ladies of high rank, she was at heart a true gentlewoman, and could always be
trusted to say and do the right thing in moments of importance: The late duke's language had
been sulphurous and his manners Georgian; and when he had been laid in the unwonted quiet of
his ancestral vault--"so unlike him, poor dear," as the duchess remarked, "that it is quite
a comfort to know he is not really there"--her Grace looked around her, and began to realise
the beauties and possibilities of Overdene.

At first she contented herself with gardening, making an aviary, and surrounding herself with
all sorts of queer birds and beasts; upon whom she lavished the affection which, of late years,
had known no human outlet.

But after a while her natural inclination to hospitality, her humorous enjoyment of other people's
foibles, and a quaint delight in parading her own, led to constant succession of house-parties
at Overdene, which soon became known as a Liberty Hall of varied delights where you always
met the people you most wanted to meet, found every facility for enjoying your favourite pastime,
were fed and housed in perfect style, and spent some of the most ideal days of your summer,
or cheery days of your winter, never dull, never bored, free to come and go as you pleased,
and everything seasoned everybody with the delightful "sauce piquante" of never being quite
sure what the duchess would do or say next.

She mentally arranged her parties under three heads--"freak parties," "mere people parties,"
and "best parties." A "best party" was in progress on the lovely June day when the duchess,
having enjoyed an unusually long siesta, donned what she called her "garden togs" and sallied
forth to cut roses.

As she tramped along the terrace and passed through the little iron gate leading to the rose-garden,
Tommy, the scarlet macaw, opened one eye and watched her; gave a loud kiss as she reached the
gate and disappeared from view, then laughed to himself and went to sleep again.

Of all the many pets, Tommy was prime favourite. He represented the duchess's one concession
to morbid sentiment. After the demise of the duke she had found it so depressing to be invariably
addressed with suave deference by every male voice she heard. If the butler could have snorted,
or the rector have rapped out an uncomplimentary adjective, the duchess would have felt cheered.
As it was, a fixed and settled melancholy lay upon her spirit until she saw in a dealer's list
an advertisement of a prize macaw, warranted a grand talker, with a vocabulary of over five
hundred words.

The duchess went immediately to town, paid a visit to the dealer, heard a few of the macaw's
words and the tone in which he said them, bought him on the spot, and took him down to Overdene.
The first evening he sat crossly on the perch of his grand new stand, declining to say a single
one of his five hundred words, though the duchess spent her evening in the hall, sitting in
every possible place; first close to him; then, away in a distant corner; in an arm-chair placed
behind a screen; reading, with her back turned, feigning not to notice him; facing him with
concentrated attention. "Because of the wreckers. The shore's bad enough, and the bar's a mean
place to escape on, but the wreckers used to make it worse."

And Dab launched out into a slightly exaggerated description of the terrors of the Long Island
coast in old times and new, and of the character of the men who were formerly the first to find
out if anything or anybody had gone ashore.

"What a prize that French steamer would have been!" said Annie, "the one you took Frank Harley
from."

"By the new system?" But they weren't all so. There was old Peter, and he lives on the Island yet.
There's his cabin now. You can just see it in the edge of that great sand-hill."

"What a queer thing it is!"

"Sometimes the storms drift the sand all over it, and old Peter has to dig it out again. He's
snowed under two or three times every winter." "Isn't there any such thing as our getting
into the cabin!"

No, there was not, so long as Mrs. Kinzer was the "stewardess" of that expedition, and Joe and Fuz
were compelled to wait her motions.

(To be continued.)

THE FOX AND THE TURKEYS; OR, CHARLEY AND THE OLD FOLKS.

By Susan Coolidge.

]

It was midsummer at the old Brush Farm. When I say "midsummer," how many pretty things it means,--woods
at their freshest and greenest, meadows sweet with newly cut hay, cinnamon-roses in the hedges
and water-lilies in the ponds, bees buzzing in and out of the clove-pinks and larkspurs which
edge the beds of cabbages and carrots in the kitchen-garden, a humming-bird at work in the
scarlet trumpets of the honeysuckle on the porch,--everywhere the sense of fullness and growth,
with no shadow as yet of rankness or decay.

August is over-ripe. September's smile is sad, but midsummer is all rosy hope, the crown and blossom
of the year.

Charley Brush lay under an apple-tree, face downward, and absorbed
in "The Red Rover," a book he had read at least ten times before.

Stories about ships and sea-life and freebooters and buccaneers were his favorite reading,
and, unfortunately, what with illustrated papers and cheap novels, and so-called "Boys' books,"
plenty of such tales abound nowadays.

I say unfortunately, for beside teaching him nothing, these books made Charley utterly dissatisfied
with his life at home. Hoeing vegetables, chopping wood, and going to the district school,
seemed dull work indeed to a boy who was longing to stand sword in hand on a blood-stained
deck, in a gory uniform trimmed with skulls and cross-bones, and order his enemies to be thrown
one by one into the sea.

"The shark awaits your car-casses!" spouted the imaginary desperado with a vicious snap of his teeth;
and when Aunt Greg interrupted by asking him to bring in an armful of kindling, he glared at
her like the Red Rover himself.

Poor Aunt Greg! how little she guessed what was passing in his mind!

"You look real pale to-day," she said. "I was afraid all that mince-pie
for supper would be bad for you. Here, Charley, I'll mix you some
ginger-and-water. That'll settle you, and make all right again."

"Mis-cre-ant!"
was what Charley yearned to say, but instead he muttered, gruffly,
"I aint sick, and I don't want no ginger." Very bad grammar, as you
perceive; but grammar seemed such an unnecessary accomplishment for
a would-be buccaneer, that Charley never could be induced to pay the
least attention to it.

That afternoon, under the apple-tree, he made
up his mind. A pirate he must and he would be, by fair means or by
foul. He was cunning enough to know that the very word "pirate" would
frighten his grandmother into fits, so he only asked her leave to
go to sea. Going to sea was, to his mind, a necessary first step toward
the noble profession he desired to enter.

"I want to so bad," he
whined. "Please say I may."

Grandmother began to cry. Aunt Hitty
was sure he must be out of his mind, and ran for the Epsom salts.
Aunt Greg quoted, "There's no place like home," and told a story about
a boy she once heard of who ran away to sea and never came back, "foundered
or drowndered," she couldn't remember which. Aunt Prue seized his
shoulders and gave him a sound shake. This was what came of idling
over story-books all day long, she said,--he could just shut up and
go and give the pig its supper, and not let her hear any more trash
like that--making them all feel so bad about nothing.

Charley twisted
his shoulder out of her grasp with a scowl, but he took the pail and
went out to the pen. All the time that piggy ate, he was considering
what to do.

She found awaiting her a tall, plain girl with a frank, boyish manner and a rather disconcerting
way as she afterwards remarked, of "taking stock of a body the while one was a-talking," which
at first checked the flow of good Sarah's reminiscences, poured forth so freely in the housekeeper's
room below, and reduced her to looking tearfully around the room, remarking that she remembered
choosing the blessed wall-paper with her dear lady now gone, whose joy had been so great when
the dear babe first took notice and reached up for the roses. "And I can show you, miss, if
you care to know it just which bunch of roses it were."

But before Sarah's visit was over, Jane had heard many undreamed-of-things; amongst others,
that her mother used to kiss her little hands, "ah, many a time she, did, miss; called them
little rose-petals, and covered them with kisses."

The child, utterly unused to any demonstrations of affection, looked at her rather ungainly
brown hands and laughed, simply because she was ashamed of the unwonted tightening at her throat
and the queer stinging of tears beneath her eyelids. Thus Sarah departed under the impression
that Miss Jane had grown up into a rather a heartless young lady. But Fraulein and Jebbie never
knew why, from that day onward, the hands, of which they had so often had cause to complain,
were kept scrupulously clean; and on her birthday night, unashamed in the quiet darkness, the
lonely little child kissed her own hands beneath the bedclothes, striving thus to reach the
tenderness of her dead mother's lips.

And in after years, when she became her own mistress, one of her first actions was to advertise
for Sarah Matthews and engage her as her own maid, at a salary which enabled the good woman
eventually to buy herself a comfortable annuity.

Jane saw but little of her father, who had found it difficult to forgive her, firstly, for
being a girl when he desired a son; secondly, being a girl, for having inherited his plainness
rather than her mother's beauty. Parents are apt to see no injustice in the fact that they
are often annoyed with their offspring for possessing attributes, both of character and appearance,
with which they themselves have endowed them.

The hero of Jane's childhood, the chum of her girlhood and the close friend of her maturer
years, was Deryck Brand, only son of the rector of the parish, and her senior by nearly ten
years. But even in their friendship, close though it was, she had never felt herself first
to him. As a medical student, at home during vacations, his mother and his profession took
precedence in his mind of the lonely child, whose devotion pleased him and whose strong character
and original mental development interested him. Later on he married a lovely girl, as unlike
Jane as one woman could possibly be to another; but still their friendship held and deepened;
and now, when he was rapidly advancing to the very front rank of his profession, her appreciation
of his work, and sympathetic understanding of his aims and efforts, meant more to him than
even the signal mark of royal favour, of which he had lately been the recipient.

Jane Champion had no close friends amongst the women of her set. Her lonely girlhood had bred
in her an absolute frankness towards herself and other people which made it difficult for her
to understand or tolerate the little artificialities of society, or the trivial weaknesses
of her own sex. Women to whom she had shown special kindness--and they were many--maintained
an attitude of grateful admiration in her presence, and of cowardly silence in her absence
when she chanced to be under discussion.

But of men friends she had many, especially among a set of young fellows just through college,
of whom she made particular chums; nice lads, who wrote to her of their college and mess-room
scrapes, as they would never have dreamed of doing to their own mothers. She knew perfectly
well that they called her "old Jane" and "pretty Jane" and "dearest Jane" amongst themselves,
but she believed in the harmlessness of their fun and the genuineness of their affection, and
gave them a generous amount of her own in return.

Jane Champion happened just now to be paying one of her long visits to Overdene, and was playing
golf with a boy for whom she had long had a rod in pickle on this summer afternoon when the
duchess went to cut blooms in her rose-garden. Only, as Jane found out, you cannot decorously
lead up to a scolding if you are very keen on golf, and go golfing with a person who is equally
enthusiastic, and who all the way to the links explains exactly how he played every hole the
last time he went round, and all the way back gloats over, in retrospection, the way you and
he have played every hole this time.

So Jane considered her afternoon, didactically, a failure. But, in the smoking-room that night,
young Cathcart explained the game all over again to a few choice spirits, and then remarked:
"Old Jane was superb! Fancy! Such a drive as that, and doing number seven in three and not
talking about it! I've jolly well made up my mind to send no more bouquets to Tou-Tou. Hang
it, boys! You can't see yourself at champagne suppers with a dancing-woman, when you've walked
round the links, on a day like this, with the Honourable Jane. She drives like a rifle shot,
and when she lofts, you'd think the ball was a swallow; and beat me three holes up and never
mentioned it. By Jove, a fellow wants to have a clean bill when he shakes hands with her!"

CHAPTER III

THE SURPRISE PACKET

The sun-dial pointed to half past four o'clock. The hour of silence appeared to be over. The
birds commenced twittering; and a cuckoo, in an adjacent wood, sounded his note at intervals.

The house awoke to sudden life. There was an opening and shutting of doors. Two footmen, in
the mulberry and silver of the Meldrum livery, hurried down from the terrace, carrying folding
tea-tables, with which they supplemented those of rustic oak standing permanently under the
cedar. One, promptly returned to the house; while the other remained behind, spreading snowy
cloths over each table.

The macaw awoke, stretched his wings and flapped them twice, then sidled up and down his perch,
concentrating his attention upon the footman.

"Mind!" he exclaimed suddenly, in the butler's voice, as a cloth, flung on too hurriedly, fluttered
to the grass.

"Hold your jaw!" said the young footman irritably, flicking the bird with the table-cloth,
and then glancing furtively at the rose-garden.

"Tommy wants a gooseberry!" shrieked the macaw, dodging the table-cloth and hanging, head downwards,
from his perch.

"Don't you wish you may get it?" said the footman viciously.

"Give it him, somebody," remarked Tommy, in the duchess's voice.

The footman started, and looked over his shoulder; then hurriedly told Tommy just what he thought
of him, and where he wished him; cuffed him soundly, and returned to the house, followed by
peals of laughter, mingled with exhortations and imprecations from the angry bird, who danced
up and down on his perch until his enemy had vanished from view.

A few minutes later the tables were spread with the large variety of eatables considered necessary
at an English afternoon tea; the massive silver urn and teapots gleamed on the buffet-table,
behind which the old butler presided; muffins, crumpets, cakes, and every kind of sandwich
supplemented the dainty little rolled slices of white and brown bread-and-butter, while heaped-up
bowls of freshly gathered strawberries lent a touch of colour to the artistic effect of white
and silver. When all was ready, the butler raised his hand and sounded an old Chinese gong
hanging in the cedar tree. Before the penetrating boom had died away, voices were heard in
the distance from all over the grounds.

Up from the river, down from the tennis courts, out from house and garden, came the duchess's
guests, rejoicing in the refreshing prospect of tea, hurrying to the welcome shade of the cedar;--charming
women in white, carefully guarding their complexions beneath shady hats and picturesque parasols;--delightful
girls, who had long ago sacrificed complexions to comfort, and now walked across the lawn bareheaded,
swinging their rackets and discussing the last hard-fought set; men in flannels, sunburned
and handsome, joining in the talk and laughter; praising their partners, while remaining unobtrusively
silent as to their own achievements.

They made a picturesque group as they gathered under the tree, subsiding with immense satisfaction
into the low wicker chairs, or on to the soft turf, and helping themselves to what they pleased.
When all were supplied with tea, coffee, or iced drinks, to their liking, conversation flowed
again.

"So the duchess's concert comes off to-night," remarked some one. "I wish to goodness they
would hang this tree with Chinese lanterns and, have it out here. It is too hot to face a crowded
function indoors."

"Oh, that's all right," said Garth Dalmain, "I'm stage-manager, you know; and I can promise
you that all the long windows opening on to the terrace shall stand wide. So no one need be
in the concert-room, who prefers to stop outside. There will be a row of lounge chairs placed
on the terrace near the windows. You won't see much; but you will hear, perfectly."

"Ah, but half the fun is in seeing," exclaimed one of the tennis girls. "People who have remained
on the terrace will miss all the point of it afterwards when the dear duchess shows us how
everybody did it. I don't care how hot it is. Book me a seat in the front row!"

"Who is the surprise packet to-night?" asked Lady Ingleby, who had arrived since luncheon.

"Velma," said Mary Strathern. "She is coming for the week-end, and delightful it will be to
have her. No one but the duchess could have worked it, and no place but Overdene would have
tempted her. She will sing only one song at the concert; but she is sure to break forth later
on, and give us plenty. We will persuade Jane to drift to the piano accidentally and play over,
just by chance, the opening bars of some of Velma's best things, and we shall soon hear the
magic voice. She never can resist a perfectly played accompaniment."

"Why call Madame Velma the `surprise packet'?" asked a girl, to whom the Overdene "best parties"
were a new experience.

"That, my dear," replied Lady Ingleby, "is a little joke of the duchess's. This concert is
arranged for the amusement of her house party, and for the gratification and glorification
of local celebrities. The whole neighbourhood is invited. None of you are asked to perform,
but local celebrities are. In fact they furnish the entire programme, to their own delight,
the satisfaction of their friends and relatives, and our entertainment, particularly afterwards
when the duchess takes us through every item, with original notes, comments, and impersonations.
Oh, Dal! Do you remember when she tucked a sheet of white writing-paper into her tea-gown for
a dog collar, and took off the high-church curate nervously singing a comic song? Then at the
very end, you see--and really some of it is quite good for amateurs--she trots out Velma, or
some equally perfect artiste, to show them how it really can be done; and suddenly the place
is full of music, and a great hush falls on the audience, and the poor complacent amateurs
realise that the noise they have been making was, after all, not music; and they go dumbly
home. But they have forgotten all about it by the following year; or a fresh contingent of
willing performers steps into the breach. The duchess's little joke always comes off."

"The Honourable Jane does not approve of it," said young Ronald Ingram; "therefore she is generally
given marching orders and departs to her next visit before the event. But no one can accompany
Madame Velma so perfectly, so this time she is commanded to stay. But I doubt if the 'surprise
packet' will come off with quite such a shock as usual, and I am certain the fun won't be so
good afterwards. The Honourable Jane has been known to jump on the duchess for that sort of
thing. She is safe to get the worst of it at the time, but it has a restraining effect afterwards."

"I think Miss Champion is quite right," said a bright-faced American girl, bravely, holding
a gold spoon poised for a moment over the strawberry ice-cream with which Garth Dalmain had
supplied her.

"In my country we should call it real mean to laugh, at people who had been our guests and
performed in our houses."

"In your country, my dear," said Myra Ingleby, "you have no duchesses."

"Well, we supply you with quite a good few," replied the American girl calmly, and went on
with her ice.

A general laugh followed; and the latest Anglo-American match came up for discussion.

"Where is the Honourable Jane?" inquired someone presently.

"Golfing with Billy," said Ronald Ingram. "Ah, here they come."

Jane's tall figure was seen, walking along the terrace, accompanied by Billy Cathcart, talking
eagerly. They put their clubs away in the lower hall; then came down the lawn together to the
tea-tables.

Jane wore a tailor-made coat and skirt of grey tweed, a blue and white cambric shirt, starched
linen collar and cuffs, a silk tie, and a soft felt hat with a few black quills in it. She
walked with the freedom of movement and swing of limb which indicate great strength and a body
well under control. Her appearance was extraordinarily unlike that of all the pretty and graceful
women grouped beneath the cedar tree. And yet it was in no sense masculine--or, to use a more
appropriate word, mannish; for everything strong is masculine; but a woman who apes an appearance
of strength which she does not possess, is mannish;--rather was it so truly feminine that she
could afford to adopt a severe simplicity of attire, which suited admirably the decided plainness
of her features, and the almost massive proportions of her figure.

She stepped into the circle beneath the cedar, and took one of the half-dozen places immediately
vacated by the men, with the complete absence of self-consciousness which always characterised her.

"What did you go round in, Miss Champion?" inquired one of the men.

"My ordinary clothes," replied Jane; quoting Punch, and evading the question.

But Billy burst out: "She went round in--"

"Oh, be quiet, Billy," interposed Jane. "You and I are practically the only golf maniacs present.
Most of these dear people are even ignorant as to who 'bogie' is, or why we should be so proud
of beating him. Where is my aunt? Poor Simmons was toddling all over the place when we went
in to put away our clubs, searching for her with a telegram."

"Why didn't you open it?" asked Myra.

"Because my aunt never allows her telegrams to be opened. She loves shocks; and there is always
the possibility of a telegram containing startling news. She says it completely spoils it if
some one else knows it first, and breaks it to her gently."

"Here comes the duchess," said Garth Dalmain, who was sitting where he could see the little
gate into the rose-garden.

"Do not mention the telegram," cautioned Jane. "It would not please her that I should even
know of its arrival. It would be a shame to take any of the bloom off the unexpected delight
of a wire on this hot day, when nothing unusual seemed likely to happen."

They turned and looked towards the duchess as she bustled across the lawn; this quaint old
figure, who had called them together; who owned the lovely place where they were spending such
delightful days; and whose odd whimsicalities had been so freely discussed while they drank
her tea and feasted off her strawberries. The men rose as she approached, but not quite so
spontaneously as they had done for her niece.

The duchess carried a large wooden basket filled to overflowing with exquisite roses. Every
bloom was perfect, and each had been cut at exactly the right moment.

CHAPTER IV

JANE VOLUNTEERS

The duchess plumped down her basket in the middle of the strawberry table.

"There, good people!" she said, rather breathlessly. "Help yourselves, and let me see you all
wearing roses to-night. And the concert-room is to be a bower of roses. We will call it 'LA
FETE DES ROSES.' ... No, thank you, Ronnie. That tea has been made half an hour at least, and
you ought to love me too well to press it upon me. Besides, I never take tea. I have a whiskey
and soda when I wake from my nap, and that sustains me until dinner. Oh yes, my dear Myra,
I know I came to your interesting meeting, and signed that excellent pledge 'POUR ENCOURAGER
LES AUTRES'; but I drove straight to my doctor when I left your house, and he gave me a certificate
to say I MUST take something when I needed it; and I always need it when I wake from my nap....
Really, Dal, it is positively wicked for any man, off the stage, to look as picturesque as
you do, in that pale violet shirt, and dark violet tie, and those white flannels. If I were
your grandmother I should send you in to take them off. If you turn the heads of old dowagers
such as I am, what chance have all these chickens? ... Hush, Tommy! That was a very naughty
word! And you need not be jealous of Dal. I admire you still more. Dal, will you paint my scarlet
macaw?"

The young artist, whose portraits in that year's Academy had created much interest in the artistic
world, and whose violet shirt had just been so severely censured, lay back in his lounge-chair,
with his arms behind his head and a gleam of amusement in his bright brown eyes.

"No, dear Duchess," he said. "I beg respectfully to decline the commission, Tommy would require
a Landseer to do full justice to his attitudes and expression. Besides, it would be demoralising
to an innocent and well-brought-up youth, such as you know me to be, to spend long hours in
Tommy's society, listening to the remarks that sweet bird would make while I painted him. But
I will tell you what I will do. I will paint you, dear Duchess, only not in that hat! Ever
since I was quite a small boy, a straw hat with black ribbons tied under the chin has made
me feel ill. If I yielded to my natural impulses now, I should hide my face in Miss Champion's
lap, and kick and scream until you took it off. I will paint you in the black velvet gown you
wore last night, with the Medici collar; and the jolly arrangement of lace and diamonds on
your head. And in your hand you shall hold an antique crystal mirror, mounted in silver."

The artist half closed his eyes, and as he described his picture in a voice full of music and
mystery, an attentive hush fell upon the gay group around him. When Garth Dalmain described
his pictures, people saw them. When they walked into the Academy or the New Gallery the following
year, they would say: "Ah, there it is! just as we saw it that day, before a stroke of it was
on the canvas."

"In your left hand, you shall hold the mirror, but you shall not be looking into it; because
you never look into mirrors, dear Duchess, excepting to see whether the scolding you are giving
your maid, as she stands behind you, is making her cry; and whether that is why she is being
so clumsy in her manipulation of pins and things. If it is, you promptly promise her a day
off, to go and see her old mother; and pay her journey there and back. If it isn't, you scold
her some more. Were I the maid, I should always cry, large tears warranted to show in the glass;
only I should not sniff, because sniffing is so intensely aggravating; and I should be most
frightfully careful that my tears did not run down your neck."

"Dal, you ridiculous CHILD!" said the duchess. "Leave off talking about my maids, and my neck,
and your crocodile tears, and finish describing the portrait. What do I do, with the mirror?"

"You do not look into it," continued Garth Dalmain, meditatively; "because we KNOW that is
a thing you never do. Even when you put on that hat, and tie those ribbons--Miss Champion,
I wish you would hold my hand--in a bow under your chin, you don't consult the mirror. But
you shall sit with it in your left hand, your elbow resting on an Eastern table of black ebony
inlaid with mother-of-pearl. You will turn it from you, so that it reflects something exactly
in front of you in the imaginary foreground. You will be looking at this unseen object with
an expression of sublime affection. And in the mirror I will paint a vivid, brilliant, complete
reflection, minute, but perfect in every detail, of your scarlet macaw on his perch. We will
call it 'Reflections,' because one must always give a silly up-to-date title to pictures, and
just now one nondescript word is the fashion, unless you feel it needful to attract to yourself
the eye of the public, in the catalogue, by calling your picture twenty lines of Tennyson.
But when the portrait goes down to posterity as a famous picture, it will figure in the catalogue
of the National Gallery as 'The Duchess, the Mirror, and the Macaw.'"

"Bravo!" said the duchess, delighted. "You shall paint it, Dal, in time for next year's Academy,
and we will all go and see it."

And he did. And they all went. And when they saw it they said: "Ah, of course! There it is;
just as we saw it under the cedar at Overdene."

"Here comes Simmons with something on a salver," exclaimed the duchess. "How that man waddles!
Why can't somebody teach him to step out? Jane! You march across this lawn like a grenadier.
Can't you explain to Simmons how it's done? ... Well? What is it? Ha! A telegram. Now what
horrible thing can have happened? Who would like to guess? I hope it is not merely some idiot
who has missed a train."

Amid a breathless and highly satisfactory silence, the duchess tore open the orange envelope.

Apparently the shock was of a thorough, though not enjoyable, kind; for the duchess, at all
times highly coloured, became purple as she read, and absolutely inarticulate with indignation.
Jane rose quietly, looked over her aunt's shoulder, read the long message, and returned to
her seat.

"Creature!" exclaimed the duchess, at last. "Oh, creature! This comes of asking them as friends.
And I had a lovely string of pearls for her, worth far more than she would have been offered,
professionally, for one song. And to fail at the last minute! Oh, CREATURE!"

"Dear aunt," said Jane, "if poor Madame Velma has a sudden attack of laryngitis, she could
not possibly sing a note, even had the Queen commanded her. Her telegram is full of regrets."

"Don't argue, Jane!" exclaimed the duchess, crossly. "And don't drag in the Queen, who has
nothing to do with my concert or Velma's throat. I do abominate irrelevance, and you know it!
WHY must she have her what--do--you--call--it, just when she was coming to sing here? In my
young days people never had these new-fangled complaints. I have no patience with all this
appendicitis and what not--cutting people open at every possible excuse. In my young days we
called it a good old-fashioned stomach-ache, and gave them Turkey rhubarb!"

Myra Ingleby hid her face behind her garden hat; and Garth Dalmain whispered to Jane: "I do
abominate irrelevance, and you know it!" But Jane shook her head at him, and refused to smile.

"Tommy wants a gooseberry!" shouted the macaw, having apparently noticed the mention of rhubarb.

"Oh, give it him, somebody!" said the worried duchess.

"Dear aunt," said Jane, "there are no gooseberries."

"Don't argue, girl!" cried the duchess, furiously; and Garth, delighted, shook his head at
Jane. "When he says 'gooseberry,' he means anything GREEN, as you very well know!"

Half a dozen people hastened to Tommy with lettuce, water-cress, and cucumber sandwiches; and
Garth picked one blade of grass, and handed it to Jane; with an air of anxious solicitude;
but Jane ignored it.

"No answer, Simmons," said the duchess. "Why don't you go? ... Oh, how that man waddles! Teach
him to walk, somebody! Now the question is, What is to be done? Here is half the county coming
to hear Velma, by my invitation; and Velma in London pretending to have appendicitis--no, I
mean the other thing. Oh, 'drat the woman!' as that clever bird would say."

"Hold your jaw!" shouted Tommy. The duchess smiled, and consented to sit down.

"But, dear Duchess," suggested Garth in his most soothing voice, "the county does not know
Madame Velma was to be here. It was a profound secret. You were to trot her out at the end.
Lady Ingleby called her your 'surprise packet.'"

Myra came out from behind her garden hat, and the duchess nodded at her approvingly.

"Quite true," she said. "That was the lovely part of it. Oh, creature!"

"But, dear Duchess," pursued Garth persuasively, "if the county did not know, the county will
not be disappointed. They are coming to listen to one another, and to hear themselves, and
to enjoy your claret-cup and ices. All this they will do, and go away delighted, saying how
cleverly the dear duchess, discovers and exploits local talent."

"Ah, ha!" said the duchess, with a gleam in the hawk eye, and a raising of the hooked nose-which
Mrs. Parker Bangs of Chicago, who had met the duchess once or twice, described as "genuine
Plantagenet"--"but they will go away wise in their own conceits, and satisfied with their own
mediocre performances. My idea is to let them do it, and then show them how it should be done."

"But Aunt 'Gina," said Jane, gently; "surely you forget that most of these people have been
to town and heard plenty of good music, Madame Velma herself most likely, and all the great
singers. They know they cannot sing like a prima donna; but they do their anxious best, because
you ask them. I cannot see that they require an object lesson."

"Jane," said the duchess, "for the third time this afternoon I must request you not to argue."

"Miss Champion," said Garth Dalmain, "if I were your grandmamma, I should send you to bed."

"What is to be done?" reiterated the duchess. "She was to sing THE ROSARY. I had set my heart
on it. The whole decoration of the room is planned to suit that song--festoons of white roses;
and a great red-cross at the back of the platform, made entirely of crimson ramblers. Jane!"

"Yes, aunt."

"Oh, don't say 'Yes, aunt,' in that senseless way! Can't you make some suggestion?"

"Drat the woman!" exclaimed Tommy, suddenly.

"Hark to that sweet bird!" cried the duchess, her good humour fully restored. "Give him a strawberry,
somebody. Now, Jane, what do you suggest?"

Jane Champion was seated with her broad back half turned to her aunt, one knee crossed over
the other, her large, capable hands clasped round it. She loosed her hands, turned slowly round,
and looked into the keen eyes peering at her from under the mushroom hat. As she read the half-resentful,
half-appealing demand in them, a slow smile dawned in her own. She waited a moment to make
sure of the duchess's meaning, then said quietly: "I will sing THE ROSARY for you, in Velma's
place, to-night, if you really wish it, aunt."

Had the gathering under the tree been a party of "mere people," it would have gasped. Had it
been a "freak party," it would have been loud-voiced in its expressions of surprise. Being
a "best party," it gave no outward sign; but a sense of blank astonishment, purely mental,
was in the air. The duchess herself was the only person present who had heard Jane Champion sing.

"Have you the song?" asked her Grace of Meldrum, rising, and picking up her telegram and empty
basket.

"I have," said Jane. "I spent a few hours with Madame Blanche when I was in town last month;
and she, who so rarely admires these modern songs, was immensely taken with it. She sang it,
and allowed me to accompany her. We spent nearly an hour over it. I obtained a copy afterwards."

"Good," said the duchess. "Then I count on you. Now I must send a sympathetic telegram to that
poor dear Velma, who will be fretting at having to fail us. So 'au revoir,' good people. Remember,
we dine punctually at eight o'clock. Music is supposed to begin at nine. Ronnie, be a kind
boy, and carry Tommy into the hall for me. He will screech so fearfully if he sees me walk
away without him. He is so very loving, dear bird!"

Silence under the cedar.

Most people were watching young Ronald, holding the stand as much at arm's length as possible;
while Tommy, keeping his balance wonderfully, sidled up close to him, evidently making confidential
remarks into Ronnie's terrified ear. The duchess walked on before, quite satisfied with the
new turn events had taken.

One or two people were watching Jane.

"It is very brave of you," said Myra Ingleby, at length. "I would offer to play your accompaniment,
dear; but I can only manage Au clair de la lune, and Three Blind Mice, with one finger."

"And I would offer to play your accompaniment, dear," said Garth Dalmain, "if you were going
to sing Lassen's Allerseelen, for I play that quite beautifully with ten fingers! It is an
education only to hear the way I bring out the tolling of the cemetery chapel bell right through
the song. The poor thing with the bunch of purple heather can never get away from it. Even
in the grand crescendo, appassionata, fortissimo, when they discover that 'in death's dark
valley this is Holy Day,' I give then no holiday from that bell. I don't know what it did 'once
in May.' It tolls all the time, with maddening persistence, in my accompaniment. But I have
seen The Rosary, and I dare not face those chords. To begin with, you start in every known
flat; and before you have gone far you have gathered unto yourself handfuls of known and unknown
sharps, to which you cling, not daring to let them go, lest they should be wanted again the
next moment. Alas, no! When it is a question of accompanying The Rosary, I must say, as the
old farmer at the tenants' dinner the other day said to the duchess when she pressed upon him
a third helping of pudding: 'Madam, I CANNOT!'"

"Don't be silly, Dal," said Jane. "You could accompany The Rosary perfectly, if I wanted it
done. But, as it happens, I prefer accompanying myself."

"Ah," said Lady Ingleby, sympathetically, "I quite understand that. It would be such a relief
all the time to know that if things seemed going wrong, you could stop the other part, and
give yourself the note."

The only two real musicians present glanced at each other, and a gleam of amusement passed
between them.

"It certainly would be useful, if necessary," said Jane.

"I would 'stop the other part' and 'give you the note,'" said Garth, demurely.

"I am sure you would," said Jane. "You are always so very kind. But I prefer to keep the matter
in my own hands."

"You realise the difficulty of making the voice carry in a place of that size unless you can
stand and face the audience?" Garth Dalmain spoke anxiously. Jane was a special friend of his,
and he had a man's dislike of the idea of his chum failing in anything, publicly.

The same quiet smile dawned in Jane's eyes and passed to her lips as when she had realised
that her aunt meant her to volunteer in Velma's place. She glanced around. Most of the party
had wandered off in twos and threes, some to the house, others back to the river. She and Dal
and Myra were practically alone. Her calm eyes were full of quiet amusement as she steadfastly
met the anxious look in Garth's, and answered his question.

"Yes, I know. But the acoustic properties of the room are very perfect, and I have learned
to throw my voice. Perhaps you may not know--in fact, how should you know?--but I have had
the immense privilege of studying with Madame Marchesi in Paris, and of keeping up to the mark
since by an occasional delightful hour with her no less gifted daughter in London. So I ought
to know all there is to know about the management of a voice, if I have at all adequately availed
myself of such golden opportunities."

These quiet words were Greek to Myra, conveying no more to her mind than if Jane had said:
"I have been learning Tonic sol-fa." In fact, not quite so much, seeing that Lady Ingleby had
herself once tried to master the Tonic sol-fa system in order to instruct her men and maids
in part-singing. It was at a time when she owned a distinctly musical household. The second
footman possessed a fine barytone. The butler could "do a little bass," which is to say that,
while the other parts soared to higher regions, he could stay on the bottom note if carefully
placed there, and told to remain. The head housemaid sang what she called "seconds"; in other
words, she followed along, slightly behind the trebles as regarded time, and a major third
below them as regarded pitch. The housekeeper, a large, dark person with a fringe on her upper
lip, unshaven and unashamed, produced a really remarkable effect by singing the air an octave
below the trebles. Unfortunately Lady Ingleby was apt to confuse her with the butler. Myra
herself was the first to admit that she had not "much ear"; but it was decidedly trying, at
a moment when she dared not remove her eyes from the accompaniment of Good King Wenceslas,
to have called out: "Stay where you are, Jenkins!" and then find it was Mrs. Jarvis who had
been travelling upwards. But when a new footman, engaged by Lord Ingleby with no reference
to his musical gifts, chanced to possess a fine throaty tenor, Myra felt she really had material
with which great things might be accomplished, and decided herself to learn the Tonic sol-fa
system. She easily mastered mi, re, do, and so, fa, fa, mi, because these represented the opening
lines of Three Blind Mice, always a musical landmark to Myra. But when it came to the fugue-like
intricacies in the theme of "They all ran after the farmer's wife," Lady Ingleby was lost without
the words to cling to, and gave up the Tonic sol-fa system in despair.

So the name of the greatest teacher of singing of this age did not convey much to Myra's mind.
But Garth Dalmain sat up.

"I say! No wonder you take it coolly. Why, Velma herself was a pupil of the great madame."

"That is how it happens that I know her rather well," said Jane. "I am here to-day because
I was to have played her accompaniment."

"I see," said Garth. "And now you have to do both. 'Land's sake!' as Mrs. Parker Bangs says
when you explain who's who at a Marlborough House garden party. But you prefer playing other
people's accompaniments, to singing yourself, don't you?"

Jane's slow smile dawned again.

"I prefer singing," she said, "but accompanying is more useful."

"Of course it is," said Garth. "Heaps of people can sing a little, but very few can accompany
properly."

"Jane," said Myra, her grey eyes looking out lazily from under their long black lashes, "if
you have had singing lessons, and know some songs, why hasn't the duchess turned you on to
sing to us before this?"

"For a sad reason," Jane replied. "You know her only son died eight years ago? He was such
a handsome, talented fellow. He and I inherited our love of music from our grandfather. My
cousin got into a musical set at college, studied with enthusiasm, and wanted to take it up
professionally. He had promised, one Christmas vacation, to sing at a charity concert in town,
and went out, when only just recovering from influenza, to fulfil this engagement. He had a
relapse, double pneumonia set in, and he died in five days from heart failure. My poor aunt
was frantic with grief; and since then any mention of my love of music makes her very bitter.
I, too, wanted to take it up professionally, but she put her foot down heavily. I scarcely
ever venture to sing or play here."

"Why not elsewhere?" asked Garth Dalmain. "We have stayed about at the same houses, and I had
not the faintest idea you sang."

"I do not know," said Jane slowly. "But--music means so much to me. It is a sort of holy of
holies in the tabernacle of one's inner being. And it is not easy to lift the veil."

"The veil will be lifted to-night," said Myra Ingleby.

"Yes," agreed Jane, smiling a little ruefully, "I suppose it will."

"And we shall pass in," said Garth Dalmain.

CHAPTER V

CONFIDENCES

The shadows silently lengthened on the lawn.

The home-coming rooks circled and cawed around the tall elm trees.

The sun-dial pointed to six o'clock.

Myra Ingleby rose and stood with the slanting rays of the sun full in her eyes, her arms stretched
over her head. The artist noted every graceful line of her willowy figure.

"Ah, bah!" she yawned. "It is so perfect out here, and I must go in to my maid. Jane, be advised
in time. Do not ever begin facial massage. You become a slave to it, and it takes up hours
of your day. Look at me."

They were both looking already. Myra was worth looking at.

"For ordinary dressing purposes, I need not have gone in until seven; and now I must lose this
last, perfect hour."

"What happens?" asked Jane. "I know nothing of the process."

"I can't go into details," replied Lady Ingleby, "but you know how sweet I have looked all
day? Well, if I did not go to my maid now, I should look less sweet by the end of dinner, and
at the close of the evening I should appear ten years older."

"You would always look sweet," said Jane, with frank sincerity; "and why mind looking the age
you are?"

"My dear, 'a man is as old as he feels; a woman is as old as she looks,'" quoted Myra.

"I FEEL just seven," said Garth.

"And you LOOK seventeen," laughed Myra.

"And I AM twenty-seven," retorted Garth; "so the duchess should not call me 'a ridiculous child.'
And, dear lady, if curtailing this mysterious process is going to make you one whit less lovely
to-night, I do beseech you to hasten to your maid, or you will spoil my whole evening. I shall
burst into tears at dinner, and the duchess hates scenes, as you very well know!"

Lady Ingleby flapped him with her garden hat as she passed.

"Be quiet, you ridiculous child!" she said. "You had no business to listen to what I was saying
to Jane. You shall paint me this autumn. And after that I will give up facial massage, and
go abroad, and come back quite old."

She flung this last threat over her shoulder as she trailed away across the lawn.

"How lovely she is!" commented Garth, gazing after her. "How much of that was true, do you
suppose, Miss Champion?"

"I have not the slightest idea," replied Jane. "I am completely ignorant on the subject of
facial massage."

"Not much, I should think," continued Garth, "or she would not have told us."

"Ah, you are wrong there," replied Jane, quickly. "Myra is extraordinarily honest, and always
inclined to be frank about herself and her foibles. She had a curious upbringing. She is one
of a large family, and was always considered the black sheep, not so much by her brothers and
sisters, as by her mother. Nothing she was, or said, or did, was ever right. When Lord Ingleby
met her, and I suppose saw her incipient possibilities, she was a tall, gawky girl, with lovely
eyes, a sweet, sensitive mouth, and a what-on-earth-am-I-going-to-do-next expression on her
face. He was twenty years her senior, but fell most determinedly in love with her and, though
her mother pressed upon him all her other daughters in turn, he would have Myra or nobody.
When he proposed to her it was impossible at first to make her understand what he meant. His
meaning dawned on her at length, and he was not kept waiting long for her answer. I have often
heard him tease her about it. She looked at him with an adorable smile, her eyes brimming over
with tears, and said: 'Why, of course. I'll marry you GRATEFULLY, and I think it is perfectly
sweet of you to like me. But what a blow for mamma!' They were married with as little delay
as possible, and he took her off to Paris, Italy, and Egypt, had six months abroad, and brought
her back--this! I was staying with them once, and her mother was also there. We were sitting
in the morning room,--no men, just half a dozen women,--and her mother began finding fault
about something, and said: 'Has not Lord Ingleby often told you of it?' Myra looked up in her
sweet, lazy way and answered: 'Dear mamma, I know it must seem strange to you, but, do you
know, my husband thinks everything I do perfect.' 'Your husband is a fool!' snapped her mother.
'From YOUR point of view, dear mamma,' said Myra, sweetly."

"Old curmudgeon!" remarked Garth. "Why are people of that sort allowed to be called 'mothers'?
We, who have had tender, perfect mothers, would like to make it law that the other kind should
always be called 'she-parents,' or 'female progenitors,' or any other descriptive title, but
not profane the sacred name of mother!"

Jane was silent. She knew the beautiful story of Garth's boyhood with his widowed mother. She
knew his passionate adoration of her sainted memory. She liked him best when she got a glimpse
beneath the surface, and did not wish to check his mood by reminding him that she herself had
never even lisped that name.

Garth rose from his chair and stretched his slim figure in the slanting sun-rays, much as Myra
had done. Jane looked at him. As is often the case with plain people, great physical beauty
appealed to her strongly. She only allowed to that appeal its right proportion in her estimation
of her friends. Garth Dalmain by no means came first among her particular chums. He was older
than most of them, and yet in some ways younger than any, and his remarkable youthfulness of
manner and exuberance of spirits sometimes made him appear foolish to Jane, whose sense of
humour was of a more sedate kind. But of the absolute perfection of his outward appearance,
there was no question; and Jane looked at him now, much as his own mother might have looked,
with honest admiration in her kind eyes.

Garth, notwithstanding the pale violet shirt and dark violet tie, was quite unconscious of
his own appearance; and, dazzled by the golden sunlight, was also unconscious of Jane's look.

"Oh, I say, Miss Champion!" he cried, boyishly. "Isn't it nice that they have all gone in?
I have been wanting a good jaw with you. Really, when we all get together we do drivel sometimes,
to keep the ball rolling. It is like patting up air-balls; and very often they burst, and one
realises that an empty, shrivelled little skin is all that is left after most conversations.
Did you ever buy air-balls at Brighton? Do you remember the wild excitement of seeing the man
coming along the parade, with a huge bunch of them--blue, green, red, white, and yellow, all
shining in the sun? And one used to wonder how he ever contrived to pick them all up--I don't
know how!--and what would happen if he put them all down. I always knew exactly which one I
wanted, and it was generally on a very inside string and took a long time to disentangle. And
how maddening it was if the grown-ups grew tired of waiting, and walked on with the penny.
Only I would rather have had none, than not have the one on which I had fixed my heart. Wouldn't
you?"

"I never bought air-balls at Brighton," replied Jane, without enthusiasm. Garth was feeling
seven again, and Jane was feeling bored.

For once he seemed conscious of this. He took his coat from the back of the chair where he
had hung it, and put it on.

"Come along, Miss Champion," he said; "I am so tired of doing nothing. Let us go down to the
river and find a boat or two. Dinner is not until eight o'clock, and I am certain you can dress,
even for the ROLE of Velma, in half an hour. I have known you do it in ten minutes, at a pinch.
There is ample time for me to row you within sight of the minster, and we can talk as we go.
Ah, fancy! the grey old minster with this sunset behind it, and a field of cowslips in the
foreground!"

But Jane did not rise.

"My dear Dal," she said, "you would not feel much enthusiasm for the minster or the sunset,
after you had pulled my twelve stone odd up the river. You would drop exhausted among the cowslips.
Surely you might know by now that I am not the sort of person to be told off to sit in the
stern of a tiny skiff and steer. If I am in a boat, I like to row; and if I row, I prefer rowing
stroke. But I do not want to row now, because I have been playing golf the whole afternoon.
And you know perfectly well it would be no pleasure to you to have to gaze at me all the way
up and all the way down the river; knowing all the time, that I was mentally criticising your
stroke and marking the careless way you feathered."

Garth sat down, lay back in his chair, with his arms behind his sleek dark head, and looked
at her with his soft shining eyes, just as he had looked at the duchess.

"How cross you are, old chap," he said, gently. "What is the matter?"

Jane laughed and held out her hand. "Oh, you dear boy! I think you have the sweetest temper
in the world. I won't be cross any more. The truth is, I hate the duchess's concerts, and I
don't like being the duchess's 'surprise-packet.'"

"I see," said Garth, sympathetically. "But, that being so, why did you offer?"

"Ah, I had to," said Jane. "Poor old dear! She so rarely asks me anything, and her eyes besought.
Don't you know how one longs to have something to do for some one who belongs to one? I would
black her boots if she wished it. But it is so hard to stay here, week after week, and be kept
at arm's length. This one thing she asked of me, and her proud old eyes pleaded. Could I refuse?"

Garth was all sympathy. "No, dear," he said thoughtfully; "of course you couldn't. And don't
bother over that silly joke about the 'surprise packet.' You see, you won't be that. I have
no doubt you sing vastly better than most of them, but they will not realise it. It takes a
Velma to make such people as these sit up. They will think THE ROSARY a pretty song, and give
you a mild clap, and there the thing will end. So don't worry."

Jane sat and considered this. Then: "Dal," she said, "I do hate singing before that sort of
audience. It is like giving them your soul to look at, and you don't want them to see it. It
seems indecent. To my mind, music is the most REVEALING thing in the world. I shiver when I
think of that song, and yet I daren't do less than my best. When the moment comes, I shall
live in the song, and forget the audience. Let me tell you a lesson I once had from Madame
Blanche. I was singing Bemberg's CHANT HINDOU, the passionate prayer of an Indian woman to
Brahma. I began: 'BRAHMA! DIEU DES CROYANTS,' and sang it as I might have sung 'DO, RE, MI.'
Brahma was nothing to me. 'Stop!' cried Madame Blanche in her most imperious manner. 'Ah, vous
Anglais! What are you doing? BRAHMA, c'est un Dieu! He may not be YOUR God. He may not be MY
God. But he is somebody's God. He is the God of the song. Ecoutez!' And she lifted her head
and sang: 'Brahma! Dieu des croyants! Maitre des cites saintes!' with her beautiful brow illumined,
and a passion of religious fervour which thrilled one's soul. It was a lesson I never forgot.
I can honestly say I have never sung a song tamely, since."

"Fine!" said Garth Dalmain. "I like enthusiasm in every branch of art. I never care to paint
a portrait, unless I adore the woman I am painting."

Jane smiled. The conversation was turning exactly the way she had hoped eventually to lead it.

"Dal, dear," she said, "you adore so many in turn, that we old friends, who have your real
interest at heart, fear you will never adore to any definite purpose."

Garth laughed. "Oh bother!" he said. "Are you like all the rest? Do you also think adoration
and admiration must necessarily mean marriage. I should have expected you to take a saner and
more masculine view."

"My dear boy," said Jane, "your friends have decided that you need a wife. You are alone in
the world. You have a lovely home. You are in a fair way to be spoiled by all the silly women
who run after you. Of course we are perfectly aware that your wife must have every incomparable
beauty under the sun united in her own exquisite person. But each new divinity you see and
paint apparently fulfils, for the time being, this wondrous ideal; and, perhaps, if you wedded
one, instead of painting her, she might continue permanently to fulfil it."

Garth considered this in silence, his level brows knitted. At last he said: "Beauty is so much
a thing of the surface. I see it, and admire it. I desire it, and paint it. When I have painted
it, I have made it my own, and somehow I find I have done with it. All the time I am painting
a woman, I am seeking for her soul. I want to express it on my canvas; and do you know, Miss
Champion, I find that a lovely woman does not always have a lovely soul."

Jane was silent. The last things she wished to discuss were other women's souls.

"There is just one who seems to me perfect," continued Garth. "I am to paint her this autumn.
I believe I shall find her soul as exquisite as her body."

"And she is--?" inquired Jane.

"Lady Brand."

"Flower!" exclaimed Jane. "Are YOU so taken with Flower?"

"Ah, she is lovely," said Garth, with reverent enthusiasm. "It positively is not right for
any one to be so absolutely flawlessly lovely. It makes me ache. Do you know that feeling,
Miss Champion, of perfect loveliness making you ache?"

"No, I don't," said Jane, shortly. "And I do not think other people's wives ought to have that
effect upon you."

"My dear old chap," exclaimed Garth, astonished; "it has nothing to do with wives or no wives.
A wood of bluebells in morning sunshine would have precisely the same effect. I ache to paint
her. When I have painted her and really done justice to that matchless loveliness as I see
it, I shall feel all right. At present I have only painted her from memory; but she is to sit
to me in October."

"From memory?" questioned Jane.

"Yes, I paint a great deal from memory. Give me one look of a certain kind at a face, let me
see it at a moment which lets one penetrate beneath the surface, and I can paint that face
from memory weeks after. Lots of my best studies have been done that way. Ah, the delight of
it! Beauty--the worship of beauty is to me a religion."

"Rather a godless form of religion," suggested Jane.

"Ah no," said Garth reverently. "All true beauty comes from God, and leads back to God. 'Every
good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights.'
I once met an old freak who said all sickness came from the devil. I never could believe that,
for my mother was an invalid during the last years of her life, and I can testify that her
sickness was a blessing to many, and borne to the glory of God. But I am, convinced all true
beauty is God-given, and that is why the worship of beauty is to me a religion. Nothing bad
was ever truly beautiful; nothing good is ever really ugly."

Jane smiled as she watched him, lying back in the golden sunlight, the very personification
of manly beauty. The absolute lack of self-consciousness, either for himself or for her, which
allowed him to talk thus to the plainest woman of his acquaintance, held a vein of humour which
diverted Jane. It appealed to her more than buying coloured air-balls, or screaming because
the duchess wore a mushroom hat.

"Then are plain people to be denied their share of goodness, Dal?" she asked.

"Plainness is not ugliness," replied Garth Dalmain simply. "I learned that when quite a small
boy. My mother took me to hear a famous preacher. As he sat on the platform during the preliminaries
he seemed to me quite the ugliest man I had ever seen. He reminded me of a grotesque gorilla,
and I dreaded the moment when he should rise up and face us and give out a text. It seemed
to me there ought to be bars between, and that we should want to throw nuts and oranges. But
when he rose to speak, his face was transfigured. Goodness and inspiration shone from it, making
it as the face of an angel. I never again thought him ugly. The beauty of his soul shone through,
transfiguring his body. Child though I was, I could differentiate even then between ugliness
and plainness. When he sat down at the close of his magnificent sermon, I no longer thought
him a complicated form of chimpanzee. I remembered the divine halo of his smile. Of course
his actual plainness of feature remained. It was not the sort of face one could have wanted
to live with, or to have day after day opposite to one at table. But then one was not called
to that sort of discipline, which would have been martyrdom to me. And he has always stood
to my mind since as a proof of the truth that goodness is never ugly; and that divine love
and aspiration shining through the plainest features may redeem them temporarily into beauty;
and, permanently, into a thing one loves to remember."

"I see," said Jane. "It must have often helped you to a right view to have realised that so
long ago. But now let us return to the important question of the face which you ARE to have
daily opposite you at table. It cannot be Lady Brand's, nor can it be Myra's; but, you know,
Dal, a very lovely one is being suggested for the position."

"No names, please," said Garth, quickly. "I object to girls' names being mentioned in this
sort of conversation."

"Very well, dear boy. I understand and respect your objection. You have made her famous already
by your impressionist portrait of her, and I hear you are to do a more elaborate picture 'in
the fall.' Now, Dal, you know you admire her immensely. She is lovely, she is charming, she
hails from the land whose women, when they possess charm, unite with it a freshness and a piquancy
which place them beyond compare. In some ways you are so unique yourself that you ought to
have a wife with a certain amount of originality. Now, I hardly know how far the opinion of
your friends would influence you in such a matter, but you may like to hear how fully they
approve your very open allegiance to--shall we say--the beautiful 'Stars and Stripes'?"

Garth Dalmain took out his cigarette case, carefully selected a cigarette, and sat with it
between his fingers in absorbed contemplation.

"Smoke," said Jane.

"Thanks," said Garth. He struck a match and very deliberately lighted his cigarette. As he
flung away the vesta the breeze caught it and it fell on the lawn, flaming brightly. Garth
sprang up and extinguished it, then drew his chair more exactly opposite to Jane's and lay
back, smoking meditatively, and watching the little rings he blew, mount into the cedar branches,
expand, fade, and vanish.

Jane was watching him. The varied and characteristic ways in which her friends lighted and
smoked their cigarettes always interested Jane. There were at least a dozen young men of whom
she could have given the names upon hearing a description of their method. Also, she had learned
from Deryck Brand the value of silences in an important conversation, and the art of not weakening
a statement by a postscript.

At last Garth spoke.

"I wonder why the smoke is that lovely pale blue as it curls up from the cigarette, and a greyish-white
if one blows it out."

Jane knew it was because it had become impregnated with moisture, but she did not say so, having
no desire to contribute her quota of pats to this air-ball, or to encourage the superficial
workings of his mind just then. She quietly awaited the response to her appeal to his deeper
nature which she felt certain would be forthcoming. Presently it came.

"It is awfully good of you, Miss Champion, to take the trouble to think all this and to say
it to me. May I prove my gratitude by explaining for once where my difficulty lies? I have
scarcely defined it to myself, and yet I believe I can express it to you." Another long silence.
Garth smoked and pondered.

Jane waited. It was a very comprehending, very companionable silence. Garth found himself parodying
the last lines of an old sixteenth-century song:

    "Then ever pray that heaven may send
     Such weeds, such chairs, and such a friend."

Either the cigarette, or the chair, or Jane, or perhaps all three combined were producing in
him a sublime sense of calm, and rest, and well-being; an uplifting of spirit which made all
good things seem better; all difficult things, easy; and all ideals, possible. The silence,
like the sunset, was golden; but at last he broke it.

"Two women--the only two women who have ever really been in my life--form for me a standard
below which I cannot fall,--one, my mother, a sacred and ideal memory; the other, old Margery
Graem, my childhood's friend and nurse, now my housekeeper and general tender and mender. Her
faithful heart and constant remembrance help to keep me true to the ideal of that sweet presence
which faded from beside me when I stood on the threshold of manhood. Margery lives at Castle
Gleneesh. When I return home, the sight which first meets my eyes as the hall door opens is
old Margery in her black satin apron, lawn kerchief, and lavender ribbons. I always feel seven
then, and I always hug her. You, Miss Champion, don't like me when I feel seven; but Margery
does. Now, this is what I want you to realise. When I bring a bride to Gleneesh and present
her to Margery, the kind old eyes will try to see nothing but good; the faithful old heart
will yearn to love and serve. And yet I shall know she knows the standard, just as I know it;
I shall know she remembers the ideal of gentle, tender, Christian womanhood, just as I remember
it; and I must not, I dare not, fall short. Believe me, Miss Champion, more than once, when
physical attraction has been strong, and I have been tempted in the worship of the outward
loveliness to disregard or forget the essentials,--the things which are unseen but eternal,--then,
all unconscious of exercising any such influence, old Margery's clear eyes look into mine,
old Margery's mittened hand seems to rest upon my coat sleeve, and the voice which has guided
me from infancy, says, in gentle astonishment: `Is this your choice, Master Garthie, to fill
my dear lady's place?' No doubt, Miss Champion, it will seem almost absurd to you when you
think of our set and our sentiments, and the way we racket round that I should sit here on
the duchess's lawn and confess that I have been held back from proposing marriage to the women
I have most admired, because of what would have been my old nurse's opinion of them! But you
must remember her opinion is formed by a memory, and that memory is the memory of my dead mother.
Moreover, Margery voices my best self, and expresses my own judgment when it is not blinded
by passion or warped by my worship of the beautiful. Not that Margery would disapprove of loveliness;
in fact, she would approve of nothing else for me, I know very well. But her penetration rapidly
goes beneath the surface. According to one of Paul's sublime paradoxes, she looks at the things
that are not seen. It seems queer that I can tell you all this, Miss Champion, and really it
is the first time I have actually formulated it in my own mind. But I think it so extremely
friendly of you to have troubled to give me good advice in the matter."

Garth Dalmain ceased speaking, and the silence which followed suddenly assumed alarming proportions,
seeming to Jane like a high fence which she was vainly trying to scale. She found herself mentally
rushing hither and thither, seeking a gate or any possible means of egress. And still she was
confronted by the difficulty of replying adequately to the totally unexpected. And what added
to her dumbness was the fact that she was infinitely touched by Garth's confession; and when
Jane was deeply moved speech always became difficult. That this young man--adored by all the
girls for his good looks and delightful manners; pursued for his extreme eligibility by mothers
and chaperons; famous already in the world of art; flattered, courted, sought after in society--should
calmly admit that the only woman really left IN his life was his old nurse, and that her opinion
and expectations held him back from a worldly, or unwise marriage, touched Jane deeply, even
while in her heart she smiled at what their set would say could they realise the situation. I
shall therefore on such occasions, first order the porter aforesaid to go off with his pack,
and then see the money in silver and gold in my possession before
I cut or measure my cloth.

But if a common soldier drinks his pot first, and then offers payment
in Wood's halfpence, the landlady may be under some difficulty; For
if she complains to his captain or ensign, they are likewise officers,
included in this general order for encouraging these halfpence to
pass as current money.

If she goes to a justice of peace, he is also an officer, to whom
this general order is directed.

I do therefore advise her to follow my practice, which I have already begun, and be paid for
her goods before she parts with them. However I should have been content, for some reasons, that
the military gentlemen had been excepted by name, because I have heard it said, that their
discipline is best confined within their own district.

His Majesty in the conclusion of his answer to the address of the House of Lords against Wood's
coin, is pleased to say that "he will do everything in his power
for the satisfaction of his people."

It should seem therefore, that the recalling the patent is not to be understood as a thing in
his power. But however since the law does not oblige us to receive this coin, and consequently
the patent leaves it to our voluntary choice, there is nothing remaining
to preserve us from rain but that the whole kingdom should continue
in a firm determinate resolution never to receive or utter this fatal
coin:[20]

[Footnote 20: So ready was the response to this suggestion
of Swift's, that it was found necessary for tradesmen to take precautions
to have it publicly known that they were in no way connected with
Wood and his money, The following is a copy of an advertisement which
illustrates this:

"Whereas several persons in this kingdom suspect
that John Molyneux of Meath Street, ironmonger, and his brother Daniel
Molyneux, of Essex Street, ironmonger, are interested in the patent
obtained by William Wood for coining of halfpence and farthings for
this kingdom.

"Now we the said John Molyneux and Daniel Molyneux, in order to satisfy
the public, do hereby declare, that we are in no way concerned with
the said Wood in relation to his said patent; And that we never were
possessed of any of the said halfpence or farthings, except one halfpence
and one farthing, which I the said John Molyneux received in a post-letter,
and which I immediately afterwards delivered to one of the Lords-Justices
of Ireland.

"And we do further declare, that we will not directly or indirectly, be anyways concerned with the said
Wood's halfpence or farthings; but on the contrary, act to the great
advantage and satisfaction of this kingdom, as good, loving and faithful
subjects ought to do.

And we do further declare, that to the best of our knowledge, the said William Wood is not in
this kingdom.

"Given under our hands in Dublin this 22d. day of August 1724.

"JOHN MOLYNEUX

"DAN. MOLYNEUX."

Another ran as follows:

"ADVERTISEMENT.

"Whereas, I, Thomas Handy, of Meath Street, Dublin, did receive by the last packet, from a
person in London, to whom I am an entire stranger, bills of lading
for eleven casks of Wood's halfpence, shipped at Bristol, and consigned
to me by the said person on his own proper account, of which I had
not the least notice until I received the said bills of lading.

"Now I, the said Thomas Handy, being highly sensible of the duty and regard which every honest
man owes to his country and to his fellow-subjects, do hereby declare, that I will not be concerned,
directly or indirectly, in entering, landing, importing, receiving,
or uttering any of the said Wood's halfpence, for that I am fully
convinced, as well from the addresses of both Houses of Parliament,
as otherwise, that the importing and uttering the said halfpence will
be destructive to this nation, and prejudicial to his Majesty's revenue.

"And

of this my resolution I gave notice by letter to the person who sent
me the bills of lading, the very day I received them, and have sent
back the said bills to him.

"THO. HANDY.

"Dublin, 29th. August, 1724." [T.S.]]

After which, let the officers to whom these orders are directed, (I would willingly except the military)
come with their exhortations, their arguments and their eloquence, to persuade us to find our
interest in our undoing.

Let Wood and his accomplices travel about the country with cart-loads
of their ware, and see who will take it off their hands, there will
be no fear of his being robbed, for a highwayman would scorn to touch
it.

I am only in pain how the commissioners of the revenue will proceed in this juncture; because I
am told they are obliged by act of Parliament to take nothing but
gold and silver in payment for His Majesty's customs, and I think
they cannot justly offer this coinage of Mr. Wood to others, unless
they will be content to receive it themselves.

The sum of the whole is this.

The "Committee advises the King to send immediate orders to all his officers here, that Wood's
coin be suffered and permitted without any let, suit, trouble, &c. to pass and be received
as current money by such as shall be willing to receive the same." It is probable, that the first
willing receivers may be those who must receive it whether they will or no, at least under the penalty
of losing an office. But the landed undepending men, the merchants, the shopkeepers and bulk of the
people, I hope, and am almost confident, will never receive it. What must the consequence be? The
owners will sell it for as much as they can get. Wood's halfpence will come to be offered for
six a penny (yet then he will be a sufficient gainer) and the necessary receivers will be
losers of two-thirds in their salaries or pay.

This puts me in mind of a passage I was told many years ago in England. At a quarter-sessions in
Leicester, the justices had wisely decreed, to take off a halfpenny in a quart from the price
of ale. One of them, who came in after the thing was determined, being informed of what had
passed, said thus: "Gentlemen; you have made an order, that ale should be sold in our country
for three halfpence a quart: I desire you will now make another to appoint who must drink it, for by
G-- I will not."[21]

[Footnote 21: The following broadside, ascribed to Swift, but written probably by Sheridan,
further amusingly illustrates the point Swift makes.

"Mr. Harding,--Although this letter also is directed to you, yet you know that it is intended for
the benefit of the whole kingdom, and therefore I pray make it public,
and take care to disperse it.

"The design of it is only to desire all people to take notice, That whatever apprehensions some
persons seem to be under on account of the above-mentioned report concerning Mr. Wood's halfpence
and farthings, yet the utmost advice which the right honourable Committee
have thought fit to give His Majesty, is, That a certain sum of the
said halfpence and farthings may be received as current money by such
as shall be willing to receive the same.

And if we are willing to ruin ourselves and our country, I think we are not to be pitied.

"Upon
this occasion I would only tell my countrymen a short story.

"A certain King of Great Britain who spoke broad Scotch, and being himself a man of wit, loved
both to hear and speak things that were humorous, had once a petition
preferred to him, in which the petitioner, having set forth his own
merits, most humbly prayed His Majesty to grant him letters-patent
for receiving a shilling from every one of his subjects who should
be willing to give so much to him.

'In gude troth,' said the King, 'a very reasonable petition. Let every man give thee twa shillings
gin he be willing so to do, and thou shalt have full liberty to receive
it.' 'But,' says the petitioner, 'I desire that this clause may be
inserted in my patent, That every man who refuses to give me a shilling,
should appear at Westminster Hall to shew cause why he so refuses.'
'This also,' says the King, 'shall be granted thee, but always with
this proviso, that the man be willing to come.'

"I am your, etc.

"MISOXULOS."]

I
must beg leave to caution your lordships and worships in one particular.

Wood hath graciously promised to load us at present only with forty thousand pounds of his coin,
till the exigences of the kingdom require the rest. I entreat you will never suffer Mr. Wood
to be a judge of your exigences. While there is one piece of silver or gold remaining in the
kingdom he will call it an exigency, he will double his present quantum by stealth as soon as he can,
and will have the remainder still to the good.

He will pour his own raps[22]and counterfeits upon us: France and Holland will do the same; nor
will our own coiners at home be behind them: To confirm which I have now in my pocket a rap or
counterfeit halfpenny in imitation of his, but so ill performed, that in my conscience I believe
it is not of his coining.

[Footnote 22: The word Rap is probably a contraction of "raparee," and was the name given to the tokens
that passed current in Ireland for copper coins of small value. Generally it referred to debased
coins; hence it may be allied to "raparee," who might be considered as a debased citizen.
The raparees were so called from the rapary or half-pike they carried. [T.S.]]

I must now desire your lordships and worships that you will give great
allowance for this long undigested paper, I find myself to have gone
into several repetitions, which were the effects of haste, while new
thoughts fell in to add something to what I had said before.

I think I may affirm that I have fully answered every paragraph in the Report, which although
it be not unartfully drawn, and is perfectly in the spirit of a pleader
who can find the most plausible topics in behalf of his client, yet
there was no great skill required to detect the many mistakes contained
in it, which however are by no means to be charged upon the right
honourable Committee, but upon the most false impudent and fraudulent
representations of Wood and his accomplices.

I desire one particular may dwell upon your minds, although I have mentioned it more than once;
That after all the weight laid upon precedents there is not one produced in the whole Report,
of a patent for coining copper in England to pass in Ireland, and only two patents referred to
(for indeed there were no more) which were both passed in Ireland,
by references to the King's Council here, both less advantageous to
the coiner than this of Wood, and in both securities given to receive
the coin at every call, and give gold and silver in lieu of it.

This demonstrates the most flagrant falsehood and impudence of Wood, by which he would endeavour
to make the right honourable Committee his instruments, (for his own illegal and exorbitant
gain,) to ruin a kingdom, which hath deserved quite different treatment.

I am very sensible that such a work as I have undertaken might have worthily employed a much
better pen. But when a house is attempted to be robbed it often happens that the weakest in
the family runs first to stop the door. All the assistance I had were some informations from
an eminent person,[23] whereof I am afraid I have spoiled a few by
endeavouring to make them of a piece with my own productions, and
the rest I was not able to manage: I was in the case of David who
could not move in the armour of Saul, and therefore I rather chose
to attack this "uncircumcised Philistine (Wood I mean) with a sling
and a stone."

In short he was like Mr. Wood, all over brass; And "he defied the armies of the living God."
Goliath's condition of combat were likewise the same with those of Wood. "If he prevail against
us, then shall we be his servants:" But if it happens that I prevail over him, I renounce the other
part of the condition, he shall never be a servant of mine, for I do not think him fit to be
trusted in any honest man's shop.

[Footnote 23: Mr. Robert Lindsay, a Dublin lawyer, assisted Swift on the legal points raised
in the Drapier's letters. This is the Mr. Lindsay, counsellor-at-law, to whom Swift submitted
a case concerning a Mr. Gorman (see Scott's edit., vol. xix., p.
294).

Mr. Lindsay is supposed to be the author of two letters addressed to Chief Justice Whitshed
on the matter of his conduct towards the grand jury which discharged Harding the printer (see
Scott's edit., vol. vi., p. 467). [T.S.]]

I will conclude with my humble desire and request which I made in my second letter; That your
lordships and worships would please to order a declaration to be drawn up expressing, in the
strongest terms, your firm resolutions never to receive or utter any of Wood's halfpence or
farthings, and forbidding your tenants to receive them. That the said declaration may be signed
by as many persons as possible who have estates in this kingdom, and be sent down to your several
tenants aforesaid.[24]

[Footnote 24: A Declaration, pursuant to this request, was signed soon after by the most considerable
persons of the kingdom, which was universally spread and of great use. [F.]

"The humble petition of the lord-mayor, sheriffs, commons, and citizens of the city of Dublin, in
Common Council assembled," was issued as a broadside on 8th September, 1724. See also Appendix IX.
[T.S.]]

And if the dread of Wood's halfpence should continue till next quarter-sessions (which I hope
it will not) the gentlemen of every county will then have a fair opportunity of declaring
against them with unanimity and zeal.

I am with the greatest respect, (May it please your lordships and
worships) Your most dutiful and obedient servant, M.B.

Aug. 25, 1724.

LETTER IV.

A LETTER TO THE WHOLE PEOPLE OF IRELAND.

NOTE

The country was now in a very fever of excitement. Everywhere meetings were held for the purpose
of expressing indignation against the imposition, and addresses from brewers, butchers, flying stationers,
and townspeople generally, were sent in embodying the public protest
against Wood and his coins.

Swift fed the flame by publishing songs and ballads well fitted for
the street singers, and appealing to the understandings of those who
he well knew would effectively carry his message to the very hearths
of the poorest labourers.

Courtier and student, tradesman and freeman, thief and prostitute,
beggar and loafer, all were alike carried by an indignation which
launched them on a maelstrom of enthusiasm.

So general became the outcry that, in Coxe's words, "the lords justices refused to issue the
orders for the circulation of the coin.... People of all descriptions and parties flocked
in crowds to the bankers to demand their money, and drew their notes with an express condition
to be paid in gold and silver. The publishers of the most treasonable pamphlets escaped with impunity,
provided Wood and his patent were introduced into the work. The grand juries could scarcely
be induced to find any bill against such delinquents; no witnesses in the prosecution were safe
in their persons; and no juries were inclined, or if inclined could venture, to find them
guilty."

In such a state of public feeling Swift assumed an entirely new attitude. He promulgated his
"Letter to the Whole People of Ireland"--a letter which openly struck at the very root of the
whole evil, and laid bare to the public eye the most secret spring of its righteous indignation.
It was not Wood nor his coins, it was the freedom of the people of
Ireland and their just rights and privileges that were being fought
for.

The King's prerogative had been held threateningly over them. What was the King's prerogative?
he asked in effect. It was but the right he enjoyed within the bounds of the law as made by
the people in parliament assembled. The law limits him with his subjects. Such prerogative
he respected and would take up arms to protect against any who should rebel. But "all government
without the consent of the governed, is the very definition of slavery."

The condition of the Irish nation was such that it was to be expected eleven armed men should
overcome a single man in his shirt; but even if those in power exercise then power to cramp
liberty, a man on the rack may still have "the liberty of roaring as loud as he thought fit."
And the men on the rack roared to a tune that Walpole had never before heard.

The letter appeared on the 13th October, 1724.[1] The Duke of Grafton
had been recalled and Carteret had taken up the reins of government.

For reasons, either personal or politic, he took Walpole's side.

Coxe goes into considerations on this attitude of Carteret's, but they hardly concern us here.
Suffice it that the Lord Lieutenant joined forces with the party in the Irish Privy Council, among
whom were Midleton and St. John Brodrick, and on October 27th issued a proclamation offering
a reward of £300[2] for the discovery of the author of this "wicked and malicious pamphlet" which
highly reflected on his Majesty and his ministers, and which tended
"to alienate the affections of his good subjects of England and Ireland
from each other."

[Footnote 1: Not on October 23rd as the earlier editors print it, and as Monck Mason, Scott
and Mr. Churton Collins repeat.]

[Footnote 2: See Appendix, No. VI.]

The author's name was not made public, nor was it likely to be. There is no doubt that it was
generally known who the author was.

In that general knowledge lies the whole pith of the Biblical quotation
circulated abroad on the heels of the proclamation: "And the people
said unto Saul, shall Jonathan die, who had wrought this great salvation
in Israel?

God forbid: as the Lord liveth there shall not one hair of his head
fall to the ground, for he hath wrought with God this day: So the
people rescued Jonathan that he died not."

Swift remained very much alive.

Harding, for printing the obnoxious letter, had been arrested and imprisoned, and the Crown
proceeded with his prosecution. In such circumstances Swift was not likely to remain idle.
On the 26th October he addressed a letter to Lord Chancellor Midleton
in defence of the Drapier's writings, and practically acknowledged
himself to be the author.[3] It was not actually printed until 1735,
but there is no doubt that Midleton received it at the time it was
written.

What effect it had on the ultimate issue is not known; but Midleton's
conduct justifies the confidence Swift placed in him.

The Grand Jury of the Michaelmas term of 1724 sat to consider the bill against Harding. On the
11th of November Swift addressed to them his "Seasonable Advice."

The bill was thrown out. Whitshed, the Chief Justice, consistently with his action on a previous occasion
(see vol. vii.), angrily remonstrated with the jury, demanded of
them their reasons for such a decision, and finally dissolved them.

This unconstitutional, and even disgraceful conduct, however, served
but to accentuate the resentment of the people against Wood and the
patent, and the Crown fared no better by a second Grand Jury.

The second jury accompanied its rejection of the bill by a presentment
against the patent,[4] and the defeat of the "prerogative" became
assured.

Every where the Drapier was acclaimed the saviour of his country. Any person who could scribble
a doggerel or indite a tract rushed into print, and now Whitshed was harnessed to Wood in a
pillory of contemptuous ridicule.

Indeed, so bitter was the outcry against the Lord Chief Justice, that it is said to have hastened his
death.

The cities of Dublin, Cork and Waterford passed resolutions declaring the uttering of Wood's
halfpence to be highly prejudicial to his Majesty's revenue and to the trades of the kingdom. The
Drapier was now the patriot, and the whole nation responded to his
appeal to assist him in its own defence.

 I begin to understand how it is you turn the heads of women
when you paint them. However, you are very delightful in your delight, and I want to go up
to bed. So I promise to sing all you want and as much as you wish to-morrow. Now keep your
promise and don't bother me any more to-night. Don't spend the whole night in the park, and
try not to frighten the deer. No, I do not need any assistance with my candle, and I am quite
used to going upstairs by myself, thank you. Can't you hear what personal and appropriate remarks
Tommy is making down there? Now do run away, Master Garthie, and count your pearls. And if
you suddenly come upon a cross--remember, the cross can, in all probability, be persuaded to
return to Chicago!"

Jane was still smiling as she entered her room and placed her candlestick on the dressing-table.

Overdene was lighted solely by lamps and candles. The duchess refused to modernise it by the
installation of electric light. But candles abounded, and Jane, who liked a brilliant illumination,
proceeded to light both candles in the branches on either side of the dressing-table mirror,
and in the sconces on the wall beside the mantelpiece, and in the tall silver candlesticks
upon the writing-table. Then she seated herself in a comfortable arm-chair, reached for her
writing-case, took out her diary and a fountain pen, and prepared to finish the day's entry.
She wrote, "SANG 'THE ROSARY' AT AUNT 'GINA'S CONCERT IN PLACE OF VELMA, FAILED (LARYNGITIS),"
and came to a full stop.

Somehow the scene with Garth was difficult to record, and the sensations which still remained
therefrom, absolutely unwritable. Jane sat and pondered the situation, content to allow the
page to remain blank.

Before she rose, locked her book, and prepared for rest, she had, to her own satisfaction,
clearly explained the whole thing. Garth's artistic temperament was the basis of the argument;
and, alas, the artistic temperament is not a very firm foundation, either for a theory, or
for the fabric of a destiny. However, FAUTE DE MIEUX, Jane had to accept it as main factor
in her mental adjustment, thus: This vibrant emotion in Garth, so strangely disturbing to her
own solid calm, was in no sense personal to herself, excepting in so far as her voice and musical
gifts were concerned. Just as the sight of paintable beauty crazed him with delight, making
him wild with alternate hope and despair until he obtained his wish and had his canvas and
his sitter arranged to his liking; so now, his passion for the beautiful had been awakened,
this time through the medium, not of sight, but of sound. When she had given him his fill of
song, and allowed him to play some of her accompaniments, he would be content, and that disquieting
look of adoration would pass from those beautiful brown eyes. Meanwhile it was pleasant to
look forward to to-morrow, though it behooved her to remember that all this admiration had
in it nothing personal to herself. He would have gone into even greater raptures over Madame
Blanche, for instance, who had the same timbre of voice and method of singing, combined with
a beauty of person which delighted the eye the while her voice enchanted the ear. Certainly
Garth must see and hear her, as music appeared to mean so much to him. Jane began planning
this, and then her mind turned to Pauline Lister, the lovely American girl, whose name had
been coupled with Garth Dalmain's all the season. Jane felt certain she was just the wife he
needed. Her loveliness would content him, her shrewd common-sense and straightforward, practical
ways would counterbalance his somewhat erratic temperament, and her adaptability would enable
her to suit herself to his surroundings, both in his northern home and amongst his large circle
of friends down south. Once married, he would give up raving about Flower and Myra, and kissing
people's hands in that--"absurd way," Jane was going to say, but she was invariably truthful,
even in her thoughts, and substituted "extraordinary" as the more correct adjective--in that
extraordinary way.

She sat forward in her chair with her elbows on her knees, and held her large hands before
her, palms upward, realising again the sensations of that moment. Then she pulled herself up
sharply. "Jane Champion, don't be a fool! You would wrong that dear, beauty-loving boy, more
than you would wrong yourself, if you took him for one moment seriously. His homage to-night
was no more personal to you than his appreciation of the excellent dinner was personal to Aunt
Georgina's chef. In his enjoyment of the production, the producer was included; but that was
all. Be gratified at the success of your art, and do not spoil that success by any absurd sentimentality.
Now wash your very ungainly hands and go to bed." Thus Jane to herself.

      *      *      *      *      *

And under the oaks, with soft turf beneath his feet, stood Garth Dalmain, the shy deer sleeping
around unconscious of his presence; the planets above, hanging like lamps in the deep purple
of the sky. And he, also, soliloquised.

"I have found her," he said, in low tones of rapture, "the ideal woman, the crown of womanhood,
the perfect mate for the spirit, soul, and body of the man who can win her.--Jane! Jane! Ah,
how blind I have been! To have known her for years, and yet not realised her to be this. But
she lifted the veil, and I passed in. Ah grand, noble heart! She will never be able to draw
the veil again between her soul and mine. And she has no rosary. I thank God for that. No other
man possesses, or has ever possessed, that which I desire more than I ever desired anything
upon this earth, Jane's love, Jane's tenderness. Ah, what will it mean? 'I count each pearl.'
She WILL count them some day--her pearls and mine. God spare us the cross. Must there be a
cross to every true rosary? Then God give me the heavy end, and may the mutual bearing of it
bind us together. Ah, those dear hands! Ah, those true steadfast eyes! ... Jane!--Jane! Surely
it has always been Jane, though I did not know it, blind fool that I have been! But one thing
I know: whereas I was blind, now I see. And it will always be Jane from this night onward through
time and-please God--into eternity."

The night breeze stirred his thick dark hair, and his eyes, as he raised them, shone in the
starlight.

      *      *      *      *      *

And Jane, almost asleep, was roused by the tapping of her blind against the casement, and murmured
"Anything you wish, Garth, just tell me, and I will do it." Then awakening suddenly to the
consciousness of what she had said, she sat up in the darkness and scolded herself furiously.
"Oh, you middle-aged donkey! You call yourself staid and sensible, and a little flattery from
a boy of whom you are fond turns your head completely. Come to your senses at once; or leave
Overdene by the first train in the morning."

CHAPTER VIII

ADDED PEARLS

The days which followed were golden days to Jane. There was nothing to spoil the enjoyment
of a very new and strangely sweet experience.

Garth's manner the next morning held none of the excitement or outward demonstration which
had perplexed and troubled her the evening before. He was very quiet, and seemed to Jane older
than she had ever known him. He had very few lapses into his seven-year-old mood, even with
the duchess; and when someone chaffingly asked him whether he was practising the correct deportment
of a soon-to-be-married man,

"Yes," said Garth quietly, "I am."

"Will she be at Shenstone?" inquired Ronald; for several of the duchess's party were due at
Lady Ingleby's for the following week-end.

"Yes," said Garth, "she will."

"Oh, lor'!" cried Billy, dramatically. "Prithee, Benedict, are we to take this seriously?"

But Jane who, wrapped in the morning paper, sat near where Garth was standing, came out from
behind it to look up at him and say, so that only he heard it "Oh, Dal, I am so glad! Did you
make up your mind last night?"

"Yes," said Garth, turning so that he spoke to her alone, "last night."

"Did our talk in the afternoon have something to do with it?"

"No, nothing whatever."

"Was it THE ROSARY?"

He hesitated; then said, without looking at her: "The revelation of THE ROSARY? Yes."

To Jane his mood of excitement was now fully explained, and she could give herself up freely
to the enjoyment of this new phase in their friendship, for the hours of music together were
a very real delight. Garth was more of a musician than she had known, and she enjoyed his clean,
masculine touch on the piano, unblurred by slur or pedal; more delicate than her own, where
delicacy was required. What her voice was to him during those wonderful hours he did not express
in words, for after that first evening he put a firm restraint upon his speech. Under the oaks
he had made up his mind to wait a week before speaking, and he waited.

But the new and strangely sweet experience to Jane was that of being absolutely first to some
one. In ways known only to himself and to her Garth made her feel this. There was nothing for
any one else to notice, and yet she knew perfectly well that she never came into the room without
his being instantly conscious that she was there; that she never left a room, without being
at once missed by him. His attentions were so unobtrusive and tactful that no one else realised
them. They called forth no chaff from friends and no "Hoity-toity! What now?" from the duchess.
And yet his devotion seemed always surrounding her. For the first time in her life Jane was
made to feel herself FIRST in the whole thought of another. It made him seem strangely her
own. She took a pleasure and pride in all he said, and did, and was; and in the hours they
spent together in the music-room she learned to know him and to understand that enthusiastic
beauty-loving, irresponsible nature, as she had never understood it before.

The days were golden, and the parting at night was sweet, because it gave an added zest to
the pleasure of meeting in the morning. And yet during these golden days the thought of love,
in the ordinary sense of the word, never entered Jane's mind. Her ignorance in this matter
arose, not so much from inexperience, as from too large an experience of the travesty of the
real thing; an experience which hindered her from recognising love itself, now that love in
its most ideal form was drawing near.

Jane had not come through a dozen seasons without receiving nearly a dozen proposals of marriage.
An heiress, independent of parents and guardians, of good blood and lineage, a few proposals
of a certain type were inevitable. Middle-aged men--becoming bald and grey; tired of racketing
about town; with beautiful old country places and an unfortunate lack of the wherewithal to
keep them up--proposed to the Honourable Jane Champion in a business-like way, and the Honourable
Jane looked them up and down, and through and through, until they felt very cheap, and then
quietly refused them, in an equally business-like way.

Two or three nice boys, whom she had pulled out of scrapes and set on their feet again after
hopeless croppers, had thought, in a wave of maudlin gratitude, how good it would be for a
fellow always to have her at hand to keep him straight and tell him what he ought to do, don't
you know? and--er--well, yes--pay his debts, and be a sort of mother-who-doesn't scold kind
of person to him; and had caught hold of her kind hand, and implored her to marry them. Jane
had slapped them if they ventured to touch her, and recommended them not to be silly.

One solemn proposal she had had quite lately from the bachelor rector of a parish adjoining
Overdene. He had often inflicted wearisome conversations upon her; and when he called, intending
to put the momentous question, Jane, who was sitting at her writing-table in the Overdene drawing-room,
did not see any occasion to move from it. If the rector became too prosy, she could surreptitiously
finish a few notes. He sank into a deep arm-chair close to the writing-table, crossed his somewhat
bandy legs one over the other, made the tips of his fingers meet with unctuous accuracy, and
intoned the opening sentences of his proposition. Jane, sharpening pencils and sorting nibs,
apparently only caught the drift of what he was saying, for when he had chanted the phrase,
"Not alone from selfish motives, my dear Miss Champion; but for the good of my parish; for
the welfare of my flock, for the advancement of the work of the church in our midst," Jane
opened a despatch-box and drew out her cheque-book. 

It flies almost entirely by the aid of the wind, and sometimes does not flap its wings for an
hour at a time.

Albatrosses often follow a ship clear across the ocean, or, rather, they keep company with the
ship, for as they are able to fly one hundred miles an hour with
ease, the rate at which a ship travels is much too slow for them;
so they make long journeys ahead and behind, like a dog taking a walk
with his master, returning occasionally to the ship to pick up any
food which may have been thrown overboard.

NANCY CHIME.

BY S. SMITH.

Untarnished by the breath of fame, Untouched by prose or rhyme, The world has never heard that
name,-- The name of Nancy Chime.

Domestic, friend, and monitor, She served us long and well; Not many "helps" could equal her,
And none, perhaps, excel.

No evil lurked within her breast; Her face was always bright; Her trusty hands, scarce needing rest,
Were busy day and night.

Her voice was sweet as voice of birds That to each other call; And when she spoke, her striking
words Were listened to by all.

E'en Baby Bunting--darling boy, The happiest of his race-- Would clap his little hands with joy,
And look up in her face.

But none can reach perfection here; Like all beneath the sun, She,
too, could err, and her career Was not a faultless one.

She only did, here let me tell, Each day the best she could; Would young folks all but do as well,
The world might soon grow good.

But all is past! Ah! cold that face! That bosom throbs no more! Oh! must another take her place,
And we our loss deplore?

Nay, nay, we could not bear the pain Of losing one so true;-- Old Nancy Chime shall tick again,
And be as good as new.

HOW HE CAUGHT HIM.

WHO PUT OUT THE TEA-PARTY?

BY ELLEN FRANCES TERRY.

One day, when I was a small girl, my little sister Katy and I found
in the yard a dry-goods box, in which the new carpets had been sent
home.

As usual, we ran to where grandma sat knitting and nodding:

"Oh, grandma, mayn't we have it?" cried I.

"Yet hab it, dranma?" echoed Katy.

"You know we never had a baby-house."

"No, nebber had no baby-'ouse."

"Oh, say yes!"

"'Ay 'et!"

"Do, do!"

"Pede do!"

Then, before she knew what she was to do, or say, or what she never
had done, or said, we coaxed her to the back door and pointed to our
treasure.

She couldn't refuse us, and the box was given to us.

John made us a card-board chimney, and cut a square window in either end, for, of course, we
set it on its feet, turning its back to the lane against whose fence
it stood, looking into the yard.

Grandma gave us red curtains for the windows, and a big striped apron, which hung across the
front and did for a door. We had to have a door, for, when we took tea, the chickens came,
without invitation, peeping inside, looking for crumbs. And, seeing what looked like a party,
down flew, with a whir and rustle, a flock of doves, saying, "Coo-oo! how do-oo-do!" and prinking
themselves in our very faces. Yes, we really had too many of these surprise-parties; for, another
time, it was a wasp that came to tea, and flew from me to Katy, and from Katy to me, till
we flew, too, to hide our heads in grandma's lap. Then she gave us the apron, which was very
grand, though the blue stripes were walking into the red ones, and there were a good many little
holes which let small arrows of light fly out. That was when we lighted the chandelier, and
they (the holes and the arrows) were the very things to let people know what grand doings there
were inside.

Then, when our crockery was arranged on the shelf at the back, a stool set in the middle for a
table, our two small green chairs placed one at either end, and a good many nails driven into
the "walls" to serve as hooks,--then we gave a party. The dolls were invited, of course, and
their invitations Katy wrote on her slate. To be sure, the letters looked a good deal like
Jack and Jill,--climbing up hill and tumbling down again,--still the dolls understood us.
There were no little girls invited, because little girls couldn't
have squeezed in, unless they were willing to be hung up, like the
extra dollies.

But oh! wouldn't they have liked to go?

We had ice-cream, just made of vanilla, cream-candy, and water,--delicious! Then there was a
whole tea-potful of chocolate-tea, which was a chocolate-cream drop scraped fine and mixed with
water. Do just try it sometime. Thimble-biscuits, too, and holes
with cookies round them.

I never expect to be as happy again as I was when I dropped the curtain at half-past four precisely,
and lighted the chandelier, which I forgot to say was a candle cut
in two, stuck in cologne-bottles of different shapes and colors.

We well knew--for didn't we go out twice to look?--how splendidly the light streamed through the
two windows and the eight holes. Why, the chickens knew it, too, on their perches, for they opened
one sleepy eye after another, solemnly changed legs, and dozed off
again.

Those long rays of light, playing truant, ran down the lane and flashed into the very eyes of
naughty Billy Quinn, who was going home from a visit, whistling, and with his hands in his
pockets.

Of course the dolls arrived promptly, and took off their shawls in the best bedroom, which was that
convenient shelf that was turned into anything on short notice.

The baby-dolls had to go early to bed under the table, and you can imagine how much pleasanter
it is to say, "Bed-time, children!" than to have it said to you.

Mrs. Green was a perfect little Mrs. Herod in her treatment of her children. Indeed, their yells
under punishment were heart-rending; but when she was only dear Katy she was tender as one of
those cooing doves.

So we ate up the ice-cream, and turned the tea-pot upside down to squeeze out the last drop of chocolate-tea.
Mrs. Green was just doing this very thing when the most dreadful event happened. Crash!--bang!--clatter!--the
whole world had turned upside down. Out went the lights, and everything fell together in a dismal
heap; but whether up or down nobody could tell. There was a splash of cold, cold water in my face
as the wash-bowl and pitcher fell and crashed beside me. Katy lay with her small nose buried
in the butter-plate. The house had tumbled over!!

For a few seconds not a sound was heard, but then there was a half-stifled burst of laughter, which
quickly died away as some thickly shod feet scampered down the alley. Yes, the beautiful house
was tipped over, and the tea-party put out, as an extinguisher is
slipped over a candle, or a hat clapped upon a butterfly.

Inside, there was a confused heap, with legs uppermost,--table-legs, chair-legs, little legs
clad in white stockings, and, mixed hopelessly up with these, the dolls, the dishes, the candles.

This
heap, however, was silent only for a moment. Then a feeble cry struggled up through it,--a cry
which, reaching the upper air, grew loud, doubled itself, became two cries, and rushed out through
a window, which, having lost its way, was where the roof ought to be.

Then growing fast and shrill, the cry ran toward the house, waking up the Brown baby, who at
once joined in. The rooster waked suddenly, and feeling that something had happened, thought
it could do no harm to crow, and that agitated his household to the last hen. Then to the cackling
and crowing, Beppo added a bark of duty, and nearly turned inside out, tugging at his chain, and
howling between times. The canary began his scales, and the scream grew and grew and rushed into
the house through every door and window. Uncle John was reading the paper, but, hearing the
fearful uproar, he dashed into the yard, turned back the house with one hand, with the other
picked out from the heap of legs all the white ones, and dragged us from the wreck of our
residence. It was quickly done, but not too soon, for a little flame, which was hiding under
the close mass of ruins, now hopped merrily up on the tarletan skirts of Alice Isabella, the prettiest
of the dolls.

While we were being taken to grandma to be cried over and comforted,
and the poor old house lay on its side forgotten, that flame finished
off poor dolly, ran up to the roof, ate up the red-striped curtain
in the twinkling of an eye, and, in fact, made short work of the whole
thing.

We knew nothing of this that night, but were so honored and indulged as to make us think everything
else had turned a new leaf as well as the house.

The next morning, grandma, coming into the breakfast-room, was called to the window by Uncle John,
who was looking at something in the yard. There was a forlorn little figure sitting on a log
among the charred embers of the burnt house. It was I, sobbing as if my heart would break, and
beside me was Katy, who stood sadly by, trying with a corner of her
apron to dry my tears.

But her eyes were wet, too, and in the fat arms were squeezed a leg and shoe, which was all
that was left of Alice Isabella.

What wicked eye had watched the festivities through the window, or what cruel heart had yielded
to the temptation to turn over the house upon it all, we never knew.

I heard that Billy Quinn was punished that night for coming home
late to supper, and now, looking impartially at the matter over all
these years, I am inclined to think it was that very Billy Quinn,
and no other, who put out the tea-party.

THE FOX, THE MONKEY, AND THE PIG.

BY HOWARD PYLE.

The fox, the monkey, and the pig were once inseparable companions. As they were nearly always
together, the fox's thefts so far reflected upon his innocent associates, that they were all
three held to be wicked animals.

At length, the enemies of these three laid a snare, in a path they were known to use.

The first that came to the trap was the pig. He viewed it with contempt, and, to show his disdain
of his enemies and his disregard for their snare, he tried to walk through it with a lofty tread.
He found he had undervalued it, however, when, in spite of his struggles, he was caught and strangled.

The
next that came was the monkey.

He inspected the trap carefully; then, priding himself upon the skill and dexterity of his fingers,
he tried to pick it to pieces. In a moment of carelessness, however, he became entangled, and
soon met the fate of the unfortunate pig.

The last that came was the fox.

He looked at the snare anxiously, from a distance, and, approaching cautiously, soon made himself
thoroughly acquainted with its size and power.

Then he cried, "Thus do I defeat the machinations of my enemies!"--and,
avoiding the trap altogether, by leaping completely over it, he went
on his way rejoicing.

DAB KINZER: A STORY OF A GROWING BOY.

BY WILLIAM O. STODDARD.

CHAPTER XIV. The yacht had been every bit as well handled as the great steamship, but then she had got
home safely, and she was such a little thing, after all.

Whatever excitement there had been in the village died out as soon as it was known that the boys
were safe; and then, too, Mrs. Lee found time to "wonder wot Dab Kinzer means to do wid all
de money he done got for dem blue-fish."

Dab himself had been talking with Ford Foster and Frank Harley, and
an original idea of his own was beginning to take some sort of form
in his mind.

He did not, as yet, mention it to any one, as he wanted very much
to consult with Ham Morris about it.

The Hart boys hardly knew whether to submit or not, when that letter came, as they had planned
for themselves all sorts of rare fun with "the young missionary" in their own home.

"Never mind, Fuz," said Joe, "we'll serve him out when we get to Grantley."
"Yes," replied Fuz; "I'd just as lief not see too much of him before
that. He wont have any special claim on us if he doesn't go there
from our house."

Other talk they had together, and the tone of it
promised very lively times at Grantley Academy for the stranger from
India. But while the Hart boys were laying their plans for the future,
they were themselves the subjects of more than one discussion, for
Ford Foster gave his two friends the benefit of all he knew of his
cousins.

"It's a good thing for you that the steamer didn't go ashore
anywhere near their house," he said to Frank Harley.

After that conversation,
it was remarkable what daily care and attention Dab Kinzer and Frank
paid to their sparring lessons. It even exceeded the pluck and perseverance
with which Dab went to work at his French.

Plenty of fishing, bathing,
riding, boxing. You may say anything you want to." How I do wish Ham
would come back!" I wont sleep in the garret or in the cellar." She
had promised Ham that his house should be ready for him, and it was
likely to be a good deal more "ready" than either he or his wife had
dreamed of.

CHAPTER XV.

One of the most troublesome of the annoyances
which come to dwellers in the country, within easy reach of the great
city, is the kind of patrolling beggar called the "tramp."

"Here
it is. Thank you ever so much, Dabney! You're a brave boy. Why, he's
almost twice your size."

Dab Kinzer was a little the proudest boy
on Long Island, as he marched along in compliance with her request.
"Well, they'll have fun before bed-time, or I'll know the reason why."

The
bushes were a good enough hiding-place for the time, and he went back
to them with the air and manner of a man whose mind is made up to
something. Just at that moment, Ford Foster exclaimed, "What's that
smell?"

CHAPTER XVI.

The Morris farm, as has been said, was a pretty
large one, and the same tendency on the part of the owners which had
made them set up so very extensive and barn-like a house, had led
them, from time to time, to provide the most liberal sort of storage
for their crops. "It's gone."

"But," said Mrs. Kinzer, "we can save
the other barns, perhaps.

But the broom? Here and there the flames
had so good a start that the broom alone would have been insufficient,
and there the fast-arriving pails of water came into capital play.
They had to be used economically, of course, but they did the work
as effectually as if they had been the streams of a steam fire-engine.
"If Ham and Dab save the long barn, the fire wont spread any further.
There was plenty of light, just then, moon or no moon, and Ham's eyes
were very busy for a minute. Once or twice Ham or Dab went out to
make sure all was right, but there was no danger, unless a high wind
should come.

By this time the whole village was aware of Dabney's
adventure with the tramp, and it was well for that individual that
he had walked fast and far before suspicion settled on him, for men
went out to seek for him on foot and on horseback. I'm afraid the
rest would have to take back seats while Mrs. Kinzer was in the house."

Very
likely Ham was right; but just then he heard the voice of Dab Kinzer
behind him. So he waited.

And then, as they sailed up the inlet,
very happy and very hungry, he suddenly exclaimed: "Ham, do you see
that? How could they have guessed where we had gone?

"What's become
of Jenny?"

"You mean my boat? Why, there she is, hitched a little
out, there by the landing."

And Dabney did not seem to guess the
meaning of Ham's queer, quizzical smile.

CHAPTER XVIII.

"Dab and
Frank and I will try and educate them."

"Yes, I heard about it last
night, but I hadn't put the two together," said Ham. "Do you really
mean Dab is to go?"

"Of course," said Mrs. Kinzer.

"Well, if that
isn't doing it easy. Do you know it's about the nicest thing since
I got here?" "You wont have much time to get ready."

"Books enough
after he gets there," exclaimed Mrs. Kinzer.

"Well, what of it? Isn't
it yours?"

"One share's mine, the rest yours and Dick's."

"He needs
it more'n I do."

"You, father?"

"Why not, Annie? Clothes and almost
everything. I must see Mrs. Kinzer about it."

Meantime Dick Lee's
part in the matter had been taken for granted all around.

"They had
a blacker boy than he is there last year, Ford says." Where Ford and
Frank are going."

"Dat spiles it all," exclaimed Dick, ruefully.
"Now I's got to fish wid fellers 'at don't know nuffin."

"No you
wont. You're going with us. It's all fixed, money and all."

"It aint
no use, Dab."

"No use? Why not?"

"They know all about it. They helped
raise the money."

"Did dey? Well, 'taint no use. "It aint no use.
I 'most wish I was a eel."

"What's that?"

"Of course. Every human
barometer among them warned him to wait a day or so.

Fuz Hart laughed
but said nothing. Both he and his brother felt a little "strange"
as yet, and were almost inclined to try and behave themselves.

When
morning came, however, sea and earth and sky seemed to be the better
for what they had just been through. It had been so near a thing that both could sense the thrill
of victory.

Pauline Lister had been sitting with Garth's coat on her lap, and his watch and chain were
in her keeping. He paused a moment to take them up and receive her congratulations; then, slipping
on his coat, and pocketing his watch, came straight to Jane.

"How do you do, Miss Champion?"

His eyes sought hers eagerly; and the welcoming gladness he saw in them filled him with certainty
and content. He had missed her so unutterably during these days. Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday
had just been weary stepping-stones to Friday. It seemed incredible that one person's absence
could make so vast a difference. And yet how perfect that it should be so; and that they should
both realise it, now the day had come when he intended to tell her how desperately he wanted
her always. Yes, that they should BOTH realise it--for he felt certain Jane had also experienced
the blank. A thing so complete and overwhelming as the miss of her had been to him could not
be one-sided. And how well worth the experience of these lonely days if they had thereby learned
something of what TOGETHER meant, now the words were to be spoken which should insure forever
no more such partings.

All this sped through Garth's mind as he greeted Jane with that most commonplace of English
greetings, the everlasting question which never receives an answer. But from Garth, at that
moment, it did not sound commonplace to Jane, and she answered it quite frankly and fully.
She wanted above all things to tell him exactly how she did; to hear all about himself, and
compare notes on the happenings of these three interminable days; and to take up their close
comradeship again, exactly where it had left off. Her hand went home to his with that firm
completeness of clasp, which always made a hand shake with Jane such a satisfactory and really
friendly thing.

"Very fit, thank you, Dal," she answered. "At least I am every moment improving in health and
spirits, now I have arrived here at last."

Garth stood his racket against the arm of her chair and deposited himself full length on the
grass beside her, leaning on his elbow.

"Was anything wrong with London?" he asked, rather low, not looking up at her, but at the smart
brown shoe, planted firmly on the grass so near his hand. "Nothing was wrong with London,"
replied Jane frankly; "it was hot and dusty of course, but delightful as usual. Something was
wrong with ME; and you will be ashamed of me, Dal, if I confess what it was."

Garth did not look up, but assiduously picked little blades of grass and laid them in a pattern
on Jane's shoe. This conversation would have been exactly to the point had they been alone.
But was Jane really going to announce to the assembled company, in that dear, resonant, carrying
voice of hers, the sweet secret of their miss of one another?

"Liver?" inquired Mrs. Parker Bangs suddenly.

"Muffins!" exclaimed Billy instantly, and, rushing for them, almost shot them into her lap
in the haste with which he handed them, stumbling headlong over Garth's legs at the same moment.

Jane stared at Mrs. Parker Bangs and her muffins; then looked down at the top of Garth's dark
head, bent low over the grass.

"I was dull," she said, "intolerably dull. And Dal always says 'only a dullard is dull.' But
I diagnosed my dulness in the train just now and found it was largely his fault. Do you hear, Dal?"

Garth lifted his head and looked at her, realising in that moment that it was, after all, possible
for a complete and overwhelming experience to be one-sided. Jane's calm grey eyes were full
of gay friendliness.

"It was your fault, my dear boy," said Jane.

"How so?" queried Garth; and though there was a deep flush on his sunburned face, his voice
was quietly interrogative.

"Because, during those last days at Overdene, you led me on into a time of musical dissipation
such as I had never known before, and I missed it to a degree which was positively alarming.
I began to fear for the balance of my well-ordered mind."

"Well," said Myra, coming out from behind her red parasol, "you and Dal can have orgies of
music here if you want them. You will find a piano in the drawing-room and another in the hall,
and a Bechstein grand in the billiard-room. That is where I hold the practices for the men
and maids. I could not make up my mind which makers I really preferred, Erard, Broadwood, Collard,
or Bechstein; so by degrees I collected one of each. And after all I think I play best upon
the little cottage piano we had in the school-room at home. It stands in my boudoir now. I
seem more accustomed to its notes, or it lends itself better to my way of playing."

"Thank you, Myra," said Jane. "I fancy Dal and I will like the Bechstein."

"And if you want something really exciting in the way of music," continued Lady Ingleby, "you
might attend some of the rehearsals for this 'service of song' they are getting up in aid of
the organ deficit fund. I believe they are attempting great things."

"I would sooner pay off the whole deficit, than go within a mile of a 'service of song,'" said
Jane emphatically.

"Oh, no," put in Garth quickly, noting Myra's look of disappointment. "It is so good for people
to work off their own debts and earn the things they need in their churches. And 'services
of song' are delightful if well done, as I am sure this will be if Lady Ingleby's people are
in it. Lawson outlined it to me this morning, and hummed all the principal airs. It is highly
dramatic. Robinson Crusoe--no, of course not! What's the beggar's name? 'Uncle Tom's Cabin'?
Yes, I knew it was something black. Lawson is Uncle Tom, and the vicar's small daughter is
to be little Eva. Miss Champion, you will walk down with me to the very next rehearsal."

"Shall I?" said Jane, unconscious of how tender was the smile she gave him; conscious only
that in her own heart was the remembrance of the evening at Overdene when she felt so inclined
to say to him: "Tell me just what you want me to do, and I will do it."

"Pauline will just love to go with you," said Mrs. Parker Bangs. "She dotes on rural music."

"Rubbish, aunt!" said Miss Lister, who had slipped into an empty chair near Myra. "I agree
with Miss Champion about 'services of song,' and I don't care for any music but the best."

Jane turned to her quickly, with a cordial smile and her most friendly manner. "Ah, but you
must come," she said. "We will be victimised together. And perhaps Dal and Lawson will succeed
in converting us to the cult of the 'service of song.' And anyway it will be amusing to have
Dal explain it to us. He will need the courage of his convictions."

"Talking of something 'really exciting in the way of music,'" said Pauline Lister, "we had
it on board when we came over. There was a nice friendly crowd on board the Arabic, and they
arranged a concert for half-past eight on the Thursday evening. We were about two hundred miles
off the coast of Ireland, and when we came up from dinner we had run into a dense fog. At eight
o'clock they started blowing the fog-horn every half-minute, and while the fog-horn was sounding
you couldn't hear yourself speak. However, all the programmes were printed, and it was our
last night on board, so they concluded to have the concert all the same. Down we all trooped
into the saloon, and each item of that programme was punctuated by the stentorian BOO of the
fog-horn every thirty seconds. You never heard anything so cute as the way it came in, right
on time. A man with a deep bass voice sang ROCKED IN THE CRADLE OF THE DEEP, and each time
he reached the refrain, 'And calm and peaceful is my sle-eep,' BOO went the fog-horn, casting
a certain amount of doubt on our expectations of peaceful sleep that night, anyway. Then a
man with a sweet tenor sang OFT IN THE STILLY NIGHT, and the fog-horn showed us just how oft,
namely, every thirty seconds. But the queerest effect of all was when a girl had to play a
piano-forte solo. It was something of Chopin's, full of runs and trills and little silvery
notes. She started all right; but when she was half-way down the first page, BOO went the fog-horn,
a longer blast than usual. We saw her fingers flying, and the turning of the page, but not
a note could we hear; and when the old horn stopped and we could hear the piano again, she
had reached a place half-way down the second page, and we hadn't heard what led to it. My!
it was funny. That went on all through. She was a plucky girl to stick to it. We gave her a
good round of applause when she had finished, and the fog-horn joined in and drowned us. It
was the queerest concert experience I ever had. But we all enjoyed it. Only we didn't enjoy
that noise keeping right on until five o'clock next morning."

Jane had turned in her chair, and listened with appreciative interest while the lovely American
girl talked, watching, with real delight, her exquisite face and graceful gestures, and thinking
how Dal must enjoy looking at her when she talked with so much charm and animation. She glanced
down, trying to see the admiration in his eyes; but his head was bent, and he was apparently
absorbed in the occupation of tracing the broguing of her shoes with the long stalk of a chestnut
leaf. For a moment she watched the slim brown hand, as carefully intent on this useless task,
as if working on a canvas; then she suddenly withdrew her foot, feeling almost vexed with him
for his inattention and apparent indifference.

Garth sat up instantly. "It must have been awfully funny," he said. "And how well you told
it. One could hear the fog-horn, and see the dismayed faces of the performers. Like an earthquake,
a fog-horn is the sort of thing you don't ever get used to. It sounds worse every time. Let's
each tell the funniest thing we remember at a concert. I once heard a youth recite Tennyson's
Charge of the Light Brigade with much dramatic action. But he was extremely nervous, and got
rather mixed. In describing the attitude of mind of the noble six hundred, he told us impressively
that it was"

  "'Theirs not to make reply;
  Theirs not to do or die;
  Theirs BUT TO REASON WHY.'"

"The tone and action were all right, and I doubt whether many of the audience noticed anything
wrong with the words."

"That reminds me," said Ronald Ingram, "of quite the funniest thing I ever heard. It was at
a Thanksgiving service when some of our troops returned from South Africa. The proceedings
concluded by the singing of the National Anthem right through. You recollect how recently we
had had to make the change of pronoun, and how difficult it was to remember not to shout:"

"'Send HER victorious'? Well, there was a fellow just behind me, with a tremendous voice, singing
lustily, and taking special pains to get the pronouns correct throughout. And when he reached
the fourth line of the second verse he sang with loyal fervour."

   "'Confound HIS politics,
     Frustrate HIS knavish tricks!'"

"That would amuse the King," said Lady Ingleby. "Are you sure it is a fact, Ronnie?"

"Positive! I could tell you the church, and the day, and call a whole pewful of witnesses who
were convulsed by it."

"Well, I shall tell his Majesty at the next opportunity, and say you heard it. But how about
the tennis? What comes next? Final for couples? Oh, yes! Dal, you and Miss Lister play Colonel
Loraine and Miss Vermount; and I think you ought to win fairly easily. You two are so well
matched. Jane, this will be worth watching."

"I am sure it will," said Jane warmly, looking at the two, who had risen and stood together
in the evening sunlight, examining their rackets and discussing possible tactics, while awaiting
their opponents. They made such a radiantly beautiful couple; it was as if nature had put her
very best and loveliest into every detail of each. The only fault which could possibly have
been found with the idea of them wedded, was that her dark, slim beauty was so very much just
a feminine edition of his, that they might easily have been taken for brother and sister; but
this was not a fault which occurred to Jane. Her whole-hearted admiration of Pauline increased
every time she looked at her; and now she had really seen them together, she felt sure she
had given wise advice to Garth, and rejoiced to know he was taking it.

      *      *      *      *      *

Later on, as they strolled back to the house together,--she and Garth alone,--Jane said, simply:
"Dal, you will not mind if I ask? Is it settled yet?"

"I mind nothing you ask," Garth replied; "only be more explicit. Is what settled?"

"Are you and Miss Lister engaged?"

"No," Garth answered. "What made you suppose we should be?"

"You said at Overdene on Tuesday--TUESDAY! oh! doesn't it seem weeks ago?--you said we were
to take you seriously."

"It seems years ago," said Garth; "and I sincerely hope you will take me--seriously. All the
same I have not proposed to Miss Lister; and I am anxious for an undisturbed talk with you
on the subject. Miss Champion, after dinner to-night, when all the games and amusements are
in full swing, and we can escape unobserved, will you come out onto the terrace with me, where
I shall be able to speak to you without fear of interruption? The moonlight on the lake is
worth seeing from the terrace. I spent an hour out there last night--ah, no; you are wrong
for once--I spent it alone, when the boating was over, and thought of--how--to-night--we might
be talking there together."

"Certainly I will come," said Jane; "and you must feel free to tell me anything you wish, and
promise to let me advise or help in any way I can."

"I will tell you everything," said Garth very low, "and you shall advise and help as ONLY you can."

      *      *      *      *      *

Jane sat on her window-sill, enjoying the sunset and the exquisite view, and glad of a quiet
half-hour before she need think of summoning her maid. Immediately below her ran the terrace,
wide and gravelled, bounded by a broad stone parapet, behind which was a drop of eight or ten
feet to the old-fashioned garden, with quaint box-bordered flower-beds, winding walks, and
stone fountains. Beyond, a stretch of smooth lawn sloping down to the lake, which now lay,
a silver mirror, in the soft evening light. The stillness was so perfect; the sense of peace,
so all-pervading. Jane held a book on her knee, but she was not reading. She was looking away
to the distant woods beyond the lake; then to the pearly sky above, flecked with rosy clouds
and streaked with gleams of gold; and a sense of content, and gladness, and well-being, filled her.

Presently she heard a light step on the gravel below and leaned forward to see to whom it belonged.
Garth had come out of the smoking-room and walked briskly to and fro, once or twice. Then he
threw himself into a wicker seat just beneath her window, and sat there, smoking meditatively.
The fragrance of his cigarette reached Jane, up among the magnolia blossoms. "'Zenith,' Marcovitch,"
she said to herself, and smiled. "Packed in jolly green boxes, twelve shillings a hundred!
I must remember in case I want to give him a Christmas present. By then it will be difficult
to find anything which has not already been showered upon him."

Garth flung away the end of his cigarette, and commenced humming below his breath; then gradually
broke into words and sang softly, in his sweet barytone:

    "'It is not mine to sing the stately grace,
     The great soul beaming in my lady's face.'"

The tones, though quiet, were so vibrant with passionate feeling, that Jane felt herself an
eavesdropper. She hastily picked a large magnolia leaf and, leaning out, let it fall upon his
head. Garth started, and looked up. "Hullo!" he said. "YOU--up there?"

"Yes," said Jane, laughing down at him, and speaking low lest other casements should be open,
"I--up here. You are serenading the wrong window, dear 'devout lover.'"

"What a lot you know about it," remarked Garth, rather moodily.

"Don't I?" whispered Jane. "But you must not mind, Master Garthie, because you know how truly
I care. In old Margery's absence, you must let me be mentor."

Garth sprang up and stood erect, looking up at her, half-amused, half-defiant.

"Shall I climb the magnolia?" he said. "I have heaps to say to you which cannot be shouted
to the whole front of the house."

"Certainly not," replied Jane. "I don't want any Romeos coming in at my window. 'Hoity-toity!
What next?' as Aunt 'Gina would say. Run along and change your pinafore, Master Garthie. The
'heaps of things' must keep until to-night, or we shall both be late for dinner."

"All right," said Garth, "all right. But you will come out here this evening, Miss Champion?
And you will give me as long as I want?"

"I will come as soon as we can possibly escape," replied Jane; "and you cannot be more anxious
to tell me everything than I am to hear it. Oh! the scent of these magnolias! And just look
at the great white trumpets! Would you like one for your buttonhole?"

He gave her a wistful, whimsical little smile; then turned and went indoors.

"Why do I feel so inclined to tease him?" mused Jane, as she moved, from the window. "Really
it is I who have been silly this time; and he, staid and sensible. Myra is quite right. He
is taking it very seriously. And how about her? Ah! I hope she cares enough, and in the right
way.--Come in, Matthews! And you can put out the gown I wore on the night of the concert at
Overdene, and we must make haste. We have just twenty minutes. What a lovely evening! Before
you do anything else, come and see this sunset on the lake. Ah! it is good to be here!"

CHAPTER X

THE REVELATION

All the impatience in the world could not prevent dinner at Shenstone from being a long function,
and two of the most popular people in the party could not easily escape afterwards unnoticed.
So a distant clock in the village was striking ten, as Garth and Jane stepped out on to the
terrace together. Garth caught up a rug in passing, and closed the door of the lower hall carefully
behind him.

They were quite alone. It was the first time they had been really alone since these days apart,
which had seemed so long to both.

They walked silently, side by side, to the wide stone parapet overlooking the old-fashioned
garden. The silvery moonlight flooded the whole scene with radiance. They could see the stiff
box-borders, the winding paths, the queerly shaped flower-beds, and, beyond, the lake, like
a silver mirror, reflecting the calm loveliness of the full moon.

Garth spread the rug on the coping, and Jane sat down. He stood beside her, one foot on the
coping, his arms folded across his chest, his head erect. Jane had seated herself sideways,
turning towards him, her back to an old stone lion mounting guard upon the parapet; but she
turned her head still further, to look down upon the lake, and she thought Garth was looking
in the same direction.

But Garth was looking at Jane.

She wore the gown of soft trailing black material she had worn at the Overdene concert, only
she had not on the pearls or, indeed, any ornament save a cluster of crimson rambler roses.
They nestled in the soft, creamy old lace which covered the bosom of her gown. There was a
quiet strength and nobility about her attitude which thrilled the soul of the man who stood
watching her. All the adoring love, the passion of worship, which filled his heart, rose to
his eyes and shone there. No need to conceal it now. His hour had come at last, and he had
nothing to hide from the woman he loved.

Presently she turned, wondering why he did not begin his confidences about Pauline Lister.
Looking up inquiringly, she met his eyes.

"Dal!" cried Jane, and half rose from her seat. "Oh, Dal,--don't!"

He gently pressed her back. "Hush, dear," he said. "I must tell you everything, and you have
promised to listen, and to advise and help. Ah, Jane, Jane! I shall need your help. I want
it so greatly, and not only your help, Jane--but YOU--you, yourself. Ah, how I want you! These
three days have been one continual ache of loneliness, because you were not there; and life
began to live and move again, when you returned. And yet it has been so hard, waiting all these
hours to speak. I have so much to tell you, Jane, of all you are to me--all you have become
to me, since the night of the concert. Ah, how can I express it? I have never had any big things
in my life; all has been more or less trivial--on the surface. This need of you--this wanting
you--is so huge. It dwarfs all that went before; it would overwhelm all that is to come,--were
it not that it will be the throne, the crown, the summit, of the future.--Oh, Jane! I have
admired so many women. I have raved about them, sighed for them, painted them, and forgotten
them. But I never LOVED a woman before; I never knew what womanhood meant to a man, until I
heard your voice thrill through the stillness--'I count each pearl.' Ah, beloved, I have learned
to count pearls since then, precious hours in the past, long forgotten, now remembered, and
at last understood. 'Each hour a pearl, each pearl a prayer,' ay, a passionate plea that past
and present may blend together into a perfect rosary, and that the future may hold no possibility
of pain or parting. Oh, Jane--Jane! Shall I ever be able to make you understand--all--how much--Oh,
JANE!"

She was not sure just when he had come so near; but he had dropped on one knee in front of
her, and, as he uttered the last broken sentences, he passed both his arms around her waist
and pressed his face into the soft lace at her bosom. A sudden quietness came over him. All
struggling with explanations seemed hushed into the silence of complete comprehension--an all-pervading,
enveloping silence.

Jane neither moved nor spoke. It was so strangely sweet to have him there--this whirlwind of
emotion come home to rest, in a great stillness, just above her quiet heart. Suddenly she realised
that the blank of the last three days had not been the miss of the music, but the miss of HIM;
and as she realised this, she unconsciously put her arms about him. Sensations unknown to her
before, awoke and moved within her,--a heavenly sense of aloofness from the world, the loneliness
of life all swept away by this dear fact--just he and she together. Even as she thought it,
felt it, he lifted his head, still holding her, and looking into her face, said: "You and I
together, my own--my own."

But those beautiful shining eyes were more than Jane could bear. The sense of her plainness
smote her, even in that moment; and those adoring eyes seemed lights that revealed it. With
no thought in her mind but to hide the outward part from him who had suddenly come so close
to the shrine within, she quickly put both hands behind his head and pressed his face down
again, into the lace at her bosom. But, to him, those dear firm hands holding him close, by
that sudden movement, seemed an acceptance of himself and of all he had to offer. For ten,
twenty, thirty exquisite seconds, his soul throbbed in silence and rapture beyond words. Then
he broke from the pressure of those restraining hands; lifted his head, and looked into her
face once more.

"My wife!" he said.

      *      *      *      *      *

Into Jane's honest face came a look of startled wonder; then a deep flush, seeming to draw
all the blood, which had throbbed so strangely through her heart, into her cheeks, making them
burn, and her heart die within her. She disengaged herself from his hold, rose, and stood looking
away to where the still waters of the lake gleamed silver in the moonlight.

Garth Dalmain stood beside her. He did not touch her, nor did he speak again. He felt sure
he had won; and his whole soul was filled with a gladness unspeakable. His spirit was content.
The intense silence seemed more expressive than words. Any ordinary touch would have dimmed
the sense of those moments when her hands had held him to her. So he stood quite still and waited.

At last Jane spoke. "Do you mean that you wish to ask me to be--to be THAT--to you?"

"Yes, dear," he answered, gently; but in his voice vibrated the quiet of strong self-control.
"At least I came out here intending to ask it of you. But I cannot ask it now, beloved. I can't
ask you TO BE what you ARE already. No promise, no ceremony, no giving or receiving of a ring,
could make you more my wife than you have been just now in those wonderful moments."

Jane slowly turned and looked at him. She had never seen anything so radiant as his face. But
still those shining eyes smote her like swords. She longed to cover them with her hands; or
bid him look away over the woods and water, while he went on saying these sweet things to her.
She put up one foot on the low parapet, leaned her elbow on her knee, and shielded her face
with her hand. Then she answered him, trying to speak calmly.

"You have taken me absolutely by surprise, Dal. I knew you had been delightfully nice and attentive
since the concert evening, and that our mutual understanding of music and pleasure in it, coupled
with an increased intimacy brought about by our confidential conversation under the cedar,
had resulted in an unusually close and delightful friendship. I honestly admit it seems to
have--it has--meant more to me than any friendship has ever meant. But that was partly owing
to your temperament, Dal, which tends to make you always the most vivid spot in one's mental
landscape. But truly I thought you wanted me out here in order to pour out confidences about
Pauline Lister. Everybody believes that her loveliness has effected your final capture, and
truly, Dal, truly--I thought so, too." Jane paused.

"Well?" said the quiet voice, with its deep undertone of gladness. "You know otherwise now."

"Dal--you have so startled and astonished me. I cannot give you an answer to-night. You must
let me have until to-morrow--to-morrow morning."

"But, beloved," he said tenderly, moving a little nearer, "there is no more need for you to
answer than I felt need to put a question. Can't you realise this? Question and answer were
asked and given just now. Oh, my dearest--come back to me. Sit down again."

But Jane stood rigid.

"No," she said. "I can't allow you to take things for granted in this way. You took me by surprise,
and I lost my head utterly--unpardonably, I admit. But, my dear boy, marriage is a serious
thing. Marriage is not a mere question of sentiment. It has to wear. It has to last. It must
have a solid and dependable foundation, to stand the test and strain of daily life together.
I know so many married couples intimately. I stay in their homes, and act sponsor to their
children; with the result that I vowed never to risk it myself. And now I have let you put
this question, and you must not wonder if I ask for twelve hours to think it over."

Garth took this silently. He sat down on the stone coping with his back to the lake and, leaning
backward, tried to see her face; but the hand completely screened it. He crossed his knees
and clasped both hands around them, rocking slightly backward and forward for a minute while
mastering the impulse to speak or act violently. He strove to compose his mind by fixing it
upon trivial details which chanced to catch his eye. His red socks showed clearly in the moonlight
against the white paving of the terrace, and looked well with black patent-leather shoes. He
resolved always to wear red silk socks in the evening, and wondered whether Jane would knit
some for him. He counted the windows along the front of the house, noting which were his and
which were Jane's, and how many came between. At last he knew he could trust himself, and,
leaning back, spoke very gently, his dark head almost touching the lace of her sleeve.

"Dearest--tell me, didn't you feel just now--"

"Oh, hush!". cried Jane, almost harshly, "hush, Dal! Don't talk about feelings with this question
between us. Marriage is fact, not feeling. If you want to do really the best thing for us both,
go straight indoors now and don't speak to me again to-night. I heard you say you were going
to try the organ in the church on the common at eleven o'clock to-morrow morning. Well--I will
come there soon after half-past eleven and listen while you play; and at noon you can send
away the blower, and I will give you my answer. But now--oh, go away, dear; for truly I cannot
bear anymore. I must be left alone."

Garth loosed the strong fingers clasped so tightly round his knee. He slipped the hand next
to her along the stone coping, close to her foot. She felt him take hold of her gown with those
deft, masterful fingers. Then he bent his dark head quickly, and whispering: "I kiss the cross,"
with a gesture of infinite reverence and tenderness, which Jane never forgot, he kissed the
hem of her skirt. The next moment she was alone.

She listened while his footsteps died away. She heard the door into the lower hall open and
close. Then slowly she sat down just as she had sat when he knelt in front of her. Now she
was quite alone. The tension of these last hard moments relaxed. She pressed both hands over
the lace at her bosom where that dear, beautiful, adoring face had been hidden. Had she FELT,
he asked. Ah! what had she not felt?

Tears never came easily to Jane. But to-night she had been called a name by which she had never
thought to be called; and already her honest heart was telling her she would never be called
by it again. And large silent tears overflowed and fell upon her hands and upon the lace at
her breast. For the wife and the mother in her had been wakened and stirred, and the deeps
of her nature broke through the barriers of stern repression and almost masculine self-control,
and refused to be driven back without the womanly tribute of tears.

And around her feet lay the scattered petals of crushed rambler roses.

      *      *      *      *      *

Presently she passed indoors. The upper hall was filled with merry groups and resounded with
"good-nights" as the women mounted the great staircase, pausing to fling back final repartees,
or to confirm plans for the morrow.

Garth Dalmain was standing at the foot of the staircase, held in conversation by Pauline Lister
and her aunt, who had turned on the fourth step. Jane saw his slim, erect figure and glossy
head the moment she entered the hall. His back was towards her, and though she advanced and
stood quite near, he gave no sign of being aware of her presence. But the joyousness of his
voice seemed to make him hers again in this new sweet way. She alone knew what had caused it,
and unconsciously she put one hand over her bosom as she listened.

"Sorry, dear ladies," Garth was saying, "but to-morrow morning is impossible. I have an engagement
in the village. Yes--really! At eleven o'clock."

"That sounds so rural and pretty, Mr. Dalmain," said Mrs. Parker Bangs. "Why not take Pauline
and me along? We have seen no dairies, and no dairy-maids, nor any of the things in Adam Bede,
since we came over. I would just love to step into Mrs. Poyser's kitchen and see myself reflected
in the warming-pans on the walls."

"Perhaps we would be DE TROP in the dairy," murmured Miss Lister archly.

She looked very lovely in her creamy-white satin gown, her small head held regally, the brilliant
charm of American womanhood radiating from her. She wore no jewels, save one string of perfectly
matched pearls; but on Pauline Lister's neck even pearls seemed to sparkle.

All these scintillations, flung at Garth, passed over his sleek head and reached Jane where
she lingered in the background. She took in every detail. Never had Miss Lister's loveliness
been more correctly appraised.

"But it happens, unfortunately, to be neither a dairy-maid nor a warming-pan," said Garth.
"My appointment is with a very grubby small boy, whose rural beauties consist in a shock of
red hair and a whole pepper-pot of freckles."

"Philanthropic?" inquired Miss Lister.

"Yes, at the rate of threepence an hour."

"A caddy, of course," cried both ladies together.

"My! What a mystery about a thing so simple!" added Mrs. Parker Bangs. "Now we have heard,
Mr. Dalmain, that it is well worth the walk to the links to see you play. So you may expect
us to arrive there, time to see you start around."

Garth's eyes twinkled. Jane could hear the twinkle in his voice. "My dear lady," he said, "you
overestimate my play as, in your great kindness of heart, you overestimate many other things
connected with me. But I shall like to think of you at the golf links at eleven o'clock to-morrow
morning. You might drive there, but the walk through the woods is too charming to miss. Only
remember, you cross the park and leave by the north gate, not the main entrance by which we
go to the railway station. I would offer to escort you, but duty takes me, at an early hour,
in quite another direction. Besides, when Miss Lister's wish to see the links is known, so
many people will discover golf to be the one possible way of spending to-morrow morning, that
I should be but a unit in the crowd which will troop across the park to the north gate. It
will be quite impossible for you to miss your way."

Mrs. Parker Bangs was beginning to explain elaborately that never, under any circumstances,
could he be a unit, when her niece peremptorily interposed.

"That will do, aunt. Don't be silly. We are all units, except when we make a crowd; which is
what we are doing on this staircase at this present moment, so that Miss Champion has for some
time been trying ineffectually to pass us. Do you golf to-morrow, Miss Champion?"

Garth stood on one side, and Jane began to mount the stairs. He did not look at her, but it
seemed to Jane that his eyes were on the hem of her gown as it trailed past him. She paused
beside Miss Lister. She knew exactly how effectual a foil she made to the American girl's white
loveliness. She turned and faced him. She wished him to look up and see them standing there
together. She wanted the artist eyes to take in the cruel contrast. She wanted the artist soul
of him to realise it. She waited.

Garth's eyes were still on the hem of her gown, close to the left foot; but he lifted them
slowly to the lace at her bosom, where her hand still lay. There they rested a moment, then
dropped again, without rising higher.

"Yes," said Mrs. Parker Bangs, "are you playing around with Mr. Dalmain to-morrow forenoon,
Miss Champion?"

Jane suddenly flushed crimson, and then was furious with herself for blushing, and hated the
circumstances which made her feel and act so unlike her ordinary self. She hesitated during
the long dreadful moment. How dared Garth behave in that way? People would think there was
something unusual about her gown. She felt a wild impulse to stoop and look at it herself to
see whether his kiss had materialised and was hanging like a star to the silken hem. Then she
forced herself to calmness and answered rather brusquely: "I am not golfing to-morrow; but
you could not do better than go to the links. Good-night, Mrs. Parker Bangs. Sleep well, Miss
Lister. Good-night, Dal."

Garth was on the step below them, handing Pauline's aunt a letter she had dropped.

"Good-night, Miss Champion," he said, and for one instant his eyes met hers, but he did not
hold out his hand, or appear to see hers half extended.

The three women mounted the staircase together, then went different ways. Miss Lister trailed
away down a passage to the right, her aunt trotting in her wake.

"There's been a tiff there," said Mrs. Parker Bangs.

"Poor thing!" said Miss Lister softly. "I like her. She's a real good sort. I should have thought
she would have been more sensible than the rest of us."

"A real plain sort," said her aunt, ignoring the last sentence.

"Well, she didn't make her own face," said Miss Lister generously.

"No, and she don't pay other people to make it for her. She's what Sir Walter Scott calls:
'Nature in all its ruggedness.'"

"Dear aunt," remarked Miss Lister wearily, "I wish you wouldn't trouble to quote the English
classics to me when we are alone. It is pure waste of breath, because you see I KNOW you have
read them all. Here is my door. Now come right in and make yourself comfy on that couch. I
am going to sit in this palatial arm-chair opposite, and do a little very needful explaining.
My! How they fix one to the floor! These ancestral castles are all right so far as they go,
but they don't know a thing about rockers. Now I have a word or two to say about Miss Champion.
She's a real good sort, and I like her. She's not a beauty; but she has a fine figure, and
she dresses right. She has heaps of money, and could have rarer pearls than mine; but she knows
better than to put pearls on that brown skin. I like a woman who knows her limitations and
is sensible over them. All the men adore her, not for what she looks but for what she is, and,
my word, aunt, that's what pays in the long run. That is what lasts. Ten years hence the Honourable
Jane will still be what she is, and I shall be trying to look what I'm not. As for Garth Dalmain,
he has eyes for all of us and a heart for none. His pretty speeches and admiring looks don't
mean marriage, because he is a man with an ideal of womanhood and he can't see himself marrying
below it. If the Sistine Madonna could step down off those clouds and hand the infant to the
young woman on her left, he might marry HER; but even then he would be afraid he might see
some one next day who did her hair more becomingly, or that her foot would not look so well
on his Persian rugs as it does on that cloud. He won't marry money, because he has plenty of
it. And even if he hadn't, money made in candles would not appeal to him. He won't marry beauty,
because he thinks too much about it. He adores so many lovely faces, that he is never sure
for twenty-four hours which of them he admires most, bar the fact that, as in the case of fruit
trees, the unattainable are usually the most desired. He won't marry goodness--virtue--worth--whatever
you choose to call the sterling qualities of character--because in all these the Honourable
Jane Champion is his ideal, and she is too sensible a woman to tie such an epicure to her plain
face. Besides, she considers herself his grandmother, and doesn't require him to teach her
to suck eggs. But Garth Dalmain, poor boy, is so sublimely lacking in self-consciousness that
he never questions whether he can win his ideal. He possesses her already in his soul, and
it will be a fearful smack in the face when she says 'No,' as she assuredly will do, for reasons
aforesaid. These three days, while he has been playing around with me, and you and other dear
match-making old donkeys have gambolled about us, and made sure we were falling in love, he
has been worshipping the ground she walks on, and counting the hours until he should see her
walk on it again. He enjoyed being with me more than with the other girls, because I understood,
and helped him to work all conversations round to her, and he knew, when she arrived here,
I could be trusted to develop sudden anxiety about you, or have important letters to write,
if she came in sight. But that is all there will ever be between me and Garth Dalmain; and
if you had a really careful regard for my young affections you would drop your false set on
the marble wash-stand, or devise some other equally false excuse for our immediate departure
for town to-morrow.--And now, dear, don't stay to argue; because I have said exactly all there
is to say on the subject, and a little more. And try to toddle to bed without telling me of
which cute character in Dickens I remind you, because I am cuter than any of them, and if I
stay in this tight frock another second I can't answer for the consequences.--Oui, Josephine,
entrez!--Good-night, dear aunt. Happy dreams!"

But after her maid had left her, Pauline switched off the electric light and, drawing back
the curtain, stood for a long while at her window, looking out at the peaceful English scene
bathed in moonlight. At last she murmured softly, leaning her beautiful head against the window
frame:

"I stated your case well, but you didn't quite deserve it, Dal. You ought to have let me know
about Jane, weeks ago. Anyway, it will stop the talk about you and me. And as for you, dear,
you will go on sighing for the moon; and when you find the moon is unattainable, you will not
dream of seeking solace in more earthly lights--not even poppa's best sperm," she added, with
a wistful little smile, for Pauline's fun sparkled in solitude as freely as in company, and
as often at her own expense as at that of other people, and her brave American spirit would
not admit, even to herself, a serious hurt.

Meanwhile Jane had turned to the left and passed slowly to her room. Garth had not taken her
half-proffered hand, and she knew perfectly well why. He would never again be content to clasp
her hand in friendship. If she cut him off from the touch which meant absolute possession,
she cut herself off from the contact of simple comradeship. Garth, to-night, was like a royal
tiger who had tasted blood. It seemed a queer simile, as she thought of him in his conventional
evening clothes, correct in every line, well-groomed, smart almost to a fault. But out on the
terrace with him she had realised, for the first time, the primal elements which go to the
making of a man--a forceful determined, ruling man--creation's king. They echo of primeval
forests. The roar of the lion is in them, the fierceness of the tiger; the instinct of dominant
possession, which says: "Mine to have and hold, to fight for and enjoy; and I slay all comers!"
She had felt it, and her own brave soul had understood it and responded to it, unafraid; and
been ready to mate with it, if only--ah! if only--

But things could never be again as they had been before. If she meant to starve her tiger,
steel bars must be between them for evermore. None of those sentimental suggestions of attempts
to be a sort of unsatisfactory cross between sister and friend would do for the man whose head
she had unconsciously held against her breast. Jane knew this. He had kept himself magnificently
in hand after she put him from her, but she knew he was only giving her breathing space. He
still considered her his own, and his very certainty of the near future had given him that
gentle patience in the present. But even now, while her answer pended, he would not take her
hand in friendship. Jane closed her door and locked it. She must face this problem of the future,
with all else locked out excepting herself and him. Ah! if she could but lock herself out and
think only of him and of his love, as beautiful, perfect gifts laid at her feet, that she might
draw them up into her empty arms and clasp them there for evermore. Just for a little while
she would do this. One hour of realisation was her right. Afterwards she must bring HERSELF
into the problem,--her possibilities; her limitations; herself, in her relation to him in the
future; in the effect marriage with her would be likely to have upon him. What it might mean
to her did not consciously enter into her calculations. Jane was self-conscious, with the intense
self-consciousness of all reserved natures, but she was not selfish.

At first, then, she left her room in darkness, and, groping her way to the curtains, drew them
back, threw up the sash, and, drawing a chair to the window, sat down, leaning her elbows on
the sill and her chin in her hands, and looked down upon the terrace, still bathed in moonlight.
Her window was almost opposite the place where she and Garth had talked. She could see the
stone lion and the vase full of scarlet geraniums. She could locate the exact spot where she
was sitting when he--Memory awoke, vibrant.

Then Jane allowed herself the most wonderful mental experience of her life. She was a woman
of purpose and decision. She had said she had a right to that hour, and she took it to the
full. In soul she met her tiger and mated with him, unafraid. He had not asked whether she
loved him or not, and she did not need to ask herself. She surrendered her proud liberty, and
tenderly, humbly, wistfully, yet with all the strength of her strong nature, promised to love,
honour, and obey him. She met the adoration of his splendid eyes without a tremor. She had
locked her body out. She was alone with her soul; and her soul was all-beautiful--perfect for him.

The loneliness of years slipped from her. Life became rich and purposeful. He needed her always,
and she was always there and always able to meet his need. "Are you content, my beloved?" she
asked over and over; and Garth's joyous voice, with the ring of perpetual youth in it, always
answered: "Perfectly content." And Jane smiled into the night, and in the depths of her calm
eyes dawned a knowledge hitherto unknown, and in her tender smile trembled, with unspeakable
sweetness, an understanding of the secret of a woman's truest bliss. "He is mine and I am his.
And because he is mine, my beloved is safe; and because I am his, he is content."

Thus she gave herself completely; gathering him into the shelter of her love; and her generous
heart expanded to the greatness of the gift. Then the mother in her awoke and realised how
much of the maternal flows into the love of a true woman when she understands how largely the
child-nature predominates in the man in love, and how the very strength of his need of her
reduces to unaccustomed weakness the strong nature to which she has become essential.

Jane pressed her hands upon her breast. "Garth," she whispered, "Garth, I UNDERSTAND. My own
poor boy, it was so hard to you to be sent away just then. But you had had all--all you wanted,
in those few wonderful moments, and nothing can rob you of that fact. And you have made me
SO yours that, whatever the future brings for you and me, no other face will ever be hidden
here. It is yours, and I am yours--to-night, and henceforward, forever."

Jane leaned her forehead on the window-sill. The moonlight fell on the heavy coils of her brown
hair. The scent of the magnolia blooms rose in fragrance around her. The song of a nightingale
purled and thrilled in an adjacent wood. The lonely years of the past, the perplexing moments
of the present, the uncertain vistas of the future, all rolled away. She sailed with Garth
upon a golden ocean far removed from the shores of time. For love is eternal; and the birth
of love frees the spirit from all limitations of the flesh.

      *      *      *      *      *

A clock in the distant village struck midnight. The twelve strokes floated up to Jane's window
across the moonlit park. Time was once more. Her freed spirit resumed the burden of the body.

A new day had begun, the day upon which she had promised her answer to Garth. The next time
that clock struck twelve she would be standing with him in the church, and her answer must
be ready.

She turned from the window without closing it, drew the curtains closely across, switched on
the electric light over the writing-table, took off her evening gown, hung up bodice and skirt
in the wardrobe, resolutely locking the door upon them. Then she slipped on a sage-green wrapper,
which she had lately purchased at a bazaar because every one else fled from it, and the old
lady whose handiwork it was seemed so disappointed, and, drawing a chair near the writing-table,
took out her diary, unlocked the heavy clasp, and began to read. She turned the pages slowly,
pausing here and there, until she came to those she sought. Over them she pondered long, her
head in her hands. Child though I was, I could differentiate even then between ugliness and
plainness. I have associated his face ever since with the wondrous beauty of his soul.

At length Jane arose, turned on all the lights over the dressing-table, particularly two bright
ones on either side of the mirror, and, sitting down before it, faced herself honestly.

      *      *      *      *      *

When the village clock struck one, Garth Dalmain stood at his window taking a final look at
the night which had meant so much to him. He remembered, with an amused smile, how, to help
himself to calmness, he had sat on the terrace and thought of his socks, and then had counted
the windows between his and Jane's. There were five of them. He knew her window by the magnolia
tree and the seat beneath it where he had chanced to sit, not knowing she was above him. He
leaned far out and looked towards it now. The curtains were drawn, but there appeared still
to be a light behind them. Even as he watched, it went out.

He looked down at the terrace. He could see the stone lion and the vase of scarlet geraniums.
He could locate the exact spot where she was sitting when he--

Then he dropped upon his knees beside the window and looked up into the starry sky.

Garth's mother had lived long enough to teach him the holy secret of her sweet patience and
endurance. In moments of deep feeling, words from his mother's Bible came to his lips more
readily than expressions of his own thought.

Then he rose to his feet and looked across once more to the stone lion and the broad coping.
His soul sang within him, and he folded his arms across his chest. "My wife!" he said. "Oh!
my wife!"

      *      *      *      *      *

And, as the village clock struck one, Jane arrived at her decision. 

See Appendix IV. [T.S.]]

However, since the Drapier is but one man, I shall think I do a public
service, by asserting that the rest of my countrymen are wholly free
from learning out of his pamphlets to reflect on the King or his ministers,
to breed sedition.

I solemnly declare, that I never once heard the least reflection cast upon the King, on the subject
of Mr. Wood's coin: For in many discourses on this matter, I do not remember His Majesty's name
to be so much as mentioned.

As to the ministry in England, the only two persons hinted at were the Duke of Grafton, and Mr.
Walpole:[8] The former, as I have heard you and a hundred others affirm, declared, that he never saw
the patent in favour of Mr. Wood, before it was passed, although
he were then lord lieutenant: And therefore I suppose everybody believes,
that his grace hath been wholly unconcerned in it since.

[Footnote 8: Walpole was created a Knight of the Bath in 1724, when that order was revived. In 1726
he was installed Knight of the Order of the Garter, being the only
commoner who had been so distinguished since the reign of James I.,
except Admiral Montague, afterwards Earl of Sandwich.

He had been offered a peerage in 1723, but declined it for himself, accepting it for his son,
who was created Baron Walpole of Walpole, in Norfolk. [T.S.]]

Mr. Walpole was indeed supposed to be understood by the letter W. in several newspapers; where
it is said, that some expressions fell from him not very favourable
to the people of Ireland; for the truth of which, the kingdom is not
to answer, any more than for the discretion of the publishers.

You observe, the Drapier wholly clears Mr. Walpole of this charge, by very strong arguments and
speaks of him with civility. I cannot deny myself to have been often present, where the company
gave then opinion, that Mr. Walpole favoured Mr. Wood's project,
which I always contradicted; and for my own part, never once opened
my lips against that minister, either in mixed or particular meetings:
And my reason for this reservedness was, because it pleased him, in
the Queen's time (I mean Queen Anne of ever blessed memory) to make
a speech directly against me, by name, in the House of Commons, as
I was told a very few minutes after, in the Court of Requests, by
more than fifty members.

But you, who are in a great station here, (if anything here may be
called great) cannot be ignorant, that whoever is understood by public
voice to be chief minister, will, among the general talkers, share
the blame, whether justly or no, of every thing that is disliked;
which I could easily make appear in many instances, from my own knowledge,
while I was in the world; and particularly in the case of the greatest,
the wisest, and the most uncorrupt minister, I ever conversed with.[9]

[Footnote
9: Robert Harley, Earl of Oxford.

[T.S.]]

But, whatever unpleasing opinion some people might conceive of Mr. Walpole, on account of those
halfpence; I dare boldly affirm, it was entirely owing to Mr. Wood. Many persons of credit,
come from England, have affirmed to me, and others, that they have seen letters under his hand,
full of arrogance and insolence towards Ireland; and boasting of his favour with Mr. Walpole; which
is highly probable: Because he reasonably thought it for his interest to spread such a report;
and because it is the known talent of low and little spirits, to have a great man's name perpetually
in their mouths.[10]

[Footnote 10: See Coxe's "Memoirs of Walpole" (vol. i., cap. 26, p. 389, ed. 1800), where Wood
is blamed for his indiscretion on this matter. See also note prefixed to the Drapier's First Letter
in the present edition.
 Memory's pearls, in all the purity of their gleaming preciousness, were counted one by
one by the flute and dulciana; and the sadder tones of the waldflute proclaimed the finding
of the cross. It all held a new meaning for Jane, who looked helplessly round, as if seeking
some way of escape from the sad sweetness of sound which filled the little church.

Suddenly it ceased. Garth stood up, turned, and saw her. The glory of a great joy leaped into
his face.

"All right, Jimmy," he said; "that will do for this morning. And here is a bright sixpence,
because you have managed the blowing so well. Hullo! It's a shilling! Never mind. You shall
have it because it is such a glorious day. There never was such a day, Jimmy; and I want you
to be happy also. Now run off quickly, and shut the church door behind you, my boy."

Ah! how his voice, with its ring of buoyant gladness, shook her soul.

The red-headed boy, rather grubby, with a whole pepper-pot of freckles, but a beaming face
of pleasure, came out from behind the organ, clattered down a side aisle; dropped his shilling
on the way and had to find it; but at last went out, the heavy door closing behind him with
a resounding clang.

Garth had remained standing beside the organ, quite motionless, without looking at Jane, and
now that they were absolutely alone in the church, he still stood and waited a few moments.
To Jane those moments seemed days, weeks, years, an eternity. Then he came out into the centre
of the chancel, his head erect, his eyes shining, his whole bearing that of a conqueror sure
of his victory. He walked down to the quaintly carved oaken screen and, passing beneath it,
stood at the step. Then he signed to Jane to come and stand beside him.

"Here, dearest," he said; "let it be here."

Jane came to him, and for a moment they stood together, looking up the chancel. It was darker
than the rest of the church, being lighted only by three narrow stained-glass windows, gems
of colour and of significance. The centre window, immediately over the communion table, represented
the Saviour of the world, dying upon the cross. They gazed at it in reverent silence. Then
Garth turned to Jane.

"My beloved," he said, "it is a sacred Presence and a sacred place. But no place could be too
sacred for that which we have to say to each other, and the Holy Presence, in which we both
believe, is here to bless and ratify it. I am waiting for your answer."

Jane cleared her throat and put her trembling hands into the large pockets of her tweed coat.

"Dal," she said; "my answer is a question. How old are you?"

She felt his start of intense surprise. She saw the light of expectant joy fade from his face.
But he replied, after only a momentary hesitation: "I thought you knew, dearest. I am twenty-seven."

"Well," said Jane slowly and deliberately, "I am thirty; and I look thirty-five, and feel forty.
You are twenty-seven, Dal, and you look nineteen, and often feel nine. I have been thinking
it over, and--you know--I cannot marry a mere boy."

Silence--absolute.

In sheer terror Jane forced herself to look at him. He was white to the lips. His face was
very stern and calm--a strange, stony calmness. There was not much youth in it just then. "ANOINT
AND CHEER OUR SOILED FACE"--The silent church seemed to wail the words in bewildered agony.

At last he spoke. "I had not thought of myself," he said slowly. "I cannot explain how it comes
to pass, but I have not thought of myself at all, since my mind has been full of you. Therefore
I had not realised how little there is in me that you could care for. I believed you had felt
as I did, that we were--just each other's." For a moment he put out his hand as if he would
have touched her. Then it dropped heavily to his side. "You are quite right," he said. "You
could not marry any one whom you consider a mere boy."

He turned from her and faced up the chancel. For the space of a long silent minute he looked
at the window over the holy table, where hung the suffering Christ. Then he bowed his head.
"I accept the cross," he said, and, turning, walked quietly down the aisle. The church door
opened, closed behind him with a heavy clang, and Jane was alone.

She stumbled back to the seat she had left, and fell upon her knees.

"O, my God," she cried, "send him back to me, oh, send him back! ... Oh, Garth! It is I who
am plain and unattractive and unworthy, not you. Oh, Garth--come back! come back! come back!
... I will trust and not be afraid ... Oh, my own Dear--come back!"

She listened, with straining ears. She waited, until every nerve of her body ached with suspense.
She decided what she would say when the heavy door reopened and she saw Garth standing in a
shaft of sunlight. She tried to remember the VENI, but the hollow clang of the door had silenced
even memory's echo of that haunting music. So she waited silently, and as she waited the silence
grew and seemed to enclose her within cruel, relentless walls which opened only to allow her
glimpses into the vista of future lonely years. Just once more she broke that silence. "Oh,
darling, come back! I WILL RISK IT," she said. But no step drew near, and, kneeling with her
face buried in her clasped hands, Jane suddenly realised that Garth Dalmain had accepted her
decision as final and irrevocable, and would not return.

How long she knelt there after realising this, she never knew. But at last comfort came to
her. She felt she had done right. A few hours of present anguish were better than years of
future disillusion. Her own life would be sadly empty, and losing this newly found joy was
costing her more than she had expected; but she honestly believed "she had done rightly towards
him, and what did her own pain matter?" Thus comfort came to Jane.

At last she rose and passed out of the silent church into the breezy sunshine.

Near the park gates a little knot of excited boys were preparing to fly a kite. Jimmy, the
hero of the hour, the centre of attraction, proved to be the proud possessor of this new kite.
Jimmy was finding the day glorious indeed, and was being happy. "Happy ALSO," Garth had said.
And Jane's eyes filled with tears, as she remembered the word and the tone in which it was spoken.

"There goes my poor boy's shilling," she said to herself sadly, as the kite mounted and soared
above the common; "but, alas, where is his joy?"

As she passed up the avenue a dog-cart was driven swiftly down it. Garth Dalmain drove it;
behind him a groom and a portmanteau. He lifted his hat as he passed her, but looked straight
before him. In a moment he was gone. Had Jane wanted to stop him she could not have done so.
But she did not want to stop him. She felt absolutely satisfied that she had done the right
thing, and done it at greater cost to herself than to him. He would eventually--ah, perhaps
before so very long--find another to be to him all, and more than all, he had believed she
could be. But she? The dull ache at her bosom reminded her of her own words the night before,
whispered in the secret of her chamber to him who, alas, was not there to hear: "Whatever the
future brings for you and me, no other face will ever be hidden here." And, in this first hour
of the coming lonely years, she knew them to be true.

In the hall she met Pauline Lister.

"Is that you, Miss Champion?" said Pauline. "Well now, have you heard of Mr. Dalmain? He has
had to go to town unexpectedly, on the 1.15 train; and aunt has dropped her false teeth on
her marble wash-stand and must get to the dentist right away. So we go to town on the 2.30.
It's an uncertain world. It complicates one's plans, when they have to depend on other people's
teeth. But I would sooner break false teeth than true hearts, any day. One can get the former
mended, but I guess no one can mend the latter. We are lunching early in our rooms; so I wish
you good-by, Miss Champion."

CHAPTER XII

THE DOCTOR'S PRESCRIPTION

The Honourable Jane Champion stood on the summit of the Great Pyramid and looked around her.
The four exhausted Arabs whose exertions, combined with her own activity, had placed her there,
dropped in the picturesque attitudes into which an Arab falls by nature. They had hoisted the
Honourable Jane's eleven stone ten from the bottom to the top in record time, and now lay around,
proud of their achievement and sure of their "backsheesh."

The whole thing had gone as if by clock-work. Two mahogany-coloured, finely proportioned fellows,
in scanty white garments, sprang with the ease of antelopes to the top of a high step, turning
to reach down eagerly and seize Jane's upstretched hands. One remained behind, unseen but indispensable,
to lend timely aid at exactly the right moment. Then came the apparently impossible task for
Jane, of placing the sole of her foot on the edge of a stone four feet above the one upon which
she was standing. It seemed rather like stepping up on to the drawing-room mantelpiece. But
encouraged by cries of "Eiwa! Eiwa!" she did it; when instantly a voice behind said, "Tyeb!"
two voices above shouted, "Keteer!" the grip on her hands tightened, the Arab behind hoisted,
and Jane had stepped up, with an ease which surprised herself. As a matter of fact, under those
circumstances the impossible thing would have been not to have stepped up.

Arab number four was water-carrier, and offered water from a gourd at intervals; and once,
when Jane had to cry halt for a few minutes' breathing space, Schehati, handsomest of all,
and leader of the enterprise, offered to recite English Shakespeare-poetry. This proved to be:

    "Jack-an-Jill
     Went uppy hill,
     To fetchy paily water;
     Jack fell down-an
     Broke his crown-an
     Jill came tumbling after."

Jane had laughed; and Schehati, encouraged by the success of his attempt to edify and amuse,
used lines of the immortal nursery epic as signals for united action during the remainder of
the climb. Therefore Jane mounted one step to the fact that Jack fell down, and scaled the
next to information as to the serious nature of his injuries, and at the third, Schehati, bending
over, confidentially mentioned in her ear, while Ali shoved behind, that "Jill came tumbling
after."

The familiar words, heard under such novel circumstances, took on fresh meaning. Jane commenced
speculating as to whether the downfall of Jack need necessarily have caused so complete a loss
of self-control and equilibrium on the part of Jill. Would she not have proved her devotion
better by bringing the mutual pail safely to the bottom of the hill, and there attending to
the wounds of her fallen hero? Jane, in her time, had witnessed the tragic downfall of various
delightful jacks, and had herself ministered tenderly to their broken crowns; for in each case
the Jill had remained on the top of the hill, flirting with that objectionable person of the
name of Horner, whose cool, calculating way of setting to work--so unlike poor Jack's headlong
method--invariably secured him the plum; upon which he remarked "What a good boy am I!" and
was usually taken at his own smug valuation. But Jane's entire sympathy on these occasions
was with the defeated lover, and more than one Jack was now on his feet again, bravely facing
life, because that kind hand had been held out to him as he lay in his valley of humiliation,
and that comprehending sympathy had proved balm to his broken crown.

"Dickery, dickery, dock!" chanted Schehati solemnly, as he hauled again; "Moses ran up the
clock. The clock struck 'one'--"

THE CLOCK STRUCK "ONE"?--It was nearly three years since that night at Shenstone when the clock
had struck "one," and Jane had arrived at her decision,--the decision which precipitated her
Jack from his Pisgah of future promise. And yet--no. He had not fallen before the blow. He
had taken it erect, and his light step had been even firmer than usual as he walked down the
church and left her, after quietly and deliberately accepting her decision. It was Jane herself,
left alone, who fell hopelessly over the pail. She shivered even now when she remembered how
its icy waters drenched her heart. Ah, what would have happened if Garth had come back in answer
to her cry during those first moments of intolerable suffering and loneliness? But Garth was
not the sort of man who, when a door has been shut upon him, waits on the mat outside, hoping
to be recalled. When she put him from her, and he realised that she meant it he passed completely
out of her life. He was at the railway station by the time she reached the house, and from
that day to this they had never met. Garth evidently considered the avoidance of meetings to
be his responsibility, and he never failed her in this. Once or twice she went on a visit to
houses where she knew him to be staying. He always happened to have left that morning, if she
arrived in time for luncheon; or by an early afternoon train, if she was due for tea. He never
timed it so that there should be tragic passings of each other, with set faces, at the railway
stations; or a formal word of greeting as she arrived and he departed,--just enough to awaken
all the slumbering pain and set people wondering. Jane remembered with shame that this was
the sort of picturesque tragedy she would have expected from Garth Dalmain. But the man who
had surprised her by his dignified acquiescence in her decision, continued to surprise her
by the strength with which he silently accepted it as final and kept out of her way. Jane had
not probed the depth of the wound she had inflicted.

Never once was his departure connected, in the minds of others, with her arrival. There was
always some excellent and perfectly natural reason why he had been obliged to leave, and he
was openly talked of and regretted, and Jane heard all the latest "Dal stories," and found
herself surrounded by the atmosphere of his exotic, beauty-loving nature. And there was usually
a girl--always the loveliest of the party--confidentially pointed out to Jane, by the rest,
as a certainty, if only Dal had had another twenty-four hours of her society. But the girl
herself would appear quite heart-whole, only very full of an evidently delightful friendship,
expressing all Dal's ideas on art and colour, as her own, and confidently happy in an assured
sense of her own loveliness and charm and power to please. Never did he leave behind him traces
which the woman who loved him regretted to find. But he was always gone--irrevocably gone.
Garth Dalmain was not the sort of man to wait on the door-mat of a woman's indecision.

Neither did this Jack of hers break his crown. His portrait of Pauline Lister, painted six
months after the Shenstone visit, had proved the finest bit of work he had as yet accomplished.
He had painted the lovely American, in creamy white satin, standing on a dark oak staircase,
one hand resting on the balustrade, the other, full of yellow roses, held out towards an unseen
friend below. Behind and above her shone a stained-glass window, centuries old, the arms, crest,
and mottoes of the noble family to whom the place belonged, shining thereon in rose-coloured
and golden glass. He had wonderfully caught the charm and vivacity of the girl. She was gaily
up-to-date, and frankly American, from the crown of her queenly little head, to the point of
her satin shoe; and the suggestiveness of placing her in surroundings which breathed an atmosphere
of the best traditions of England's ancient ancestral homes, the fearless wedding of the new
world with the old, the putting of this sparkling gem from the new into the beautiful mellow
setting of the old and there showing it at its best,--all this was the making of the picture.
People smiled, and said the painter had done on canvas what he shortly intended doing in reality;
but the tie between artist and sitter never grew into anything closer than a pleasant friendship,
and it was the noble owner of the staircase and window who eventually persuaded Miss Lister
to remain in surroundings which suited her so admirably.

One story about that portrait Jane had heard discussed more than once in circles where both
were known. Pauline Lister had come to the first sittings wearing her beautiful string of pearls,
and Garth had painted them wonderfully, spending hours over the delicate perfecting of each
separate gleaming drop. Suddenly one day he seized his palette-knife, scraped the whole necklace
off the canvas with a stroke and, declared she must wear her rose-topazes in order to carry
out his scheme of colour. She was wearing her rose-topazes when Jane saw the picture in the
Academy, and very lovely they looked on the delicate whiteness of her neck. But people who
had seen Garth's painting of the pearls maintained that that scrape of the palette-knife had
destroyed work which would have been the talk of the year. And Pauline Lister, just after it
had happened, was reported to have said, with a shrug of her pretty shoulders: "Schemes of
colour are all very well. But he scraped my pearls off the canvas because some one who came
in hummed a tune while looking at the picture. I would be obliged if people who walk around
the studio while I am being painted will in future refrain from humming tunes. I don't want
him to scoop off my topazes and call for my emeralds. Also I feel like offering a reward for
the discovery of that tune. I want to know what it has to do with my scheme of colour, anyway."

When Jane heard the story, she was spending a few days with the Brands in Wimpole Street. It
was told at tea, in Lady Brand's pretty boudoir. The duchess's Concert, at which Garth had
heard her sing THE ROSARY, was a thing of the past. Nearly a year had elapsed since their final
parting, and this was the very first thought or word or sign of his remembrance, which directly
or indirectly, had come her way. She could not doubt that the tune hummed had been THE ROSARY.

She seemed to hear Garth's voice on the terrace, as she heard it in those first startled moments
of realising the gift which was being laid at her feet--"I have learned to count pearls, beloved."

Jane's heart was growing cold and frozen in its emptiness. This incident of the studio warmed
and woke it for the moment, and with the waking came sharp pain. When the visitors had left,
and Lady Brand had gone to the nursery, she walked over to the piano, sat down, and softly
played the accompaniment of "The Rosary." The fine unexpected chords, full of discords working
into harmony, seemed to suit her mood and her memories.

Suddenly a voice behind her said: "Sing it, Jane." She turned quickly. The doctor had come
in, and was lying back luxuriously in a large arm-chair at her elbow, his hands clasped behind
his head. "Sing it, Jane," he said.

"I can't, Deryck," she answered, still softly sounding the chords. "I have not sung for months."

"What has been the matter--for months?"

Jane took her hands off the keys, and swung round impulsively.

"Oh, boy," she said. "I have made a bad mess of my life! And yet I know I did right. I would
do the same again; at least--at least, I hope I would."

The doctor sat in silence for a minute, looking at her and pondering these short, quick sentences.
Also he waited for more, knowing it would come more easily if he waited silently.

It came.

"Boy--I gave up something, which was more than life itself to me, for the sake of another,
and I can't get over it. I know I did right, and yet--I can't get over it."

The doctor leaned forward and took the clenched hands between his.

"Can you tell me about it, Jeanette?"

"I can tell no one, Deryck; not even you."

"If ever you find you must tell some one, Jane, will you promise to come to me?"

"Gladly."

"Good! Now, my dear girl, here is a prescription for you. Go abroad. And, mind, I do not mean
by that, just to Paris and back, or Switzerland this summer, and the Riviera in the autumn.
Go to America and see a few big things. See Niagara. And all your life afterwards, when trivialities
are trying you, you will love to let your mind go back to the vast green mass of water sweeping
over the falls; to the thunderous roar, and the upward rush of spray; to the huge perpetual
onwardness of it all. You will like to remember, when you are bothering about pouring water
in and out of teacups, 'Niagara is flowing still.' Stay in a hotel so near the falls that you
can hear their great voice night and day, thundering out themes of power and progress. Spend
hours walking round and viewing it from every point. Go to the Cave of the Winds, across the
frail bridges, where the guide will turn and shout to you: 'Are your rings on tight?' Learn,
in passing, the true meaning of the Rock of Ages. Receive Niagara into your life and soul as
a possession, and thank God for it."

"Then go in for other big things in America. Try spirituality and humanity; love and life.
Seek out Mrs. Ballington Booth, the great 'Little Mother' of all American prisoners. I know
her well, I am proud to say, and can give you a letter of introduction. Ask her to take you
with her to Sing-Sing, or to Columbus State Prison, and to let you hear her address an audience
of two thousand convicts, holding out to them the gospel of hope and love,--her own inspired
and inspiring belief in fresh possibilities even for the most despairing."

"Go to New York City and see how, when a man wants a big building and has only a small plot
of ground, he makes the most of that ground by running his building up into the sky. Learn
to do likewise.--And then, when the great-souled, large-hearted, rapid-minded people of America
have waked you to enthusiasm with their bigness, go off to Japan and see a little people nobly
doing their best to become great.--Then to Palestine, and spend months in tracing the footsteps
of the greatest human life ever lived. Take Egypt on your way home, just to remind yourself
that there are still, in this very modern world of ours, a few passably ancient things,--a
well-preserved wooden man, for instance, with eyes of opaque white quartz, a piece of rock
crystal in the centre for a pupil. These glittering eyes looked out upon the world from beneath
their eyelids of bronze, in the time of Abraham. You will find it in the museum at Cairo. Ride
a donkey in the Mooskee if you want real sport; and if you feel a little slack, climb the Great
Pyramid. Ask for an Arab named Schehati, and tell him you want to do it one minute quicker
than any lady has ever done it before."

"Then come home, my dear girl, ring me up and ask for an appointment; or chance it, and let
Stoddart slip you into my consulting-room between patients, and report how the prescription
has worked. I never gave a better; and you need not offer me a guinea! I attend old friends
gratis."

Jane laughed, and gripped his hand. "Oh, boy," she said, "I believe you are right. My whole
ideas of life have been focussed on myself and my own individual pains and losses. I will do
as you say; and God bless you for saying it.--Here comes Flower. Flower," she said, as the
doctor's wife trailed in, wearing a soft tea-gown, and turning on the electric lights as she
passed, "will this boy of ours ever grow old? Here he is, seriously advising that a stout,
middle-aged woman should climb the Great Pyramid as a cure for depression, and do it in record
time!"

"Darling," said the doctor's wife, seating herself on the arm of his chair, "whom have you
been seeing who is stout, or depressed, or middle-aged? If you mean Mrs. Parker Bangs, she
is not middle-aged, because she is an American, and no American is ever middle-aged. And she
is only depressed because, even after painting her lovely niece's portrait, Garth Dalmain has
failed to propose to her. And it is no good advising her to climb the Great Pyramid, though
she is doing Egypt this winter, because I heard her say yesterday that she should never think
of going up the pyramids until the children of Israel, or whoever the natives are who live
around those parts, have the sense to put an elevator right up the centre."

Jane and the doctor laughed, and Flower, settling herself more comfortably, for the doctor's
arm had stolen around her, said: "Jane, I heard you playing THE ROSARY just now, such a favourite
of mine, and it is months since I heard it. Do sing it, dear."

Jane met the doctor's eyes and smiled reassuringly; then turned without any hesitation and
did as Flower asked. The prescription had already done her good.

At the last words of the song the doctor's wife bent over and laid a tender little kiss just
above his temple, where the thick dark hair was streaked with silver. But the doctor's mind
was intent on Jane, and before the final chords were struck he knew he had diagnosed her case
correctly. "But she had better go abroad," he thought. "It will take her mind off herself altogether,
giving her a larger view of things in general, and a better proportioned view of things in
particular. And the boy won't change; or, if he does, Jane will be proved right, to her own
satisfaction. But, if this is HER side, good heavens, what must HIS be! I had wondered what
was sapping all his buoyant youthfulness. To care for Jane would be an education; but to have
made Jane care! And then to have lost her! He must have nerves of steel, to be facing life
at all. What is this cross they are both learning to kiss, and holding up between them? Perhaps
Niagara will sweep it away, and she will cable him from there."

Then the doctor took the dear little hand resting on his shoulder and kissed it softly, while
Jane's back was still turned. For the doctor had had past experience of the cross, and now
the pearls were very precious.

So Jane took the prescription, and two years went by in the taking; and here she was, on the
top of the Great Pyramid, and, moreover, she had done it in record time, and laughed as she
thought of how she should report the fact to Deryck.

Her Arabs lay around, very hot and shiny, and content. Large backsheesh was assured, and they
looked up at her with pleased possessive eyes, as an achievement of their own; hardly realising
how large a part her finely developed athletic powers and elastic limbs had played in the speed
of the ascent.

And Jane stood there, sound in wind and limb, and with the exhilarating sense, always helpful
to the mind, of a bodily feat accomplished.

She was looking her best in her Norfolk coat and skirt of brown tweed with hints of green and
orange in it, plenty of useful pockets piped with leather, leather buttons, and a broad band
of leather round the bottom of the skirt. A connoisseur would have named at once the one and
only firm from which that costume could have come, and the hatter who supplied the soft green
Tyrolian hat--for Jane scorned pith helmets--which matched it so admirably. But Schehati was
no connoisseur of clothing, though a pretty shrewd judge of ways and manners, and he summed
up Jane thus: "Nice gentleman-lady! Give good backsheesh, and not sit down halfway and say:
`No top'! But real lady-gentleman! Give backsheesh with kind face, and not send poor Arab to
Assouan."

Jane was deeply tanned by the Eastern sun. Burning a splendid brown, and enjoying the process,
she had no need of veils or parasols; and her strong eyes faced the golden light of the desert
without the aid of smoked glasses. She had once heard Garth remark that a sight which made
him feel really ill, was the back view of a woman in a motor-veil, and Jane had laughingly
agreed, for to her veils of any kind had always seemed superfluous. The heavy coils of her
brown hair never blew about into fascinating little curls and wisps, but remained where, with
a few well-directed hairpins, she each morning solidly placed them.

Jane had never looked better than she did on this March day, standing on the summit of the
Great Pyramid. Strong, brown, and well-knit, a reliable mind in a capable body, the undeniable
plainness of her face redeemed by its kindly expression of interest and enjoyment; her wide,
pleasant smile revealing her fine white teeth, witnesses to her perfect soundness and health,
within and without.

"Nice gentleman-lady," murmured Schehati again: and had Jane overheard the remark it would
not have offended her; for, though she held a masculine woman only one degree less in abhorrence
than an effeminate man, she would have taken Schehati's compound noun as a tribute to the fact
that she was well-groomed and independent, knowing her own mind, and, when she started out
to go to a place, reaching it in the shortest possible time, without fidget, fuss, or flurry.
These three feminine attributes were held in scorn by Jane, who knew herself so deeply womanly
that she could afford in minor ways to be frankly unfeminine.

The doctor's prescription had worked admirably. That look of falling to pieces and ageing prematurely--a
general dilapidation of mind and body--which it had grieved and startled him to see in Jane
as she sat before him on the music-stool, was gone completely. She looked a calm, pleasant
thirty; ready to go happily on, year by year, towards an equally agreeable and delightful forty;
and not afraid of fifty, when that time should come. Her clear eyes looked frankly out upon
the world, and her sane mind formed sound opinions and pronounced fair judgments, tempered
by the kindliness of an unusually large and generous heart.

Just now she was considering the view and finding it very good. Its strong contrasts held her.

On one side lay the fertile Delta, with its groves of waving palm, orange, and olive trees,
growing in rich profusion on the banks of the Nile, a broad band of gleaming silver. On the
other, the Desert, with its far-distant horizon, stretching away in undulations of golden sand;
not a tree, not a leaf, not a blade of grass, but boundless liberty, an ocean of solid golden
glory. For the sun was setting, and the sky flamed into colour.

"A parting of the ways," said Jane; "a place of choice. How difficult to know which to choose--liberty
or fruitfulness. One would have to consult the Sphinx--wise old guardian of the ages, silent
keeper of Time's secrets, gazing on into the future as It has always gazed, while future became
present, and present glided into past.--Come, Schehati, let us descend. Oh, yes, I will certainly
sit upon the stone on which the King sat when he was Prince of Wales. Thank you for mentioning
it. It will supply a delightful topic of conversation next time I am honoured by a few minutes
of his gracious Majesty's attention, and will save me from floundering into trite remarks about
the weather.--And now take me to the Sphinx, Schehati. There is a question I would ask of It,
just as the sun dips below the horizon."

CHAPTER XIII

THE ANSWER OF THE SPHINX

Moonlight in the desert.

Jane ordered her after-dinner coffee on the piazza of the hotel, that she might lose as little
as possible of the mystic loveliness of the night. The pyramids appeared so huge and solid,
in the clear white light; and the Sphinx gathered unto itself more mystery.

Jane promised herself a stroll round by moonlight presently. Meanwhile she lay back in a low
wicker chair, comfortably upholstered, sipping her coffee, and giving herself up to the sense
of dreamy content which, in a healthy body, is apt to follow vigorous exertion.

Very tender and quiet thoughts of Garth came to her this evening, perhaps brought about by
the associations of moonlight.

Ah! the great poet knew the effect upon the heart of a vivid reminder to the senses. Jane now
passed beneath the spell.

To begin with, Garth's voice seemed singing everywhere:

    "Enable with perpetual light
     The dulness of our blinded sight."

Then from out the deep blue and silvery light, Garth's dear adoring eyes seemed watching her.
Jane closed her own, to see them better. To-night she did not feel like shrinking from them,
they were so full of love.

No shade of critical regard was in them. Ah! had she wronged him with her fears for the future?
Her heart seemed full of trust to-night, full of confidence in him and in herself. It seemed
to her that if he were here she could go out with him into this brilliant moonlight, seat herself
upon some ancient fallen stone, and let him kneel in front of her and gaze and gaze in his
persistent way, as much as he pleased. In thought there seemed to-night no shrinking from those
dear eyes. She felt she would say: "It is all your own, Garth, to look at when you will. For
your sake, I could wish it beautiful; but if it is as you like it, my own Dear, why should
I hide it from you?"

What had brought about this change of mind? Had Deryck's prescription done its full work? Was
this a saner point of view than the one she had felt constrained to take when she arrived,
through so much agony of renunciation, at her decision? Instead of going up the Nile, and then
to Constantinople and Athens, should she take the steamer which sailed from Alexandria to-morrow,
be in London a week hence, send for Garth, make full confession, and let him decide as to their
future?

That he loved her still, it never occurred to Jane to doubt. At the very thought of sending
for him and telling him the simple truth, he seemed so near her once more, that she could feel
the clasp of his arms, and his head upon her heart. And those dear shining eyes! Oh, Garth, Garth!

"One thing is clear to me to-night," thought Jane. "If he still needs me--wants me--I cannot
live any longer away from him. I must go to him." She opened her eyes and looked towards the
Sphinx. The whole line of reasoning which had carried such weight at Shenstone flashed through
her mind in twenty seconds. Then she closed her eyes again and clasped her hands upon her bosom.

"I will risk it," she said; and deep joy awoke within her heart.

A party of English people came from the dining-room on to the piazza with a clatter. They had
arrived that evening and gone in late to dinner. Jane had hardly noticed them,--a handsome
woman and her daughter, two young men, and an older man of military appearance. They did not
interest Jane, but they broke in upon her reverie; for they seated themselves at a table near
by and, in truly British fashion, continued a loud-voiced conversation, as if no one else were
present. One or two foreigners, who had been peacefully dreaming over coffee and cigarettes,
rose and strolled away to quiet seats under the palm trees. Jane would have done the same,
but she really felt too comfortable to move, and afraid of losing the sweet sense of Garth's
nearness. So she remained where she was.

The elderly man held in his hand a letter and a copy of the MORNING POST, just received from
England. They were discussing news contained in the letter and a paragraph he had been reading
aloud from the paper.

"Poor fellow! How too sad!" said the chaperon of the party.

"I should think he would sooner have been killed outright!" exclaimed the girl. "I know I would."

"Oh, no," said one of the young men, leaning towards her. "Life is sweet, under any circumstances."

"Oh, but blind!" cried the young voice, with a shudder. "Quite blind for the rest of one's
life. Horrible!"

"Was it his own gun?" asked the older woman. "And how came they to be having a shooting party
in March?"

Jane smiled a fierce smile into the moonlight. Passionate love of animal life, intense regard
for all life, even of the tiniest insect, was as much a religion with her as the worship of
beauty was with Garth. She never could pretend sorrow over these accounts of shooting accidents,
or falls in the hunting-field. When those who went out to inflict cruel pain were hurt themselves;
when those who went forth to take eager, palpitating life, lost their own; it seemed to Jane
a just retribution. She felt no regret, and pretended none. So now she smiled fiercely to herself,
thinking: "One pair of eyes the less to look along a gun and frustrate the despairing dash
for home and little ones of a terrified little mother rabbit. One hand that will never again
change a soaring upward flight of spreading wings, into an agonised mass of falling feathers.
One chance to the good, for the noble stag, as he makes a brave run to join his hinds in the
valley."

Meanwhile the military-looking man had readjusted his eye-glasses and was holding the sheets
of a closely written letter to the light.

"No," he said after a moment, "shooting parties are over. There is nothing doing on the moors
now. They were potting bunnies."

"Was he shooting?" asked the girl.

"No," replied the owner of the letter, "and that seems such hard luck. He had given up shooting
altogether a year or two ago. He never really enjoyed it, because he so loved the beauty of
life and hated death in every form. He has a lovely place in the North, and was up there painting.
He happened to pass within sight of some fellows rabbit-shooting, and saw what he considered
cruelty to a wounded rabbit. He vaulted over a gate to expostulate and to save the little creature
from further suffering. Then it happened. One of the lads, apparently startled, let off his
gun. The charge struck a tree a few yards off, and the shot glanced. It did not strike him
full. The face is only slightly peppered and the brain quite uninjured. But shots pierced the
retina of each eye, and the sight is hopelessly gone."

"Awful hard luck," said the young man.

"I never can understand a chap not bein' keen on shootin'," said the youth who had not yet spoken.

"Ah, but you would if you had known him," said the soldier. "He was so full of life and vivid
vitality. One could not imagine him either dying or dealing death. And his love of the beautiful
was almost a form of religious worship. I can't explain it; but he had a way of making you
see beauty in things you had hardly noticed before. And now, poor chap, he can't see them himself."

"Has he a mother?" asked the older woman.

"No, he has no one. He is absolutely alone. Scores of friends of course; he was a most popular
man about town, and could stay in almost any house in the kingdom if he chose to send a post-card
to say he was coming. But no relations, I believe, and never would marry. Poor chap! He will
wish he had been less fastidious, now. He might have had the pick of all the nicest girls,
most seasons. But not he! Just charming friendships, and wedded to his art. And now, as Lady
Ingleby, says, he lies in the dark, helpless and alone."

"Oh, do talk of something else!" cried the girl, pushing back her chair and rising. "I want
to forget it. It's too horribly sad. Fancy what it must be to wake up and not know whether
it is day or night, and to have to lie in the dark and wonder. Oh, do come out and talk of
something cheerful."

They all rose, and the young man slipped his hand through the girl's arm, glad of the excuse
her agitation provided.

"Forget it, dear," he said softly. "Come on out and see the old Sphinx by moonlight."

They left the piazza, followed by the rest of the party; but the man to whom the MORNING POST
belonged laid it on the table and stayed behind, lighting a cigar.

Jane rose from her chair and came towards him.

"May I look at your paper?" she said abruptly.

"Certainly," he replied, with ready courtesy. Then, looking more closely at her: "Why, certainly,
Miss Champion. And how do you do? I did not know you were in these parts."

"Ah, General Loraine! Your face seemed familiar, but I had not recognised you, either. Thanks,
I will borrow this if I may. And don't let me keep you from your friends. We shall meet again
by and by."

Jane waited until the whole party had passed out of sight and until the sound of their voices
and laughter had died away in the distance. Then she returned to her chair, the place where
Garth had seemed so near. She looked once more at the Sphinx and at the huge pyramid in the
moonlight.

Then she took up the paper and opened it.

    "Enable with perpetual light
     The dulness of our blinded sight."

Yes--it was Garth Dalmain--HER Garth, of the adoring shining eyes--who lay at his house in
the North; blind, helpless, and alone.

CHAPTER XIV

IN DERYCK'S SAFE CONTROL

The white cliffs of Dover gradually became more solid and distinct, until at length they rose
from the sea, a strong white wall, emblem of the undeniable purity of England, the stainless
honour and integrity of her throne, her church, her parliament, her courts of justice, and
her dealings at home and abroad, whether with friend or foe. "Strength and whiteness," thought
Jane as she paced the steamer's deck; and after a two years' absence her heart went out to
her native land. Then Dover Castle caught her eye, so beautiful in the pearly light of that
spring afternoon. Her mind leaped to enjoyment, then fell back stunned by the blow of quick
remembrance, and Jane shut her eyes.

All beautiful sights brought this pang to her heart since the reading of that paragraph on
the piazza of the Mena House Hotel.

An hour after she had read it, she was driving down the long straight road to Cairo; embarked
at Alexandria the next day; landed at Brindisi, and this night and day travelling had brought
her at last within sight of the shores of England. In a few minutes she would set foot upon
them, and then there would be but two more stages to her journey. For, from the moment she
started, Jane never doubted her ultimate destination,--the room where pain and darkness and
despair must be waging so terrible a conflict against the moral courage, the mental sanity,
and the instinctive hold on life of the man she loved.

That she was going to him, Jane knew; but she felt utterly unable to arrange how or in what
way her going could be managed. That it was a complicated problem, her common sense told her;
though her yearning arms and aching bosom cried out: "O God, is it not simple? Blind and alone!
MY Garth!"

But she knew an unbiased judgment, steadier than her own, must solve the problem; and that
her surest way to Garth lay through the doctor's consulting-room. So she telegraphed to Deryck
from Paris, and at present her mind saw no further than Wimpole Street.

At Dover she bought a paper, and hastily scanned its pages as she walked along the platform
in the wake of the capable porter who had taken possession of her rugs and hand baggage. In
the personal column she found the very paragraph she sought.

"We regret to announce that Mr. Garth Dalmain still lies in a most precarious condition at
his house on Deeside, Aberdeenshire, as a result of the shooting accident a fortnight ago.
His sight is hopelessly gone, but the injured parts were progressing favourably, and all fear
of brain complications seemed over. During the last few days, however, a serious reaction from
shock has set in, and it has been considered necessary to summon Sir Deryck Brand, the well-known
nerve specialist, in consultation with the oculist and the local practitioner in charge of
the case. There is a feeling of wide-spread regret and sympathy in those social and artistic
circles where Mr. Dalmain was so well-known and so deservedly popular."

"Oh, thank you, m'lady," said the efficient porter when he had ascertained, by a rapid glance
into his palm, that Jane's half-crown was not a penny. He had a sick young wife at home, who
had been ordered extra nourishment, and just as the rush on board began, he had put up a simple
prayer to the Heavenly Father "who knoweth that ye have need of these things," asking that
he might catch the eye of a generous traveller. He felt he had indeed been "led" to this plain,
brown-faced, broad-shouldered lady, when he remembered how nearly, after her curt nod from
a distance had engaged him, he had responded to the blandishments of a fussy little woman,
with many more bags and rugs, and a parrot cage, who was now doling French coppers out of the
window of the next compartment. "Seven pence 'apenny of this stuff ain't much for carrying
all that along, I DON'T think!" grumbled his mate; and Jane's young porter experienced the
double joy of faith confirmed, and willing service generously rewarded.

A telegraph boy walked along the train, saying: "Honrubble Jain Champyun" at intervals. Jane
heard her name, and her arm shot out of the window.

"Here, my boy! It is for me."

She tore it open. It was from the doctor.

"Welcome home. Just back from Scotland. Will meet you Charing Cross, and give you all the time
you want. Have coffee at Dover. DERYCK."

Jane gave one hard, tearless sob of thankfulness and relief. She had been so lonely.

Then she turned to the window. "Here, somebody! Fetch me a cup of coffee, will you?"

Coffee was the last thing she wanted; but it never occurred to any one to disobey the doctor,
even at a distance.

The young porter, who still stood sentry at the door of Jane's compartment, dashed off to the
refreshment room; and, just as the train began to move, handed a cup of steaming coffee and
a plate of bread-and-butter in at the window.

"Oh, thank you, my good fellow," said Jane, putting the plate on the seat, while she dived
into her pocket. "Here! you have done very well for me. No, never mind the change. Coffee at
a moment's notice should fetch a fancy price. Good-bye."

The train moved on, and the porter stood looking after it with tears in his eyes. Over the
first half-crown he had said to himself: "Milk and new-laid eggs." Now, as he pocketed the
second, he added the other two things mentioned by the parish doctor: "Soup and jelly"; and
his heart glowed. "Your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of these things."

And Jane, seated in a comfortable corner, choked back the tears of relief which threatened
to fall, drank her coffee, and was thereby more revived than she could have thought possible.
She, also, had need of many things. Not of half-crowns; of those she had plenty. But above
all else she needed just now a wise, strong, helpful friend, and Deryck had not failed her.

She read his telegram through once more, and smiled. How like him to think of the coffee; and
oh, how like him to be coming to the station.

She took off her hat and leaned back against the cushions. She had been travelling night and
day, in one feverish whirl of haste, and at last she had brought herself within reach of Deryck's
hand and Deryck's safe control. The turmoil of her soul was stilled; a great calm took its
place, and Jane dropped quietly off to sleep. "Your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need
of these things."

      *      *      *      *      *

Washed and brushed and greatly refreshed, Jane stood at the window of her compartment as the
train steamed into Charing Cross.

The doctor was stationed exactly opposite the door when her carriage came to a standstill;
mere chance, and yet, to Jane, it seemed so like him to have taken up his position precisely
at the right spot on that long platform. Hath he saved any other kingdom at his own expense, to
give him a title of reimbursing himself by the destruction of ours? Hath he discovered the longitude
or the universal medicine? No. But he hath found out the philosopher's stone after a new manner,
by debasing of copper, and resolving to force it upon us for gold.

When the two Houses represented to His Majesty, that this patent to Wood was obtained in a clandestine
manner, surely the Committee could not think the Parliament would insinuate that it had not
passed in the common forms, and run through every office where fees
and perquisites were due.

They knew very well that persons in places were no enemies to grants, and that the officers of the
crown could not be kept in the dark. But the late Lord Lieutenant of Ireland[9] affirmed it was
a secret to him (and who will doubt of his veracity, especially when he swore to a person of
quality; from whom I had it, that Ireland should never be troubled with these halfpence). It was a
secret to the people of Ireland, who were to be the only sufferers, and those who best knew the state
of the kingdom and were most able to advise in such an affair, were
wholly strangers to it.

[Footnote 9: The Duke of Grafton.

Walpole called him "a fair-weather pilot, that knew not what he had to do, when the first storm
arose." Charles, second Duke of Grafton (1683-1757), was the grandfather of the third duke, so
virulently attacked by Junius in his famous letters. [T. S.]]

It is allowed by the Report that this patent was passed without the knowledge of the chief governor
or officers of Ireland; and it is there elaborately shewn, that "former
patents have passed in the same manner, and are good in law."

I shall not dispute the legality of patents, but am ready to suppose
it in His Majesty's power to grant a patent for stamping round bits
of copper to every subject he hath.

Therefore to lay aside the point of law, I would only put the question,
whether in reason and justice it would not have been proper, in an
affair upon which the welfare of a kingdom depends, that the said
kingdom should have received timely notice, and the matter not be
carried on between the patentee and the officers of the Crown, who
were to be the only gainers by it.

The Parliament, who in matters of this nature are the most able and
faithful counsellors, did represent this grant to be "destructive
of trade, and dangerous to the properties of the people," to which
the only answer is, that "the King hath a prerogative to make such
a grant."

It is asserted that in the patent to Knox, his "halfpence, are made
and declared the current coin of the kingdom," whereas in this to
Wood, there is only a "power given to issue them to such as will receive
them."

The authors of the Report, I think, do not affirm that the King can by law declare anything
to be current money by his letters-patents.

I dare say they will not affirm it, and if Knox's patent contained in it powers contrary to
law, why is it mentioned as a precedent in His Majesty's just and merciful reign:[10] But although
that clause be not in Wood's patent, yet possibly there are others,
the legality whereof may be equally doubted, and particularly that,
whereby "a power is given to William Wood to break into houses in
search of any coin made in imitation of his."

This may perhaps be affirmed to be illegal and dangerous to the liberty of the subject. Yet
this is a precedent taken from Knox's patent, where the same power is granted, and is a strong
instance what uses may be sometimes made of precedents.

[Footnote 10: Knox's patent, as Monck Mason points out, did not contain
the right to have his coins pass as the current coin of the realm;
that was permitted by a proclamation of the lord lieutenant, and could
in the same manner be withdrawn.

Knox's patent differed materially from that granted to Wood, since
he was obliged to take back his coins and give gold or silver for
them, and no one was compelled to take more than five shillings in
the payment of each £100.

See note, p. 66.

[T.S.]]

But although before the passing of this patent, it was not thought necessary to consult any persons
of this kingdom, or make the least enquiry whether copper money were wanted among us; yet
now at length, when the matter is over, when the patent hath long
passed, when Wood hath already coined seventeen thousand pounds, and
hath his tools and implements prepared to coin six times as much more;
the Committee hath been pleased to make this affair the subject of
enquiry.

Wood is permitted to produce his evidences, which consist as I have already observed, of four
in number, whereof Coleby, Brown and Mr. Finley the banker are three. And these were to prove
that copper money was extremely wanted in Ireland. The first had been out of the kingdom almost
twenty years, from the time that he was tried for robbing the treasury, and therefore his knowledge
and credibility are equal.

The second may be allowed a more knowing witness, because I think it is not above a year since
the House of Commons ordered the Attorney-general to prosecute him, for endeavouring "to take
away the life of John Bingham Esq; member of parliaments by perjury and subornation." He asserted
that he was forced to tally with his labourers for want of small money (which hath often been
practised in England by Sir Ambrose Crawley[11] and others) but those who knew him better
give a different reason, (if there be any truth at all in the fact) that he was forced to tally
with his labourers not for want of halfpence, but of more substantial money, which is highly
possible, because the race of suborners, forgers, perjurers and ravishers, are usually people of
no fortune, or of those who have run it out by their vices and profuseness. Mr. Finley the third
witness honestly confessed, that he was ignorant whether Ireland wanted copper money or no;
but all his intention was to buy a certain quantity from Wood at a large discount, and sell them
as well as he could, by which he hoped to get two or three thousand pounds for himself.

[Footnote 11: Ambrose Crowley (not Crawley) was alderman and sheriff of London. He was knighted January
1st, 1706-1707, and sat in the House of Commons as member for Andover in 1713-1714. [T.S.]]

But
suppose there were not one single halfpenny of copper coin in this
whole kingdom (which Mr. Wood seems to intend, unless we will come
to his terms, as appears by employing his emissaries to buy up our
old ones at a penny in the shilling more than they pass for), it could
not be any real evil to us, although it might be some inconvenience.

We have many sorts of small silver coins, to which they are strangers in England, such as the
French threepences, fourpence halfpennies and eightpence half-pennies, the Scotch fivepences
and tenpences, besides their twenty-pences, and three-and-four-pences, by all which we are
able to make change to a halfpenny of almost any piece of gold or silver, and if we are driven
to Brown's expedient of a sealed card, with the little gold or silver still remaining, it will
I suppose, be somewhat better than to have nothing left but Wood's adulterated copper, which
he is neither obliged by his patent, nor hitherto able by his estate to make good. First we desire
to know, why His Majesty's prerogative might not have been as well asserted, by passing this
patent in Ireland, and subjecting the several conditions of the contract to the inspection of
those who are only concerned, as was formerly done in the only precedents for patents granted for
coining for this kingdom, since the mixed money[12] in Queen Elizabeth's time, during the difficulties
of a rebellion: Whereas now upon the greatest imposition that can possibly be practised, we
must go to England with our complaints, where it hath been for some time the fashion to think
and to affirm that "we cannot be too hardly used." Again the Report says, that "such patents are
obligatory." After long thinking, I am not able to find out what can possibly be meant here
by this word obligatory. This patent of Wood neither obligeth him to utter his coin, nor us to
take it, or if it did the latter, it would be so far void, because
no patent can oblige the subject against law, unless an illegal patent
passed in one kingdom can bind another and not itself.

[Footnote 12: "Civill warre having set all Ireland in a combustion, the Queene [Elizabeth] more
easily to subdue the rebels, did take silver coyne from the Irish, some few years before her
death, and paid her army with a mixed base coyne, which, by proclamation, was commanded to be
spent and received, for sterling silver money. This base mixed money had three parts of copper, and the
fourth part of silver, which proportion of silver was in some part consumed by the mixture, so as
the English goldsmiths valued a shilling thereof at no more than two silver pence, though they
acknowledged the same to be worth two pence halfpenny." (Fynes Moryson's "Itinerary," pt. i., p.
283). [T.S.]]

Lastly, it is added that "such patents are in no manner derogatory
or invasive of any liberty or privilege of the King's subjects of
Ireland."

If this proposition be true, as it is here laid down, without any
limitation either expressed or implied, it must follow that a King
of England may at any time coin copper money for Ireland, and oblige
his subjects here to take a piece of copper under the value of half
a farthing for half-a-crown, as was practised by the late King James,
and even without that arbitrary prince's excuse, from the necessity
and exigences of his affairs.

If this be in no manner "derogatory nor evasive of any liberties or privileges of the subjects
of Ireland," it ought to have been expressed what our liberties and privileges are, and whether
we have any at all, for in specifying the word Ireland, instead of saying "His Majesty's subjects,"
it would seem to insinuate that we are not upon the same foot with our fellow-subjects in
England; which, however the practice may have been, I hope will never be directly asserted, for
I do not understand that Poining's act[13] deprived us of our liberty, but only changed the manner
of passing laws here (which however was a power most indirectly obtained) by leaving the negative
to the two Houses of Parliament. But, waiving all controversies relating to the legislature,
no person, I believe, was ever yet so bold as to affirm that the people of Ireland have not the
same title to the benefits of the common law, with the rest of His Majesty's subjects, and therefore
whatever liberties or privileges the people of England enjoy by common law, we of Ireland have the
same; so that in my humble opinion, the word Ireland standing in that proposition, was, in the
mildest interpretation, a lapse of the pen.

[Footnote 13: It was not intended that Poyning's act should interfere with the liberty of the
people, but it is undoubted that advantage was taken of this law, and an interpretation put on
it far different from the intention that brought it on the statute books. It was passed by
a parliament convened by Sir Edward Poyning, at Drogheda, in the tenth year of Henry VII.'s reign.
Its immediate cause was the invasion of Perkin Warbeck. That pretender assumed royal authority
in Ireland and had several statutes passed during his short-lived term of power. To prevent
any viceroy from arrogating to himself the powers of law-making it was enacted by Poyning's parliament:

"That
no parliament be holden hereafter in Ireland, but at such season as the King's lieutenant and
counsaile there first do certifie the King, under the Great Seal of that land, the causes and
considerations, and all such acts as them seemeth should pass in the same parliament, and such
causes, considerations, and acts affirmed by the King and his counsaile to be good and expedient
for that land, and his licence thereupon, as well in affirmation of the said causes and acts,
as to summon the said parliament, under his Great Seal of England had and obtained; that done,
a parliament to be had and holden as afore rehearsed" ("Irish Statutes," vol. i., p. 44).

Two statutes, one, the Act of 3 and 4 Phil., and Mary, cap. 4, and the other of II Eliz. Ses.
3, cap.

      8, explain this act further, and the latter points out the reason
for the original enactment, namely, that "before this statute, when
liberty was given to the governors to call parliaments at their pleasure,
acts passed as well to the dishonour of the prince, as to the hindrance
of their subjects"

("Irish Statutes," vol. i., p. 346).

"By Poyning's Law," says Lecky, "a great part of the independence of the Irish Parliament had
indeed been surrendered; but even the servile Parliament which passed it, though extending
by its own authority to Ireland laws previously enacted in England, never admitted the right
of the English Parliament to make laws for Ireland." ("Hist. Ireland," vol. ii., p. 154; 1892 ed).
It may be so, and I am heartily sorry for it, because it may prove an eternal source of discontent.
However among all these precedents there is not one of a patent for coining money for Ireland.

There is nothing hath perplexed me more than this doctrine of precedents. If a job is to be done,
and upon searching records you find it hath been done before, there will not want a lawyer to
justify the legality of it, by producing his precedents, without ever considering the motives
and circumstances that first introduced them, the necessity or turbulence or iniquity of times,
the corruptions of ministers, or the arbitrary disposition of the prince then reigning. And
I have been told by persons eminent in the law, that the worst actions which human nature is
capable of, may be justified by the same doctrine. How the first precedents began of determining
cases of the highest importance to Ireland, and immediately affecting its interest, without
any previous reference or advice to the King's officers here, may soon be accounted for. Before
this kingdom was entirely reduced by the submission of Tyrone in the last year of Queen Elizabeth's
reign, there was a period of four hundred years, which was a various scene of war and peace between
the English pale and the Irish natives, and the government of that part of this island which
lay in the English hands, was, in many things under the immediate administration of the King. Silver
and copper were often coined here among us, and once at least upon great necessity, a mixed
or base metal was sent from England. The reign of King James Ist. was employed in settling the
kingdom after Tyrone's rebellion, and this nation flourished extremely till the time of the massacre
1641. In that difficult juncture of affairs, the nobility and gentry
coined their own plate here in Dublin.

By all that I can discover, the copper coin of Ireland for three hundred years past consisted
of small pence and halfpence, which particular men had licence to coin, and were current only
within certain towns and districts, according to the personal credit of the owner who uttered
them, and was bound to receive them again, whereof I have seen many
sorts; neither have I heard of any patent granted for coining copper
for Ireland till the reign of King Charles II. which was in the year
1680. to George Legge Lord Dartmouth, and renewed by King James II.
in the first year of his reign to John Knox.

Both patents were passed in Ireland, and in both the patentees were obliged to receive their coin
again to any that would offer then twenty shillings of it, for which they were obliged to pay
gold or silver.

The patents both of Lord Dartmouth and Knox were referred to the Attorney-general here, and a
report made accordingly, and both, as I have already said, were passed in this kingdom. Knox had
only a patent for the remainder of the term granted to Lord Dartmouth,
the patent expired in 1701, and upon a petition by Roger Moor to have
it renewed, the matter was referred hither, and upon the report of
the attorney and solicitor, that it was not for His Majesty's service
or the interest of the nation to have it renewed, it was rejected
by King William.

 He had as often heard the expression, and could recall the whole-hearted
affection and admiration in the tones of those who used it.

"Men as a rule," Continued Jane, "get on better with me than do women. Being large and solid,
and usually calling a spade 'a spade;' and not 'a garden implement,' women consider me strong-minded,
and are inclined to be afraid of me. The boys know they can trust me; they make a confidante
of me, looking upon me as a sort of convenient elder sister who knows less about them than
an elder sister would know, and is probably more ready to be interested in those things which
they choose to tell. Among my men friends, Deryck, was Garth Dalmain."

Jane paused, and the doctor waited silently for her to continue.

"I was always interested in him, partly because he was so original and vivid in his way of
talking, and partly because"--a bright flush suddenly crept up into the tanned cheeks-"well,
though I did not realise it then, I suppose I found his extraordinary beauty rather fascinating.
And then, our circumstances were so much alike,--both orphans, and well off; responsible to
no one for our actions; with heaps of mutual friends, and constantly staying at the same houses.
We drifted into a pleasant intimacy, and of all my friends, he was the one who made me feel
most like `a man and a brother.' We discussed women by the dozen, all his special admirations
in turn, and the effect of their beauty upon him, and I watched with interest to see who, at
last, would fix his roving fancy. But on one eventful day all this was changed in half an hour.
We were both staying at Overdene. There was a big house party, and Aunt Georgina had arranged
a concert to which half the neighbourhood was coming. Madame Velma failed at the last minute.
Aunt 'Gina, in a great state of mind, was borrowing remarks from her macaw. You know how? She
always says she is merely quoting `the dear bird.' Something had to be done. I offered to take
Velma's place; and I sang."

"Ah," said the doctor.

"I sang The Rosary--the song Flower asked for the last time I was here. Do you remember?"

The doctor nodded. "I remember."

"After that, all was changed between Garth and me. I did not understand it at first. I knew
the music had moved him deeply, beauty of sound having upon him much the same effect as beauty
of colour; but I thought the effect would pass in the night. But the days went on, and there
was always this strange sweet difference; not anything others would notice; but I suddenly
became conscious that, for the first time in my whole life, I was essential to somebody. I
could not enter a room without realising that he was instantly aware of my presence; I could
not leave a room without knowing that he would at once feel and regret my absence. The one
fact filled and completed all things; the other left a blank which could not be removed. I
knew this, and yet--incredible though it may appear--I did not realise it meant LOVE. I thought
it was an extraordinarily close bond of sympathy and mutual understanding, brought about principally
by our enjoyment of one another's music. We spent hours in the music-room. I put it down to
that; yet when he looked at me his eyes seemed to touch as well as see me, and it was a very
tender and wonderful touch. And all the while I never thought of love. I was so plain and almost
middle-aged; and he, such a beautiful, radiant youth. He was like a young sun-god, and I felt
warmed and vivified when he was near; and he was almost always near. Honestly, that was my
side of the days succeeding the concert. But HIS! He told me afterwards, Deryck, it had been
a sudden revelation to him when he heard me sing The Rosary, not of music only, but of ME.
He said he had never thought of me otherwise than as a good sort of chum; but then it was as
if a veil were lifted, and he saw, and knew, and felt me as a woman. And--no doubt it will
seem odd to you. Boy; it did to me;--but he said, that the woman he found then was his ideal
of womanhood, and that from that hour he wanted me for his own as he had never wanted anything
before."

Jane paused, and looked into the glowing heart of the fire.

The doctor turned slowly and looked at Jane. He himself had experienced the intense attraction
of her womanliness,--all the more overpowering when it was realised, because it did not appear
upon the surface. He had sensed the strong mother-tenderness lying dormant within her; had
known that her arms would prove a haven of refuge, her bosom a soothing pillow, her love a
consolation unspeakable. In his own days of loneliness and disappointment, the doctor had had
to flee from this in Jane,--a precious gift, so easy to have taken because of her very ignorance
of it; but a gift to which he had no right. Thus the doctor could well understand the hold
it would gain upon a man who had discovered it, and who was free to win it for his own.

But he only said, "I do not think it odd, dear."

Jane had forgotten the doctor. She came back promptly from the glowing heart of the fire.

"I am glad you don't," she said. "I did.--well, we both left Overdene on the same day. I came
to you; he went to Shenstone. It was a Tuesday. On the Friday I went down to Shenstone, and
we met again. Having been apart for a little while seemed to make this curious feeling of `togetherness,'
deeper and sweeter than ever. In the Shenstone house party was that lovely American girl, Pauline
Lister. Garth was enthusiastic about her beauty, and set on painting her. Everybody made sure
he was going to propose to her. Deryck, I thought so, too; in fact I had advised him to do
it. I felt so pleased and interested over it, though all the while his eyes touched me when
he looked at me, and I knew the day did not begin for him until we had met, and was over when
we had said good-night. And this experience of being first and most to him made everything
so golden, and life so rich, and still I thought of it only as an unusually delightful friendship.
But the evening of my arrival at Shenstone he asked me to come out on to the terrace after
dinner, as he wanted specially to talk to me. Deryck, I thought it was the usual proceeding
of making a confidante of me, and that I was to hear details of his intentions regarding Miss
Lister. Thinking that, I walked calmly out beside him; sat down on the parapet, in the brilliant
moonlight, and quietly waited for him to begin. Then--oh, Deryck! It happened."

Jane put her elbows on her knees, and buried her face in her clasped hands.

"I cannot tell you--details. His love--it just poured over me like molten gold. It melted the
shell of my reserve; it burst through the ice of my convictions; it swept me off my feet upon
a torrent of wondrous fire. I knew nothing in heaven or earth but that this love was mine,
and was for me. And then--oh, Deryck! I can't explain--I don't know myself how it happened--but
this whirlwind of emotion came to rest upon my heart. He knelt with his arms around me, and
we held each other in a sudden great stillness; and in that moment I was all his, and he knew
it. He might have stayed there hours if he had not moved or spoken; but presently he lifted
up his face and looked at me. Then he said two words. I can't repeat them, Boy; but they brought
me suddenly to my senses, and made me realise what it all meant. Garth Dalmain wanted me to
marry him."

Jane paused, awaiting the doctor's expression of surprise.

"What else could it have meant?" said Deryck Brand, very quietly. He passed his hand over his
lips, knowing they trembled a little. Jane's confessions were giving him a stiffer time than
he had expected. "Well, dear, so you--?"

"I stood up," said Jane; "for while he knelt there he was master of me, mind and body; and
some instinct told me that if I were to be won to wifehood, my reason must say `yes' before
the rest of me. It is `spirit, soul, and body' in the Word, not `body, soul, and spirit,' as
is so often misquoted; and I believe the inspired sequence to be the right one."

The doctor made a quick movement of interest. "Good heavens, Jane!" he said. "You have got
hold of a truth there, and you have expressed it exactly as I have often wanted to express
it without being able to find the right words. You have found them, Jeanette."

She looked into his eager eyes and smiled sadly. "Have I, Boy?" she said. "Well, they have
cost me dear.--I put my lover from me and told him I must have twelve hours for calm reflection.
He was so sure--so sure of me, so sure of himself--that he agreed without a protest. At my
request he left me at once. The manner of his going I cannot tell, even to you, Dicky. I promised
to meet him at the village church next day and give him my answer. He was to try the new organ
at eleven. We knew we should be alone. I came. He sent away the blower. He called me to him
at the chancel step. The setting was so perfect. The artist in him sang for joy, and thrilled
with expectation. The glory of absolute certainty was in his eyes; though he had himself well
in hand. He kept from touching me while he asked for my answer. Then--I refused him, point
blank, giving a reason he could not question. He turned from me and left the church, and I
have not spoken to him from that day to this."

A long silence in the doctor's consulting-room. One manly heart was entering into the pain
of another, and yet striving not to be indignant until he knew the whole truth.

Jane's spirit was strung up to the same pitch as in that fateful hour, and once more she thought
herself right.

At last the doctor spoke. He looked at her searchingly now, and held her eyes.

"And why did you refuse him, Jane?" The kind voice was rather stern.

Jane put out her hands to him appealingly. "Ah, Boy, I must make you understand! How could
I do otherwise, though, indeed, it was putting away the highest good life will ever hold for
me? Deryck, you know Garth well enough to realise how dependent he is on beauty; he must be
surrounded by it, perpetually. Could I have tied Garth to my plain face? Could I have let myself
become a daily, hourly discipline to that radiant, beauty-loving nature? I know they say, 'Love
is blind.' But that is before Love has entered into his kingdom. Love desirous, sees only that,
in the one beloved, which has awakened the desire. But Love content, regains full vision, and,
as time goes on, those powers of vision increase and become, by means of daily, hourly, use,--microscopic
and telescopic. Wedded love is not blind. Bah! An outsider staying with married people is apt
to hear what love sees, on both sides, and the delusion of love's blindness is dispelled forever.
I know Garth was blind, during all those golden days, to my utter lack of beauty, because he
wanted ME so much. But when he had had me, and had steeped himself in all I have to give of
soul and spirit beauty; when the daily routine of life began, which after all has to be lived
in complexions, and with features to the fore; when he sat down to breakfast and I saw him
glance at me and then look away, when I was conscious that I was sitting behind the coffee-pot,
looking my very plainest, and that in consequence my boy's discipline had begun; could I have
borne it? Should I not, in the miserable sense of failing him day by day, through no fault
of my own, have grown plainer and plainer; until bitterness and disappointment, and perhaps
jealousy, all combined to make me positively ugly? I ask you, Deryck, could I have borne it?"

The doctor was looking at Jane with an expression of keen professional interest.

"How awfully well I diagnosed the case when I sent you abroad," he remarked meditatively. "Really,
with so little data to go upon--"

"Oh, Boy," cried Jane, with a movement of impatience, "don't speak to me as if I were a patient.
Treat me as a human being, at least, and tell me--as man to man--could I have tied Garth Dalmain
to my plain face? For you know it is plain."

The doctor laughed. He was glad to make Jane a little angry. "My dear girl," he said, "were
we speaking as man to man, I should have a few very strong things to say to you. As we are
speaking as man to woman,--and as a man who has for a very long time respected, honoured, and
admired a very dear and noble woman,--I will answer your question frankly. You are not beautiful,
in the ordinary acceptation of the word, and no one who really loves you would answer otherwise;
because no one who knows and loves you would dream of telling you a lie. We will even allow,
if you like, that you are plain, although I know half a dozen young men who, were they here,
would want to kick me into the street for saying so, and I should have to pretend in self-defence
that their ears had played them false and I had said, 'You are JANE,' which is all they would
consider mattered. So long as you are yourself, your friends will be well content. At the same
time, I may add, while this dear face is under discussion, that I can look back to times when
I have felt that I would gladly walk twenty miles for a sight of it; and in its absence I have
always wished it present, and in its presence I have never wished it away."

"Ah, but, Deryck, you did not have to have it always opposite you at meals," insisted Jane gravely.

"Unfortunately not. But I enjoyed the meals more on the happy occasions when it was there."

"And, Deryck--YOU DID NOT HAVE TO KISS IT."

The doctor threw back his head and shouted with laughter, so that Flower, passing up the stairs,
wondered what turn the conversation could be taking.

But Jane was quite serious; and saw in it no laughing matter.

"No, dear," said the doctor when he had recovered; "to my infinite credit be it recorded, that
in all the years I have known it I have never once kissed it."

"Dicky, don't tease! Oh, Boy, it is the most vital question of my whole life; and if you do
not now give me wise and thoughtful advice, all this difficult confession will have been for
nothing."

The doctor became grave immediately. He leaned forward and took those clasped hands between his.

"Dear," he said, "forgive me if I seemed to take it lightly. My most earnest thought is wholly
at your disposal. And now let me ask you a few questions. How did you ever succeed in convincing
Dalmain that such a thing as this was an insuperable obstacle to your marriage?"

"I did not give it as a reason."

"What then did you give as your reason for refusing him?"

"I asked him how old he was."

"Jane! Standing there beside him in the chancel, where he had come awaiting your answer?"

"Yes. It did seem awful when I came to think it over afterwards. But it worked."

"I have no doubt it worked. What then?"

"He said he was twenty-seven. I said I was thirty, and looked thirty-five, and felt forty.
I also said he might be twenty-seven, but he looked nineteen, and I was sure he often felt nine."

"Well?"

"Then I said that I could not marry a mere boy."

"And he acquiesced?"

"He seemed stunned at first. Then he said of course I could not marry him if I considered him
that. He said it was the first time he had given a thought to himself in the matter. Then he
said he bowed to my decision, and he walked down the church and went out, and we have not met
since."

"Jane," said the doctor, "I wonder he did not see through it. You are so unused to lying, that
you cannot have lied, on the chancel step, to the man you loved, with much conviction."

A dull red crept up beneath Jane's tan.

"Oh, Deryck, it was not entirely a lie. It was one of those dreadful lies which are 'part a
truth,' of which Tennyson says that they are 'a harder matter to fight.'"

"Yes," said Jane. "And he could not fight this, just because it was partly true. He is younger
than I by three years, and still more by temperament. It was partly for his delightful youthfulness
that I feared my maturity and staidness. It was part a truth, but oh, Deryck, it was more a
lie; and it was altogether a lie to call him--the man whom I had felt complete master of me
the evening before--'a mere boy.' Also he could not fight it because it took him so utterly
by surprise. He had been all the time as completely without self-consciousness, as I had been
morbidly full of it. His whole thought had been of me. Mine had been of him and--of myself."

"Jane," said the doctor, "of all that you have suffered since that hour, you deserved every pang."

Jane bent her head. "I know," she said.

"You were false to yourself, and not true to your lover. You robbed and defrauded both. Cannot
you now see your mistake? To take it on the lowest ground, Dalmain, worshipper of beauty as
he was, had had a surfeit of pretty faces. He was like the confectioner's boy who when first
engaged is allowed to eat all the cakes and sweets he likes, and who eats so many in the first
week, that ever after he wants only plain bread-and-butter. YOU were Dal's bread-and-butter.
I am sorry if you do not like the simile."

Jane smiled. "I do like the simile," she said.

"Ah, but you were far more than this, my dear girl. You were his ideal of womanhood. He believed
in your strength and tenderness, your graciousness and truth. You shattered this ideal; you
failed this faith in you. His fanciful, artistic, eclectic nature with all its unused possibilities
of faithful and passionate devotion, had found its haven in your love; and in twelve hours
you turned it adrift. Jane--it was a crime. The magnificent strength of the fellow is shown
by the way he took it. His progress in his art was not arrested. All his best work has been
done since. He has made no bad mad marriage, in mockery of his own pain; and no grand loveless
one, to spite you. He might have done both--I mean either. And when I realise that the poor
fellow I was with yesterday--making such a brave fight in the dark, and turning his head on
the pillow to say with a gleam of hope on his drawn face: `Where Thou art Guide, no ill can
come'--had already been put through all this by you--Jane, if you were a man, I'd horsewhip
you!" said the doctor.

Jane squared her shoulders and lifted her head with more of her old spirit than she had yet shown.

"You have lashed me well, Boy," she said, "as only words spoken in faithful indignation can
lash. And I feel the better for the pain.-- And now I think I ought to tell you that while
I was on the top of the Great Pyramid I suddenly saw the matter from a different standpoint.
You remember that view, with its sharp line of demarcation? On one side the river, and verdure,
vegetation, fruitfulness, a veritable 'garden enclosed'; on the other, vast space as far as
the eye could reach; golden liberty, away to the horizon, but no sign of vegetation, no hope
of cultivation, just barren, arid, loneliness. I felt this was an exact picture of my life
as I live it now. Garth's love, flowing through it, as the river, could have made it a veritable
'garden of the Lord.' It would have meant less liberty, but it would also have meant no loneliness.
And, after all, the liberty to live for self alone becomes in time a weary bondage. Then I
realised that I had condemned him also to this hard desert life. I came down and took counsel
of the old Sphinx. Those calm, wise eyes, looking on into futurity, seemed to say: 'They only
live who love.' That evening I resolved to give up the Nile trip, return home immediately,
send for Garth, admit all to him, asking him to let us both begin again just where we were
three years ago in the moonlight on the terrace at Shenstone. Ten minutes after I had formed
this decision, I heard of his accident."

The doctor shaded his face with his hand. "The wheels of time," he said in a low voice, "move
forward--always; backward, never."

"Oh, Deryck," cried Jane, "sometimes they do. You and Flower know that sometimes they do."

The doctor smiled sadly and very tenderly. "I know," he said, "that there is always one exception
which proves every rule." Then he added quickly: "But, unquestionably, it helps to mend matters,
so far as your own mental attitude is concerned, that before you knew of Dalmain's blindness
you should have admitted yourself wrong, and made up your mind to trust him."

"I don't know that I was altogether clear about having been wrong," said Jane, "but I was quite
convinced that I couldn't live any longer without him, and was therefore prepared to risk it.
And of course now, all doubt or need to question is swept away by my poor boy's accident, which
simplifies matters, where that particular point is concerned."

The doctor looked at Jane with a sudden raising of his level brows. "Simplifies matters?" he said.

Then, as Jane, apparently satisfied with the expression, did not attempt to qualify it, he
rose and stirred the fire; standing over it for a few moments in silent thought. When he sat
down again, his voice was very quiet, but there was an alertness about his expression which
roused Jane. She felt that the crisis of their conversation had been reached.

"And now, my dear Jeanette," said the doctor, "suppose you tell me what you intend doing."

"Doing?" said Jane. "Why, of course, I shall go straight to Garth. I only want you to advise
me how best to let him know I am coming, and whether it is safe for him to have the emotion
of my arrival. Also I don't want to risk being kept from him by doctors or nurses. My place
is by his side. I ask no better thing of life than to be always beside him. But sick-room attendants
are apt to be pig-headed; and a fuss under these circumstances would be unbearable. A wire
from you will make all clear."

"I see," said the doctor slowly. "Yes, a wire from me will undoubtedly open a way for you to
Garth Dalmain's bedside. And, arrived there, what then?"

A smile of ineffable tenderness parted Jane's lips. The doctor saw it, but turned away immediately.
It was not for him, or for any man, to see that look. The eyes which should have seen it were
sightless evermore.

"What then, Deryck? Love will know best what then. All barriers will be swept away, and Garth
and I will be together."

The doctor's finger-tips met very exactly before he spoke again; and when he did speak, his
tone was very level and very kind.

"Ah, Jane," he said, "that is the woman's point of view. It is certainly the simplest, and
perhaps the best. But at Garth's bedside you will be confronted with the man's point of view;
and I should be failing the trust you have placed in me did I not put that before you now.--From
the man's point of view, your own mistaken action three years ago has placed you now in an
almost impossible position. If you go to Garth with the simple offer of your love--the treasure
he asked three years ago and failed to win--he will naturally conclude the love now given is
mainly pity; and Garth Dalmain is not the man to be content with pity, where he has thought
to win love, and failed. Nor would he allow any woman--least of all his crown of womanhood--to
tie herself to his blindness unless he were sure such binding was her deepest joy. And how
could you expect him to believe this in face of the fact that, when he was all a woman's heart
could desire, you refused him and sent him from you?--If, on the other hand, you explain, as
no doubt you intend to do, the reason of that refusal, he can but say one thing: 'You could
not trust me to be faithful when I had my sight. Blind, you come to me, when it is no longer
in my power to prove my fidelity. There is no virtue in necessity. I can never feel I possess
your trust, because you come to me only when accident has put it out of my power either to
do the thing you feared, or to prove myself better than your doubts.' My dear girl, that is
how matters stand from the man's point of view; from his, I make no doubt, even more than from
mine; for I recognise in Garth Dalmain a stronger man than myself. Had it been I that day in
the church, wanting you as he did, I should have grovelled at your feet and promised to grow
up. Garth Dalmain had the iron strength to turn and go, without a protest, when the woman who
had owned him mate the evening before, refused him on the score of inadequacy the next morning.
I fear there is no question of the view he would take of the situation as it now stands."

Jane's pale, startled face went to the doctor's heart.

"But Deryck--he--loves--"

"Just because he loves, my poor old girl, where you are concerned he could never be content
with less than the best."

"Oh, Boy, help me! Find a way! Tell me what to do!" Despair was in Jane's eyes.

The doctor considered long, in silence. At last he said: "I see only one way out. If Dal could
somehow be brought to realise your point of view at that time as a possible one, without knowing
it had actually been the cause of your refusal of him, and could have the chance to express
himself clearly on the subject--to me, for instance--in a way which might reach you without
being meant to reach you, it might put you in a better position toward him. But it would be
difficult to manage. If you could be in close contact with his mind, constantly near him unseen--ah,
poor chap, that is easy now--I mean unknown to him; if, for instance, you could be in the shoes
of this nurse-companion person I am sending him, and get at his mind on the matter; so that
he could feel when you eventually made your confession, he had already justified himself to
you, and thus gone behind his blindness, as it were."

Jane bounded in her chair. "Deryck, I have it! Oh, send ME as his nurse-companion! He would
never dream it was I. It is three years since he heard my voice, and he thinks me in Egypt.
The society column in all the papers, a few weeks ago, mentioned me as wintering in Egypt and
Syria and remaining abroad until May. Not a soul knows I have come home. You are the best judge
as to whether I have had training and experience; and all through the war our work was fully
as much mental and spiritual, as surgical. It was not up to much otherwise. This (may it please
your lordships and worships) may seem a strange way of discoursing in an illiterate shopkeeper.
I have endeavoured (although without the help of books) to improve that small portion of reason
which God hath pleased to give me, and when reason plainly appears
before me, I cannot turn away my head from it.

Thus for instance, if any lawyer should tell me that such a point were law, from which many gross
palpable absurdities must follow, I would not, I could not believe him. If Sir Edward Coke
should positively assert (which he nowhere does, but the direct contrary) that a limited prince,
could by his prerogative oblige his subjects to take half an ounce of lead, stamped with his
image, for twenty shillings in gold, I should swear he was deceived or a deceiver, because
a power like that, would leave the whole lives and fortunes of the people entirely at the mercy
of the monarch: Yet this, in effect, is what Wood hath advanced in some of his papers, and what
suspicious people may possibly apprehend from some passages in that which is called the "Report."

That
paper mentions "such persons to have been examined, who were desirous and willing to be heard
upon that subject." I am told, they were four in all, Coleby, Brown, Mr. Finley the banker, and
one more whose name I know not. The first of these was tried for robbing the Treasury in Ireland,
and although he was acquitted for want of legal proof, yet every person in the Court believed
him to be guilty. The second was tried for a rape, and stands recorded in the votes of the House
of Commons, for endeavouring by perjury and subornation, to take away the life of John Bingham,
Esq.[3]

[Footnote 3: Referring to these persons who were examined by the Committee, Monck Mason quotes
from two letters from Archbishop King to Edward Southwell, Esq. King was one of the council, and
Southwell secretary of state at the time. The first of these letters remarks: "Could a greater
contempt be put upon a nation, than to see such a little fellow as Wood favoured and supported
against them, and such profligates as Brown and Coleby believed before a whole parliament, government,
and private council." From the second letter, written on August 15th, 1724, Monck Mason gives
the following extracts:

"--When I returned to Dublin I met with resolutions concerning our halfpence, founded chiefly on
the testimony of two infamous persons, John Brown and Coleby: as to the first of these, you
will find his character in the votes of the house of commons, last parliament. Tuesday, the 5th
of November.

"'Resolved, that it appears to this Committee, that a wicked conspiracy was maliciously contrived
and carried on against John Bingham, to take away his life and fortune.

"'Resolved, that it is the opinion of this Committee, that the said John Brown, of Rabens, Esq.
and his accomplices, were the chief promoters and advisers of the said conspiracy.

"'Resolved, that it is the opinion of this Committee, that the said John Brown is a person not
fit to serve his majesty, in any office or employment, civil or military, whatsoever.

"'Resolved, that the said John Brown has, in the course of his examination,
grossly prevaricated with this Committee.

"'To all which resolutions, the question being severally put, the house did agree, nemine contradicente.

"'Ordered,
that the said John Brown be, for his said prevarication, taken into the custody of the serjeant
at arms attending this house.

"'Ordered, that his majesty's attorney-general do present the said John Brown, for conniving
and maliciously carrying on the said conspiracy to take away the life of the said John Bingham,
and others.'

"As to Coleby, he was turned out of the treasury for robbing it of a considerable sum of money.
I was present at his trial at the King's-bench, and the evidence
was such as convinced every one, in his conscience, that he was guilty;
but, the proofs being presumptive, and not direct, the jury acquitted
him; on which the judge (Pine, if I remember right) observed the happiness
of English subjects, that, though everybody was convinced of a man's
guilt, yet, if the evidence did not come up to the strict requisites
of the law, he would escape"

("History of St. Patrick's Cathedral," pp. xciv-xcv.) [T.S.]]

But since I have gone so far as to mention particular persons, it
may be some satisfaction to know who is this Wood himself, that has
the honour to have a whole kingdom at his mercy, for almost two years
together.

I find he is in the patent entitled Esq; although he were understood
to be only a hardware-man, and so I have been bold to call him in
my former letters; however a 'squire he is, not only by virtue of
his patent, but by having been a collector in Shropshire, where pretending
to have been robbed, and suing the county, he was cast, and for the
infamy of the fact, lost his employment.

I have heard another story of this 'Squire Wood from a very honourable
lady, that one Hamilton told her.

He (Hamilton) was sent for six years ago by Sir Isaac Newton to try
the coinage of four men, who then solicited a patent for coining halfpence
for Ireland; their names were Wood, Coster, Elliston, and Parker.

Parker made the fairest offer, and Wood the worst, for his coin were three halfpence in a
pound less value than the other.

By which it is plain with what intentions he solicited this patent, but not so plain how he obtained
it. That none of the principal members of both Houses, who were in the King's service or council,
would take upon them to advise how any material person or papers might be sent over on this occasion,
&c." This learned biographer's remarks are specially important inasmuch as he has fortified
them with letters from Archbishop King, unpublished at the time he wrote: "But this [referring
to the extract from the Report given by Swift] will not appear so strange or inexplicable after
perusing the following letter from Archbishop King ... to Edward Southwell, Esq. ...; this important
state paper may, therefore, be considered as an official communication of the sentiments of the
Irish Privy Council upon this matter.

"Letter from William King, Archbishop of Dublin, to Edward Southwell,
Esq., dated the 23d March, 1723.

"'I have not had any occasion of late to trouble you with my letters; but yesternight I came
to the knowledge of an affair which gave me some uneasiness, and, I believe, will do so to
the whole kingdom, when it becomes public. My lord lieutenant sent for several lords and commoners
of the privy council, and communicated to them a letter from my Lord Carteret, writ by his
majesty's command, in which was repeated the answer given to the addresses of the lords and commons,
about one William Wood's farthings and halfpence; and his grace is required to send over witnesses
and evidences against the patentee or patent: this has surprised most people, because we were borne
in hand that that affair was dead, and that we should never hear any more of it.

"'His grace's design was, to be advised by what means and methods he might effectually comply
with his majesty's commands; and, by what I could perceive, it was the sense of all, that it
was not possible, in the present situation of affairs, to answer his majesty's expectations
or those of the kingdom; and that, for these reasons:

"'1st, because this is a controversy between the parliament of Ireland and William Wood, and,
the parliament being now prorogued, nobody either would, or durst,
take on them to meddle in a business attacked by the parliament, or
pretend to manage a cause which so deeply concerned the parliament,
and the whole nation, without express orders.

If this letter had come whilst the parliament was sitting, and had been communicated to the
houses, they could have appointed certain persons to have acted for them, and raised a fund
to support them, as has been done formerly in this kingdom on several
occasions; but, for any, without such authority, to make himself a
party for the legislature and people of Ireland, would be a bold undertaking,
and, perhaps, dangerous; for, if such undertaker or undertakers should
fail in producing all evidences that may be had, or any of the papers
necessary to make the case evident, they must expect to be severely
handled the next parliament for their officiousness, and bear the
blame of the miscarriage of the cause: for these reasons, as it seemed
to me, the privy councillors were unwilling to engage at all in the
business, or to meddle with it.

"'But, 2dly, the thing seemed impracticable; because it would signify
nothing to send over the copies of the papers that were laid before
the parliament, if the design is, as it seems to be, to bring the
patent to a legal trial; for such copies we were told by lawyers,
could not be produced in any court as evidence; and, as to the originals,
they are in the possession of the houses, and (as was conceived) could
not be taken from the proper officers with whom they were trusted,
but by the like order.

"'And, as to the witnesses, it was a query whether my lord lieutenant
by his own power could send them; and, if he have such power, yet
it will not be possible to come at the witnesses, for several in each
house vouched several facts on their own knowledge, to whom the houses
gave credit; my lord lieutenant can neither be apprised of the persons
nor of the particulars which the members testified; whereas, if the
parliament was sitting, those members would appear, and make good
their assertions.

"'There were several sorts of farthings and halfpence produced to the houses, differing in weight,
and there was likewise a difference in the stamp.

These were sent over by William Wood to his correspondents here, and by them produced. But
can it be proved, on a legal trial, that these particular halfpence were coined by him? It is
easy for him to say, that they are counterfeited, as (if I remember right) he has already affirmed
in the public prints, in his answer to the address of the commons.

"'But, 3dly, it was not on the illegality of the patent, nor chiefly
on the abuse of it the patentee (which was not so much as mentioned
by the lords), that the parliament insisted, but on the unavoidable
mischief and destruction it would bring on the kingdom, and on its
being obtained by most false and notorious misinformation of his majesty;
it being suggested, as appears by the preamble, that the kingdom wanted
such halfpence and farthings: now, if the king be misinformed, the
lawyers tell us, that the grant is void.

And, that his majesty was deceived in this grant by a false representation,
it was said, needed no further proof than the patent itself.--William
Wood by it was empowered to coin 360 tons of copper into halfpence
and farthings, which would have made £90,000, about the fifth part
of all the current cash of Ireland; for that is not reckoned, by those
who suppose it most, to be £500,000.

Now, the current cash of England is reckoned above twenty millions; in proportion, therefore, if
Ireland wants £90,000 England will want four millions.

It is easy to imagine what would be said to a man that would propose to his majesty such a coinage;
and it is agreed, that the people of England would not be more alarmed by such a patent, than
the people of Ireland are, by the prospect of turning the fifth part of their current coin into
brass.

"'This, so far as I can remember, is a brief of what passed in the meeting before my lord lieutenant'"
("History of St. Patrick's Cathedral," pp. lxxxvii-lxxxviii). [T.S.]]

How shall I, a poor ignorant shopkeeper, utterly unskilled in law, be able to answer so weighty
an objection. I will try what can be done by plain reason, unassisted by art, cunning or eloquence.

In
my humble opinion, the committee of council, hath already prejudged the whole case, by calling
the united sense of both Houses of Parliament in Ireland an "universal clamour." Here the addresses
of the Lords and Commons of Ireland against a ruinous destructive project of an "obscure, single
undertaker," is called a "clamour."

I desire to know how such a style would be resented in England from
a committee of council there to a Parliament, and how many impeachments
would follow upon it.

But supposing the appellation to be proper, I never heard of a wise minister who despised the
universal clamour of a people, and if that clamour can be quieted
by disappointing the fraudulent practice of a single person, the purchase
is not exorbitant.

But in answer to this objection.

First it is manifest, that if this coinage had been in Ireland, with such limitations as have
been formerly specified in other patents, and granted to persons of this kingdom, or even of
England, able to give sufficient security, few or no inconveniencies
could have happened, which might not have been immediately remedied.

As to Mr. Knox's patent mentioned in the Report, security was given into the exchequer, that the patentee
should at any time receive his halfpence back, and pay gold or silver in exchange for them.
And Mr. Moor (to whom I suppose that patent was made over) was in 1694 forced to leave off
coining, before the end of that year, by the great crowds of people continually offering to
return his coinage upon him. In 1698 he coined again, and was forced to give over for the same
reason. This entirely alters the case; for there is no such condition in Wood's patent, which
condition was worth a hundred times all other limitations whatsoever.[5]

[Footnote 5: It will serve to elucidate this paragraph if an account
be given of the various coinage patents issued for Ireland.

Monck Mason gives an account in a long note to his biography of Swift; but as he has obtained
it from the very ably written tract, "A Defence of the Conduct of the People of Ireland," etc., I
have gone to that pamphlet for the present résumé. I quote from pp. 21-24 of the Dublin edition,
issued in 1724 and printed by George Ewing:

"K. Charles 2d.

1660 granted a patent for coining only farthings for the kingdom of Ireland to Coll. Armstrong:
But I do not find he ever made any use of it.[A] For all our copper and brass money to the year
1680 was issued by private persons, who obtained particular licences, on giving security to
change their half-pence and farthings for gold and silver; but some of their securities failing,
others pretending the half-pence which were tendered to be changed were counterfeits, the
public always suffered. Col. Armstrong's son, finding great profit was made by coining half-pence in
Ireland, by virtue of particular licences recallable at pleasure, solicited and obtained a patent
in the name of George Legg afterwards Lord Dartmouth, for coining half-pence for Ireland from 1680,
for 21 years, he giving security to exchange them for gold or silver on demand.[B] In pursuance
of this he coined considerable quantities of half-pence for four years; but in 1685 [John] Knox,
with the consent of Armstrong, got the remaining part of this term
granted by patent in his own name, he giving security as above, and
got his half-pence declared the current coin of Ireland, notwithstanding
two Acts of Parliament had enacted that they should not be received
in the revenue.

Knox was interrupted in his coinage in 1689, by King James's taking it into his own hands, to
coin his famous brass money, of which he coined no less than £965,375,
three penny worth of metal passing for £10 ster.

In this money creditors were obliged to receive their debts, and by this cruel stratagem Ireland
lost about £60,000 per month. This not only made our gold and silver, but even our half-pence to
disappear; which obliged King William to coin pewter half-pence for the use of his army....

[Footnote A: Monck Mason, quoting Simon "On Irish Coins" (Append., No. LXV), says: "Sir Thomas
[Armstrong] was never admitted to make use of this grant, nor could he obtain allowance of the chief
governor of Ireland, to issue them as royal coin among the subjects of that kingdom."]

[Footnote B: "A proclamation was issued by the lord lieutenant, declaring these half-pence to
be the current coin of the kingdom, but it provided that none should be enforced to take more
than five shillings in the payment of one hundred pounds, and so proportionately in all greater
and lesser sums.... This patent was granted, by and with, the advice of James, Duke of Ormond"
(Monck Mason, "History of St. Patrick's," p. 334, note y).]

"After the Revolution, Col. Roger Moore being possessed of Knox's patent, commenced his coinage
in Dublin, and at first kept several offices for changing his half-pence for gold or silver.
He soon overstocked the kingdom so with copper money, that persons were obliged to receive large
sums in it; for the officers of the crown were industrious dispensers
of it, for which he allowed them a premium.

It was common at that time for one to compound for 1/4 copper, and the collectors paid nothing
else.
 She
would see the face she had not seen since they stood together at the chancel step--the face
from which the glad confidence slowly faded, a horror of chill disillusion taking its place.

   "Anoint and cheer our soiled face
   With the abundance of Thy grace."

She would see that dear face, and he, sightless, would not see hers, but would be easily deluded
into believing her to be some one else.

The gig had turned the last bend of the road, and passed out of sight on its way to the front
of the house.

Jane rose and stood waiting. Suddenly she remembered two sentences of her conversation with
Deryck. She had said: "Shall I ever have the courage to carry it through?" And Deryck had answered,
earnestly: "If you value your own eventual happiness and his, you will."

A tap came at her door. Jane walked across the room, and opened it.

Simpson stood on the threshold.

"Dr. Mackenzie is in the library, nurse," he said, "and wishes to see you there."

"Then, will you kindly take me to the library, Mr. Simpson," said Nurse Rosemary Gray.

CHAPTER XVIII

THE NAPOLEON OF THE MOORS

On the bear-skin rug, with his back to the fire, stood Dr. Robert Mackenzie, known to his friends
as "Dr. Rob" or "Old Robbie," according to their degrees of intimacy.

Jane's first impression was of a short, stout man, in a sealskin waistcoat which had seen better
days, a light box-cloth overcoat three sizes too large for him, a Napoleonic attitude,--little
spindle legs planted far apart, arms folded on chest, shoulders hunched up,--which led one
to expect, as the eye travelled upwards, an ivory-white complexion, a Roman nose, masterful
jaw, and thin lips folded in a line of conscious power. Instead of which one found a red, freckled
face, a nose which turned cheerfully skyward, a fat pink chin, and drooping sandy moustache.
The only striking feature of the face was a pair of keen blue eyes, which, when turned upon
any one intently, almost disappeared beneath bushy red eyebrows and became little points of
turquoise light.

Jane had not been in his presence two minutes before she perceived that, when his mind was
working, he was entirely unconscious of his body, which was apt to do most peculiar things
automatically; so that his friends had passed round the remark: "Robbie chews up dozens of
good pen-holders, while Dr. Mackenzie is thinking out excellent prescriptions."

When Jane entered, his eyes were fixed upon an open letter, which she instinctively knew to
be Deryck's, and he did not look up at once. When he did look up, she saw his unmistakable
start of surprise. He opened his mouth to speak, and Jane was irresistibly reminded of a tame
goldfish at Overdene, which used to rise to the surface when the duchess dropped crumbs. He
closed it without uttering a word, and turned again to Deryck's letter; and Jane felt herself
to be the crumb, or rather the camel, which he was finding it difficult to swallow.

She waited in respectful silence, and Deryck's words passed with calming effect through the
palpitating suspense of her brain. "The Gaelic mind works slowly, though it works exceeding
sure. He will be exceeding sure that I am a verra poor judge o' women."

At last the little man on the hearth-rug lifted his eyes again to Jane's; and, alas, how high
he had to lift them!

"Nurse--er?" he said inquiringly, and Jane thought his searching eyes looked like little bits
of broken blue china in a hay-stack.

"Rosemary Gray," replied Jane meekly, with a curtsey in her voice; feeling as if they were
rehearsing amateur theatricals at Overdene, and the next minute the duchess's cane would rap
the floor and they would be told to speak up and not be so slow.

"Ah," said Dr. Robert Mackenzie, "I see."

He stared hard at the carpet in a distant corner of the room, then walked across and picked
up a spline broken from a bass broom; brought it back to the hearth-rug; examined it with minute
attention; then put one end between his teeth and began to chew it.

Jane wondered what was the correct thing to do at this sort of interview, when a doctor neither
sat down himself nor suggested that the nurse should do so. She wished she had asked Deryck.
But he could not possibly have enlightened her, because the first thing he always said to a
nurse was: "My dear Nurse SO-AND-SO, pray sit down. People who have much unavoidable standing
to do should cultivate the habit of seating themselves comfortably at every possible opportunity."

But the stout little person on the hearth-rug was not Deryck. So Jane stood at attention, and
watched the stiff bit of bass wag up and down, and shorten, inch by inch. When it had finally
disappeared, Dr. Robert Mackenzie spoke again.

"So you have arrived, Nurse Gray," he said.

"Truly the mind of a Scotchman works slowly," thought Jane, but she was thankful to detect
the complete acceptance of herself in his tone. Deryck was right; and oh the relief of not
having to take this unspeakable little man into her confidence in this matter of the deception
to be practised on Garth.

"Yes, sir, I have arrived," she said.

Another period of silence. A fragment of the bass broom reappeared and vanished once more,
before Dr. Mackenzie spoke again.

"I am glad you have arrived, Nurse Gray," he said.

"I am glad TO have arrived, sir," said Jane gravely, almost expecting to hear the duchess's
delighted "Ha, ha!" from the wings. The little comedy was progressing.

Then suddenly she became aware that during the last few minutes Dr. Mackenzie's mind had been
concentrated upon something else. She had not filled it at all. The next moment it was turned
upon her and two swift turquoise gleams from under the shaggy brows swept over her, with the
rapidity and brightness of search-lights. Dr. Mackenzie commenced speaking quickly, with a
wonderful rolling of r's.

"I understand, Miss Gray, you have come to minister to the patient's mind rather than to his
body. You need not trouble to explain. I have it from Sir Deryck Brand, who prescribed a nurse-companion
for the patient, and engaged you. I fully agreed with his prescription; and, allow me to say,
I admire its ingredients."

Jane bowed, and realised how the duchess would be chuckling. What an insufferable little person!
Jane had time to think this, while he walked across to the table-cloth, bent over it, and examined
an ancient spot of ink. Finding a drop of candle grease near it, he removed it with his thumb
nail; brought it carefully to the fire, and laid it on the coals. He watched it melt, fizzle,
and flare, with an intense concentration of interest; then jumped round on Jane, and caught
her look of fury.

"And I think there remains very little for me to say to you about the treatment, Miss Gray,"
he finished calmly. "You will have received minute instructions from Sir Deryck himself. The
great thing now is to help the patient to take an interest in the outer world. The temptation
to persons who suddenly become totally blind, is to form a habit of living entirely in a world
within; a world of recollection, retrospection, and imagination; the only world, in fact, in
which they can see."

Jane made a quick movement of appreciation and interest. After all she might learn something
useful from this eccentric little Scotchman. Oh to keep his attention off rubbish on the carpet,
and grease spots on the table-cloth!

"Yes?" she said. "Do tell me more."

"This," continued Dr. Mackenzie, "is our present difficulty with Mr. Dalmain. There seems to
be no possibility of arousing his interest in the outside world. He refuses to receive visitors;
he declines to hear his letters. Hours pass without a word being spoken by him. Unless you
hear him speak to me or to his valet, you will easily suppose yourself to have a patient who
has lost the power of speech as well as the gift of sight. Should he express a wish to speak
to me alone when we are with him, do not leave the room. Walk over to the fireplace and remain
there. I desire that you should hear, that when he chooses to rouse and make an effort, he
is perfectly well able to do so. The most important part of your duties, Nurse Gray, will be
the aiding him day by day to resume life,--the life of a blind man, it is true; but not therefore
necessarily an inactive life. Now that all danger of inflammation from the wounds has subsided,
he may get up, move about, learn to find his way by sound and touch. He was an artist by profession.
He will never paint again. But there are other gifts which may form reasonable outlets to an
artistic nature."

He paused suddenly, having apparently caught sight of another grease spot, and walked over
to the table; but the next instant jumped round on Jane, quick as lightning, with a question.

"Does he play?" said Dr. Rob.

But Jane was on her guard, even against accidental surprises.

"Sir Deryck did not happen to mention to me, Dr. Mackenzie, whether Mr. Dalmain is musical or not."

"Ah, well," said the little doctor, resuming his Napoleonic attitude in the centre of the hearth-rug;
"you must make it your business to find out. And, by the way, Nurse, do you play yourself?"

"A little," said Jane.

"Ah," said Dr. Rob. "And I dare say you sing a little, too?"

Jane acquiesced.

"In that case, my dear lady, I leave most explicit orders that you neither sing a little nor
play a little to Mr. Dalmain. We, who have our sight, can just endure while people who 'play
a little' show us how little they can play; because we are able to look round about us and
think of other things. But to a blind man, with an artist's sensitive soul, the experience
might culminate in madness. We must not risk it. I regret to appear uncomplimentary, but a
patient's welfare must take precedence of all other considerations."

Jane smiled. She was beginning to like Dr. Rob.

"I will be most careful," she said, "neither to play nor to sing to Mr. Dalmain."

"Good," said Dr. Mackenzie. "But now let me tell you what you most certainly may do, by-and-by.
Lead him to the piano. Place him there upon a seat where he will feel secure; none of your
twirly, rickety stools. Make a little notch on the key-board by which he can easily find middle
C. Then let him relieve his pent-up soul by the painting of sound-pictures. You will find this
will soon keep him happy for hours. And, if he is already something of a musician,--as that
huge grand piano, with no knick-knacks on it indicates,--he may begin that sort of thing at
once, before he is ready to be worried with the Braille system, or any other method of instructing
the blind. But contrive an easy way--a little notch in the wood-work below the note--by means
of which, without hesitation or irritation, he can locate himself instantly at middle C. Never
mind the other notes. It is all the SEEING he will require when once he is at the piano. Ha,
ha! Not bad for a Scotchman, eh, Nurse Gray?"

But Jane could not laugh; though somewhere in her mental background she seemed to hear laughter
and applause from the duchess. This was no comedy to Jane,--her blind Garth at the piano, his
dear beautiful head bent over the keys, his fingers feeling for that pathetic little notch,
to be made by herself, below middle C. She loathed this individual who could make a pun on
the subject of Garth's blindness, and, in the back of her mind, Tommy seemed to join the duchess,
flapping up and down on his perch and shrieking: "Kick him out! Stop his jaw!"

"And now," said Dr. Mackenzie unexpectedly, "the next thing to be done, Nurse Gray, is to introduce
you to the patient."

Jane felt the blood slowly leave her face and concentrate in a terrible pounding at her heart.
But she stood her ground, and waited silently.

Dr. Mackenzie rang the bell. Simpson appeared.

"A decanter of sherry, a wine-glass, and a couple of biscuits," said Dr. Rob.

Simpson vanished.

"Little beast!" thought Jane. "At eleven o'clock in the morning!".

Dr. Rob stood, and waited; tugging spitefully at his red moustache, and looking intently out
of the window.

Simpson reappeared, placed a small tray on the table, and went quietly out, closing the door
behind him.

Dr. Rob poured out a glass of sherry, drew up a chair to the table, and said: "Now, Nurse,
sit down and drink that, and take a biscuit with it."

Jane protested. "But, indeed, doctor, I never--"

"I have no doubt you 'never,'" said Dr. Rob, "especially at eleven o'clock in the morning.
But you will to-day; so do not waste any time in discussion. You have had a long night journey;
you are going upstairs to a very sad sight indeed, a strain on the nerves and sensibilities.
You have come through a trying interview with me, and you are praising Heaven it is over. But
you will praise Heaven with more fervency when you have drunk the sherry. Also you have been
standing during twenty-three minutes and a half. I always stand to speak myself, and I prefer
folk should stand to listen. I can never talk to people while they loll around. But you will
walk upstairs all the more steadily, Nurse Rosemary Gray, if you sit down now for five minutes
at this table."

Jane obeyed, touched and humbled. So, after all, it was a kind, comprehending heart under that
old sealskin waistcoat; and a shrewd understanding of men and matters, in spite of the erratic,
somewhat objectionable exterior. While she drank the wine and finished the biscuits, he found
busy occupation on the other side of the room, polishing the window with his silk pocket-handkerchief;
making a queer humming noise all the time, like a bee buzzing up the pane. He seemed to have
forgotten her presence; but, just as she put down the empty glass, he turned and, walking straight
across the room, laid his hand upon her shoulder.

"Now, Nurse," he said, "follow me upstairs, and, just at first, speak as little as possible.
Remember, every fresh voice intruding into the still depths of that utter blackness, causes
an agony of bewilderment and disquietude to the patient. Speak little and speak low, and may
God Almighty give you tact and wisdom."

There was a dignity of conscious knowledge and power in the small quaint figure which preceded
Jane up the staircase. As she followed, she became aware that her spirit leaned on his and
felt sustained and strengthened. The unexpected conclusion of his sentence, old-fashioned in
its wording, yet almost a prayer, gave her fresh courage. "May God Almighty give you tact and
wisdom," he had said, little guessing how greatly she needed them. And now another voice, echoing
through memory's arches to organ-music, took up the strain: "Where Thou art Guide, no ill can
come." And with firm though noiseless step, Jane followed Dr. Mackenzie into the roam where
Garth was lying, helpless, sightless, and disfigured.

CHAPTER XIX

THE VOICE IN THE DARKNESS

Just the dark head upon the pillow. That was all Jane saw at first, and she saw it in sunshine.
Somehow she had always pictured a darkened room, forgetting that to him darkness and light
were both alike, and that there was no need to keep out the sunlight, with its healing, purifying,
invigorating powers.

He had requested to have his bed moved into a corner--the corner farthest from door, fireplace,
and windows--with its left side against the wall, so that he could feel the blank wall with
his hand and, turning close to it, know himself shut away from all possible prying of unseen
eyes. This was how he now lay, and he did not turn as they entered.

Just the dear dark head upon the pillow. It was all Jane saw at first. Then his right arm in
the sleeve of a blue silk sleeping-suit, stretched slightly behind him as he lay on his left
side, the thin white hand limp and helpless on the coverlet.

Jane put her hands behind her. The impulse was so strong to fall on her knees beside the bed,
take that poor hand in both her strong ones, and cover it with kisses. Ah surely, surely then,
the dark head would turn to her, and instead of seeking refuge in the hard, blank wall, he
would hide that sightless face in the boundless tenderness of her arms. But Deryck's warning
voice sounded, grave and persistent: "If you value your own eventual happiness and his--" So
Jane put her hands behind her back.

Dr. Mackenzie advanced to the side of the bed and laid his hand upon Garth's shoulder. Then,
with an incredible softening of his rather strident voice, he spoke so slowly and quietly,
that Jane could hardly believe this to be the man who had jerked out questions, comments, and
orders to her, during the last half-hour.

"Good morning, Mr. Dalmain. Simpson tells me it has been an excellent night, the best you have
yet had. Now that is good. No doubt you were relieved to be rid of Johnson, capable though
he was, and to be back in the hands of your own man again. These trained attendants are never
content with doing enough; they always want to do just a little more, and that little more
is a weariness to the patient.--Now I have brought you to-day one who is prepared to do all
you need, and yet who, I feel sure, will never annoy you by attempting more than you desire.
Sir Deryck Brand's prescription, Nurse Rosemary Gray, is here; and I believe she is prepared
to be companion, secretary, reader, anything you want, in fact a new pair of eyes for you,
Mr. Dalmain, with a clever brain behind them, and a kind, sympathetic, womanly heart directing
and controlling that brain. Nurse Gray arrived this morning, Mr. Dalmain."

No response from the bed. But Garth's hand groped for the wall; touched it, then dropped listlessly
back.

Jane could not realise that SHE was "Nurse Gray." She only longed that her poor boy need not
be bothered with the woman! It all seemed, at this moment, a thing apart from herself and him.

Dr. Mackenzie spoke again. "Nurse Rosemary Gray is in the room, Mr. Dalmain."

Then Garth's instinctive chivalry struggled up through the blackness. He did not turn his head,
but his right hand made a little courteous sign of greeting, and he said in a low, distinct
voice: "How do you do? I am sure it is most kind of you to come so far. I hope you had an easy
journey."

Jane's lips moved, but no sound would pass them.

Dr. Rob made answer quickly, without looking at her: "Miss Gray had a very good journey, and
looks as fresh this morning as if she had spent the night in bed. I can see she is a cold-water
young lady."

"I hope my housekeeper will make her comfortable. Please give orders," said the tired voice;
and Garth turned even closer to the wall, as if to end the conversation.

Dr. Rob attacked his moustache, and stood looking down at the blue silk shoulder for a minute,
silently.

Then he turned and spoke to Jane. "Come over to the window, Nurse Gray. I want to show you
a special chair we have obtained for Mr. Dalmain, in which he will be most comfortable as soon
as he feels inclined to sit up. You see? Here is an adjustable support for the head, if necessary;
and these various trays and stands and movable tables can be swung round into any position
by a touch. I consider it excellent, and Sir Deryck approved it. Have you seen one of this
kind before, Nurse Gray?"

"We had one at the hospital, but not quite so complete as this," said Jane.

In the stillness of that sunlit chamber, the voice from the bed broke upon them with startling
suddenness; and in it was the cry of one lost in an abyss of darkness, but appealing to them
with a frantic demand for instant enlightenment.

"WHO is in the room?" cried Garth Dalmain.

His face was still turned to the wall; but he had raised himself on his left elbow, in an attitude
which betokened intent listening.

Dr. Mackenzie answered. "No one is in the room, Mr. Dalmain, but myself and Nurse Gray."

"There IS some one else in the room!" said Garth violently. "How dare you lie to me! Who was
speaking?"

Then Jane came quickly to the side of the bed. Her hands were trembling, but her voice was
perfectly under control.

"It was I who spoke, sir," she said; "Nurse Rosemary Gray. And I feel sure I know why my voice
startled you. Dr. Brand warned me it might do so. He said I must not be surprised if you detected
a remarkable similarity between my voice and that of a mutual friend of yours and his. He said
he had often noticed it."

Garth, in his blindness, remained quite still; listening and considering. At length he asked
slowly: "Did he say whose voice?"

"Yes, for I asked him. He said it was Miss Champion's."

Garth's head dropped back upon the pillow. Then without turning he said in a tone which Jane
knew meant a smile on that dear hidden face: "You must forgive me, Miss Gray, for being so
startled and so stupidly, unpardonably agitated. But, you know, being blind is still such a
new experience, and every fresh voice which breaks through the black curtain of perpetual night,
means so infinitely more than the speaker realises. The resemblance in your voice to that of
the lady Sir Deryck mentioned is so remarkable that, although I know her to be at this moment
in Egypt, I could scarcely believe she was not in the room. And yet the most unlikely thing
in the world would be that she should have been in this room. So I owe you and Dr. Mackenzie
most humble apologies for my agitation and unbelief."

He stretched out his right hand, palm upwards, towards Jane.

Jane clasped her shaking hands behind her.

"Now, Nurse, if you please," broke in Dr. Mackenzie's rasping voice from the window, "I have
a few more details to explain to you over here."

They talked together for a while without interruption, until Dr. Rob remarked: "I suppose I
will have to be going."

Then Garth said: "I wish to speak to you alone, doctor, for a few minutes."

"I will wait for you downstairs, Dr. Mackenzie," said Jane, and was moving towards the door,
when an imperious gesture from Dr. Rob stopped her, and she turned silently to the fireplace.
She could not see any need now for this subterfuge, and it annoyed her. But the freckled little
Napoleon of the moors was not a man to be lightly disobeyed. He walked to the door, opened
and closed it; then returned to the bedside, drew up a chair, and sat down.

"Now, Mr. Dalmain," he said.

Garth sat up and turned towards him eagerly.

Then, for the first time, Jane saw his face.

"Doctor," he said, "tell me about this nurse. Describe her to me."

The tension in tone and attitude was extreme. His hands were clasped in front of him, as if
imploring sight through the eyes of another. His thin white face, worn with suffering, looked
so eager and yet so blank.

"Describe her to me, doctor," he said; "this Nurse Rosemary Gray, as you call her."

"But it is not a pet name of mine, my dear sir," said Dr. Rob deliberately. "It is the young
lady's own name, and a pretty one, too. 'Rosemary for remembrance.' Is not that Shakespeare?"

"Describe her to me," insisted Garth, for the third time.

Dr. Mackenzie glanced at Jane. But she had turned her back, to hide the tears which were streaming
down her cheeks. Oh, Garth! Oh, beautiful Garth of the shining eyes!

Dr. Rob drew Deryck's letter from his pocket and studied it.

"Well," he said slowly, "she is a pretty, dainty little thing; just the sort of elegant young
woman you would like to have about you, could you see her."

"Dark or fair?" asked Garth.

The doctor glanced at what he could see of Jane's cheek, and at the brown hands holding on
to the mantelpiece.

"Fair," said Dr. Rob, without a moment's hesitation.

Jane started and glanced round. Why should this little man be lying on his own account?

"Hair?" queried the strained voice from the bed.

"Well," said Dr. Rob deliberately, "it is mostly tucked away under a modest little cap; but,
were it not for that wise restraint, I should say it might be that kind of fluffy, fly-away
floss-silk, which puts the finishing touch to a dainty, pretty woman."

Garth lay back, panting, and pressed his hands over his sightless face.

"Doctor," he said, "I know I have given you heaps of trouble, and to-day you must think me
a fool. But if you do not wish me to go mad in my blindness, send that girl away. Do not let
her enter my room again."

"Now, Mr. Dalmain," said Dr. Mackenzie patiently; "let us consider this thing. We may take
it you have nothing against this young lady excepting a chance resemblance in her voice to
that of a friend of yours now far away. Was not this other lady a pleasant person?"

Garth laughed suddenly, bitterly; a laugh like a hard, sob. "Oh, yes," he said, "she was quite
a pleasant person."

"'Rosemary for remembrance,'" quoted Dr. Rob. "Then why should not Nurse Rosemary call up a
pleasant remembrance? Also it seems to me to be a kind, sweet, womanly voice, which is something
to be thankful for nowadays, when so many women talk, fit to scare the crows; cackle, cackle,
cackle--like stones rattling in a tin canister."

"But can't you understand, doctor," said Garth wearily, "that it is just the remembrance and
the resemblance which, in my blindness, I cannot bear? I have nothing against her voice, Heaven
knows! But I tell you, when I heard it first I thought it was--it was she--the other--come
to me--here--and--" Garth's voice ceased suddenly.

"The pleasant lady?" suggested Dr. Rob. "I see. Well now, Mr. Dalmain, Sir Deryck said the
best thing that could happen would be if you came to wish for visitors. It appears you have
many friends ready and anxious to come any distance in order to bring you help or cheer. Why
not let me send for this pleasant lady? I make no doubt she would come. Then when she herself
had sat beside you, and talked with you, the nurse's voice would trouble you no longer."

Garth sat up again, his face wild with protest. Jane turned on the hearth-rug, and stood watching
it.

"No, doctor," he said. "Oh, my God, no! In the whole world, she is the last person I would
have enter this room!"

Dr. Mackenzie bent forward to examine minutely a microscopic darn in the sheet. "And why?"
he asked very low.

"Because," said Garth, "that pleasant lady, as you rightly call her, has a noble, generous
heart, and it might overflow with pity for my blindness; and pity from her I could not accept.
It would be the last straw upon my heavy cross. I can bear the cross, doctor; I hope in time
to carry it manfully, until God bids me lay it down. But that last straw--HER pity--would break
me. I should fall in the dark, to rise no more."

"I see," said Dr. Rob gently. "Poor laddie! The pleasant lady must not come."

He waited silently a few minutes, then pushed back his chair and stood up.

"Meanwhile," he said, "I must rely on you, Mr. Dalmain, to be agreeable to Nurse Rosemary Gray,
and not to make her task too difficult. I dare not send her back. She is Dr. Brand's choice.
Besides--think of the cruel blow to her in her profession. Think of it, man!--sent off at a
moment's notice, after spending five minutes in her patient's room, because, forsooth, her
voice maddened him! Poor child! What a statement to enter on her report! See her appear before
the matron with it! Can't you be generous and unselfish enough to face whatever trial there
may be for you in this bit of a coincidence?"

Garth hesitated. "Dr. Mackenzie," he said at last, "will you swear to me that your description
of this young lady was accurate in every detail?"

"'Swear not at all,'" quoted Dr. Rob unctuously. "I had a pious mother, laddie. Besides I can
do better than that. I will let you into a secret. I was reading from Sir Deryck's letter.
I am no authority on women myself, having always considered dogs and horses less ensnaring
and more companionable creatures. So I would not trust my own eyes, but preferred to give you
Sir Deryck's description. You will allow him to be a fine judge of women. You have seen Lady
Brand?"

"Seen her? Yes," said Garth eagerly, a slight flush tinting his thin cheeks, "and more than
that, I've painted her. Ah, such a picture!--standing at a table, the sunlight in her hair,
arranging golden daffodils in an old Venetian vase. Did you see it, doctor, in the New Gallery,
two years ago?"

"No," said Dr. Rob. "I am not finding myself in galleries, new or old. But"--he turned a swift
look of inquiry on Jane, who nodded--"Nurse Gray was telling me she had seen it."

"Really?" said Garth, interested. "Somehow one does not connect nurses with picture galleries."

"I don't know why not," said Dr. Rob. "They must go somewhere for their outings. They can't
be everlastingly nosing shop windows in all weathers; so why not go in and have a look at your
pictures? Besides, Miss Rosemary is a young lady of parts. Sir Deryck assures me she is a gentlewoman
by birth, well-read and intelligent.--Now, laddie, what is it to be?"

Garth considered silently.

Jane turned away and gripped the mantelpiece. So much hung in the balance during that quiet minute.

At length Garth spoke, slowly, hesitatingly. "If only I could quite disassociate the voice
from the--from that other personality. If I could be quite sure that, though her voice is so
extraordinarily like, she herself is not--" he paused, and Jane's heart stood still. Was a
description of herself coming?--"is not at all like the face and figure which stand clear in
my remembrance as associated with that voice."

"Well," said Dr. Rob, "I'm thinking we can manage that for you. These nurses know their patients
must be humoured. We will call the young lady back, and she shall kneel down beside your bed--Bless
you! She won't mind, with me to play old Gooseberry!--and you shall pass your hands over her
face and hair, and round her little waist, and assure yourself, by touch, what an elegant,
dainty little person it is, in a blue frock and white apron."

Garth burst out laughing, and his voice had a tone it had not yet held. "Of all the preposterous
suggestions!" he said. "Good heavens! What an ass I must have been making of myself! And I
begin to think I have exaggerated the resemblance. In a day or two, I shall cease to notice
it. And, look here, doctor, if she really was interested in that portrait--Here, I say--where
are you going?"

"All right, sir," said Dr. Rob. "I was merely moving a chair over to the fireside, and taking
the liberty of pouring out a glass of water. Really you are becoming abnormally quick of hearing.
Now I am all attention. What about the portrait?"

"I was only going to say, if she the nurse, you know--is really interested in my portrait of
Lady Brand, there are studies of it up in the studio, which she might care to see. If she brought
them here and described them to me I could explain--But, I say, doctor. I can't have dainty
young ladies in and out of my room while I'm in bed. Why shouldn't I get up and try that chair
of yours? Send Simpson along; and tell him to look out my brown lounge-suit and orange tie.
Good heavens! what a blessing to have the MEMORY of colours and of how they blend! Think of
the fellows who are BORN blind. And please ask Miss Gray to go out in the pine wood, or on
the moor, or use the motor, or rest, or do anything she likes. Tell her to make herself quite
at home; but on no account to come up here until Simpson reports me ready."

"You may rely on Nurse Gray to be most discreet," said Dr. Rob; whose voice had suddenly become
very husky. "And as for getting up, laddie, don't go too fast. You will not find your strength
equal to much. But I am bound to tell you there is nothing to keep you in bed if you feel like
rising."

"Good-bye, doctor," said Garth, groping for his hand; "and I am sorry I shall never be able
to offer to paint Mrs. Mackenzie!"

"You'd have to paint her with a shaggy head, four paws, and the softest amber eyes in the world,"
said Dr. Rob tenderly; "and, looking out from those eyes, the most faithful, loving dog-heart
in creation. In all the years we've kept house together she has never failed to meet me with
a welcome, never contradicted me or wanted the last word, and never worried me for so much
as the price of a bonnet. There's a woman for you!--Well, good-bye, lad, and God Almighty bless
you. And be careful how you go. Do not be surprised if I look in again on my way back from
my rounds to see how you like that chair."

Dr. Mackenzie held open the door. Jane passed noiselessly out before him. He followed, signing
to her to precede him down the stairs.

In the library, Jane turned and faced him. He put her quietly into a chair and stood before
her. The bright blue eyes were moist, beneath the shaggy brows.

"My dear," he said, "I feel myself somewhat of a blundering old fool. You must forgive me.
I never contemplated putting you through such an ordeal. I perfectly understand that, while
he hesitated, you must have felt your whole career at stake. I see you have been weeping; but
you must not take it too much to heart that our patient made so much of your voice resembling
this Miss Champion's. He will forget all about it in a day or two, and you will be worth more
to him than a dozen Miss Champions. See what good you have done him already. Here he is wanting
to get up and explain his pictures to you. Never you fear. You will soon win your way, and
I shall be able to report to Sir Deryck what a fine success you have made of the case. Now
I must see the valet and give him very full instructions. And I recommend you to go for a blow
on the moor and get an appetite for lunch. Only put on something warmer than that. You will
have no sick-room work to do; and having duly impressed me with your washableness and serviceableness,
you may as well wear something comfortable to protect you from our Highland nip. Have you warmer
clothing with you?"

"It is the rule of our guild to wear uniform," said Jane; "but I have a grey merino."

"Ah, I see. Well, wear the grey merino. I shall return in two hours to observe how he stands
that move. Now, don't let me keep you."

"Dr. Mackenzie," said Jane quietly, "may I ask why you described me as fair; and my very straight,
heavy, plainly coiled hair, as fluffy, fly-away floss-silk?"

Dr. Rob had already reached the bell, but at her question he stayed his hand and, turning,
met Jane's steadfast eyes with the shrewd turquoise gleam of his own.

"Why certainly you may ask, Nurse Rosemary Gray," he said, "though I wonder you think it necessary
to do so. It was of course perfectly evident to me that, for reasons of his own, Sir Deryck
wished to paint an imaginary portrait of you to the patient, most likely representing some
known ideal of his. As the description was so different from the reality, I concluded that,
to make the portrait complete, the two touches unfortunately left to me to supply, had better
be as unlike what I saw before me as the rest of the picture. And now, if you will be good
enough--" Dr. Rob rang the bell violently.

"And why did you take the risk of suggesting that he should feel me?" persisted Jane.

"Because I knew he was a gentleman," shouted Dr. Rob angrily. "Oh, come in, Simpson--come in,
my good fellow--and shut that door! And God Almighty be praised that He made you and me MEN,
and not women!"

A quarter of an hour later, Jane watched him drive away, thinking to herself: "Deryck was right.
But what a queer mixture of shrewdness and obtuseness, and how marvellously it worked out to
the furtherance of our plans."

But as she watched the dog-cart start off at a smart trot across the moor, she would have been
more than a little surprised could she have overheard Dr. Rob's muttered remarks to himself,
as he gathered up the reins and cheered on his sturdy cob. He had a habit of talking over his
experiences, half aloud, as he drove from case to case; the two sides of his rather complex
nature apparently comparing notes with each other. And the present conversation opened thus:

"Now what has brought the Honourable Jane up here?" said Dr. Rob.

"Dashed if I know," said Dr. Mackenzie.

"You must not swear, laddie," said Dr. Rob; "you had a pious mother."

CHAPTER XX

JANE REPORTS PROGRESS

Letter from the Honourable Jane Champion to Sir Deryck Brand.

Castle Gleneesh, N. B.

My dear Deryck: My wires and post-cards have not told you much beyond the fact of my safe arrival.
Having been here a fortnight, I think it is time I sent you a report. Only you must remember
that I am a poor scribe. From infancy it has always been difficult to me to write anything
beyond that stock commencement: "I hope you are quite well;" and I approach the task of a descriptive
letter with an effort which is colossal. And yet I wish I might, for once, borrow the pen of
a ready writer; because I cannot help knowing that I have been passing through experiences
such as do not often fall to the lot of a woman.

Nurse Rosemary Gray is getting on capitally. She is making herself indispensable to the patient,
and he turns to her with a completeness of confidence which causes her heart to swell with
professional pride.

Poor Jane has got no further than hearing, from his own lips, that she is the very last person
in the whole world he would wish should come near him in his blindness. When she was suggested
as a possible visitor, he said: "Oh, my God, NO!" and his face was one wild, horrified protest.
So Jane is getting her horsewhipping, Boy, and--according to the method of a careful and thoughtful
judge, who orders thirty lashes of the "cat," in three applications of ten--so is Jane's punishment
laid on at intervals; not more than she can bear at a time; but enough to keep her heart continually
sore, and her spirit in perpetual dread. And you, dear, clever doctor, are proved perfectly
right in your diagnosis of the sentiment of the case. He says her pity would be the last straw
on his already heavy cross; and the expression is an apt one, her pity for him being indeed
a thing of straw. The only pity she feels is pity for herself, thus hopelessly caught in the
meshes of her own mistake. But how to make him realise this, is the puzzle.

Do you remember how the Israelites were shut in, between Migdol and the sea? I knew Migdol
meant "towers," but I never understood the passage, until I stood upon that narrow wedge of
desert, with the Red Sea in front and on the left; the rocky range of Gebel Attaka on the right,
towering up against the sky, like the weird shapes of an impregnable fortress; the sole outlet
or inlet behind, being the route they had just travelled from Egypt, and along which the chariots
and horsemen of Pharaoh were then thundering in hot pursuit. Even so, Boy, is poor Jane now
tramping her patch of desert, which narrows daily to the measure of her despair. Migdol is
HIS certainty that HER love could only be pity. The Red Sea is the confession into which she
must inevitably plunge, to avoid scaling Migdol; in the chill waters of which, as she drags
him in with her, his love is bound to drown, as waves of doubt and mistrust sweep over its
head,--doubts which he has lost the power of removing; mistrust which he can never hope to
prove to have been false and mistaken. And behind come galloping the hosts of Pharaoh; chance,
speeding on the wheels of circumstance. At any moment some accident may compel a revelation;
and instantly HE will be scaling rocky Migdol, with torn hands and bleeding feet; and she--poor
Jane--floundering in the depths of the Red Sea. O for a Moses, with divine commission, to stretch
out the rod of understanding love, making a safe way through; so that together they might reach
the Promised Land! Dear wise old Boy, dare you undertake the role of Moses!

But here am I writing like a page of Baedeker, and failing to report on actual facts.

As you may suppose, Jane grows haggard and thin in spite of old Margery's porridge--which is
"put on" every day after lunch, for the next morning's breakfast, and anybody passing "gives
it a stir." Did you know that was the right way to make porridge, Deryck? I always thought
it was made in five minutes, as wanted. Margery says that must be the English stuff which profanely
goes by the name. (N.B. Please mark the self-control with which I repeat Scotch remarks, without
rushing into weird spelling; a senseless performance, it seems to me. For if you know already
how old Margery pronounces "porridge," you can read her pronunciation into the sentence; and
if you do not know it, no grotesque spelling on my part could convey to your mind any but a
caricatured version of the pretty Scotch accent with which Margery says: "Stir the porridge,
Nurse Gray." In fact, I am agreeably surprised at the ease with which I understand the natives,
and the pleasure I derive from their conversation; for, after wrestling with one or two modern
novels dealing with the Highlands, I had expected to find the language an unknown tongue. Instead
of which, lo! and behold, old Margery, Maggie the housemaid, Macdonald the gardener, and Macalister
the game-keeper, all speak a rather purer English than I do; far more carefully pronounced,
and with every R sounded and rolled. Their idioms are more characteristic than their accent.
They say "whenever" for "when," and use in their verbs several quaint variations of tense.)

But what a syntactical digression! Oh, Boy, the wound at my heart is so deep and so sore that
I dread the dressings, even by your delicate touch. As for me, if he's goin' on to behave as he
has done for a spell back, the sooner he quits the better. I wash my hands of him," and Aunt
Prue flounced into the buttery just as Grandmother came in at the other door.

"Charley is it you was talking about?" she asked. "Did you hear him coughin' last night? I did,
and I couldn't sleep a wink for worrying about it. A real deep cough it was. Do you suppose it
the lungs, and what's good for him to take?"

"He's well enough except for mischief," put in Aunt Prue through the
buttery door.

"Prue never thinks anything ails anybody," said Mrs.
Brush, sinking her voice to a whisper. "I'm really consarned about
Charley. He don't eat hardly anything at dinner. That aint a bit natural
for a growin' boy. You can have no conception how often awkward moments arose; as, for instance,
in the library, the first time Garth came downstairs; when he ordered Simpson to bring the
steps for Miss Gray, and Simpson opened his lips to remark that Nurse Gray could reach to the
top shelf on her own tiptoes with the greatest ease, he having just seen her do it. Mercifully,
the perfect training of an English man-servant saved the situation, and he merely said: "Yessir;
certainly sir," and looked upon, me, standing silently by, as a person who evidently delighted
in giving unnecessary trouble. Had it been dear old Margery with her Scotch tongue, which starts
slowly, but gathers momentum as it rolls, and can never be arrested until the full flood of
her thought has been poured forth, I should have been constrained to pick her up bodily in
my dainty arms and carry her out.

So I sent for Simpson and Margery to the dining-room that evening, when the master was safely
out of ear-shot, and told them that, for reasons which I could not fully explain, a very incorrect
description of my appearance had been given him. He thought me small and slim; fair and very
pretty; and it was most important, in order to avoid long explanations and mental confusion
for him, that he should not at present be undeceived. Simpson's expression of polite attention
did not vary, and his only comment was: "Certainly, miss. Quite so." But across old Margery's
countenance, while I was speaking, passed many shades of opinion, which, fortunately, by the
time I had finished, crystallized into an approving smile of acquiescence. She even added her
own commentary: "And a very good thing, too, I am thinking. For Master Garth, poor laddie,
was always so set upon having beauty about him. 'Master Garthie,' I would say to him, when
he had friends coming, and all his ideas in talking over the dinner concerned the cleaning
up of the old silver, and putting out of Valentine glass and Worstered china; 'Master Garthie,'
I would say, feeling the occasion called for the apt quoting of Scripture, 'it appears to me
your attention is given entirely to the outside of the cup and platter, and you care nothing
for all the good things that lie within.' So it is just as well to keep him deceived, Miss
Gray." And then, as Simpson coughed tactfully behind his hand, and nudged her very obviously
with his elbow, she added, as a sympathetic after-thought: "For, though a homey face may indeed
be redeemed by its kindly expression, you cannot very well explain expression to the blind."
So you see, Deryck, this shrewd old body, who has known Garth from boyhood, would have entirely
agreed with the decision of three years ago.

Well, to continue my report. The voice gave us some trouble, as you foresaw, and the whole
plan hung in the balance during a few awful moments; for, though he easily accepted the explanation
we had planned, he sent me out, and told Dr. Mackenzie my voice in his room would madden him.
Dr. Rob was equal to the occasion, and won the day; and Garth, having once given in, never
mentioned the matter again. Only, sometimes I see him listening and remembering.

But Nurse Rosemary Gray has beautiful hours when poor anxious, yearning Jane is shut out. For
her patient turns to her, and depends on her, and talks to her, and tries to reach her mind,
and shows her his, and is a wonderful person to live with and know. Jane, marching about in
the cold, outside, and hearing them talk, realises how little she understood the beautiful
gift which was laid at her feet; how little she had grasped the nature and mind of the man
whom she dismissed as "a mere boy." Nurse Rosemary, sitting beside him during long sweet hours
of companionship, is learning it; and Jane, ramping up and down her narrowing strip of desert,
tastes the sirocco of despair.

And now I come to the point of my letter, and, though I am a woman, I will not put it in a
postscript.

Deryck, can you come up soon, to pay him a visit, and to talk to me? I don't think I can bear
it, unaided, much longer; and he would so enjoy having you, and showing you how he had got
on, and all the things he had already learned to do. Also you might put in a word for Jane;
or at all events, get at his mind on the subject. Oh, Boy, if you COULD spare forty-eight hours!
And a breath of the moors would be good for you. Also I have a little private plan, which depends
largely for its fulfilment on your coming. Oh, Boy--come!

Yours, needing you,

Jeanette.

From Sir Deryck Brand to Nurse Rosemary Gray, Castle Gleneesh, N. B.

Wimpole Street.

My dear Jeanette: Certainly I will come. I will leave Euston on Friday evening. I can spend
the whole of Saturday and most of Sunday at Gleneesh, but must be home in time for Monday's work.

I will do my best, only, alas! I am not Moses, and do not possess his wonder-working rod. Moreover,
latest investigations have proved that the Israelites could not have crossed at the place you
mention, but further north at the Bitter Lakes; a mere matter of detail, in no way affecting
the extreme appositeness of your illustration, rather, adding to it; for I fear there are bitter
waters ahead of you, my poor girl.

Still I am hopeful, nay, more than hopeful,--confident. Often of late, in connection with you,
I have thought of the promise about all things working together for good. Any one can make
GOOD things work together for good: but only the Heavenly Father can bring good out of evil;
and, taking all our mistakes and failings and foolishnesses, cause them to work to our most
perfect well-being. Ancient marching orders, and simple; but true, and therefore eternal.

I am glad Nurse Rosemary is proving so efficient, but I hope we may not have to face yet another
complication in our problem. Suppose our patient falls in love with dainty little Nurse Rosemary,
where will Jane be then? I fear the desert would have to open its mouth and swallow her up.
We must avert such a catastrophe. Could not Rosemary be induced to drop an occasional H, or
to confess herself as rather "gone" on Simpson?

Oh, my poor old girl! I could not jest thus, were I not coming shortly to your aid.

How maddening it is! And you so priceless! But most men are either fools or blind, and one
is both. Trust me to prove it to him,--to my own satisfaction and his,--if I get the chance.

Yours always devotedly,

Deryck Brand.

From Sir Deryck Brand to Dr. Robert Mackenzie.

Dear Mackenzie: Do you consider it to be advisable that I should shortly pay a visit to our
patient at Gleneesh and give an opinion on his progress?

I find I can make it possible to come north this week-end.

I hope you are satisfied with the nurse I sent up.

Yours very faithfully,

Deryck Brand.

From Dr. Robert Mackenzie to Sir Deryck Brand.

Dear Sir Deryck: Every possible need of the patient's is being met by the capable lady you
sent to be his nurse. I am no longer needed. Nor are you--for the patient. But I deem it exceedingly
advisable that you should shortly pay a visit to the nurse, who is losing more flesh than a
lady of her proportions can well afford.

Some secret care, besides the natural anxiety of having the responsibility of this case, is
wearing her out. She may confide in you. She cannot quite bring herself to trust in

Your humble servant,

Robert Mackenzie.

CHAPTER XXI

HARD ON THE SECRETARY

Nurse Rosemary sat with her patient in the sunny library at Gleneesh. A small table was between
them, upon which lay a pile of letters--his morning mail--ready for her to open, read to him,
and pass across, should there chance to be one among them he wished to touch or to keep in
his pocket.

They were seated close to the French window opening on to the terrace; the breeze, fragrant
with the breath of spring flowers, blew about them, and the morning sun streamed in.

Garth, in white flannels, wearing a green tie and a button-hole of primroses, lay back luxuriously,
enjoying, with his rapidly quickening senses, the scent of the flowers and the touch of the
sun-beams.

Nurse Rosemary finished reading a letter of her own, folded it, and put it in her pocket with
a feeling of thankful relief. Deryck was coming. He had not failed her.

"A man's letter, Miss Gray," said Garth unexpectedly.

"Quite right," said Nurse Rosemary. "How did you know?"

"Because it was on one sheet. A woman's letter on a matter of great importance would have run
to two, if not three. And that letter was on a matter of importance."

"Right again," said Nurse Rosemary, smiling. "And again, how did you know?"

"Because you gave a little sigh of relief after reading the first line, and another, as you
folded it and replaced it in the envelope."

Nurse Rosemary laughed. "You are getting on so fast, Mr. Dalmain, that soon we shall be able
to keep no secrets. My letter was from--"

"Oh, don't tell me," cried Garth quickly, putting out his hand in protest. "I had no idea of
seeming curious as to your private correspondence, Miss Gray. Only it is such a pleasure to
report progress to you in the things I manage to find out without being told."

"But I meant to tell you anyway," said Nurse Rosemary. "The letter is from Sir Deryck, and,
amongst other things, he says he is coming up to see you next Saturday."

"Ah, good!" said Garth. "And what a change he will find! And I shall have the pleasure of reporting
on the nurse, secretary, reader, and unspeakably patient guide and companion he provided for
me." Then he added, in a tone of suddenly awakened anxiety: "He is not coming to take you away,
is he?"

"No," said Nurse Rosemary, "not yet. But, Mr. Dalmain, I was wanting to ask whether you could
spare me just during forty-eight hours; and Dr. Brand's visit would be an excellent opportunity.
I could leave you more easily, knowing you would have his companionship. If I may take the
week-end, leaving on Friday night, I could return early on Monday morning, and be with you
in time to do the morning letters. Dr. Brand would read you Saturday's and Sunday's--Ah, I
forgot; there is no Sunday post. So I should miss but one; and he would more than take my place
in other ways."

"Very well," said Garth, striving not to show disappointment. "I should have liked that we
three should have talked together. But no wonder you want a time off. Shall you be going far?"

"No; I have friends near by. And now, do you wish to attend to your letters?"

"Yes," said Garth, reaching out his hand. "Wait a minute. There is a newspaper among them.
I smell the printing ink. I don't want that. But kindly give me the rest."

Nurse Rosemary took out the newspaper; then pushed the pile along, until it touched his hand.

Garth took them. "What a lot!" he said, smiling in pleasurable anticipation. "I say, Miss Gray,
if you profit as you ought to do by the reading of so many epistles written in every possible
and impossible style, you ought to be able to bring out a pretty comprehensive 'Complete Letter-writer.'
Do you remember the condolences of Mrs. Parker-Bangs? I think that was the first time we really
laughed together. Kind old soul! But she should not have mentioned blind Bartimaeus dipping
seven times in the pool of Siloam. It is always best to avoid classical allusions, especially
if sacred, unless one has them accurately. Now--" Garth paused.

He had been handling his letters, one by one; carefully fingering each, before laying it on
the table beside him. He had just come to one written on foreign paper, and sealed. He broke
off his sentence abruptly, held the letter silently for a moment, then passed his fingers slowly
over the seal.

Nurse Rosemary watched him anxiously. He made no remark, but after a moment laid it down and
took up the next. But when he passed the pile across to her, he slipped the sealed letter beneath
the rest, so that she should come to it last of all.

Then the usual order of proceedings commenced. Garth lighted a cigarette--one of the first
things he had learned to do for himself--and smoked contentedly, carefully placing his ash-tray,
and almost unfailingly locating the ash, in time and correctly.

Nurse Rosemary took up the first letter, read the postmark, and described the writing on the
envelope. Garth guessed from whom it came, and was immensely pleased if, on opening, his surmise
proved correct. There were nine to-day, of varying interest,--some from men friends, one or
two from charming women who professed themselves ready to come and see him as soon as he wished
for visitors, one from a blind asylum asking for a subscription, a short note from the doctor
heralding his visit, and a bill for ties from a Bond Street shop.

Nurse Rosemary's fingers shook as she replaced the eighth in its envelope. The last of the
pile lay on the table. As she took it up, Garth with a quick movement flung his cigarette-end
through the window, and lay back, shading his face with his hand.

"Did I shoot straight, nurse?" he asked.

She leaned forward and saw the tiny column of blue smoke rising from the gravel.

"Quite straight," she said. "Mr. Dalmain, this letter has an Egyptian stamp, and the postmark
is Cairo. It is sealed with scarlet sealing-wax, and the engraving on the seal is a plumed
helmet with the visor closed."

"And the writing?" asked Garth, mechanically and very quietly.

"The handwriting is rather bold and very clear, with no twirls or flourishes. It is written
with a broad nib."

"Will you kindly open it, nurse, and tell me the signature before reading the rest of the letter."

Nurse Rosemary fought with her throat, which threatened to close altogether and stifle her
voice. She opened the letter, turned to the last page, and found the signature.

"It is signed 'Jane Champion,' Mr. Dalmain," said Nurse Rosemary.

"Read it, please," said Garth quietly. And Nurse Rosemary began.

Dear Dal: What CAN I write? If I were with you, there would be so much I could say; but writing
is so difficult, so impossible.

I know it is harder for you than it would have been for any of us; but you will be braver over
it than we should have been, and you will come through splendidly, and go on thinking life
beautiful, and making it seem so to other people. I never thought it so until that summer at
Overdene and Shenstone when you taught me the perception of beauty. Since then, in every sunset
and sunrise, in the blue-green of the Atlantic, the purple of the mountains, the spray of Niagara,
the cherry blossom of Japan, the golden deserts of Egypt, I have thought of you, and understood
them better, because of you. Oh, Dal! I should like to come and tell you all about them, and
let you see them through my eyes; and then you would widen out my narrow understanding of them,
and show them again to me in greater loveliness.

I hear you receive no visitors; but cannot you make just one exception, and let me come?

I was at the Great Pyramid when I heard. I was sitting on the piazza after dinner. The moonlight
called up memories. I had just made up my mind to give up the Nile, and to come straight home,
and write asking you to come and see me; when General Loraine turned up, with an English paper
and a letter from Myra, and--I heard. Would you have come, Garth?

And now, my friend, as you cannot come to me, may I come to you? If you just say: "COME," I
will come from any part of the world where I may chance to be when the message reaches me.
Never mind this Egyptian address. I shall not be there when you are hearing this. Direct to
me at my aunt's town house. All my letters go there, and are forwarded unopened.

LET ME COME. And oh, do believe that I know something of how hard it is for you. But God can
"enable."

Believe me to be,

Yours, more than I can write,

Jane Champion.

Garth removed the hand which had been shielding his face.

"If you are not tired, Miss Gray, after reading so many letters, I should like to dictate my
answer to that one immediately, while it is fresh in my mind. Have you paper there? Thank you.
May we begin?-- Dear Miss Champion ... I am deeply touched by your kind letter of sympathy
... It was especially good of you to write to me from so far away amid so much which might
well have diverted your attention from friends at home."

A long pause. Nurse Rosemary Gray waited, pen in hand, and hoped the beating of her heart was
only in her own ears, and not audible across the small table.

"I am glad you did not give up the Nile trip but--"

An early bee hummed in from the hyacinths and buzzed against the pane. Otherwise the room was
very still.

--"but of course, if you had sent for me I should have come."

The bee fought the window angrily, up and down, up and down, for several minutes; then found
the open glass and whirled out into the sunshine, joyfully.

Absolute silence in the room, until Garth's quiet voice broke it as he went on dictating.

"It is more than kind of you to suggest coming to see me, but--"

Nurse Rosemary dropped her pen. "Oh, Mr. Dalmain," she said, "let her come."

Garth turned upon her a face of blank surprise.

"I do not wish it," he said, in a tone of absolute finality.

"But think how hard it must be for any one to want so much to be near a--a friend in trouble,
and to be kept away."

"It is only her wonderful kindness of heart makes her offer to come, Miss Gray. She is a friend
and comrade of long ago. It would greatly sadden her to see me thus."

"It does not seem so to her," pleaded Nurse Rosemary. "Ah, cannot you read between the lines?
Or does it take a woman's heart to understand a woman's letter? Did I read it badly? May I
read it over again?"

A look of real annoyance gathered upon Garth's face. He spoke with quiet sternness, a frown
bending his straight black brows.

"You read it quite well," he said, "but you do not do well to discuss it. I must feel able
to dictate my letters to my secretary, without having to explain them."

"I beg your pardon, sir," said Nurse Rosemary humbly. "I was wrong."

Garth stretched his hand across the table, and left it there a moment; though no responsive
hand was placed within it.

"Never mind," he said, with his winning smile, "my kind little mentor and guide. You can direct
me in most things, but not in this. Now let us conclude. Where were we? Ah--'to suggest coming
to see me.' Did you put `It is most kind' or `It is more than kind?'"

"'More than kind,'" said Nurse Rosemary, brokenly.

"Right, for it is indeed more than kind. Only she and I can possibly know how much more. Now
let us go on ... But I am receiving no visitors, and do not desire any until I have so mastered
my new circumstances that the handicap connected with them shall neither be painful nor very
noticeable to other people. During the summer I shall be learning step by step to live this
new life, in complete seclusion at Gleneesh. I feel sure my friends will respect my wish in
this matter. I have with me one who most perfectly and patiently is helping--Ah, wait!" cried
Garth suddenly. "I will not say that. She might think--she might misunderstand. Had you begun
to write it? No? What was the last word? 'Matter?' Ah yes. That is right. Full stop after 'matter.'
Now let me think."

Garth dropped his face into his hands, and sat for a long time absorbed in thought.

Nurse Rosemary waited. Her right hand held the pen poised over the paper. Her left was pressed
against her breast. Her eyes rested on that dark bowed head, with a look of unutterable yearning
and of passionate tenderness. At last Garth lifted his face. "Yours very sincerely, Garth Dalmain;"
he said. And, silently, Nurse Rosemary wrote it.

CHAPTER XXII

DR. ROB TO THE RESCUE

Into the somewhat oppressive silence which followed the addressing and closing of the envelope,
broke the cheery voice of Dr. Rob.

"Which is the patient to-day? The lady or the gentleman? Ah, neither, I see. Both flaunt the
bloom of perfect health and make the doctor shy. It is spring without, but summer within,"
ran on Dr. Rob gaily, wondering why both faces were so white and perturbed, and why there was
in the air a sense of hearts in torment. "Flannels seem to call up boating and picnic parties;
and I see you have discarded the merino, Nurse Gray, and returned to the pretty blue washables.
More becoming, undoubtedly; only, don't take cold; and be sure you feed up well. In this air
people must eat plenty, and you have been perceptibly losing weight lately. We don't want TOO
airy-fairy dimensions."

"Why do you always chaff Miss Gray about being small, Dr. Rob?" asked Garth, in a rather vexed
tone. "I am sure being short is in no way detrimental to her."

"I will chaff her about being tall if you like," said Dr. Rob, looking at her with a wicked
twinkle, as she stood in the window, drawn up to her full height, and regarding him with cold
disapproval.

"I would sooner no comments of any kind were made upon her personal appearance," said Garth
shortly; then added, more pleasantly: "You see, she is just a voice to me--a kind, guiding
voice. At first I used to form mental pictures of her, of a hazy kind; but now I prefer to
appropriate in all its helpfulness what I DO know, and leave unimagined what I do not. Did
it ever strike you that she is the only person--bar that fellow Johnson, who belongs to a nightmare
time I am quickly forgetting--I have yet had near me, in my blindness, whom I had not already
seen; the only voice I have ever heard to which I could not put a face and figure? In time,
of course, there will be many. At present she stands alone to me in this."

Dr. Rob's observant eye had been darting about during this explanation, seeking to focus itself
upon something worthy of minute examination. Suddenly he spied the foreign letter lying close
beside him on the table.

"Hello!" he said. "Pyramids? The Egyptian stamp? That's interesting. Have you friends out there,
Mr. Dalmain?"

"That letter came from Cairo," Garth replied; "but I believe Miss Champion has by now gone
on to Syria." Dr. Rob attacked his moustache, and stared at the letter meditatively. "Champion?"
he repeated. "Champion? It's an uncommon name. Is your correspondent, by any chance, the Honourable
Jane?"

"Why, that letter is from her," replied Garth, surprised. "Do you know her?" His voice vibrated
eagerly.

"Well," answered Dr. Rob, with slow deliberation, "I know her face, and I know her voice; I
know her figure, and I know a pretty good deal of her character. I know her at home, and I
know her abroad. I've seen her under fire, which is more than most men of her acquaintance
can claim. But there is one thing I never knew until to-day and that is her handwriting. May
I examine this envelope?" He turned to the window;--yes, this audacious little Scotchman had
asked the question of Nurse Rosemary. But only a broad blue back met his look of inquiry. Nurse
Rosemary was studying the view. He turned back to Garth, who had evidently already made a sign
of assent, and on whose face was clearly expressed an eager desire to hear more, and an extreme
disinclination to ask for it.

Dr. Mackenzie took up the envelope and pondered it.

"Yes," he said, at last, "it is like her,--clear, firm, unwavering; knowing what it means to
say, and saying it; going where it means to go, and getting there. Ay, lad, it's a grand woman
that; and if you have the Honourable Jane for your friend, you can be doing without a few other
things."

A tinge of eager colour rose in Garth's thin cheeks. He had been so starved in his darkness
for want of some word concerning her, from that outer light in which she moved. He had felt
so hopelessly cut off from all chance of hearing of her. And all the while, if only he had
known it, old Robbie could have talked of her. He had had to question Brand so cautiously,
fearing to betray his secret and hers; but with Dr. Rob and Nurse Gray no such precautions
were needed. He could safely guard his secret, and yet listen and speak.

"Where--when?" asked Garth.

"I will tell you where, and I will tell you when," answered Dr. Rob, "if you feel inclined
for a war tale on this peaceful spring morning."

Garth was aflame With eagerness. "Have you a chair, doctor?" he said. "And has Miss Gray a chair?"

"I have no chair, sir," said Dr. Rob, "because when I intend thoroughly to enjoy my own eloquence
it is my custom to stand. Nurse Gray has no chair, because she is standing at the window absorbed
in the view. She has apparently ceased to pay any heed to you and me. You will very rarely
find one woman take much interest in tales about another. But you lean back in your own chair,
laddie, and light a cigarette. And a wonderful thing it is to see you do it, too, and better
than pounding the wall. Eh? All of which we may consider we owe to the lady who disdains us
and prefers the scenery. Well, I'm not much to look at, goodness knows; and she can see you
all the rest of the day. Now that's a brand worth smoking. What do you call it--'Zenith'? Ah,
and 'Marcovitch.' Yes; you can't better that for drawing-room and garden purposes. It mingles
with the flowers. Lean back and enjoy it, while I smell gun-powder. For I will tell you where
I first saw the Honourable Jane. Out in South Africa, in the very thick of the Boer war. I
had volunteered for the sake of the surgery experience. She was out there, nursing; but the
real thing, mind you. None of your dabbling in eau-de-cologne with lace handkerchiefs, and
washing handsome faces when the orderlies had washed them already; making charming conversation
to men who were getting well, but fleeing in dread from the dead or the dying. None of that,
you may be sure, and none of that allowed in her hospital; for Miss Champion was in command
there, and I can tell you she made them scoot. She did the work of ten, and expected others
to do it too. Doctors and orderlies adored her. She was always called 'The Honourable Jane,'
most of the men sounding the H and pronouncing the title as four syllables. Ay, and the wounded
soldiers! There was many a lad out there, far from home and friends, who, when death came,
died with a smile on his lips, and a sense of mother and home quite near, because the Honourable
Jane's arm was around him, and his dying head rested against her womanly breast. Her voice
when she talked to them? No,--that I shall never forget. And to hear her snap at the women,
and order along the men; and then turn and speak to a sick Tommy as his mother or his sweetheart
would have wished to hear him spoken to, was a lesson in quick-change from which I am profiting
still. And that big, loving heart must often have been racked; but she was always brave and
bright. Just once she broke down. It was over a boy whom she tried hard to save--quite a youngster.
She had held him during the operation which was his only chance; and when it proved no good,
and he lay back against her unconscious, she quite broke down and said: 'Oh, doctor,--a mere
boy--and to suffer so, and then die like this!' and gathered him to her, and wept over him,
as his own mother might have done. The surgeon told me of it himself. He said the hardest hearts
in the tent were touched and softened. But, it was the only time the Honourable Jane broke down."

Garth shielded his face with his hand. His half-smoked cigarette fell unheeded to the floor.
The hand that had held it was clenched on his knee. Dr. Rob picked it up, and rubbed the scorched
spot on the carpet carefully with his foot. He glanced towards the window. Nurse Rosemary had
turned and was leaning against the frame. She did not look at him, but her eyes dwelt with
troubled anxiety on Garth.

"I came across her several times, at different centres," continued Dr. Rob; "but we were not
in the same departments, and she spoke to me only once. I had ridden in, from a temporary overflow
sort of place where we were dealing with the worst cases straight off the field, to the main
hospital in the town for a fresh supply of chloroform. While they fetched it, I walked round
the ward, and there in a corner was Miss Champion, kneeling beside a man whose last hour was
very near, talking to him quietly, and taking measures at the same time to ease his pain. Suddenly
there came a crash--a deafening rush--and another crash, and the Honourable Jane and her patient
were covered with dust and splinters. A Boer shell had gone clean through the roof just over
their heads. The man sat up, yelling with fear. Poor chap, you couldn't blame him; dying, and
half under morphine. The Honourable Jane never turned a hair. 'Lie down, my man,' she said,
'and keep still.' 'Not here,' sobbed the man. 'All right,' said the Honourable Jane; 'we will
soon move you.' Then she turned and saw me. I was in the most nondescript khaki, a non-com's
jacket which I had caught up on leaving the tent, and various odds and ends of my outfit which
had survived the wear and tear of the campaign. Also I was dusty with a long gallop. 'Here,
serjeant,' she said, 'lend a hand with this poor fellow. I can't have him disturbed just now.'
That was Jane's only comment on the passing of a shell within a few yards of her own head.
Do you wonder the men adored her? She placed her hands beneath his shoulders, and signed to
me to take him under the knees, and together we carried him round a screen, out of the ward,
and down a short passage; turning unexpectedly into a quiet little room, with a comfortable
bed, and photographs and books arranged on the tiny dressing-table. She said: 'Here, if you
please, serjeant,' and we laid him on the bed. 'Whose is it?' I asked. She looked surprised
at being questioned, but seeing I was a stranger, answered civilly: 'Mine.' And then, noting
that he had dozed off while we carried him, added: 'And he will have done with beds, poor chap,
before I need it.' There's nerve for you!--Well, that was my only conversation out there with
the Honourable Jane. Soon after I had had enough and came home."

Garth lifted his head. "Did you ever meet her at home?" he asked.

"I did," said Dr. Rob. "But she did not remember me. Not a flicker of recognition. Well, how
could I expect it? I wore a beard out there; no time to shave; and my jacket proclaimed me
a serjeant, not a surgeon. No fault of hers if she did not expect to meet a comrade from the
front in the wilds of--of Piccadilly," finished Dr. Rob lamely. "Now, having spun so long a
yarn, I must be off to your gardener's cot in the wood, to see his good wife, who has had what
he pathetically calls 'an increase.' I should think a decrease would have better suited the
size of his house. But first I must interview Mistress Margery in the dining-room. She is anxious
about herself just now because she 'canna eat bacon.' She says it flies between her shoulders.
So erratic a deviation from its normal route on the part of the bacon, undoubtedly requires
investigation. So, by your leave, I will ring for the good lady."

"Not just yet, doctor," said a quiet voice from the window. "I want to see you in the dining-room,
and will follow you there immediately. And afterwards, while you investigate Margery, I will
run up for my bonnet, and walk with you through the woods, if Mr. Dalmain will not mind an
hour alone."

When Jane reached the dining-room, Dr. Robert Mackenzie was standing on the hearth-rug in a
Napoleonic attitude, just as on the morning of their first interview. He looked up uncertainly
as she came in.

"Well?" he said. "Am I to pay the piper?"

Jane came straight to him, with both hands extended.

"Ah, serjeant!" she said. "You dear faithful old serjeant! See what comes of wearing another
man's coat. And my dilemma comes from taking another woman's name. So you knew me all the time,
from the first moment I came into the room?"

"From the first moment you entered the room," assented Dr. Rob.

"Why did you not say so?" asked Jane.

"Well, I concluded you had your reasons for being 'Nurse Rosemary Gray,' and it did not come
within my province to question your identity."

"Oh, you dear!" said Jane. "Was there ever anything so shrewd, and so wise, and so bewilderingly
far-seeing, standing on two legs on a hearth-rug before! And when I remember how you said:
'So you have arrived, Nurse Gray?' and all the while you might have been saying. 'How do you
do, Miss Champion? And what brings you up here under somebody else's name?"

"I might have so said," agreed Dr. Rob reflectively; "but praise be, I did not."

"But tell me" said Jane "why let it out now?"

Dr. Rob laid his hand on her arm. "My dear, I am an old fellow, and all my life I have made
it my business to know, without being told. You have been coming through a strain,--a prolonged
period of strain, sometimes harder, sometimes easier, but never quite relaxed,--a strain such
as few women could have borne. It was not only with him; you had to keep it up towards us all.
I knew, if it were to continue, you must soon have the relief of some one with whom to share
the secret,--some one towards whom you could be yourself occasionally. And when I found you
had been writing to him here, sending the letter to be posted in Cairo (how like a woman, to
strain at a gnat, after swallowing such a camel!), awaiting its return day after day, then
obliged to read it to him yourself, and take down his dictated answer, which I gathered from
your faces when I entered was his refusal of your request to come and see him, well, it seemed
to me about time you were made to realise that you might as well confide in an old fellow who,
in common with all the men who knew you in South Africa, would gladly give his right hand for
the Honourable Jane."

Jane looked at him, her eyes full of gratitude. For the moment she could not speak.

"But tell me, my dear," said Dr. Rob, "tell me, if you can: why does the lad put from him so
firmly that which, if indeed it might be his for the asking, would mean for him so great, so
wonderful, so comforting a good?"

"Ah, doctor," said Jane, "thereby hangs a tale of sad mistrust and mistake, and the mistrust
and mistake, alas, were mine. Now, while you see Margery, I will prepare for walking; and as
we go through the wood I will try to tell you the woeful thing which came between him and me
and placed our lives so far apart. Your wise advice will help me, and your shrewd knowledge
of men and of the human heart may find us a way out, for indeed we are shut in between Migdol
and the sea."

As Jane crossed the hall and was about to mount the stairs, she looked towards the closed library
door. A sudden fear seized her, lest the strain of listening to that tale of Dr. Rob's had
been too much for Garth. None but she could know all it must have awakened of memory to be
told so vividly of the dying soldiers whose heads were pillowed on her breast, and the strange
coincidence of those words, "A mere boy--and to suffer so!" She could not leave the house without
being sure he was safe and well. And yet she instinctively feared to intrude when he imagined
himself alone for an hour.

Then Jane, in her anxiety, did a thing she had never done before. She opened the front door
noiselessly, passed round the house to the terrace, and when approaching the open window of
the library, trod on the grass border, and reached it without making the faintest sound.

Never before had she come upon him unawares, knowing he hated and dreaded the thought of an
unseen intrusion on his privacy.

But now--just this once--

Jane looked in at the window.

Garth sat sideways in the chair, his arms folded on the table beside him, his face buried in
them. He was sobbing as she had sometimes heard men sob after agonising operations, borne without
a sound until the worst was over. And Garth's sob of agony was this: "OH, MY WIFE--MY WIFE--MY
WIFE!"

Jane crept away. How she did it she never knew. But some instinct told her that to reveal herself
then, taking him at a disadvantage, when Dr. Rob's story had unnerved and unmanned him, would
be to ruin all. "IF YOU VALUE YOUR ULTIMATE HAPPINESS AND HIS," Deryck's voice always sounded
in warning. Besides, it was such a short postponement. In the calm earnest thought which would
succeed this storm, his need of her, would win the day. The letter, not yet posted, would be
rewritten. He would say "COME"--and the next minute he would be in her arms.

So Jane turned noiselessly away.

Coming in, an hour later, from her walk with Dr. Rob, her heart filled with glad anticipation,
she found him standing in the window, listening to the countless sounds he was learning to
distinguish. He looked so slim and tall and straight in his white flannels, both hands thrust
deep into the pockets of his coat, that when he turned at her approach it seemed to her as
if the shining eyes MUST be there.

"Was it lovely in the woods?" he asked. "Simpson shall take me up there after lunch. Meanwhile,
is there time, if you are not tired, Miss Gray, to finish our morning's work?"

Five letters were dictated and a cheque written. Then Jane noticed that hers to him had gone
from among the rest. But his to her lay on the table ready for stamping. She hesitated.

"And about the letter to Miss Champion?" she said. "Do you wish it to go as it is, Mr. Dalmain?"

"Why certainly," he said. "Did we not finish it?"

"I thought," said Jane nervously, looking away from his blank face, "I thought perhaps--after
Dr. Rob's story--you might--"

"Dr. Rob's story could make no possible difference as to whether I should let her come here
or not," said Garth emphatically; then added more gently: "It only reminded me--"

"Of what?" asked Jane, her hands upon her breast.

"Of what a glorious woman she is," said Garth Dalmain, and blew a long, steady cloud of smoke
into the summer air.

CHAPTER XXIII

THE ONLY WAY

When Deryck Brand alighted at the little northern wayside station, he looked up and down the
gravelled platform, more than half expecting to see Jane. The hour was early, but she invariably
said "So much the better" to any plan which involved rising earlier than usual. Nothing was
to be seen, however, but his portmanteau in the distance--looking as if it had taken up a solitary
and permanent position where the guard had placed it--and one slow porter, who appeared to
be overwhelmed by the fact that he alone was on duty to receive the train.

There were no other passengers descending; there was no other baggage to put out. The guard
swung up into his van as the train moved off.

The old porter, shading his eyes from the slanting rays of the morning sun, watched the train
glide round the curve and disappear from sight; then slowly turned and looked the other way,--as
if to make sure there was not another coming,--saw the portmanteau, and shambled towards it.
He stood looking down upon it pensively, then moved slowly round, apparently reading the names
and particulars of all the various continental hotels at which the portmanteau had recently
stayed with its owner.

Dr. Brand never hurried people, He always said: "It answers best, in the long run, to let them
take their own time. The minute or two gained by hurrying them is lost in the final results."
But this applied chiefly to patients in the consulting-room; to anxious young students in hospital;
or to nurses, too excitedly conscious at first of the fact that he was talking to them, to
take in fully what he was saying. His habit of giving people, even in final moments, the full
time they wanted, had once lost him an overcoat, almost lost him a train, and won him the thing
in life he most desired. But that belongs to another story.

Meanwhile he wanted his breakfast on this fresh spring morning. And he wanted to see Jane.
Therefore, as porter and portmanteau made no advance towards him, the doctor strode down the
platform.

"Now then, my man!" he called.

"I beg your pardon?" said the Scotch porter.

"I want my portmanteau."

"Would this be your portmanteau?" inquired the porter doubtfully.

"It would," said the doctor. "And it and I would be on our way to Castle Gleneesh, if you would
be bringing it out and putting it into the motor, which I see waiting outside."

"I will be fetching a truck," said the porter. But when he returned, carefully trundling it
behind him, the doctor, the portmanteau, and the motor were all out of sight.

The porter shaded his eyes and gazed up the road.

"I will be hoping it WAS his portmanteau," he said, and went back to his porridge.

Meanwhile the doctor sped up into the hills, his mind alight with eagerness to meet Jane and
to learn the developments of the last few days. Her non-appearance at the railway station filled
him with an undefinable anxiety. It would have been so like Jane to have been there, prompt
to seize the chance of a talk with him alone before he reached the house. He had called up,
in anticipation, such a vivid picture of her, waiting on the platform,--bright, alert, vigorous,
with that fresh and healthy vigour which betokens a good night's rest, a pleasant early awakening,
and a cold tub recently enjoyed,--and the disappointment of not seeing her had wrought in him
a strange foreboding. What if her nerve had given way under the strain?

They turned a bend in the winding road, and the grey turrets of Gleneesh came in sight, high
up on the other side of the glen, the moor stretching away behind and above it. As they wound
up the valley to the moorland road which would bring them round to the house, the doctor could
see, in the clear morning light, the broad lawn and terrace of Gleneesh, with its gay flower-beds,
smooth gravelled walks, and broad stone parapet, from which was a drop almost sheer down into
the glen below.

Simpson received him at the hall door; and he just stopped himself in time, as he was about
to ask for Miss Champion. And, if I had in me the least spirit of a projector, I would engage that
this might be effected in a few years, at a very inconsiderable charge.[10]

[Footnote 10: Since this hint was suggested, several useful seminaries have been instituted, under
the name of "Charter Working Schools," in Ireland, supported by the
royal benefaction of a thousand pounds a year, by a tax on hawkers
and pedlars, and by voluntary subscriptions.

The schools are for the education of boys and girls born of Popish parents; in most of them, the
children manufacture their own clothing, and the boys are employed in matters relative to husbandry.
[F.]

These Charter Schools, founded by Marsh, Bishop of Clogher, and adopted by Primate Boulter in 1733,
were intended "to rescue the souls of thousands of poor children
from the dangers of Popish superstition and idolatry, and their bodies
from the miseries of idleness and beggary."

In reality the scheme was one by which it was hoped to prevent the
growth of Catholicism.

The conditions and methods of instruction were positively cruel,
since the children were actually withheld from any communication with
their parents.

Mr. Lecky deals with the subject fully in the first volume of his "Ireland in the Eighteenth
Century," Froude gives the scheme his praise and admiration, but at the time of its institution
it was the cause of "an intensity of bitterness hardly equalled by any portion of the penal code.
Parents would rather do anything than send their children into such prisons where, at last, they
would receive an education which, to their minds, must lead them to forfeit their soul's salvation."
[T.S.]]

Fifthly, That due encouragement should be given to agriculture; and a stop put to that pernicious
practice of graziers; engrossing vast quantities of land, sometimes at great distance; whereby
the country is extremely depopulated.

Sixthly, That the defects in those acts for planting forest trees, might be fully supplied,
since they have hitherto been wholly ineffectual; except about the demesnes of a few gentlemen;
and even there, in general, very unskilfully made, and thriving accordingly.

Neither hath there yet been due care taken to preserve what is planted,
or to enclose grounds; not one hedge, in a hundred, coming to maturity,
for want of skill and industry.

The neglect of copsing woods cut down, hath likewise been of very ill consequences. And if men
were restrained from that unlimited liberty of cutting down their own woods before the proper
time, as they are in some other countries; it would be a mighty benefit
to the kingdom.

For, I believe, there is not another example in Europe, of such a prodigious quantity of excellent
timber cut down, in so short a time, with so little advantage to
the country, either in shipping or building.

I may add, that absurd practice of cutting turf, without any regularity;
whereby great quantities of restorable land are made utterly desperate,
many thousands of cattle destroyed, the turf more difficult to come
at, and carry home, and less fit for burning; the air made unwholesome
by stagnating pools and marshes; and the very sight of such places
offensive to those who ride by.

Neither should that odious custom be allowed, of cutting scraws, (as they call them) which is
flaying off the green surface of the ground, to cover their cabins; or make up their ditches;
sometimes in shallow soils, where all is gravel within a few inches; and sometimes in low ground,
with a thin greensward, and sloughy underneath; which last turns all into bog, by this mismanagement.
And, I have heard from very skilful country-men, that by these two
practices in turf and scraws, the kingdom loseth some hundreds of
acres of profitable land every year; besides the irreparable loss
of many skirts of bogs, which have a green coat of grass, and yet
are mangled for turf; and, besides the want of canals, by regular
cutting, which would not only be a great convenience for bringing
their turf home at an easy rate; but likewise render even the larger
bogs more dry and safe, for summer pasture.

These, and some other speculations of the like kind, I had intended to publish in a particular discourse
against this session of Parliament; because, in some periods of my
life, I had opportunity and curiosity to observe, from what causes
those great errors, in every branch of country management, have arisen;
of which I have now ventured to relate but few, out of very many;
whereof some, perhaps, would not be mentioned without giving offence;
which I have endeavoured, by all possible means, to avoid.

And, for the same reason, I chose to add here, the little I thought proper to say on this
subject.

But, as to the lands of those who are perpetual absentees, I do not see any probability of their
being ever improved.

In former times, their tenants sat at easy rents; but for some years past, they have been, generally
speaking, more terribly racked by the dexterity of merciless agents from England, than even
those held under the severest landlords here. I was assured upon the place, by great numbers
of credible people, that a prodigious estate in the county of Cork, being let upon leases for
lives, and great fines paid; the rent was so high, that the tenants
begged leave to surrender their leases, and were content to lose their
fines.

The cultivating and improvement of land, is certainly a subject worthy
of the highest enquiry in any country, but especially in ours; where
we are so strangely limited in every branch of trade, that can be
of advantage to us; and utterly deprived of those, which are of the
greatest importance; whereof I defy the most learned man in Europe,
to produce me an example from any other kingdom in the world: For,
we are denied the benefits which God and nature intended to us; as
manifestly appears by our happy situation for commerce, and the great
number of our excellent ports.

So that, I think, little is left us, beside the cultivating our own soil, encouraging agriculture,
and making great plantations of trees, that we might not be under the necessity of sending
for corn and bark from England, and timber from other countries. This would increase the number
of our inhabitants, and help to consume our natural products, as well as manufactures at home.
And I shall never forget what I once ventured to say to a great man in England; "That few politicians,
with all their schemes, are half so useful members of a commonwealth, as an honest farmer; who,
by skilfully draining, fencing, manuring, and planting, hath increased
the intrinsic value of a piece of land; and thereby done a perpetual
service to his country;" which it is a great controversy, whether
any of the former ever did, since the creation of the world; but no
controversy at all, that ninety-nine in a hundred, have done abundance
of mischief.

APPENDIXES

APPENDIX I

ADDRESSES TO THE KING[1]

"To the King's most Excellent MAJESTY: The humble ADDRESS of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses,
in Parliament assembled.

"MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN,

It is with the utmost Concern, that We, Your Majesty's most dutiful subjects, the Commons of
IRELAND in Parliament assembled, find ourselves indispensably obliged, to represent to Your
Majesty, our unanimous Opinion: That the importing and uttering of Copper Farthings and Halfpence by virtue of the Patent
lately granted to William Wood, Esq.; under the Great Seal of Great Britain, will be highly prejudicial
to Your Majesty's Revenue, destructive of the trade and commerce
of this nation, and of the most dangerous consequence to the properties
of the subject.

[Footnote 1: Addresses by the House of Commons and the House of Lords presented to the King in
conformity with the resolutions passed by these Houses.

See Introductory Note to the Drapier's First Letter. The texts of these addresses are taken
from "Fraud Detected: or, the Hibernian Patriot," printed by George Faulkner in 1725. [T.S.]]

"We
are fully convinced, from the tender regard Your Majesty has always
expressed for our welfare and prosperity, that this Patent could not
have been obtained, had not William Wood and his accomplices, greatly
misrepresented the state of this nation to Your Majesty, it having
appeared to us, by Examinations taken in the most solemn manner, that
though the terms thereof had been strictly complied with, there would
have been a loss to this nation of at least 150 per Cent. by means
of the said coinage, and a much greater in the manner the said Half-pence
have been coined.

"And we do further humbly beseech Your Majesty, That you will be graciously pleased to give
such direction, as you, in your great wisdom, shall think proper, to prevent the fatal effects
of uttering any Farthings or Half-pence pursuant to the said Patent.

"As this enquiry has proceeded entirely from our love to our country,
so we cannot omit this opportunity of repeating our unanimous resolution,
to stand by and support Your Majesty to the utmost of our power, against
all Your enemies, both at home and abroad; and of assuring Your Majesty,
that we will, upon every occasion, give Your Majesty, and the world,
all possible demonstration of our zeal and inviolable duty and affection
to Your Majesty's most sacred person and government, and to the succession,
as established in Your Royal House."

"To the King's most Excellent MAJESTY.

The humble Address of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of IRELAND, in Parliament assembled,
against Wm. Wood.

"May it please Your most Sacred Majesty, WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled,
are under the utmost concern to find, that our duty to Your Majesty and our Country, indispensably
calls upon us to acquaint Your Majesty with the ill consequences,
which will inevitably follow from a Patent for coining Half-pence
and Farthings to be uttered in this Kingdom, obtained under the Great
Seal of Great Britain, by one William Wood in a clandestine and unprecedented
manner, and by a gross misrepresentation of the state of this Kingdom.

"We are most humbly of opinion, that the diminution of Your Majesty's revenue, the ruin of our
trade, and the impoverishing of your people, must unavoidably attend this undertaking; and
we beg leave to observe to Your Majesty, that from the most exact Enquiries and Computations we have
been able to make, it appears to us, that the gain to William Wood will be excessive, and the loss
to this Kingdom, by circulating this base coin, greater than this poor country is able to bear.

"With
the greatest submission and deference to Your Majesty's wisdom, we beg we may offer it as our
humble opinion. That the reserving the coining of Half-pence and Farthings to the Crown and
the not intrusting it with any private person, body politic or corporate, will always be for Your
Majesty's service, and the good of your people in this Kingdom.

"In confidence, Sir, of your paternal care of the welfare of this country, we beseech Your Majesty,
that you will be pleased to extend that goodness and compassion to us, which has so eminently
shewed itself to all your other subjects, who have the happiness to live under your protection
and government; and that you will give such directions as may effectually free us from the
terrible apprehensions we labour under from the Patent granted to William Wood."

The following was the King's reply to the above address:

"GEORGE R.

"His Majesty is very much concerned to see, That His granting the
Patent for coining Half-pence and Farthings agreeable to the Practice
of his Royal Predecessors, has given so much uneasiness to the House
of Lords: And if there have been any abuses committed by the Patentee,
His Majesty will give the necessary Orders for enquiring into, and
punishing those Abuses.

And will do everything that is in His Power, for the Satisfaction of His People."

"May it please your Lordships,

According to your Lordships' Order, the pix of the copper-money coined at Bristol by Mr. Wood
for Ireland, has been opened and tried before us at his Majesty's
Mint in the Tower; and by the Comptroller's account, to which Mr.
Wood agreed, there hath been coined from Lady-day 1723 to March 28,
1724, in half-pence, fifty and five tons, five hundred and three quarters,
and twelve ounces, and in farthings, three tons, seventeen hundred
and two quarters, ten pounds, and eight ounces, avoirdupois, the whole
coinage amounting to 59 tons, 3 cwt, 1 qr.

11 lbs. We found also that both half-pence and farthings when heated red hot, spread thin under
the hammer without cracking, as your Lordships may see by the pieces now laid before your Lordships.
As already noted, the assayists had for trial only those coins which
were coined between March, 1723, and March, 1724, and these coins
were neither imported into Ireland nor attempted to be uttered there.

As Wood asked for the assay, he no doubt knew what he was about. But even as it stands, the Report
was not very favourable to him. The author of the tract named above enters minutely into this
point, and for a further inquiry the reader is referred to pages
15 to 19 of his publication.

[T.S.]]

"We found also that thirty and two old half-pence coined for Ireland
in the reigns of King Charles 2d., King James 2d., and King William
3d. and Queen Mary, and produced by Mr. Wood, weighed six ounces and
eight pennyweight Troy, that is, one hundred and three grains and
a half apiece one with another.

They were much worn, and if about six or seven grains be allowed to each of them one with another
for loss of their weight by wearing, the copper-money coined for England, in the reign of King
William being already as much lightened by wearing, they might at
first weigh about half a pound avoirdupois; whereas only thirty of
those coined by Mr. Wood are to be of that.

They were also made of bad copper, two of those coined in the reign
of King Charles II. wasted much in the fire, and then spread thin
under the hammer, but not so well without cracking as those of Mr.
Wood.

Two of those coined in the reign of King James II. wasted much more
in the fire, and were not malleable when red hot.

Two of those coined in the reign of King William and Queen Mary wasted
still more in the fire, and turned to an unmalleable substance like
a cinder, as your Lordships may see the pieces now laid before you.

"By the assays we reckon the copper of Mr. Wood's halfpence and farthings to be of the same goodness
and value with the copper of which the copper money is coined in the King's Mint for England;
or worth in the market about twelve or thirteen pence per pound weight avoirdupois; and the
copper of which the half-pence were coined for Ireland in the reigns of King Charles, King
James, and King William, to be much inferior in value, the mixture being unknown, and not bearing
the fire for converting it to any other use until it be refined.

"The half-pence and farthings in the pix coined by Mr. Wood had on one side the head of the King,
with this inscription GEORGIUS DEI GRATIA REX: And on the other side, a woman sitting with
a harp by her left side, and above her the inscription HIBERNIA with
the date.



Jane, sitting upstairs in her self-imposed darkness, with nothing to do but listen, fancied
she could hear the low hum of quiet voices in the room beneath, carrying on a more or less
continuous conversation.

It was a pity she could not see them as they sat together, each looking his very best,--Garth
in the dinner jacket which suited his slight upright figure so well; the doctor in immaculate
evening clothes of the latest cut and fashion, which he had taken the trouble to bring, knowing
Jane expected the men of her acquaintance to be punctilious in the matter of evening dress,
and little dreaming she would have, literally, no eyes for him.

And indeed the doctor himself was fastidious to a degree where clothes were concerned, and
always well groomed and unquestionably correct in cut and fashion, excepting in the case of
his favourite old Norfolk jacket. This he kept for occasions when he intended to be what he
called "happy and glorious," though Lady Brand made gentle but persistent attempts to dispose
of it.

The old Norfolk jacket had walked the moors that morning with Jane. She had recognised the
feel of it as he drew her hand within his arm, and they had laughed over its many associations.
But now Simpson was folding it and putting it away, and a very correctly clad doctor sat in
an arm-chair in front of the library fire, his long legs crossed the one over the other, his
broad shoulders buried in the depths of the chair.

Garth sat where he could feel the warm flame of the fire, pleasant in the chill evening which
succeeded the bright spring day. His chair was placed sideways, so that he could, with his
hand, shield his face from his visitor should he wish to do so.

"Yes," Dr. Brand was saying thoughtfully, "I can easily see that all things which reach you
in that darkness assume a different proportion and possess a greatly enhanced value. But I
think you will find, as time goes on, and you come in contact with more people, there will
be a great readjustment, and you will become less consciously sensitive to sound and touch
from others. At present your whole nervous system is highly strung, and responds with an exaggerated
vibration to every impression made upon it. A highly strung nervous system usually exaggerates.
And the medium of sight having been taken away, the other means of communication with the outer
world, hearing and touch, draw to themselves an overplus of nervous force, and have become
painfully sensitive. Eventually things will right themselves, and they will only be usefully
keen and acute. What was it you were going to tell me about Nurse Rosemary not shaking hands?"

"Ah, yes," said Garth. "But first I want to ask, Is it a rule of her order, or guild, or institution,
or whatever it is to which she belongs, that the nurses should never shake hands with their
patients?"

"Not that I have ever heard," replied the doctor.

"Well, then, it must have been Miss Gray's own perfect intuition as to what I want, and what
I don't want. For from the very first she has never shaken hands, nor in any way touched me.
Even in passing across letters, and handing me things, as she does scores of times daily, never
once have I felt her fingers against mine."

"And this pleases you?" inquired the doctor, blowing smoke rings into the air, and watching
the blind face intently.

"Ah, I am so grateful for it," said Garth earnestly. "Do you know, Brand, when you suggested
sending me a lady nurse and secretary, I felt I could not possibly stand having a woman touch me."

"So you said," commented the doctor quietly.

"No! Did I? What a bear you must have thought me."

"By no means," said the doctor, "but a distinctly unusual patient. As a rule, men--"

"Ah, I dare say," Garth interposed half impatiently. "There was a time when I should have liked
a soft little hand about me. And I dare say by now I should often enough have caught it and
held it, perhaps kissed it--who knows? I used to do such things, lightly enough. But, Brand,
when a man has known the touch of THE Woman, and when that touch has become nothing but a memory;
when one is dashed into darkness, and that memory becomes one of the few things which remain,
and, remaining, brings untold comfort, can you wonder if one fears another touch which might
in any way dim that memory, supersede it, or take away from its utter sacredness?"

"I understand," said the doctor slowly. "It does not come within my own experience, but I understand.
Only--my dear boy, may I say it?--if the One Woman exists--and it is excusable in your case
to doubt it, because there were so many--surely her place should be here; her actual touch,
one of the things which remain."

"Ah, say it," answered Garth, lighting another cigarette. "I like to hear it said, although
as a matter of fact you might as well say that if the view from the terrace exists, I ought
to be able to see it. The view is there, right enough, but my own deficiency keeps me from
seeing it."

"In other words," said the doctor, leaning forward and picking up the match which, not being
thrown so straight as usual, had just missed the fire; "in other words, though She was the
One Woman, you were not the One Man?"

"Yes," said Garth bitterly, but almost beneath his breath. "I was 'a mere boy.'"

"Or you thought you were not," continued the doctor, seeming not to have heard the last remark.
"As a matter of fact, you are always the One Man to the One Woman, unless another is before
you in the field. Only it may take time and patience to prove it to her."

Garth sat up and turned a face of blank surprise towards the doctor. "What an extraordinary
statement!" he said. "Do you really mean it?"

"Absolutely," replied the doctor in a tone of quiet conviction. "If you eliminate all other
considerations, such as money, lands, titles, wishes of friends, attraction of exteriors--that
is to say, admiration of mere physical beauty in one another, which is after all just a question
of comparative anatomy; if, freed of all this social and habitual environment, you could place
the man and the woman in a mental Garden of Eden, and let them face one another, stripped of
all shams and conventionalities, soul viewing soul, naked and unashamed; if under those circumstances
she is so truly his mate, that all the noblest of the man cries out: 'This is the One Woman!'
then I say, so truly is he her mate, that he cannot fail to be the One Man; only he must have
the confidence required to prove it to her. On him it bursts, as a revelation; on her it dawns
slowly, as the breaking of the day."

"Oh, my God," murmured Garth brokenly, "it was just that! The Garden of Eden, soul to soul,
with no reservations, nothing to fear, nothing to hide. I realised her my WIFE, and called
her so. And the next morning she called ME 'a mere boy,' whom she could not for a moment think
of marrying. So what becomes of your fool theory, Brand?"

"Confirmed," replied the doctor quietly. "Eve, afraid of the immensity of her bliss, doubtful
of herself, fearful of coming short of the marvel of his ideal of her, fleeing from Adam, to
hide among the trees of the garden. Don't talk about fool theories, my boy. The fool-fact was
Adam, if he did not start in prompt pursuit."

Garth sat forward, his hands clutching the arms of his chair. That quiet, level voice was awakening
doubts as to his view of the situation, the first he had had since the moment of turning and
walking down the Shenstone village church three years ago. His face was livid, and as the firelight
played upon it the doctor saw beads of perspiration gleam on his forehead.

"Oh, Brand," he said, "I am blind. Be merciful. Things mean so terribly much in the dark."

The doctor considered. Could his nurses and students have seen the look on his face at that
moment, they would have said that he was performing a most critical and delicate operation,
in which a slip of the scalpel might mean death to the patient. They would have been right;
for the whole future of two people hung in the balance; depending, in this crisis, upon the
doctor's firmness and yet delicacy of touch. This strained white face in the firelight, with
its beads of mental agony and its appealing "I am blind," had not entered into the doctor's
calculations. It was a view of "the other man" upon which he could not look unmoved. But the
thought of that patient figure with bandaged eyes sitting upstairs in suspense, stretching
dear helpless hands to him, steadied the doctor's nerve. He looked into the fire.

"You may be blind, Dalmain, but I do not want you to be a fool," said the doctor quietly.

"Am I--was I--a fool?" asked Garth.

"How can I judge?" replied the doctor. "Give me a clear account of the circumstances from your
point of view, and I will give you my opinion of the case."

His tone was so completely dispassionate and matter-of-fact, that it had a calming effect on
Garth, giving him also a sense of security. The doctor might have been speaking of a sore throat,
or a tendency to sciatica.

Garth leaned back in his chair, slipped his hand into the breast-pocket of his jacket, and
touched a letter lying there. Dare he risk it? Could he, for once take for himself the comfort
of speaking of his trouble to a man he could completely trust, and yet avoid the danger of
betraying her identity to one who knew her so intimately?

Garth weighed this, after the manner of a chess-player looking several moves ahead. Could the
conversation become more explicit, sufficiently so to be of use, and yet no clue be given which
would reveal Jane as the One Woman?

Had the doctor uttered a word of pressure or suggestion, Garth would have decided for silence.
But the doctor did not speak. He leaned forward and reached the poker, mending the fire with
extreme care and method. He placed a fragrant pine log upon the springing flame, and as he
did so he whistled softly the closing bars of Veni, Creator Spiritus.

He took them as an omen. They turned the scale.

"Brand," he said, "if, as you are so kind as to suggest, I give myself the extreme relief of
confiding in you, will you promise me never to attempt to guess at the identity of the One Woman?"

The doctor smiled; and the smile in his voice as he answered, added to Garth's sense of security.

"My dear fellow," he said, "I never guess at other people's secrets. It is a form of mental
recreation which does not appeal to me, and which I should find neither entertaining nor remunerative.
If I know them already, I do not require to guess them. If I do not know them, and their possessors
wish me to remain in ignorance, I would as soon think of stealing their purse as of filching
their secret."

"Ah, thanks," said Garth. "Personally, I do not mind what you know. But I owe it to her, that
her name should not appear."

"Undoubtedly," said the doctor. "Except in so far as she herself, chooses to reveal it, the
One Woman's identity should always remain a secret. Get on with your tale, old chap. I will
not interrupt."

"I will state it as simply and as shortly as I can," began Garth. "And you will understand
that there are details of which no fellow could speak.--I had known her several years in a
friendly way, just staying at the same houses, and meeting at Lord's and Henley and all the
places where those in the same set do meet. I always liked her, and always felt at my best
with her, and thought no end of her opinion, and so forth. She was a friend and a real chum
to me, and to lots of other fellows. But one never thought of love-making in connection with
her. All the silly things one says to ordinary women she would have laughed at. If one had
sent her flowers to wear, she would have put them in a vase and wondered for whom they had
really been intended. She danced well, and rode straight; but the man she danced with had to
be awfully good at it, or he found himself being guided through the giddy maze; and the man
who wanted to be in the same field with her, must be prepared for any fence or any wall. Not
that I ever saw her in the hunting-field; her love of life and of fair play would have kept
her out of that. But I use it as a descriptive illustration. One was always glad to meet her
in a house party, though one could not have explained why. It is quite impossible to describe
her. She was just--well, just--"

The doctor saw "just Jane" trembling on Garth's lips, and knew how inadequate was every adjective
to express this name. He did not want the flood of Garth's confidences checked, so he supplied
the needed words.

"Just a good sort. Yes, I quite understand. Well?"

"I had had my infatuations, plenty of them," went on the eager young voice. "The one thing
I thought of in women was their exteriors. Beauty of all kinds--of any kind--crazed me for
the moment. I never wanted to marry them, but I always wanted to paint them. Their mothers,
and aunts, and other old dowagers in the house parties used to think I meant marriage, but
the girls themselves knew better. I don't believe a girl now walks this earth who would accuse
me of flirting. I admired their beauty, and they knew it, and they knew that was all my admiration
meant. It was a pleasant experience at the time, and, in several instances, helped forward
good marriages later on. Pauline Lister was apportioned to me for two whole seasons, but she
eventually married the man on whose jolly old staircase I painted her. Why didn't I come a
cropper over any of them? Because there were too many, I suppose. Also, the attraction was
skin-deep. I don't mind telling you quite frankly: the only one whose beauty used to cause
me a real pang was Lady Brand. But when I had painted it and shown it to the world in its perfection,
I was content. I asked no more of any woman than to paint her, and find her paintable. I could
not explain this to the husbands and mothers and chaperons, but the women themselves understood
it well enough; and as I sit here in my darkness not a memory rises up to reproach me."

"Good boy," said Deryck Brand, laughing. "You were vastly misunderstood, but I believe you."

"You see," resumed Garth, "that sort of thing being merely skin-deep, I went no deeper. The
only women I really knew were my mother, who died when I was nineteen, and Margery Graem, whom
I always hugged at meeting and parting, and always shall hug until I kiss the old face in its
coffin, or she straightens me in mine. Those ties of one's infancy and boyhood are among the
closest and most sacred life can show. Well, so things were until a certain evening in June
several years ago. She--the One Woman--and I were in the same house party at a lovely old place
in the country. One afternoon we had been talking intimately, but quite casually and frankly.
I had no more thought of wanting to marry her than of proposing to old Margery. Then--something
happened,--I must not tell you what; it would give too clear a clue to her identity. But it
revealed to me, in a few marvellous moments, the woman in her; the wife, the mother; the strength,
the tenderness; the exquisite perfection of her true, pure soul. In five minutes there awakened
in me a hunger for her which nothing could still, which nothing ever will still, until I stand
beside her in the Golden City, where they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; and
there shall be no more darkness, or depending upon sun, moon, or candle, for the glory of God
shall lighten it; and there shall be no more sorrow, neither shall there be any more pain,
for former things shall have passed away."

The blind face shone in the firelight. Garth's retrospection was bringing him visions of things
to come.

The doctor sat quite still and watched the vision fade. Then he said: "Well?"

"Well," continued the young voice in the shadow, with a sound in it of having dropped back
to earth and finding it a mournful place; "I never had a moment's doubt as to what had happened
to me. I knew I loved her; I knew I wanted her; I knew her presence made my day and her absence
meant chill night; and every day was radiant, for she was there."

Garth paused for breath and to enjoy a moment of silent retrospection.

The doctor's voice broke in with a question, clear, incisive. "Was she a pretty woman; handsome,
beautiful?"

"A pretty woman?" repeated Garth, amazed: "Good heavens, no! Handsome? Beautiful? Well you
have me there, for, 'pon my honour, I don't know."

"I mean, would you have wished to paint her?"

"I HAVE painted her," said Garth very low, a moving tenderness in his voice; "and my two paintings
of her, though done in sadness and done from memory, are the most beautiful work I ever produced.
No eye but my own has ever seen them, and now none ever will see them, excepting those of one
whom I must perforce trust to find them for me, and bring them to me for destruction."

"And that will be--?" queried the doctor.

"Nurse Rosemary Gray," said Garth.

The doctor kicked the pine log, and the flames darted up merrily. "You have chosen well," he
said, and had to make a conscious effort to keep the mirth in his face from passing into his
voice. "Nurse Rosemary will be discreet. Very good. Then we may take it the One Woman was beautiful?"

But Garth looked perplexed. "I do not know," he answered slowly. "I cannot see her through
the eyes of others. My vision of her, in that illuminating moment, followed the inspired order
of things,--spirit, soul, and body. Her spirit was so pure and perfect, her soul so beautiful,
noble, and womanly, that the body which clothed soul and spirit partook of their perfection
and became unutterably dear."

"I see," said the doctor, very gently. "Yes, you dear fellow, I see." (Oh, Jane, Jane! You
were blind, without a bandage, in those days!)

"Several glorious days went by," continued Garth. "I realise now that I was living in the glow
of my own certainty that she was the One Woman. It was so clear and sweet and wonderful to
me, that I never dreamed of it not being equally clear to her. We did a lot of music together
for pure enjoyment; we talked of other people for the fun of it; we enjoyed and appreciated
each other's views and opinions; but we did not talk of ourselves, because we KNEW, at least
I knew, and, before God, I thought she did. Every time I saw her she seemed more grand and
perfect. I held the golden key to trifling matters not understood before. We young fellows,
who all admired her, used nevertheless to joke a bit about her wearing collars and stocks,
top boots and short skirts; whacking her leg with a riding-whip, and stirring the fire with
her toe. But after that evening, I understood all this to be a sort of fence behind which she
hid her exquisite womanliness, because it was of a deeper quality than any man looking upon
the mere surface of her had ever fathomed or understood. And when she came trailing down in
the evening, in something rich and clinging and black, with lots of soft old lace covering
her bosom and moving with the beating of her great tender heart; ah, then my soul rejoiced
and my eyes took their fill of delight! I saw her, as all day long I had known her to be,--perfect
in her proud, sweet womanliness."

"Is he really unconscious," thought the doctor, "of how unmistakable a word-picture of Jane
he is painting?"

"Very soon," continued Garth, "we had three days apart, and then met again at another house,
in a weekend party. One of the season's beauties was there, with whom my name was being freely
coupled, and something she said on that subject, combined with the fearful blankness of those
three interminable days, made me resolve to speak without delay. I asked her to come out on
to the terrace that evening. We were alone. It was a moonlight night."

A long silence. The doctor did not break it. He knew his friend was going over in his mind
all those things of which a man does not speak to another man.

At last Garth said simply, "I told her."

No comment from the doctor, who was vividly reminded of Jane's "Then--it happened," when SHE
had reached this point in the story. After a few moments of further silence, steeped in the
silver moonlight of reminiscence for Garth; occupied by the doctor in a rapid piecing in of
Jane's version; the sad young voice continued:

"I thought she understood completely. Afterwards I knew she had not understood at all. Her
actions led me to believe I was accepted, taken into her great love, even as she was wrapped
around by mine. Not through fault of hers,--ah, no; she was blameless throughout; but because
she did not, could not, understand what any touch of hers must mean to me. In her dear life,
there had never been another man; that much I knew by unerring instinct and by her own admission. I
am very sensible how ill your lordship is like to be entertained with the pedantry of a drapier
in the terms of his own trade. How will the matter be mended, when you find me entering again,
though very sparingly, into an affair of state; for such is now grown the controversy with Mr. Wood,
if some great lawyers are to be credited. And as it often happens at play, that men begin with farthings,
and go on to gold, till some of them lose their estates, and die in jail; so it may possibly
fall out in my case, that by playing too long with Mr. Wood's halfpence, I may be drawn in to pay
a fine, double to the reward for betraying me, be sent to prison, and "not be delivered thence till
I shall have paid the uttermost farthing."

There are my lord, three sorts of persons with whom I am resolved never to dispute: A highwayman
with a pistol at my breast, a troop of dragoons who come to plunder
my house, and a man of the law who can make a merit of accusing me.

In each of these cases, which are almost the same, the best method
is to keep out of the way, and the next best is to deliver your money,
surrender your house, and confess nothing.

I am told that the two points in my last letter, from which an occasion of offence hath been taken,
are where I mention His Majesty's answer to the address of the House of Lords upon Mr. Wood's
patent, and where I discourse upon Ireland's being a dependent kingdom. As to the former, I
can only say, that I have treated it with the utmost respect and caution, and I thought it necessary
to shew where Wood's patent differed in many essential parts from all others that ever had
been granted, because the contrary had for want of due information been so strongly and so
largely asserted. As to the other, of Ireland's dependency, I confess to have often heard it
mentioned, but was never able to understand what it meant. This gave me the curiosity to enquire
among several eminent lawyers, who professed they knew nothing of
the matter.

I then turned over all the statutes of both kingdoms without the least information, further
than an Irish act, that I quoted, of the 33d of Henry 8th, uniting Ireland to England under
one king.

I cannot say I was sorry to be disappointed in my search, because it is certain, I could be
contented to depend only upon God and my prince and the laws of my own country, after the manner
of other nations. But since my betters are of a different opinion, and desire further dependencies,
I shall readily submit, not insisting on the exception I made of
M.B. Drapier.

For indeed that hint was borrowed from an idle story I had heard in England, which perhaps may
be common and beaten, but because it insinuates neither treason nor sedition, I will just barely relate
it.

Some hundred years ago when the peers were so great that the commons were looked upon as little
better than their dependents, a bill was brought in for making some new additions to the power
and privileges of the peerage.

After it was read, one Mr. Drewe a member of the house, stood up, and said, he very much approved
the bill, and would give his vote to have it pass; but however, for
some reasons best known to himself, he desired that a clause might
be inserted for excepting the family of the Drewes.

The oddness of the proposition taught others to reflect a little, and the bill was thrown
out.

Whether I were mistaken, or went too far in examining the dependency
must be left to the impartial judgment of the world, as well as to
the courts of judicature, although indeed not in so effectual and
decisive a manner.

But to affirm, as I hear some do, in order to countenance a fearful
and servile spirit, that this point did not belong to my subject,
is a false and foolish objection.

There were several scandalous reports industriously spread by Wood and his accomplices to discourage
all opposition against his infamous project.

They gave it out that we were prepared for a rebellion, that we disputed the King's prerogative,
and were shaking off our dependency. The first went so far, and obtained so much belief against
the most visible demonstrations to the contrary, that a great person of this kingdom, now in
England, sent over such an account of it to his friends, as would make any good subject both
grieve and tremble. I thought it therefore necessary to treat that calumny as it deserved.
Then I proved by an invincible argument that we could have no intention
to dispute His Majesty's prerogative, because the prerogative was
not concerned in the question, the civilians and lawyers of all nations
agreeing that copper is not money.

And lastly to clear us from the imputation of shaking off our dependency, I shewed wherein as
I thought this dependency consisted, and cited the statute above mentioned made in Ireland, by
which it is enacted, that "whoever is King of England shall be King of Ireland," and that the
two kingdoms shall be "for ever knit together under one King." This, as I conceived, did wholly
acquit us of intending to break our dependency, because it was altogether out of our power, for
surely no King of England will ever consent to the repeal of that
statute.

But upon this article I am charged with a heavier accusation. It is said I went too far, when I
declared, that "if ever the Pretender should come to be fixed upon the throne of England (which
God forbid) I would so far venture to transgress this statute, that I would lose the last drop
of my blood before I would submit to him as King of Ireland."

This I hear on all sides, is the strongest and weightiest objection
against me, and which hath given the most offence; that I should be
so bold to declare against a direct statute, and that any motive how
strong soever, could make me reject a King whom England should receive.

Now if in defending myself from this accusation I should freely confess, that I "went too far," that
"the expression was very indiscreet, although occasioned by my zeal for His present Majesty
and his Protestant line in the House of Hanover," that "I shall be careful never to offend again
in the like kind." And that "I hope this free acknowledgment and sorrow for my error, will be some
atonement and a little soften the hearts of my powerful adversaries." I say if I should offer
such a defence as this, I do not doubt but some people would wrest
it to an ill meaning by some spiteful interpretation, and therefore
since I cannot think of any other answer, which that paragraph can
admit, I will leave it to the mercy of every candid reader.

I will now venture to tell your lordship a secret, wherein I fear you are too deeply concerned
You will therefore please to know that this habit of writing and discoursing, wherein I unfortunately
differ from almost the whole kingdom, and am apt to grate the ears of more than I could wish, was
acquired during my apprenticeship in London, and a long residence there after I had set up
for myself. Upon my return and settlement here, I thought I had only
changed one country of freedom for another.

I had been long conversing with the writings of your lordship,[12]
Mr. Locke, Mr. Molineaux,[13] Colonel Sidney[14] and other dangerous
authors, who talk of "liberty as a blessing, to which the whole race
of mankind hath an original title, whereof nothing but unlawful force
can divest them."

I knew a good deal of the several Gothic institutions in Europe, and by what incidents and events
they came to be destroyed; and I ever thought it the most uncontrolled and universally agreed
maxim, that freedom consists in a people being governed by laws made
with their own consent; and slavery in the contrary.

I have been likewise told, and believe it to be true, that liberty and property are words of
known use and signification in this kingdom, and that the very lawyers
pretend to understand, and have them often in their mouths.

These were the errors which have misled me, and to which alone I must impute the severe treatment
I have received. But I shall in time grow wiser, and learn to consider my driver, the road I
am in, and with whom I am yoked. This I will venture to say, that the boldest and most obnoxious
words I ever delivered, would in England have only exposed me as a stupid fool, who went to prove
that the sun shone in a clear summer's day; and I have witnesses
ready to depose that your lordship hath said and writ fifty times
worse, and what is still an aggravation, with infinitely more wit
and learning, and stronger arguments, so that as politics run, I do
not know a person of more exceptionable principles than yourself;
and if ever I shall be discovered, I think you will be bound in honour
to pay my fine and support me in prison; or else I may chance to inform
against you by way of reprisal.[15]

[Footnote 12: See note ante,
p. 161.

[T.S.]]

[Footnote 13: William Molyneux (1656-1698), the correspondent of John
Flamsteed and Locke.

His "Dioptrica Nova" contains a warm appreciation of Locke's "Essay
on the Human Understanding."

He died in October, 1698, but in the early part of this year, he
published his famous inquiry into the effect of English legislation
on Irish manufactures.

The work was entitled, "The Case of Ireland's being bound by Acts of Parliament in England
stated," and its publication made a great stir both in England and
in Ireland.

Molyneux attempted to show that the Irish Parliament was independent
of the English Parliament.

His book was reported by a Committee of the House of Commons, on June 22nd, 1698, to be "of
dangerous consequence to the Crown and Parliament of England," but
the matter went no further than embodying this resolution of the committee
in an address to the King.

[T.S.]]

[Footnote 14: Algernon Sidney (1622-1682), the author of the well known "Discourses concerning
Government," and the famous republican of the Cromwellian and Restoration
years, was the second surviving son of the second Earl of Leicester
His career as soldier, statesman, agitator, ambassador and author,
forms an interesting and even fascinating chapter of the story of
this interesting period of English history.

He was tried for treason before Jeffreys, and in spite of a most excellent defence, sentenced
to death.

His execution took place on December 7th, 1682. [T. S.]]

[Footnote 15: A writer, signing himself M.M., replying to this letter of Swift's in a broadside
entitled, "Seasonable Advice to M.B. Drapier, Occasioned by his Letter to the R--t. Hon. the
Lord Visct. Molesworth," actually takes this paragraph to mean that Swift intended seriously
to turn informer: "Now sir, some people are of opinion that you carried this too far, inasmuch
as you become a precedent to informers: others think that you intimate to his lordship, the
miserable circumstance you are in by the menaces of the prentice
to whom you dictate; they conceive your declaring to inform, if not
fee'd, to the contrary, signifies your said prentice on the last occasion
to swear, if you don't forthwith deliver him his indentures, and half
of your stock to set up trade with, he will inform against you, bring
you to justice, be dismissed by law, and get the promised £300 to
begin trade with; how near these conceptions be to truth I can't tell;
but I know people think that word inform unseasonable. . . ."

[T.S.]]

In the meantime, I beg your lordship to receive my confession, that if there be any such thing as
a dependency of Ireland upon England, otherwise than as I have explained
it, either by the law of God, of nature, of reason, of nations, or
of the land (which I shall never hereafter contest,) then was the
proclamation against me, the most merciful that ever was put out,
and instead of accusing me as malicious, wicked and seditious, it
might have been directly as guilty of high treason.

All I desire is, that the cause of my country against Mr. Wood may
not suffer by any inadvertency of mine; Whether Ireland depends upon
England, or only upon God, the King and the law, I hope no man will
assert that it depends upon Mr. Wood.

I should be heartily sorry that this commendable resentment against
me should accidentally (and I hope, what was never intended) strike
a damp upon that spirit in all ranks and corporations of men against
the desperate and ruinous design of Mr. Wood.

Let my countrymen blot out those parts in my last letter which they
dislike, and let no rust remain on my sword to cure the wounds I have
given to our most mortal enemy.

When Sir Charles Sidley[16] was taking the oaths, where several things
were to be renounced, he said "he loved renouncing," asked "if any
more were to be renounced, for he was ready to renounce as much as
they pleased."

Although I am not so thorough a renouncer; yet let me have but good
city security against this pestilent coinage, and I shall be ready
not only to renounce every syllable in all my four letters, but to
deliver them cheerfully with my own hands into those of the common
hangman, to be burnt with no better company than the coiner's effigies,
if any part of it hath escaped out of the secular hands of the rabble.

[Footnote 16: This must be Sir Charles Sedley (properly Sidley), the
famous wit and dramatist of Charles II.'s reign.

In his reprint of 1735, Faulkner prints the name "Sidley," though the original twopenny tract
and the "Hibernian Patriot" print it as "Sidney."

Sir W. Scott corrects it to "Sedley." [T.S.]]

But whatever the sentiments of some people may be, I think it is agreed
that many of those who subscribed against me, are on the side of a
vast majority in the kingdom who opposed Mr. Wood; and it was with
great satisfaction that I observed some right honourable names very
amicably joined with my own at the bottom of a strong declaration
against him and his coin.

But if the admission of it among us be already determined the worthy
person who is to betray me ought in prudence to do it with all convenient
speed, or else it may be difficult to find three hundred pounds in
sterling for the discharge of his hire; when the public shall have
lost five hundred thousand, if there be so much in the nation; besides
four-fifths of its annual income for ever.

I am told by lawyers, that in all quarrels between man and man, it is of much weight, which of
them gave the first provocation or struck the first blow.

It is manifest that Mr. Wood hath done both, and therefore I should humbly propose to have him first
hanged and his dross thrown into the sea; after which the Drapier
will be ready to stand his trial.

"It must needs be that offences come, but woe unto him by whom the
offence cometh."

If Mr. Wood had held his hand every body else would have held their tongues, and then there would
have been little need of pamphlets, juries, or proclamations upon
this occasion.

The provocation must needs have been great, which could stir up an obscure indolent Drapier to
become an author.

One would almost think the very stones in the street would rise up in such a cause: And I am
not sure they will not do so against Mr. Wood if ever he comes within
their reach.

It is a known story of the dumb boy, whose tongue forced a passage for speech by the horror of
seeing a dagger at his father's throat. This may lessen the wonder that a tradesman hid in privacy
and silence should cry out when the life and being of his political
mother are attempted before his face, and by so infamous a hand.

But in the meantime, Mr. Wood the destroyer of a kingdom walks about in triumph (unless it be
true that he is in jail for debt) while he who endeavoured to assert
the liberty of his country is forced to hide his head for occasionally
dealing in a matter of controversy.

However I am not the first who hath been condemned to death for gaining a great victory over
a powerful enemy, by disobeying for once the strict orders of military discipline.

I am now resolved to follow (after the usual proceeding of mankind,
because it is too late) the advice given me by a certain Dean.

He shewed the mistake I was in of trusting to the general good-will
of the people, "that I had succeeded hitherto better than could be
expected, but that some unfortunate circumstantial lapse would probably
bring me within the reach of power.

That my good intentions would be no security against those who watched every motion of my
pen, in the bitterness of my soul." He produced an instance of "a writer as innocent, as disinterested,
and as well meaning as myself, where the printer, who had the author
in his power, was prosecuted with the utmost zeal, the jury sent back
nine times, and the man given up to the mercy of the court."[17] The
Dean further observed "that I was in a manner left alone to stand
the battle, while others who had ten thousand times better talents
than a Drapier, were so prudent to lie still, and perhaps thought
it no unpleasant amusement to look on with safety, while another was
giving them diversion at the hazard of his liberty and fortune, and
thought they made a sufficient recompense by a little applause."

Whereupon he concluded with a short story of a Jew at Madrid, who being condemned to the fire
on account of his religion, a crowd of school-boys following him to the stake, and apprehending they
might lose their sport, if he should happen to recant, would often clap him on the back, and
cry, "Sta firme Moyse (Moses, continue steadfast)."

[Footnote 17: This was for the publication of "A Proposal for the
Universal Use of Irish Manufactures."

[T.S.]]

I allow this gentleman's advice to have been good, and his observations just, and in one respect
my condition is worse than that of the Jew, for no recantation will save me. However it should
seem by some late proceedings, that my state is not altogether deplorable. This I can impute to
nothing but the steadiness of two impartial grand juries, which hath confirmed in me an opinion
I have long entertained, that, as philosophers say, "virtue is seated in the middle," so in another
sense, the little virtue left in the world is chiefly to be found among the middle rank of mankind,
who are neither allured out of her paths by ambition, nor driven by poverty.

Since the proclamation occasioned by my last letter, and a due preparation for proceeding against
me in a court of justice, there have been two printed papers clandestinely spread about, whereof
no man is able to trace the original further than by conjecture, which with its usual charity
lays them to my account.

The former is entitled, "Seasonable Advice,"[18] and appears to have been intended for information
of the grand jury, upon the supposition of a bill to be prepared
against that letter.

The other[19] is an extract from a printed book of Parliamentary Proceedings in the year 1680
containing an angry resolution of the House of Commons in England
against dissolving grand juries.

As to the former, your lordship will find it to be the work of a more artful hand than that of
a common Drapier. It hath been censured for endeavouring to influence the minds of a jury, which
ought to be wholly free and unbiassed, and for that reason it is
manifest that no judge was ever known either upon or off the bench,
either by himself or his dependents, to use the least insinuation
that might possibly affect the passions or interests of any one single
juryman, much less of a whole jury; whereof every man must be convinced
who will just give himself the trouble to dip into the common printed
trials; so as, it is amazing to think, what a number of upright judges
there have been in both kingdoms for above sixty years past, which,
considering how long they held their offices during pleasure, as they
still do among us, I account next to a miracle.

 Hark! I hear the first
gong, Brand. Margery will be grieved if we keep her Sunday dishes waiting."

He stood up and turned his sightless face towards the view.

"Ah, how well I know it," he said. "When Miss Gray and I sit up here, she tells me all she
sees, and I tell her what she does not see, but what I know is there. She is keen on art, and
on most of the things I care about. I must ask for an arm, Brand, though the path is wide and
good. I cannot risk a tumble. I have come one or two awful croppers, and I promised Miss Gray--The
path is wide. Yes, we can walk two abreast, three abreast if necessary. It is well we had this
good path made. It used to be a steep scramble."

"Three abreast," said the doctor. "So we could--if necessary." He stepped back and raised Jane
from her seat, drawing her cold hand through his left arm. "Now, my dear fellow, my right arm
will suit you best; then you can keep your stick in your right hand."

And thus they started down through the wood, on that lovely Sabbath morn of early summer; and
the doctor walked erect between those two severed hearts, uniting, and yet dividing them.

Just once Garth paused and listened. "I seem to hear another footstep," he said, "besides yours
and mine."

"The wood is full of footsteps," said the doctor, "just as the heart is full of echoes. If
you stand still and listen you can hear what you will in either."

"Then let us not stand still," said Garth, "for in old days, if I was late for lunch, Margery
used to spank me."

CHAPTER XXVI

HEARTS MEET IN SIGHTLESS LAND

"It will be absolutely impossible, Miss Gray, for me ever to tell you what I think of this
that you have done for my sake."

Garth stood at the open library window. The morning sunlight poured into the room. The air
was fragrant with the scent of flowers, resonant with the songs of birds. As he stood there
in the sunshine, a new look of strength and hopefulness was apparent in every line of his erect
figure. He held out eager hands towards Nurse Rosemary, but more as an expression of the outgoing
of his appreciation and gratitude than with any expectation of responsive hands being placed
within them.

"And here was I, picturing you having a gay weekend, and wondering where, and who your friends
in this neighbourhood could be. And all the while you were sitting blindfold in the room over
my head. Ah, the goodness of it is beyond words! But did you not feel somewhat of a deceiver,
Miss Gray?"

She always felt that--poor Jane. So she readily answered: "Yes. And yet I told you I was not
going far. And my friends in the neighbourhood were Simpson and Margery, who aided and abetted.
And it was true to say I was going, for was I not going into darkness? and it is a different
world from the land of light."

"Ah, how true that is!" cried Garth. "And how difficult to make people understand the loneliness
of it, and how they seem suddenly to arrive close to one from another world; stooping from
some distant planet, with sympathetic voice and friendly touch; and then away they go to another
sphere, leaving one to the immensity of solitude in Sightless Land."

"Yes," agreed Nurse Rosemary, "and you almost dread the coming, because the going makes the
darkness darker, and the loneliness more lonely."

"Ah, so YOU experienced that?" said Garth. "Do you know, now you have week-ended in Sightless
Land, I shall not feel it such a place of solitude. At every turn I shall be able to say:--'A
dear and faithful friend has been here.'"

He laughed a laugh of such almost boyish pleasure, that all the mother in Jane's love rose
up and demanded of her one supreme effort. She looked at the slight figure in white flannels,
leaning against the window frame, so manly, so beautiful still, and yet so helpless and so
needing the wealth of tenderness which was hers to give. Then, standing facing him, she opened
her arms, as if the great preparedness of that place of rest, so close to him must, magnet-like,
draw him to her; and standing thus in the sunlight, Jane spoke.

Was she beautiful? Was she paintable? Would a man grow weary of such a look turned on him,
of such arms held out? Alas! Too late! On that point no lover shall ever be able to pass judgment.
That look is for one man alone. He only will ever bring it to that loving face. And he cannot
pronounce upon its beauty in voice of rapturous content. He cannot judge. He cannot see. He
is blind!

"Mr. Dalmain, there are many smaller details; but before we talk of those I want to tell you
the greatest of all the lessons I learned in Sightless Land." Then, conscious that her emotion
was producing in her voice a resonant depth which might remind him too vividly of notes in
The Rosary, she paused, and resumed in the high, soft edition of her own voice which it had
become second nature to her to use as Nurse Rosemary: "Mr. Dalmain, it seems to me I learned
to understand how that which is loneliness unspeakable to ONE might be Paradise of a very perfect
kind for TWO. I realised that there might be circumstances in which the dark would become a
very wonderful meeting-place for souls. If I loved a man who lost his sight, I should be glad
to have mine in order to be eyes for him when eyes were needed; just as, were I rich and he
poor, I should value my money simply as a thing which might be useful to him. But I know the
daylight would often be a trial to me, because it would be something he could not share; and
when evening came, I should long to say: 'Let us put out the lights and shut away the moonlight
and sit together in the sweet soft darkness, which is more uniting than the light.'"

While Jane was speaking, Garth paled as he listened, and his face grew strangely set. Then,
as if under a reaction of feeling, a boyish flush spread to the very roots of his hair. He
visibly shrank from the voice which was saying these things to him. He fumbled with his right
hand for the orange cord which would guide him to his chair.

"Nurse Rosemary," he said, and at the tone of his voice Jane's outstretched arms dropped to
her sides; "it is kind of you to tell me all these beautiful thoughts which came to you in
the darkness. But I hope the man who is happy enough to possess your love, or who is going
to be fortunate enough to win it, will neither be so unhappy nor so unfortunate as to lose
his sight. It will be better for him to live with you in the light, than to be called upon
to prove the kind way in which you would be willing to adapt yourself to his darkness. How
about opening our letters?" He slipped his hand along the orange cord and walked over to his chair.

Then, with a sense of unutterable dismay, Jane saw what she had done. She had completely forgotten
Nurse Rosemary, using her only as a means of awakening in Garth an understanding of how much
her--Jane's--love might mean to him in his blindness. She had forgotten that, to Garth, Nurse
Rosemary's was the only personality which counted in this conversation; she, who had just given
him such a proof of her interest and devotion. And--O poor dear Garth! O bold, brazen Nurse
Rosemary!--he very naturally concluded she was making love to him. Jane felt herself between
Scylla and Charybdis, and she took a very prompt and characteristic plunge.

She came across to her place on the other side of the small table and sat down. "I believe
it was the thought of him made me realise this," she said; "but just now I and my young man
have fallen out. He does not even know I am here."

Garth unbent at once, and again that boyish heightening of colour indicated his sense of shame
at what he had imagined.

"Ah, Miss Gray," he said eagerly, "you will not think it impertinent or intrusive on my part,
but do you know I have wondered sometimes whether there was a happy man."

Nurse Rosemary laughed. "Well, we can't call him a happy man just now," she said, "so far as
his thoughts of me are concerned. My whole heart is his, if he could only be brought to believe
it. But a misunderstanding has grown up between us,--my fault entirely,--and he will not allow
me to put it right."

"What a fool!" cried Garth. "Are you and he engaged?"

Nurse Rosemary hesitated. "Well--not exactly engaged," she said, "though it practically amounts
to that. Neither of us would give a thought to any one else."

Garth knew there was a class of people whose preliminary step to marriage was called "keeping
company," a stage above the housemaid's "walking out," both expressions being exactly descriptive
of the circumstances of the case; for, whereas pretty Phyllis and her swain go walking out
of an evening in byways and between hedges, or along pavements and into the parks,--these keep
each other company in the parlours and arbours of their respective friends and relations. Yet,
somehow, Garth had never thought of Nurse Rosemary as belonging to any other class than his
own. Perhaps this ass of a fellow, whom he already cordially disliked, came of a lower stratum;
or perhaps the rules of her nursing guild forbade a definite engagement, but allowed "an understanding."
Anyway the fact remained that the kind-hearted, clever, delightful little lady, who had done
so much for him, had "a young man" of her own; and this admitted fact lifted a weight from
Garth's mind. He had been so afraid lately of not being quite honest with her and with himself.
She had become so necessary to him, nay, so essential, and by her skill and devotion had won
so deep a place in his gratitude. Their relation was of so intimate a nature, their companionship
so close and continuous; and into this rather ideal state of things had heavily trodden Dr.
Rob the other day with a suggestion. Garth, alone with him, bad been explaining how indispensable
Miss Gray had become to his happiness and comfort, and how much he dreaded a recall from her
matron.

"I fear they do not let them go on indefinitely at one case; but perhaps Sir Deryck can arrange
that this should be an exception," said Garth.

"Oh, hang the matron, and blow Sir Deryck," said Dr. Rob breezily. "If you want her as a permanency,
make sure of her. Marry her, my boy! I'll warrant she'd have you!"

Thus trod Dr. Rob, with heavily nailed boots, upon the bare toes of a delicate situation.

Garth tried to put the suggestion out of his mind and failed. He began to notice thoughts and
plans of Nurse Rosemary's for his benefit, which so far exceeded her professional duties that
it seemed as if there must be behind them the promptings of a more tender interest. He put
the thought away again and again, calling Dr. Rob an old fool, and himself a conceited ass.
But again and again there came about him, with Nurse Rosemary's presence, the subtile surrounding
atmosphere of a watchful love.

Then, one night, he faced and fought a great temptation.

After all why should he not do as Dr. Rob suggested? Why not marry this charming, capable,
devoted nurse, and have her constantly about him in his blindness? SHE did not consider him
"a mere boy." ... What had he to offer her? A beautiful home, every luxury, abundant wealth,
a companionship she seemed to find congenial ... But then the Tempter overreached himself,
for he whispered: "And the voice would be always Jane's. You have never seen the nurse's face;
you never will see it. You can go on putting to the voice the face and form you adore. You
can marry the little nurse, and go on loving Jane." ... Then Garth cried out in horror: "Avaunt,
Satan!" and the battle was won.

But it troubled his mind lest by any chance her peace of heart should be disturbed through
him. So it was with relief, and yet with an unreasonable smouldering jealousy, that he heard
of the young man to whom she was devoted. And now it appeared she was unhappy through her young
man, just as he was unhappy through--no, because of--Jane.

A sudden impulse came over him to do away forever with the thought which in his own mind had
lately come between them, and to establish their intimacy on an even closer and firmer basis,
by being absolutely frank with her on the matter.

"Miss Gray," he said, leaning towards her with that delightful smile of boyish candour which
many women had found irresistible, "it is good of you to have told me about yourself; and,
although I confess to feeling unreasonably jealous of the fortunate fellow who possesses your
whole heart, I am glad he exists, because we all miss something unless we have in our lives
the wonderful experience of the One Woman or the One Man. And I want to tell you something,
dear sweet friend of mine, which closely touches you and me; only, before I do so, put your
hand in mine, that I may realise you in a closer intimacy than heretofore. You, who have been
in Sightless Land, know how much a hand clasp means down here."

Garth stretched his hand across the table, and his whole attitude was tense with expectation.

"I cannot do that, Mr. Dalmain," said Nurse Rosemary, in a voice which shook a little. "I have
burned my hands. Oh, not seriously. Do not look so distressed. Just a lighted match. Yes; while
I was blind. Now tell me the thing which touches you and me."

Garth withdrew his hand and clasped both around his knee. He leaned back in his chair, his
face turned upwards. There was upon it an expression so pure, the exaltation of a spirit so
lifted above the temptations of the lower nature, that Jane's eyes filled with tears as she
looked at him. She realised what his love for her, supplemented by the discipline of suffering,
had done for her lover.

He began to speak softly, not turning towards her. "Tell me," he said, "is he--very much to you?"

Jane's eyes could not leave the dear face and figure in the chair. Jane's emotion trembled
in Nurse Rosemary's voice.

"He is all the world to me," she said.

"Does he love you as you deserve to be loved?"

Jane bent and laid her lips on the table where his outstretched hand had rested. Then Nurse
Rosemary answered: "He loved me far, FAR more than I ever deserved."

"Why do you say 'loved'? Is not 'loves' the truer tense?"

"Alas, no!" said Nurse Rosemary, brokenly; "for I fear I have lost his love by my own mistrust
of it and my own wrong-doing."

"Never!" said Garth. "'Love never faileth.' It may for a time appear to be dead, even buried.
But the Easter morn soon dawns, and lo, Love ariseth! Love grieved, is like a bird with wet
wings. It cannot fly; it cannot rise. It hops about upon the ground, chirping anxiously. But
every flutter shakes away more drops; every moment in the sunshine is drying the tiny feathers;
and very soon it soars to the tree top, all the better for the bath, which seemed to have robbed
it of the power to rise."

"Ah,--if my beloved could but dry his wings," murmured Nurse Rosemary. "But I fear I did more
than wet them. I clipped them. Worse still,--I broke them."

"Does he know you feel yourself so in the wrong?" Garth asked the question very gently.

"No," replied Nurse Rosemary. "He will give me no chance to explain, and no opportunity to
tell him how he wrongs himself and me by the view he now takes of my conduct."

"Poor girl!" said Garth in tones of sympathy and comprehension. "My own experience has been
such a tragedy that I can feel for those whose course of true love does not run smooth. But
take my advice, Miss Gray. Write him a full confession. Keep nothing back. Tell him just how
it all happened. Any man who truly loves would believe, accept your explanation, and be thankful.
Only, I hope he would not come tearing up here and take you away from me!"

Jane smiled through a mist of tears.

"If he wanted me, Mr. Dalmain, I should have to go to him," said Nurse Rosemary.

"How I dread the day," continued Garth, "when you will come and say to me: 'I have to go.'
And, do you know, I have sometimes thought--you have done so much for me and become so much
to me--I have sometimes thought--I can tell you frankly now--it might have seemed as if there
were a very obvious way to try to keep you always. You are so immensely worthy of all a man
could offer, of all the devotion a man could give. And because, to one so worthy, I never could
have offered less than the best, I want to tell you that in my heart I hold shrined forever
one beloved face. All others are gradually fading. Now, in my blindness, I can hardly recall
clearly the many lovely faces I have painted and admired. All are more or less blurred and
indistinct. But this one face grows clearer, thank God, as the darkness deepens. It will be
with me through life, I shall see it in death, THE FACE OF THE WOMAN I LOVE. You said 'loved'
of your lover, hesitating to be sure of his present state of heart. I can neither say 'love'
nor 'loved' of my beloved. She never loved me. But I love her with a love which makes it impossible
for me to have any 'best' to offer to another woman. If I could bring myself, from unworthy
motives and selfish desires, to ask another to wed me, I should do her an untold wrong. For
her unseen face would be nothing to me; always that one and only face would be shining in my
darkness. Her voice would be dear, only in so far as it reminded me of the voice of the woman
I love. Dear friend, if you ever pray for me, pray that I may never be so base as to offer
to any woman such a husk as marriage with me would mean."

"But--" said Nurse Rosemary. "She--she who has made it a husk for others; she who might have
the finest of the wheat, the full corn in the ear, herself?"

"She," said Garth, "has refused it. It was neither fine enough nor full enough. It was not
worthy. O my God, little girl--! What it means, to appear inadequate to the woman one loves!"

Garth dropped his face between his hands with a groan.

Silence unbroken reigned in the library.

Suddenly Garth began to speak, low and quickly, without lifting his head.

"Now," he said, "now I feel it, just as I told Brand, and never so clearly before, excepting
once, when I was alone. Ah, Miss Gray! Don't move! Don't stir! But look all round the room
and tell me whether you see anything. Look at the window. Look at the door. Lean forward and
look behind the screen. I cannot believe we are alone. I will not believe it. I am being deceived
in my blindness. And yet--I am NOT deceived. I am conscious of the presence of the woman I
love. Her eyes are fixed upon me in pity, sorrow, and compassion. Her grief at my woe is so
great that it almost enfolds me, as I had dreamed her love would do ... O my God! She is so
near--and it is so terrible, because I do not wish her near. I would sooner a thousand miles
were between us--and I am certain there are not many yards! ... Is it psychic? or is it actual?
or am I going mad? ... Miss Gray! YOU would not lie to me. No persuasion or bribery or confounded
chicanery could induce YOU to deceive me on this point. Look around, for God's sake, and tell
me! Are we alone? And if not, WHO IS IN THE ROOM besides you and me?"

Jane had been sitting with her arms folded upon the table, her yearning eyes fixed upon Garth's
bowed head. When he wished her a thousand miles away she buried her face upon them. She was
so near him that had Garth stretched out his right hand again, it would have touched the heavy
coils of her soft hair. But Garth did not raise his head, and Jane still sat with her face buried.

There was silence in the library for a few moments after Garth's question and appeal. Then
Jane lifted her face.

"There is no one in the room, Mr. Dalmain," said Nurse Rosemary, "but YOU--and ME."

CHAPTER XXVII

THE EYES GARTH TRUSTED

"So you enjoy motoring, Miss Gray?"

They had been out in the motor together for the first time, and were now having tea together
in the library, also for the first time; and, for the first time, Nurse Rosemary was pouring
out for her patient. This was only Monday afternoon, and already her week-end experience had
won for her many new privileges.

"Yes, I like it, Mr. Dalmain; particularly in this beautiful air."

"Have you had a case before in a house where they kept a motor?"

Nurse Rosemary hesitated. "Yes, I have stayed in houses where they had motors, and I have been
in Dr. Brand's. He met me at Charing Cross once with his electric brougham."

"Ah, I know," said Garth. "Very neat. On your way to a case, or returning from a case?"

Nurse Rosemary smiled, then bit her lip. "To a case," she replied quite gravely. "I was on
my way to his house to talk it over and receive instructions."

"It must be splendid working under such a fellow as Brand," said Garth; "and yet I am certain
most of the best things you do are quite your own idea. For instance, he did not suggest your
week-end plan, did he? I thought not. Ah, the difference it has made! Now tell me. When we
were motoring we never slowed up suddenly to pass anything, or tooted to make something move
out of the way, without your having already told me what we were going to pass or what was
in the road a little way ahead. It was: 'We shall be passing a hay cart at the next bend; there
will be just room, but we shall have to slow up'; or, 'An old red cow is in the very middle
of the road a little way on. I think she will move if we hoot.' Then, when the sudden slow
down and swerve came, or the toot toot of the horn, I knew all about it and was not taken unawares.
Did you know how trying it is in blindness to be speeding along and suddenly alter pace without
having any idea why, or swerve to one side, and not know what one has just been avoiding? This
afternoon our spin was pure pleasure, because not once did you let these things happen. I knew
all that was taking place, as soon as I should have known it had I had my sight."

Jane pressed her hand over her bosom. Ah, how able she was always to fill her boy's life with
pure pleasure. How little of the needless suffering of the blind should ever be his if she
won the right to be beside him always.

"Well, Mr. Dalmain," said Nurse Rosemary, "I motored to the station with Sir Deryck yesterday
afternoon, and I noticed all you describe. I have never before felt nervous in a motor, but
I realised yesterday how largely that is owing to the fact that all the time one keeps an unconscious
look-out; measuring distances, judging speed, and knowing what each turn of the handle means.
So when we go out you must let me be eyes to you in this."

"How good you are!" said Garth, gratefully. "And did you see Sir Deryck off?"

"No. I did not SEE Sir Deryck at all. But he said good-bye, and I felt the kind, strong grip
of his hand as he left me in the car. And I sat there and heard his train start and rush away
into the distance."

"Was it not hard to you to let him come and go and not to see his face?"

Jane smiled. "Yes, it was hard," said Nurse Rosemary; "but I wished to experience that hardness."

"It gives one an awful blank feeling, doesn't it?" said Garth.

"Yes. It almost makes one wish the friend had not come."

"Ah--" There was a depth of contented comprehension in Garth's sigh; and the brave heart, which
had refused to lift the bandage to the very last, felt more than recompensed.

"Next time I reach the Gulf of Partings in Sightless Land," continued Garth, "I shall say:
'A dear friend has stood here for my sake.'"

"Oh, and one's meals," said Nurse Rosemary laughing. "Are they not grotesquely trying?"

"Yes, of course; I had forgotten you would understand all that now. I never could explain to
you before why I must have my meals alone. You know the hunt and chase?"

"Yes," said Nurse Rosemary, "and it usually resolves itself into 'gone away,' and turns up
afterwards unexpectedly! But, Mr. Dalmain, I have thought out several ways of helping so much
in that and making it all quite easy. If you will consent to have your meals with me at a small
table, you will see how smoothly all will work. And later on, if I am still here, when you
begin to have visitors, you must let me sit at your left, and all my little ways of helping
would be so unobtrusive, that no one would notice."

"Oh, thanks," said Garth. "I am immensely grateful. I have often been reminded of a silly game
we used to play at Overdene, at dessert, when we were a specially gay party. Do you know the
old Duchess of Meldrum? Or anyway, you may have heard of her? Ah, yes, of course, Sir Deryck
knows her. She called him in once to her macaw. She did not mention the macaw on the telephone,
and Sir Deryck, thinking he was wanted for the duchess, threw up an important engagement and
went immediately. Luckily she was at her town house. She would have sent just the same had
she been at Overdene. I wish you knew Overdene. The duchess gives perfectly delightful 'best
parties,' in which all the people who really enjoy meeting one another find themselves together,
and are well fed and well housed and well mounted, and do exactly as they like; while the dear
old duchess tramps in and out, with her queer beasts and birds, shedding a kindly and exciting
influence wherever she goes. Last time I was there she used to let out six Egyptian jerboas
in the drawing-room every evening after dinner, awfully jolly little beggars, like miniature
kangaroos. They used to go skipping about on their hind legs, frightening some of the women
into fits by hiding under their gowns, and making young footmen drop trays of coffee cups.
The last importation is a toucan,--a South American bird, with a beak like a banana, and a
voice like an old sheep in despair. But Tommy, the scarlet macaw, remains prime favourite,
and I must say he is clever and knows more than you would think."

"Well, at Overdene we used to play a silly game at dessert with muscatels. We each put five
raisins at intervals round our plates, then we shut our eyes and made jabs at them with forks.
Whoever succeeded first in spiking and eating all five was the winner. The duchess never would
play. She enjoyed being umpire, and screaming at the people who peeped. Miss Champion and I--she
is the duchess's niece, you know--always played fair, and we nearly always made a dead heat of it."

"Yes," said Nurse Rosemary, "I know that game. I thought of it at once when I had my blindfold
meals."

"Ah," cried Garth, "had I known, I would not have let you do it!"

"I knew that," said Nurse Rosemary. "That was why I week-ended."

Garth passed his cup to be refilled, and leaned forward confidentially.

"Now," he said, "I can venture to tell you one of my minor trials. I am always so awfully afraid
of there being a FLY in things. Ever since I was a small boy I have had such a horror of inadvertently
eating flies. When I was about six, I heard a lady visitor say to my mother: 'Oh, one HAS to
swallow a fly--about once a year! I have just swallowed mine, on the way here!' This terrible
idea of an annual fly took possession of my small mind. I used to be thankful when it happened,
and I got it over. I remember quickly finishing a bit of bread in which I had seen signs of
legs and wings, feeling it was an easy way of taking it and I should thus be exempt for twelve
glad months; but I had to run up and down the terrace with clenched hands while I swallowed
it. And when I discovered the fallacy of the annual fly, I was just as particular in my dread
of an accidental one. I don't believe I ever sat down to sardines on toast at a restaurant
without looking under the toast for my bugbear, though as I lifted it I felt rather like the
old woman who always looks under the bed for a burglar. Ah, but since the accident this foolishly
small thing HAS made me suffer! I cannot say: 'Simpson, are you sure there is not a fly in
this soup?' Simpson would say: 'No--sir; no fly--sir,' and would cough behind his hand, and
I could never ask him again."

Nurse Rosemary leaned forward and placed his cup where he could reach it easily, just touching
his right hand with the edge of the saucer. "Have all your meals with me," she said, in a tone
of such complete understanding, that it was almost a caress; "and I can promise there shall
never be any flies in anything. Could you not trust my eyes for this?"

And Garth replied, with a happy, grateful smile: "I could trust your kind and faithful eyes
for anything. Ah! and that reminds me: I want to intrust to them a task I could confide to
no one else. Is it twilight yet, Miss Gray, or is an hour of daylight left to us?"

Nurse Rosemary glanced out of the window and looked at her watch. "We ordered tea early," she
said, "because we came in from our drive quite hungry. It is not five o'clock yet, and a radiant
afternoon. The sun sets at half-past seven."

"Then the light is good," said Garth. "Have you finished tea? The sun will be shining in at
the west window of the studio. You know my studio at the top of the house? You fetched the
studies of Lady Brand from there. I dare say you noticed stacks of canvases in the corners.
Some are unused; some contain mere sketches or studies; some are finished pictures. Miss Gray,
among the latter are two which I am most anxious to identify and to destroy. I made Simpson
guide me up the other day and leave me there alone. And I tried to find them by touch; but
I could not be sure, and I soon grew hopelessly confused amongst all the canvases. I did not
wish to ask Simpson's help, because the subjects, are--well, somewhat unusual, and if he found
out I had destroyed them it might set him wondering and talking, and one hates to awaken curiosity
in a servant. I could not fall back on Sir Deryck because he would have recognised the portraits.
The principal figure is known to him. When I painted those pictures I never dreamed of any
eye but my own seeing them. So you, my dear and trusted secretary, are the one person to whom
I can turn. Will you do what I ask? And will you do it now?"

Nurse Rosemary pushed back her chair. "Why of course, Mr. Dalmain. I am here to do anything
and everything you may desire; and to do it when you desire it."

Garth took a key from his waistcoat pocket, and laid it on the table. "There is the studio
latch-key. I think the canvases I want are in the corner furthest from the door, behind a yellow
Japanese screen. They are large--five feet by three and a half. If they are too cumbersome
for you to bring down, lay them face to face, and ring for Simpson. But do not leave him alone
with them."

Nurse Rosemary picked up the key, rose, and went over to the piano, which she opened. Then
she tightened the purple cord, which guided Garth from his chair to the instrument.

"Sit and play," she said, "while I am upstairs, doing your commission. But just tell me one
thing. You know how greatly your work interests me. When I find the pictures, is it your wish
that I give them a mere cursory glance, just sufficient for identification; or may I look at
them, in the beautiful studio light? You can trust me to do whichever you desire."

The artist in Garth could not resist the wish to have his work seen and appreciated. "You may
look at them of course, if you wish," he sail. "They are quite the best work I ever did, though
I painted them wholly from memory. That is--I mean, that used to be--a knack of mine. And they
are in no sense imaginary. I painted exactly what I saw--at least, so far as the female face
and figure are concerned. And they make the pictures. The others are mere accessories." He
stood up, and went to the piano. His fingers began to stray softly amongst the harmonies of
the Veni.

Nurse Rosemary moved towards the door. "How shall I know them?" she asked, and waited.

The chords of the Veni hushed to a murmur, Garth's voice from the piano came clear and distinct,
but blending with the harmonies as if he were reciting to music.

"A woman and a man ... alone, in a garden--but the surroundings are only indicated. She is
in evening dress; soft, black, and trailing; with lace at her breast. It is called: 'The Wife.'"

"Yes?"

"The same woman; the same scene; but without the man, this time. No need to paint the man;
for now--visible or invisible--to her, he is always there. In her arms she holds"--the low
murmur of chords ceased; there was perfect silence in the room-"a little child. It is called:
'The Mother.'"

The Veni burst forth in an unrestrained upbearing of confident petition:

"Keep far our foes; give peace at home"--and the door closed behind Nurse Rosemary.

CHAPTER XXVIII

IN THE STUDIO

Jane mounted to the studio; unlocked the door, and, entering, closed it after her.

The evening sun shone through a western window, imparting an added richness to the silk screens
and hangings; the mauve wistaria of a Japanese embroidery; or the golden dragon of China on
a deep purple ground, wound up in its own interminable tail, and showing rampant claws in unexpected
places.

Several times already Jane had been into Garth's studio, but always to fetch something for
which he waited eagerly below; and she had never felt free to linger. Margery had a duplicate
key; for she herself went up every day to open the windows, dust tenderly all special treasures;
and keep it exactly as its owner had liked it kept, when his quick eyes could look around it.
But this key was always on Margery's bunch; and Jane did not like to ask admission, and risk
a possible refusal.

Now, however, she could take her own time; and she seated herself in one of the low and very
deep wicker lounge-chairs, comfortably upholstered; so exactly fitting her proportions, and
supporting arms, knees, and head, just rightly, that it seemed as if all other chairs would
in future appear inadequate, owing to the absolute perfection of this one. Ah, to be just that
to her beloved! To so fully meet his need, at every point, that her presence should be to him
always a source of strength, and rest, and consolation.

She looked around the room. It was so like Garth; every detail perfect; every shade of colour
enhancing another, and being enhanced by it. The arrangements for regulating the light, both
from roof and windows; the easels of all kinds and sizes; clean bareness, where space, and
freedom from dust, were required; the luxurious comfort round the fireplace, and in nooks and
corners; all were so perfect. And the plain brown wall-paper, of that beautiful quiet shade
which has in it no red, and no yellow; a clear nut-brown. On an easel near the further window
stood an unfinished painting; palette and brushes beside it, just as Garth had left them when
he went out on that morning, nearly three months ago; and, vaulting over a gate to protect
a little animal from unnecessary pain, was plunged himself into such utter loss and anguish.

Jane rose, and took stock of all his quaint treasures on the mantelpiece. Especially her mind
was held and fascinated by a stout little bear in brass, sitting solidly yet jauntily on its
haunches, its front paws clasping a brazen pole; its head turned sideways; its small, beady,
eyes, looking straight before it. The chain, from its neck to the pole denoted captivity and
possible fierceness. Jane had no doubt its head would lift, and its body prove a receptacle
for matches; but she felt equally certain that, should she lift its head and look, no matches
would be within it. This little bear was unmistakably Early Victorian; a friend of childhood's
days; and would not be put to common uses. She lifted the head. The body was empty. She replaced
it gently on the mantelpiece, and realised that she was deliberately postponing an ordeal which
must be faced.

Deryck had told her of Garth's pictures of the One Woman. Garth, himself, had now told her
even more. But the time had come when she must see them for herself. It was useless to postpone
the moment. She looked towards the yellow screen.

Then she walked, over to the western window, and threw it wide open. The sun was dipping gently
towards the purple hills. The deep blue of the sky began to pale, as a hint of lovely rose
crept into it. Jane looked heavenward and, thrusting her hands deeply into her pockets, spoke
aloud. "Before God" she said,--"in case I am never able to say or think it again, I will say
it now--I BELIEVE I WAS RIGHT. I considered Garth's future happiness, and I considered my own.
I decided as I did for both our sakes, at terrible cost to present joy. But, before God, I
believed I was right; and--I BELIEVE IT STILL."

Jane never said it again.

CHAPTER XXIX

JANE LOOKS INTO LOVE'S MIRROR

Behind the yellow screen, Jane found a great confusion of canvases, and unmistakable evidence
of the blind hands which had groped about in a vain search, and then made fruitless endeavours
to sort and rearrange. Very tenderly, Jane picked up each canvas from the fallen heap; turning
it the right way up, and standing it with its face to the wall. Beautiful work, was there;
some of it finished; some, incomplete. One or two faces she knew, looked out at her in their
pictured loveliness. But the canvases she sought were not there.

She straightened herself, and looked around. In a further corner, partly concealed by a Cairo
screen, stood another pile. Jane went to them.

Almost immediately she found the two she wanted; larger than the rest, and distinguishable
at a glance by the soft black gown of the central figure.

Without giving them more than a passing look, she carried them over to the western window,
and placed them in a good light. Then she drew up the chair in which she had been sitting;
took the little brass bear in her left hand, as a talisman to help her through what lay before
her; turned the second picture with its face to the easel; and sat down to the quiet contemplation
of the first.

The noble figure of a woman, nobly painted, was the first impression which leapt from eye to
brain. Yes, nobility came first, in stately pose, in uplifted brow, in breadth of dignity.
Then--as you marked the grandly massive figure, too well-proportioned to be cumbersome, but
large and full, and amply developed; the length of limb; the firmly planted feet; the large
capable hands,--you realised the second impression conveyed by the picture, to be strength;--strength
to do; strength to be; strength to continue. Then you looked into the face. And there you were
confronted with a great surprise. The third thought expressed by the picture was Love--love,
of the highest, holiest, most ideal, kind; yet, withal, of the most tenderly human order; and
you found it in that face.

It was a large face, well proportioned to the figure. It had no pretensions whatever to ordinary
beauty. The features were good; there was not an ugly line about them; and yet, each one just
missed the beautiful; and the general effect was of a good-looking plainness; unadorned, unconcealed,
and unashamed. But the longer you looked, the more desirable grew the face; the less you noticed
its negations; the more you admired its honesty, its purity, its immense strength of purpose;
its noble simplicity. You took in all these outward details; you looked away for a moment,
to consider them; you looked back to verify them; and then the miracle happened. Into the face
had stolen the "light that never was on sea or land." It shone from the quiet grey eyes,--as,
over the head of the man who knelt before her, they looked out of the picture--with an expression
of the sublime surrender of a woman's whole soul to an emotion which, though it sways and masters
her, yet gives her the power to be more truly herself than ever before. The startled joy in
them; the marvel at a mystery not yet understood; the passionate tenderness; and yet the almost
divine compassion for the unrestrained violence of feeling, which had flung the man to his
knees, and driven him to the haven of her breast; the yearning to soothe, and give, and content;--all
these were blended into a look of such exquisite sweetness, that it brought tears to the eyes
of the beholder.

The woman was seated on a broad marble parapet. She looked straight before her. Her knees came
well forward, and the long curve of the train of her black gown filled the foreground on the
right. On the left, slightly to one side of her, knelt a man, a tall slight figure in evening
dress, his arms thrown forward around her waist; his face completely hidden in the soft lace
at her bosom; only the back of his sleek dark head, visible. And yet the whole figure denoted
a passion of tense emotion. She had gathered him to her with what you knew must have been an
exquisite gesture, combining the utter self-surrender of the woman, with the tender throb of
maternal solicitude; and now her hands were clasped behind his head, holding him closely to
her. Not a word was being spoken. The hidden face was obviously silent; and her firm lips above
his dark head were folded in a line of calm self-control; though about them hovered the dawning
of a smile of bliss ineffable.

A crimson rambler rose climbing some woodwork faintly indicated on the left, and hanging in
a glowing mass from the top left-hand corner, supplied the only vivid colour in the picture.

But, from taking in these minor details, the eye returned to that calm tender face, alight
with love; to those strong capable hands, now learning for the first time to put forth the
protective passion of a woman's tenderness; and the mind whispered the only possible name for
that picture: The Wife.

Jane gazed at it long, in silence. Had Garth's little bear been anything less solid than Early
Victorian brass; it must have bent and broken under the strong pressure of those clenched hands.

She could not doubt, for a moment, that she looked upon herself; but, oh, merciful heavens!
how unlike the reflected self of her own mirror! Once or twice as she looked, her mind refused
to work, and she simply gazed blankly at the minor details of the picture. But then again,
the expression of the grey eyes drew her, recalling so vividly every feeling she had experienced
when that dear head had come so unexpectedly to its resting-place upon her bosom. "It is true,"
she whispered; and again: "Yes; it is true. I cannot deny it. It is as I felt; it must be as
I looked."

And then, suddenly; she fell upon her knees before the picture. "Oh, my God! Is that as I looked?
And the next thing that happened was my boy lifting his shining eyes and gazing at me in the
moonlight. Is THIS what he saw? Did I look SO? And did the woman who looked so; and who, looking
so, pressed his head down again upon her breast, refuse next day to marry him, on the grounds
of his youth, and her superiority?... Oh, Garth, Garth! ... O God, help him to understand!
... help him to forgive me!"

In the work-room just below, Maggie the housemaid was singing as she sewed. The sound floated
through the open window, each syllable distinct in the clear Scotch voice, and reached Jane
where she knelt. Her mind, stunned to blankness by its pain, took eager hold upon the words
of Maggie's hymn. And they were these.

Jane took the second picture, and placed it in front of the first.

The same woman, seated as before; but the man was not there; and in her arms, its tiny dark
head pillowed against the fulness of her breast, lay a little child. The woman did not look
over that small head, but bent above it, and gazed into the baby face.

The crimson rambler had grown right across the picture, and formed a glowing arch above mother
and child. A majesty of tenderness was in the large figure of the mother. The face, as regarded
contour and features, was no less plain; but again it was transfigured, by the mother-love
thereon depicted. You knew "The Wife" had more than fulfilled her abundant promise. The wife
was there in fullest realisation; and, added to wifehood, the wonder of motherhood. All mysteries
were explained; all joys experienced; and the smile on her calm lips, bespoke ineffable content.

A rambler rose had burst above them, and fallen in a shower of crimson petals upon mother and
child. The baby-fingers clasped tightly the soft lace at her bosom. A petal had fallen upon
the tiny wrist. She had lifted her hand to remove it; and, catching the baby-eyes, so dark
and shining, paused for a moment, and smiled.

Jane, watching them, fell to desperate weeping. The "mere boy" had understood her potential
possibilities of motherhood far better than she understood them herself. Having had one glimpse
of her as "The Wife," his mind had leaped on, and seen her as "The Mother." And again she was
forced to say: "It is true--yes; it is true."

And then she recalled the old line of cruel reasoning:

"It was not the sort of face one would have wanted to see always in front of one at table."
Was this the sort of face--this, as Garth had painted it, after a supposed year of marriage?
Would any man weary of it, or wish to turn away his eyes?

Jane took one more long look. Then she dropped the little bear, and buried her face in her
hands; while a hot blush crept up to the very roots of her hair, and tingled to her finger-tips.

Below, the fresh young voice was singing again.

After a while Jane whispered: "Oh, my darling, forgive me. I was altogether wrong. I will confess;
and, God helping me, I will explain; and, oh, my darling, you will forgive me?"

Once more she lifted her head and looked at the picture. A few stray petals of the crimson
rambler lay upon the ground; reminding her of those crushed roses, which, falling from her
breast, lay scattered on the terrace at Shenstone, emblem of the joyous hopes and glory of
love which her decision of that night had laid in the dust of disillusion. But crowning this
picture, in rich clusters of abundant bloom, grew the rambler rose. And through the open window
came the final verse of Maggie's hymn.

Jane went to the western window, and stood, with her arms stretched above her, looking out
upon the radiance of the sunset. The sky blazed into gold and crimson at the horizon; gradually
as the eye lifted, paling to primrose, flecked with rosy clouds; and, overhead, deep blue--fathomless,
boundless, blue.

Jane gazed at the golden battlements above the purple hills, and repeated, half aloud: "And
the city was of pure gold;--and had no need of the sun, neither of the moon to shine in it:
for the glory of God did lighten it. And there shall be no more death; neither sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away."

Ah, how much had passed away since she stood at that western window, not an hour before. All
life seemed readjusted; its outlook altered; its perspective changed. Truly Garth had "gone
behind his blindness."

Jane raised her eyes to the blue; and a smile of unspeakable anticipation parted her lips.
"Life, that shall endless be," she murmured. Then, turning, found the little bear, and restored
him to his place upon the mantelpiece; put back the chair; closed the western window; and,
picking up the two canvases, left the studio, and made her way carefully downstairs. 

You will wonder, perhaps, that Charley did not run away, as so many
boys do in books, and a few out of them.

Somehow he never thought of that.

He was not a hardy, adventurous fellow at all.

His desire to go to sea was a fancy born of foolish reading, and he wanted to have his going made
easy for him.

"I must set to work in another way," he thought at last. "Asking of 'em aint no use. I must make
'em want to have me go."

Then he fell to thinking how this could be done.

"Aunt Hitty wouldn't hold out long if the others didn't," he thought.

"I could coax her into it as easy as fun. She'll do anything if I kiss and pet her a bit. Then
there's Aunt Greg,--she thinks so much of poetry and such stuff.

I'll hunt up the pieces in the 'Reader' about 'The sea, the sea,
the deep blue sea,' and all that, and learn 'em and say 'em to her,
and I'll tell her about coral groves and palm-trees, and make her
think it's the jimmiest thing going to sail off and visit 'em.

Grandmother's always bothering about my being sick, and afraid of this and afraid of that; so
I'll just be sick--so sick that nothing but a viyage'll cure me! As for Aunt Prue, 'taint no use trying
to impose on her. I guess I'll have to be real hateful and troublesome to Aunt Prue. I'll tease
pussy and slop on the pantry shelves, and track up the floor every
time she mops it, and leave the dipper in the sink, and all the other
things she don't like, and by and by she'll be just glad to see the
last of me!

Hi!--that'll fetch 'em all!"

He ended his reflections with a chuckle.

Charley wasn't really a bad boy,--not bad through and through, that
is,--but he had a cunning, tricky side to his nature which made him
like to play on the weaknesses of his grandmother and aunts.

A sharp boy may prove more than a match for four unsuspecting old women; and though in this
case they were in the right and he in the wrong, none the less was
he likely to succeed in his crafty plans.

He waited a few days to let opposition subside, and then began his tricks. Charley's first
victim was Aunt Hitty.

She was a gentle, weak-minded person, easy to persuade, and when Charley put his head into her
lap and called her coaxing names, and was sure she was too kind to
disappoint him in the thing he was set upon, her heart softened, and
she began to think that they all had been hard and unkind.

"The dear boy wants to go awful bad," she told Aunt Greg, and to
her surprise Aunt Greg did not fly out and scold as she had expected,
but answered, with a sigh, "I suppose sailing on the ocean is beautiful!"

Aunt Greg had never seen the ocean in her life, but she was naturally
romantic; and Charley, who had been hard at work at the "Reader,"
had crammed her with all sorts of poetical quotations and fancies
concerning it.

Flying fish, coral islands, pole stars, dolphins, gallant mariners,
wet sheets and flowing seas, figured largely in these extracts, but
there was no mention whatever of storms, sharks, drowning, hard work,
or anything disagreeable.



Garth sat perfectly silent.

"Depend upon it," continued Nurse Rosemary, "she never sees herself as 'The Wife'--'The Mother.'
Is she a wife?".

Garth hesitated only the fraction of a second. "Yes," he said, very quietly.

Jane's hands flew to her breast. Her heart must be held down, or he would hear it throbbing.

Nurse Rosemary's voice had in it only a slight tremor, when she spoke again.

"Is she a mother?"

"No," said Garth. "I painted what might have been."

"If--?"

"If it HAD been," replied Garth, curtly.

Nurse Rosemary felt rebuked. "Dear Mr. Dalmain," she said, humbly; "I realise how officious
I must seem to you, with all these questions, and suggestions. But you must blame the hold
these wonderful paintings of yours have taken on my mind. Oh, they are beautiful--beautiful!"

"Ah," said Garth, the keen pleasure of the artist springing up once more. "Miss Gray, I have
somewhat forgotten them. Have you them here? That is right. Put them up before you, and describe
them to me. Let me hear how they struck you, as pictures." Jane rose, and went to the window.
She threw it open; and as she breathed in the fresh air, breathed out a passionate prayer that
her nerve, her voice, her self-control might not fail her, in this critical hour. She herself
had been convicted by Garth's pictures. Now she must convince Garth, by her description of
them. He must be made to believe in the love he had depicted.

Then Nurse Rosemary sat down; and, in the gentle, unemotional voice, which was quite her own,
described to the eager ears of the blind artist, exactly what Jane had seen in the studio.

It was perfectly done. It was mercilessly done. All the desperate, hopeless, hunger for Jane,
awoke in Garth; the maddening knowledge that she had been his, and yet not his; that, had he
pressed for her answer that evening, it could not have been a refusal; that the cold calculations
of later hours, had no place in those moments of ecstasy. Yet--he lost her--lost her! Why?
Ah, why? Was there any possible reason other than the one she gave?

Nurse Rosemary's quiet voice went on, regardless of his writhings. But she was drawing to a
close. "And it is such a beautiful crimson rambler, Mr. Dalmain," she said. "I like the idea
of its being small and in bud, in the first picture; and blooming in full glory, in the second."

Garth pulled himself together and smiled. He must not give way before this girl.

"Yes," he said; "I am glad you noticed that. And, look here. We will not destroy them at once.
Now they are found, there is no hurry. I am afraid I am giving you a lot of trouble; but will
you ask for some large sheets of brown paper, and make a package, and write upon it: 'Not to
be opened,' and tell Margery to put them back in the studio. Then, when I want them, at any
time, I shall have no difficulty in identifying them."

"I am so glad," said Nurse Rosemary. "Then perhaps the plain lady--"

"I cannot have her spoken of so," said Garth, hotly. "I do not know what she thought of herself--I
doubt if she ever gave a thought to self at all. I do not know what you would have thought
of her. I can only tell you that, to me, hers is the one face which is visible in my darkness.
All the loveliness I have painted, all the beauty I have admired, fades from my mental vision,
as wreaths of mist; flutters from memory's sight, as autumn leaves. Her face alone abides;
calm, holy, tender, beautiful,--it is always before me. And it pains me that one who has only
seen her as MY hand depicted her should speak of her as plain."

"Forgive me," said Nurse Rosemary, humbly. "I did not mean to pain you, sir. And, to show you
what your pictures have done for me, may I tell you a resolution I made in the studio? I cannot
miss what they depict--the sweetest joys of life--for want of the courage to confess myself
wrong; pocket my pride; and be frank and humble. I am going to write a full confession to my
young man, as to my share of the misunderstanding which has parted us. Do you think he will
understand? Do you think he will forgive?"

Garth smiled. He tried to call up an image of a pretty troubled face, framed in a fluffy setting
of soft fair hair. It harmonised so little with the voice; but it undoubtedly was Nurse Rosemary
Gray, as others saw her.

"He will be a brute if he doesn't, child," he said.

CHAPTER XXXI

IN LIGHTER VEIN

Dinner that evening, the first at their small round table, was a great success. Nurse Rosemary's
plans all worked well; and Garth delighted in arrangements which made him feel less helpless.

The strain of the afternoon brought its reaction of merriment. A little judicious questioning
drew forth further stories of the duchess and her pets; and Miss Champion's name came in with
a frequency which they both enjoyed.

It was a curious experience for Jane, to hear herself described in Garth's vivid word-painting.
Until that fatal evening at Shenstone, she had been remarkably free from self-consciousness;
and she had no idea that she had a way of looking straight into people's eyes when she talked
to them, and that that was what muddled up "the silly little minds of women who say they are
afraid of her, and that she makes them nervous! You see she looks right into their shallow
shuffling little souls, full of conceited thoughts about themselves, and nasty ill-natured
thoughts about her; and no wonder they grow panic-stricken, and flee; and talk of her as 'that
formidable Miss Champion.' I never found her formidable; but, when I had the chance of a real
talk with her, I used to be thankful I had nothing of which to be ashamed. Those clear eyes
touched bottom every time, as our kindred over the water so expressively put it."

Neither had Jane any idea that she always talked with a poker, if possible; building up the
fire while she built up her own argument; or attacking it vigorously, while she demolished
her opponent's; that she stirred the fire with her toe, but her very smart boots never seemed
any the worse; that when pondering a difficult problem, she usually stood holding her chin
in her right hand, until she had found the solution. All these small characteristics Garth
described with vivid touch, and dwelt upon with a tenacity of remembrance, which astonished
Jane, and revealed him, in his relation to herself three years before, in a new light.

His love for her had been so suddenly disclosed, and had at once had to be considered as a
thing to be either accepted or put away; so that when she decided to put it away, it seemed
not to have had time to become in any sense part of her life. She had viewed it; realised all
it might have meant; and put it from her.

But now she understood how different it had been for Garth. During the week which preceded
his declaration, he had realised, to the full, the meaning of their growing intimacy; and,
as his certainty increased, he had more and more woven her into his life; his vivid imagination
causing her to appear as his beloved from the first; loved and wanted, when as yet they were
merely acquaintances; kindred spirits; friends.

To find herself thus shrined in his heart and memory was infinitely touching to Jane; and seemed
to promise, with sweet certainty, that it would not be difficult to come home there to abide,
when once all barriers between them were removed.

After dinner, Garth sat long at the piano, filling the room with harmony. Once or twice the
theme of The Rosary crept in, and Jane listened anxiously for its development; but almost immediately
it gave way to something else. It seemed rather to haunt the other melodies, than to be actually
there itself.

When Garth left the piano, and, guided by the purple cord, reached his chair, Nurse Rosemary
said gently "Mr. Dalmain, can you spare me for a few days at the end of this week?"

"Oh, why?" said Garth. "To go where? And for how long? Ah, I know I ought to say: 'Certainly!
Delighted!' after all your goodness to me. But I really cannot! You don't know what life was
without you, when you week-ended! That week-end seemed months, even though Brand was here.
It is your own fault for making yourself so indispensable."

Nurse Rosemary smiled. "I daresay I shall not be away for long," she said. "That is, if you
want me, I can return. But, Mr. Dalmain, I intend to-night to write that letter of which I
told you. I shall post it to-morrow. I must follow it up almost immediately. I must be with
him when he receives it, or soon afterwards. I think--I hope--he will want me at once. This
is Monday. May I go on Thursday?"

Poor Garth looked blankly dismayed.

"Do nurses, as a rule, leave their patients, and rush off to their young men in order to find
out how they have liked their letters?" he inquired, in mock protest.

"Not as a rule, sir," replied Nurse Rosemary, demurely. "But this is an exceptional case."

"I shall wire to Brand."

"He will send you a more efficient and more dependable person."

"Oh you wicked little thing!" cried Garth. "If Miss Champion were here, she would shake you!
You, know perfectly well that nobody could fill your place!"

"It is good of you to say so, sir," replied Nurse Rosemary, meekly. "And is Miss Champion much
addicted to shaking people?"

"Don't call me 'sir'! Yes; when people are tiresome she often says she would like to shake
them; and one has a mental vision of how their teeth would chatter. There is a certain little
lady of our acquaintance whom we always call 'Mrs. Do-and-don't.' She isn't in our set; but
she calls upon it; and sometimes it asks her to lunch, for fun. If you inquire whether she
likes a thing, she says: 'Well, I do, and I don't.' If you ask whether she is going to a certain
function, she says: 'Well, I am, and I'm not.' And if you send her a note, imploring a straight
answer to a direct question, the answer comes back: 'Yes AND no.' Miss Champion used to say
she would like to take her up by the scruff of her feather boa, and shake her, asking at intervals:
'Shall I stop?' so as to wring from Mrs. Do-and-don't a definite affirmative, for once."

"Could Miss Champion carry out such a threat? Is she a very massive person?"

"Well, she could, you know; but she wouldn't. She is most awfully kind, even to little freaks
she laughs at. No, she isn't massive. That word does not describe her at all. But she is large,
and very finely developed. Do you know the Venus of Milo? Yes; in the Louvre. I am glad you
know Paris. Well, just imagine the Venus of Milo in a tailor-made coat and skirt,--and you
have Miss Champion."

Nurse Rosemary laughed, hysterically. Either the Venus of Milo, or Miss Champion, or this combination
of both, proved too much for her.

"Little Dicky Brand summed up Mrs. Do-and-don't rather well," pursued Garth. "She was calling
at Wimpole Street, on Lady Brand's 'at home' day. And Dicky stood talking to me, in his black
velvets and white waistcoat, a miniature edition of Sir Deryck. He indicated Mrs. Do-and-don't
on a distant lounge, and remarked: 'THAT lady never KNOWS; she always THINKS. I asked her if
her little girl might come to my party, and she said: "I think so." Now if she had asked ME
if I was coming to HER party, I should have said: "Thank you; I am." It is very trying when
people only THINK about important things, such as little girls and parties; because their thinking
never amounts to much. It does not so much matter what they think about other things--the weather,
for instance; because that all happens, whether they think or not. Mummie asked that lady whether
it was raining when she got here; and she said: "I THINK not." I can't imagine why Mummie always
wants to know what her friends think about the weather. I have heard her ask seven ladies this
afternoon whether it is raining. Now if father or I wanted to know whether it was raining we
should just step over to the window, and look out; and then come back and go do with really
interesting conversation. But Mummie asks them whether it is raining, or whether they think
it has been raining, or is going to rain; and when they have told her, she hurries away and
asks somebody else. I asked the thinking lady in the feather thing, whether she knew who the
father and mother were, of the young lady whom Cain married; and she said: "Well, I do; and
I don't." I said: "If you DO, perhaps you will tell me. And if you DON'T, perhaps you would
like to take my hand, and we will walk over together and ask the Bishop--the one with the thin
legs, and the gold cross, talking to Mummie." But she thought she had to go, quite in a hurry.
So I saw her off; and then asked the Bishop alone. Bishops are most satisfactory kind of people;
because they are quite sure about everything; and you feel safe in quoting them to Nurse. Nurse
told Marsdon that this one is in "sheep's clothing," because he wears a gold cross. I saw the
cross; but I saw no sheep's clothing. I was looking out for the kind of woolly thing our new
curate wears on his back in church. Should you call that "sheep's clothing"? I asked father,
and he said: "No. Bunny-skin." And mother seemed as shocked as if father and I had spoken in
church, instead of just as we came out. And she said: "It is a B.A. hood." Possibly she thinks
"baa" is spelled with only one "a." Anyway father and I felt it best to let the subject drop.'"

Nurse Rosemary laughed. "How exactly like Dicky," she said. "I could hear his grave little
voice, and almost see him pull down his small waistcoat!"

"Why, do you know the little chap?" asked Garth.

"Yes," replied Nurse Rosemary; "I have stayed with them. Talking to Dicky is an education;
and Baby Blossom is a sweet romp. Here comes Simpson. How quickly the evening has flown. Then
may I be off on Thursday?"

"I am helpless," said Garth. "I cannot say 'no.' But suppose you do not come back?"

"Then you can wire to Dr. Brand."

"I believe you want to leave me," said Garth reproachfully.

"I do, and I don't!" laughed Nurse Rosemary; and fled from his outstretched hands.

      *      *      *      *      *

When Jane had locked the letter-bag earlier that evening, and handed it to Simpson, she had
slipped in two letters of her own. One was addressed to

         Georgina, Duchess of Meldrum

              Portland Place

The other, to

         Sir Deryck Brand

             Wimpole Street

Both were marked: Urgent. If absent, forward immediately.

CHAPTER XXXII

AN INTERLUDE

Tuesday passed uneventfully, to all outward seeming.

There was nothing to indicate to Garth that his secretary had sat up writing most of the night;
only varying that employment by spending long moments in silent contemplation of his pictures,
which had found a temporary place of safety, on their way back to the studio, in a deep cupboard
in her room, of which she had the key.

If Nurse Rosemary marked, with a pang of tender compunction, the worn look on Garth's face,
telling how mental suffering had chased away sleep; she made no comment thereupon.

Thus Tuesday passed, in uneventful monotony.

Two telegrams had arrived for Nurse Gray in the course of the morning. The first came while
she was reading a Times leader aloud to Garth. Simpson brought it in, saying: "A telegram for
you, miss."

It was always a source of gratification to Simpson afterwards, that, almost from the first,
he had been led, by what he called his "unHaided HintuHition," to drop the "nurse," and address
Jane with the conventional "miss." In time he almost convinced himself that he had also discerned
in her "a Honourable"; but this, Margery Graem firmly refused to allow. She herself had had
her "doots," and kept them to herself; but all Mr. Simpson's surmisings had been freely expressed
and reiterated in the housekeeper's room; and never a word about any honourable lead passed
Mr. Simpson's lips. Therefore Mrs. Graem berated him for being so ready to "go astray and speak
lies." But Maggie, the housemaid, had always felt sure Mr. Simpson knew more than he said.
"Said more than he knew, you mean," prompted old Margery. "No," retorted Maggie, "I know what
I said; and I said what I meant." "You may have said what you meant, but you did not mean what
you knew," insisted Margery; "and if anybody says another word on the matter, I shall say grace
and dismiss the table," continued old Margery, exercising the cloture, by virtue of her authority,
in a way which Simpson and Maggie, who both wished for cheese, afterwards described as "mean."

But this was long after the uneventful Tuesday, when Simpson entered, with a salver; and, finding
Jane enveloped in the Times, said: "A telegram for you, miss."

Nurse Rosemary took it; apologised for the interruption, and opened it. It was from the duchess,
and ran thus:

MOST INCONVENIENT, AS YOU VERY WELL KNOW; BUT AM LEAVING EUSTON TO-NIGHT. WILL AWAIT FURTHER
ORDERS AT ABERDEEN.

Nurse Rosemary smiled, and put the telegram into her pocket. "No answer, thank you, Simpson."

"Not bad news, I hope?" asked Garth.

"No," replied Nurse Rosemary; "but it makes my departure on Thursday imperative. It is from
an old aunt of mine, who is going to my 'young man's' home. I must be with him before she is,
or there will be endless complications."

"I don't believe he will ever let you go again, when once he gets you back," remarked Garth,
moodily.

"You think not?" said Nurse Rosemary, with a tender little smile, as she took up the paper,
and resumed her reading.

The second telegram arrived after luncheon. Garth was at the piano, thundering Beethoven's
Funeral March on the Death of a Hero. The room was being rent asunder by mighty chords; and
Simpson's smug face and side-whiskers appearing noiselessly in the doorway, were an insupportable
anticlimax. Nurse Rosemary laid her finger on her lips; advanced with her firm noiseless tread,
and took the telegram. She returned to her seat and waited until the hero's obsequies were
over, and the last roll of the drums had died away. Then she opened the orange envelope. And
as she opened it, a strange thing happened. Garth began to play The Rosary. The string of pearls
dropped in liquid sound from his fingers; and Nurse Rosemary read her telegram. It was from
the doctor, and said: SPECIAL LICENSE EASILY OBTAINED. FLOWER AND I WILL COME WHENEVER YOU
WISH. WIRE AGAIN.

The Rosary drew to a soft melancholy close.

"What shall I play next?" asked Garth, suddenly.

"Veni, Creator Spiritus," said Nurse Rosemary; and bowed her head in prayer.

CHAPTER XXXIII

"SOMETHING IS GOING TO HAPPEN!"

Wednesday dawned; an ideal First of May: Garth was in the garden before breakfast. Jane heard
him singing, as he passed beneath her window.

She leaned out.

He was walking below in the freshest of white flannels; his step so light and elastic; his
every movement so lithe and graceful; the only sign of his blindness the Malacca cane he held
in his hand, with which he occasionally touched the grass border, or the wall of the house.
She could only see the top of his dark head. It might have been on the terrace at Shenstone,
three years before. She longed to call from the window; "Darling--my Darling! Good morning!
God bless you to-day."

Ah what would to-day bring forth;--the day when her full confession, and explanation, and plea
for pardon, would reach him? He was such a boy in many ways; so light-hearted, loving, artistic,
poetic, irrepressible; ever young, in spite of his great affliction. But where his manhood
was concerned; his love; his right of choice and of decision; of maintaining a fairly-formed
opinion, and setting aside the less competent judgment of others; she knew him rigid, inflexible.
His very pain seemed to cool him, from the molten lover, to the bar of steel.

As Jane knelt at her window that morning, she had not the least idea whether the evening would
find her travelling to Aberdeen, to take the night mail south; or at home forever in the heaven
of Garth's love.

And down below he passed again, still singing:

   "But mine it is to follow in her train;
    Do her behests in pleasure or in pain;
    Burn at her altar love's sweet frankincense,
    And worship her in distant reverence."

"Ah, beloved!" whispered Jane, "not 'distant.' If you want her, and call her, it will be to
the closest closeness love can devise. No more distance between you and me." "Ah, dear Christ!"
she whispered. "If Thy cross could do this for Jew and Gentile, may not my boy's heavy cross,
so bravely borne, do it for him and for me? So shall we come at last, indeed, to 'kiss the cross.'"

The breakfast gong boomed through the house. Simpson loved gongs. He considered them "Haristocratic."
He always gave full measure.

Nurse Rosemary went down to breakfast.

Garth came in, through the French window, humming "The thousand beauties that I know so well."
He was in his gayest, most inconsequent mood. He had picked a golden rosebud in the conservatory
and wore it in his buttonhole. He carried a yellow rose in his hand.

"Good day, Miss Rosemary," he said. "What a May Day! Simpson and I were up with the lark; weren't
we, Simpson? Poor Simpson felt like a sort of 'Queen of the May,' when my electric bell trilled
in his room, at 5 A.M. But I couldn't stay in bed. I woke with my something-is-going-to-happen
feeling; and when I was a little chap and woke with that, Margery used to say: 'Get up quickly
then, Master Garth, and it will happen all the sooner.' You ask her if she didn't, Simpson.
Miss Gray, did you ever learn: 'If you're waking call me early, call me early, mother dear'?
I always hated that young woman! I should think, in her excited state, she would have been
waking long before her poor mother, who must have been worn to a perfect rag, making all the
hussy's May Queen-clothes, overnight."

Simpson had waited to guide him to his place at the table. Then he removed the covers, and
left the room.

As soon as he had closed the door behind him, Garth leaned forward, and with unerring accuracy
laid the opening rose upon Nurse Rosemary's plate.

"Roses for Rosemary," he said. "Wear it, if you are sure the young man would not object. I
have been thinking about him and the aunt. I wish you could ask them both here, instead of
going away on Thursday. We would have the 'maddest, merriest time!' I would play with the aunt,
while you had it out with the young man. And I could easily keep the aunt away from nooks and
corners, because my hearing is sharper than any aunt's eyes could be, and if you gave a gentle
cough, I would promptly clutch hold of auntie, and insist upon being guided in the opposite
direction. And I would take her out in the motor; and you and the young man could have the
gig. And then when all was satisfactorily settled, we could pack them off home, and be by ourselves
again. Ah, Miss Gray, do send for them, instead of leaving me on Thursday."

"Mr. Dalmain," said Nurse Rosemary, reprovingly, as she leaned forward and touched his right
hand with the rim of his saucer, "this May-Day morning has gone to your head. I shall send
for Margery. She may have known the symptoms, of old."

"It is not that," said Garth. He leaned forward and spoke confidentially. "Something is going
to happen to-day, little Rosemary. Whenever I feel like this, something happens. The first
time it occurred, about twenty-five years ago, there was a rocking-horse in the hall, when
I ran downstairs! I have never forgotten my first ride on that rocking-horse. The fearful joy
when he went backward; the awful plunge when he went forward; and the proud moment when it
was possible to cease clinging to the leather pommel. I nearly killed the cousin who pulled
out his tail. I thrashed him, then and there, WITH the tail; which was such a silly thing to
do; because, though it damaged the cousin, it also spoiled the tail. The next time--ah, but
I am boring you!"

"Not at all," said Nurse Rosemary, politely; "but I want you to have some breakfast; and the
letters will be here in a few minutes."

He looked so brown and radiant, this dear delightful boy, with his gold-brown tie, and yellow
rose. She was conscious of her pallor, and oppressive earnestness, as she said: "The letters
will be here."

"Oh, bother the letters!" cried Garth. "Let's have a holiday from letters on May Day! You shall
be Queen of the May; and Margery shall be the old mother. I will be Robin, with the breaking
heart, leaning on the bridge beneath the hazel tree; and Simpson can be the 'bolder lad.' And
we will all go and 'gather knots of flowers, and buds, and garlands gay.'"

"Mr. Dalmain," said Nurse Rosemary, laughing, in spite of herself, "you really must be sensible,
or I shall go and consult Margery. I have never seen you in such a mood."

"You have never seen me, on a day when something was going to happen," said Garth; and Nurse
Rosemary made no further attempt to repress him.

After breakfast, he went to the piano, and played two-steps, and rag-time music, so infectiously,
that Simpson literally tripped as he cleared the table; and Nurse Rosemary, sitting pale and
preoccupied, with a pile of letters before her, had hard work to keep her feet still.

Simpson had two-stepped to the door with the cloth, and closed it after him. Nurse Rosemary's
remarks about the post-bag, and the letters, had remained unanswered. "Shine little glowworm
glimmer" was pealing gaily through the room, like silver bells,--when the door opened, and
old Margery appeared, in a black satin apron, and a blue print sunbonnet. She came straight
to the piano, and laid her hand gently on Garth's arm.

"Master Garthie," she said, "on this lovely May morning, will you take old Margery up into
the woods?"

Garth's hands dropped from the keys. "Of course I will, Margie," he said. "And, I say Margie,
SOMETHING IS GOING TO HAPPEN."

"I know it, laddie," said the old woman, tenderly; and the expression with which she looked
into the blind face filled Jane's eyes with tears. "I woke with it too, Master Garthie; and
now we will go into the woods, and listen to the earth, and trees, and flowers, and they will
tell us whether it is for joy, or for sorrow. Come, my own laddie."

Garth rose, as in a dream. Even in his blindness he looked so young, and so beautiful, that
Jane's watching heart stood still.

At the window he paused. "Where is that secretary person?" he said, vaguely. "She kept trying
to shut me up."

"I know she did, laddie," said old Margery, curtseying apologetically towards Jane. "You see
she does not know the 'something-is-going-to-happen-to-day' awakening."

"Ah, doesn't she?" thought Jane, as they disappeared through the window. "But as my Garth has
gone off his dear head, and been taken away by his nurse, the thing that is going to happen,
can't happen just yet." And Jane sat down to the piano, and very softly ran through the accompaniment
of The Rosary. Then,--after shading her eyes on the terrace, and making sure that a tall white
figure leaning on a short dark one, had almost reached the top of the hill,--still more softly,
she sang it.

Afterwards she went for a tramp on the moors, and steadied her nerve by the rapid swing of
her walk, and the deep inbreathing of that glorious air. Once or twice she took a telegram
from her pocket, stood still and read it; then tramped on, to the wonder of the words: "Special
license easily obtained." Ah, the license might be easy to obtain; but how about his forgiveness?
That must be obtained first. If there were only this darling boy to deal with, in his white
flannels and yellow roses, with a May-Day madness in his veins, the license might come at once;
and all he could wish should happen without delay. But this is a passing phase of Garth. What
she has to deal with is the white-faced man, who calmly said: "I accept the cross," and walked
down the village church leaving her--for all these years. Loving her, as he loved her; and
yet leaving her,--without word or sign, for three long years. To hire, was the confession;
his would be the decision; and, somehow, it did not surprise her, when she came down to luncheon,
a little late, to find HIM seated at the table.

"Miss Gray," he said gravely, as he heard her enter, "I must apologise for my behaviour this
morning. I was what they call up here 'fey.' Margery understands the mood; and together she
and I have listened to kind Mother Earth, laying our hands on her sympathetic softness, and
she has told us her secrets. Then I lay down under the fir trees and slept; and awakened calm
and sane, and ready for what to-day must bring. For it WILL bring something. That is no delusion.
It is a day of great things. That much, Margery knows, too."

"Perhaps," suggested Nurse Rosemary, tentatively, "there may be news of interest in your letters."

"Ah," said Garth, "I forgot. We have not even opened this morning's letters. Let us take time
for them immediately after lunch. Are there many?"

"Quite a pile," said Nurse Rosemary.

"Good. We will work soberly through them."

Half an hour later Garth was seated in his chair, calm and expectant; his face turned towards
his secretary. He had handled his letters, and amongst them he had found one sealed; and the
seal was a plumed helmet, with visor closed. Nurse Rosemary saw him pale, as his fingers touched
it. He made no remark; but, as before, slipped it beneath the rest, that it might come up for
reading, last of all.

When the others were finished, and Nurse Rosemary took up this letter, the room was very still.
They were quite alone. Bees hummed in the garden. The scent of flowers stole in at the window.
But no one disturbed their solitude.

Nurse Rosemary took up the envelope.

"Mr. Dalmain, here is a letter, sealed with scarlet wax. The seal is a helmet with visor--"

"I know," said Garth. "You need not describe it further. Kindly open it."

Nurse Rosemary opened it. "It is a very long letter, Mr. Dalmain."

"Indeed? Will you please read it to me, Miss Gray."

A tense moment of silence followed. Nurse Rosemary lifted the letter; but her voice suddenly
refused to respond to her will. Garth waited without further word.

Then Nurse Rosemary said: "Indeed, sir, it seems a most private letter. I find it difficult
to read it to you."

Garth heard the distress in her voice, and turned to her kindly.

"Never mind, my dear child. It in no way concerns you. It is a private letter to me; but my
only means of hearing it is through your eyes, and from your lips. Besides, the lady, whose
seal is a plumed helmet, can have nothing of a very private nature to say to me."

"Ah, but she has," said Nurse Rosemary, brokenly.

Garth considered this in silence.

Then: "Turn over the page," he said, "and tell me the signature."

"There are many pages," said Nurse Rosemary.

"Turn over the pages then," said Garth, sternly. "Do not keep me waiting. How is that letter
signed?"

"YOUR WIFE," whispered Nurse Rosemary.

There was a petrifying quality about the silence which followed. It seemed as if those two
words, whispered into Garth's darkness, had turned him to stone.

At last he stretched out his hand. "Will you give me that letter, if you please, Miss Gray?
Thank you. I wish to be alone for a quarter of an hour. I shall be glad if you will be good
enough to sit in the dining-room, and stop any one from coming into this room. I must be undisturbed.
At the end of that time kindly return."

He spoke so quietly that Jane's heart sank within her. Some display of agitation would have
been reassuring. This was the man who, bowing his dark head towards the crucifixion window,
said: "I accept the cross." This was the man, whose footsteps never once faltered as he strode
down the aisle, and left her. This was the man, who had had the strength, ever since, to treat
that episode between her and himself, as completely closed; no word of entreaty; no sign of
remembrance; no hint of reproach. And this was the man to whom she had signed herself: "Your wife."

In her whole life, Jane had never known fear. She knew it now.

As she silently rose and left him, she stole one look at his face. He was sitting perfectly
still; the letter in his hand. He had not turned his head toward her as he took it. His profile
might have been a beautiful carving in white ivory. There was not the faintest tinge of colour
in his face; just that ivory pallor, against the ebony lines of his straight brows, and smooth
dark hair.

Jane softly left the room, closing the door behind her.

Then followed the longest fifteen minutes she had ever known. She realised what a tremendous
conflict was in progress in that quiet room. Garth was arriving at his decision without having
heard any of her arguments. By the strange fatality of his own insistence, he had heard only
two words of her letter, and those the crucial words; the two words to which the whole letter
carefully led up. They must have revealed to him instantly, what the character of the letter
would be; and what was the attitude of mind towards himself, of the woman who wrote them.

Jane paced the dining-room in desperation, remembering the hours of thought which had gone
to the compiling of sentences, cautiously preparing his mind to the revelation of the signature.

Suddenly, in the midst of her mental perturbation, there came to her the remembrance of a conversation
between Nurse Rosemary and Garth over the pictures. The former had said: "Is she a wife?" And
Garth had answered: "Yes." Jane had instantly understood what that answer revealed and implied.
Because Garth had so felt her his during those wonderful moments on the terrace at Shenstone,
that he could look up into her face and say, "My wife"--not as an interrogation, but as an
absolute statement of fact,--he still held her this, as indissolubly as if priest, and book,
and ring, had gone to the wedding of their union. To him, the union of souls came before all
else; and if that had taken place, all that might follow was but the outward indorsement of
an accomplished fact. Owing to her fear, mistrust, and deception, nothing had followed. Their
lives had been sundered; they had gone different ways. He regarded himself as being no more
to her than any other man of her acquaintance. During these years he had believed, that her
part in that evening's wedding of souls had existed in his imagination, only; and had no binding
effect upon her. But his remained. Because those words were true to him then, he had said them;
and, because he had said them, he would consider her his wife, through life,--and after. It
was the intuitive understanding of this, which had emboldened Jane so to sign her letter. But
how would he reconcile that signature with the view of her conduct which he had all along taken,
without ever having the slightest conception that there could be any other?

Then Jane remembered, with comfort, the irresistible appeal made by Truth to the soul of the
artist; truth of line; truth of colour; truth of values; and, in the realm of sound, truth
of tone, of harmony, of rendering, of conception. And when Nurse Rosemary had said of his painting
of "The Wife": "It is a triumph of art"; Garth had replied: "It is a triumph of truth." And
Jane's own verdict on the look he had seen and depicted was: "It is true--yes, it is true!"
Will he not realise now the truth of that signature; and, if he realises it, will he not be
glad in his loneliness, that his wife should come to him; unless the confessions and admissions
of the letter cause him to put her away as wholly unworthy?

Suddenly Jane understood the immense advantage of the fact that he would hear every word of
the rest of her letter, knowing the conclusion, which she herself could not possibly have put
first. She saw a Higher Hand in this arrangement; and said, as she watched the minutes slowly
pass: "He hath broken down the middle wall of partition between us"; and a sense of calm assurance
descended, and garrisoned her soul with peace.

The quarter of an hour was over.

Jane crossed the hall with firm, though noiseless, step; stood a moment on the threshold relegating
herself completely to the background; then opened the door; and Nurse Rosemary re-entered the
library.

CHAPTER XXXIV

"LOVE NEVER FAILETH"

Garth was standing at the open window, when Nurse Rosemary re-entered the library; and he did
not turn, immediately.

She looked anxiously for the letter, and saw it laid ready on her side of the table. It bore
signs of having been much crumpled; looking almost as a letter might appear which had been
crushed into a ball, flung into the waste-paper basket, and afterwards retrieved. It had, however,
been carefully smoothed out; and lay ready to her hand.

When Garth turned from the window and passed to his chair, his face bore the signs of a great
struggle. He looked as one who, sightless, has yet been making frantic efforts to see. The
ivory pallor was gone. His face was flushed; and his thick hair, which grew in beautiful curves
low upon his forehead and temples, and was usually carefully brushed back in short-cropped
neatness, was now ruffled and disordered. But his voice was completely under control, as he
turned towards his secretary.

"My dear Miss Gray," he said, "we have a difficult task before us. I have received a letter,
which it is essential I should hear. I am obliged to ask you to read it to me, because there
is absolutely no one else to whom I can prefer such a request. I cannot but know that it will
be a difficult and painful task for you, feeling yourself an intermediary between two wounded
and sundered hearts. May I make it easier, my dear little girl, by assuring you that I know
of no one in this world from whose lips I could listen to the contents of that letter with
less pain; and, failing my own, there are no eyes beneath which I could less grudgingly let
it pass, there is no mind I could so unquestioningly trust, to judge kindly, both of myself
and of the writer; and to forget faithfully, all which was not intended to come within the
knowledge of a third person."

"Thank you, Mr. Dalmain," said Nurse Rosemary.

Garth leaned back in his chair, shielding his face with his hand.

"Now, if you please," he said. And, very clearly and quietly, Nurse Rosemary began to read.

"DEAR GARTH, As you will not let me come to you, so that I could say, between you and me alone,
that which must be said, I am compelled to write it. It is your own fault, Dal; and we both
pay the penalty. For how can I write to you freely when I know, that as you listen, it will
seem to you of every word I am writing, that I am dragging a third person into that which ought
to be, most sacredly, between you and me alone. And yet, I must write freely; and I must make
you fully understand; because the whole of your future life and mine will depend upon your
reply to this letter. I must write as if you were able to hold the letter in your own hands,
and read it to yourself. Therefore, if you cannot completely trust your secretary, with the
private history of your heart and mine, bid her give it you back without turning this first
page; and let me come myself, Garth, and tell you all the rest."

"That is the bottom of the page," said Nurse Rosemary; and waited.

Garth did not remove his hand. "I do completely trust; and she must not come," he said.

Nurse Rosemary turned the page, and went on reading.

"I want you to remember, Garth, that every word I write, is the simple unvarnished truth. If
you look back over your remembrance of me, you will admit that I am not naturally an untruthful
person, nor did I ever take easily to prevarication. But, Garth, I told you one lie; and that
fatal exception proves the rule of perfect truthfulness, which has always otherwise held, between
you and me; and, please God, always will hold. The confession herein contained, concerns that
one lie; and I need not ask you to realise how humbling it is to my pride to have to force
the hearing of a confession upon the man who has already refused to admit me to a visit of
friendship. You will remember that I am not naturally humble; and have a considerable amount
of proper pride; and, perhaps, by the greatness of the effort I have had to make, you will
be able to gauge the greatness of my love. God help you to do so--my darling; my beloved; my
poor desolate boy!"

Nurse Rosemary stopped abruptly; for, at this sudden mention of love, and at these words of
unexpected tenderness from Jane, Garth had risen to his feet, and taken two steps towards the
window; as if to escape from something too immense to be faced. But, in a moment he recovered
himself, and sat down again, completely hiding his face with his hand.

Nurse Rosemary resumed the reading of the letter.

"Ah, what a wrong I have done, both to you, and to myself! Dear, you remember the evening on
the terrace at Shenstone, when you asked me to be--when you called me--when I WAS--YOUR WIFE?
Garth, I leave this last sentence as it stands, with its two attempts to reach the truth. I
will not cross them out, but leave them to be read to you; for, you see Garth, I finally arrived!
I WAS your wife. I did not understand it then. I was intensely surprised; unbelievably inexperienced
in matters of feeling; and bewildered by the flood of sensation which swept me off my feet
and almost engulfed me. But even then I knew that my soul arose and proclaimed you mate and
master. And when you held me, and your dear head lay upon my heart, I knew, for the first time
the meaning of the word ecstasy; and I could have asked no kinder gift of heaven, than to prolong
those moments into hours."

Nurse Rosemary's quiet voice broke, suddenly; and the reading ceased.

Garth was leaning forward, his head buried in his hands. A dry sob rose in his throat, just
at the very moment when Nurse Rosemary's voice gave way.

Garth recovered first. Without lifting his head, with a gesture of protective affection and
sympathy, he stretched his hand across the table.

"Poor little girl," he said, "I am so sorry. It is rough on you. If only it had come when Brand
was here! I am afraid you MUST go on; but try to read without realising. Leave the realising
to me."

And Nurse Rosemary read on.

"When you lifted your head in the moonlight and gazed long and earnestly at me--Ah, those dear
eyes!--your look suddenly made me self-conscious. There swept over me a sense of my own exceeding
plainness, and of how little there was in what those dear eyes saw, to provide reason, for
that adoring look. Overwhelmed with a shy shame I pressed your head back to the place where
the eyes would be hidden; and I realise now what a different construction you must have put
upon that action. Garth, I assure you, that when you lifted your head the second time, and
said, 'My wife,' it was the first suggestion to my mind that this wonderful thing which was
happening meant--marriage. I know it must seem almost incredible, and more like a child of
eighteen, than a woman of thirty. But you must remember, all my dealings with men up to that
hour had been handshakes, heartiest comradeship, and an occasional clap on the shoulder given
and received. And don't forget, dear King of my heart, that, until one short week before, you
had been amongst the boys who called me 'good old Jane,' and addressed me in intimate conversation
as 'my dear fellow'! Don't forget that I had always looked upon you as YEARS younger than myself;
and though a strangely sweet tie had grown up between us, since the evening of the concert
at Overdene, I had never realised it as love. Well--you will remember how I asked for twelve
hours to consider my answer; and you yielded, immediately; (you were so perfect, all the time,
Garth) and left me, when I asked to be alone; left me, with a gesture I have never forgotten.
It was a revelation of the way in which the love of a man such as you exalts the woman upon
whom it is outpoured. The hem of that gown has been a sacred thing to me, ever since. It is
always with me, though I never wear it.--A detailed account of the hours which followed, I
shall hope to give you some day, my dearest. I cannot write it. Let me hurl on to paper, in
all its crude ugliness, the miserable fact which parted us; turning our dawning joy to disillusion
and sadness. Garth--it was this. I did not believe your love would stand the test of my plainness.
I knew what a worshipper of beauty you were; how you must have it, in one form or another,
always around you. I got out my diary in which I had recorded verbatim our conversation about
the ugly preacher, whose face became illumined into beauty, by the inspired glory within. And
you added that you never thought him ugly again; but he would always be plain. And you said
it was not the sort of face one would want to have always before one at meals; but that you
were not called upon to undergo that discipline, which would be sheer martyrdom to you."

"I was so interested, at the time; and so amused at the unconscious way in which you stood
and explained this, to quite the plainest woman of your acquaintance, that I recorded it very
fully in my journal.--Alas! On that important night, I read the words, over and over, until
they took morbid hold upon my brain. Then--such is the self-consciousness awakened in a woman
by the fact that she is loved and sought--I turned on all the lights around my mirror, and
critically and carefully examined the face you would have to see every day behind your coffee-pot
at breakfast, for years and years, if I said 'Yes,' on the morrow. Darling, I did not see myself
through your eyes, as, thank God, I have done since. And I DID NOT TRUST YOUR LOVE TO STAND
THE TEST. It seemed to me, I was saving both of us from future disappointment and misery, by
bravely putting away present joy, in order to avoid certain disenchantment. My beloved, it
will seem to you so coolly calculating, and so mean; so unworthy of the great love you were
even then lavishing upon me. But remember, for years, your remarkable personal grace and beauty
had been a source of pleasure to me; and I had pictured you wedded to Pauline Lister, for instance,
in her dazzling whiteness, and soft radiant youth. So my morbid self-consciousness said: 'What!
This young Apollo, tied to my ponderous plainness; growing handsomer every year, while I grow
older and plainer?' Ah, darling! It sounds so unworthy, now we know what our love is. But it
sounded sensible and right that night; and at last, with a bosom that ached, and arms that
hung heavy at the thought of being emptied of all that joy, I made up my mind to say 'no.'
Ah, believe me, I had no idea what it already meant to you. I thought you would pass on at
once to another fancy; and transfer your love to one more able to meet your needs, at every
point. And if the project miscarry, my private merit is still entire. This arithmetic, as horrible as
it appears, I knowingly affirm to have been practised, and applied in conjunctures, whereon
depended the ruin or safety of a nation: Although, probably the charity and virtue of a senate,
will hardly be induced to believe, that there can be such monsters among mankind. And yet,
the wise Lord Bacon mentions a sort of people, (I doubt the race is not yet extinct) who would "set
a house on fire, for the convenience of roasting their own eggs at the flame."

But whoever is old enough to remember, and hath turned his thoughts to observe the course of
public affairs in this kingdom, from the time of the Revolution; must acknowledge, that the
highest points of interest and liberty, have been often sacrificed to the avarice and ambition of
particular persons, upon the very principles and arithmetic that
I have supposed: The only wonder is, how these artists were able to
prevail upon numbers; and influence even public assemblies to become
instruments for effecting their execrable designs.

It is, I think, in all conscience, latitude enough for vice, if a man in station be allowed to act
injustice, upon the usual principles of getting a bribe, wreaking his malice, serving his
party, or consulting his preferment; while his wickedness terminates in the ruin only of particular
persons: But, to deliver up our whole country, and every living soul who inhabits it, to certain
destruction; hath not, as I remember, been permitted by the most
favourable casuists on the side of corruption.

It were far better, that all who have had the misfortune to be born in this kingdom, should
be rendered incapable of holding any employment whatsoever, above the degree of a constable,
(according to the scheme and intention of a great minister[2] gone to his own place)than to
live under the daily apprehension of a few false brethren among ourselves. Because, in the former
case we should be wholly free from the danger of being betrayed; since none could then have impudence
enough to pretend any public good.

[Footnote 2: The Earl of Sunderland. See note on p. 377 of vol. v. of present edition. [T.S.]]

It
is true, that in this desperate affair of the new halfpence, I have
not heard of any man above my own degree of a shopkeeper, to have
been hitherto so bold, as, in direct terms, to vindicate the fatal
project; although I have been told of some very mollifying expressions
which were used, and very gentle expedients proposed and handed about,
when it first came under debate: But, since the eyes of the people
have been so far opened, that the most ignorant can plainly see their
own ruin, in the success of Wood's attempt; these grand compounders
have been more cautious.[3]

[Footnote 3: Alluding to Walpole's overture
for reducing the amount to be coined to £40,000.

[T.S.]]

But that the same spirit still subsists, hath manifestly appeared (among other instances of
great compliance) from certain circumstances, that have attended
some late proceedings in a court of judicature.

There is not any commonplace more frequently insisted on, by those who treat of our constitution,
than the great happiness and excellency of trials by juries; yet if this blessed part of our law be
eludible at pleasure, by the force of power, frowns, and artifice;
we shall have little reason to boast of our advantage, in this particular,
over other states or kingdoms in Europe.

And surely, these high proceedings, exercised in a point that so nearly concerned the life-blood of
the people, their necessary subsistence, their very food and raiment, and even the public peace; will
not allow any favourable appearance; because it was obvious, that
so much superabundant zeal could have no other design, or produce
any other effect, than to damp that spirit raised in the nation against
this accursed scheme of William Wood, and his abettors; to which spirit
alone, we owe, and for ever must owe, our being hitherto preserved,
and our hopes of being preserved for the future; if it can be kept
up, and strongly countenanced by your wise assemblies.

I wish I could account for such a demeanour upon a more charitable
foundation, than that of putting our interest in over balance with
the ruin of our country.

I remember some months ago, when this affair was fresh in discourse;
a person near allied to SOMEBODY, or (as the hawkers called him) NOBODY,
who was thought deeply concerned, went about very diligently among
his acquaintance, to shew the bad consequences that might follow from
any public resentment to the disadvantage of his ally Mr. Wood; principally
alleging the danger of all employments being disposed of from England.

One of these emissaries came to me, and urged the same topic: I answered,
naturally, that I knew there was no office of any kind, which a man
from England might not have, if he thought it worth his asking; and
that I looked upon all who had the disadvantage of being born here,
as only in the condition of leasers and gleaners.

Neither could I forbear mentioning the known fable of the countryman,
who entreated his ass to fly for fear of being taken by the enemy;
but the ass refused to give himself that trouble; and upon a very
wise reason, because he could not possibly change his present master
for a worse: The enemy could not make him fare harder; beat him more
cruelly; nor load him with heavier burthens.

Upon these, and many other considerations, I may affirm it to be the
wish of the whole nation, that the power and privileges of juries
were declared, ascertained, and confirmed by the legislature; and
that whoever hath been manifestly known to violate them, might be
stigmatized by public censure; not from any hope that such a censure
will amend their practices, or hurt their interest, (for it may probably
operate quite contrary in both:) but that the nation may know their
enemies from their friends.

I say not this with any regard or view to myself; for I write in great security; and am resolved
that none shall merit at my expense further than by shewing their
zeal to discover, prosecute, and condemn me, for endeavouring to do
my duty in serving my country: And yet I am conscious to myself that
I never had the least intention to reflect on His Majesty's ministers,
nor on any other person, except William Wood, whom I neither did,
nor do yet conceive to be of that number.

However, some would have it, that I went too far; but I suppose they
will now allow themselves mistaken.

I am sure I might easily have gone further; and I think I could not easily have fared worse.
And therefore I was no further affected with their proclamation,
and subsequent proceedings, than a good clergyman is with the sins
of the people.

And as to the poor printer, he is now gone to appear before a higher,
and before a righteous tribunal.

As my intention is only to lay before your great assemblies, the general wishes of the nation; and
as I have already declared it our principal wish that your first proceeding would be to examine
into the pernicious fraud of William Wood; so I must add, as the
universal opinion, that all schemes of commutation, composition, and
the like expedients, either avowed or implied, will be of the most
pernicious consequences to the public; against the dignity of a free
kingdom; and prove an encouragement to future adventurers in the same
destructive projects.

For, it is a maxim, which no man at present disputes, that even a connivance to admit one thousand
pounds in these halfpence, will produce, in time, the same ruinous effects, as if we openly
consented to admit a million. It were, therefore, infinitely more safe and eligible, to leave
things in the doubtful, melancholy state they are at present, (which,
however, God forbid) and trust entirely to the general aversion of
our people against this coin; using all honest endeavours to preserve,
continue, and increase that aversion, than submit to apply those palliatives
which weak, perfidious, or abject politicians, are, upon all occasions,
and in all diseases, so ready to administer.

In the small compass of my reading, (which, however, hath been more extensive than is usual
to men of my inferior calling) I have observed that grievances have
always preceded supplies; and if ever grievances had a title to such
a pre-eminence, it must be this of Wood; because it is not only the
greatest grievance that any country could suffer, but a grievance
of such a kind that, if it should take effect, would make it impossible
for us to give any supplies at all; except in adulterate copper; unless
a tax were laid for paying the civil and military lists, and the large
pensions, with real commodities instead of money; which, however,
might be liable to some few objections as well as difficulties: For
although the common soldiers might be content with beef and mutton,
and wool, and malt, and leather; yet I am in some doubt as to the
generals, the colonels, the numerous pensioners, the civil officers,
and others, who all live in England upon Irish pay; as well as those
few who reside among us only because they cannot help it.

    

    

    There is one particular, which although I have mentioned more than
once in some of my former papers, yet I cannot forbear to repeat,
and a little enlarge upon it; because I do not remember to have read
or heard of the like in the history of any age or country; neither
do I ever reflect upon it without the utmost astonishment.

    

    After the unanimous addresses to his Sacred Majesty, against this
patent of Wood, from both Houses of Parliament, which are the three
estates of the kingdom; and likewise an address from the Privy-council,
to whom, under the chief governors, the whole administration is entrusted;
the matter is referred to a committee of council in London.

    Wood, and his adherents, are heard on one side; and a few volunteers,
without any trust or direction from hence, on the other.

The question (as I remember) chiefly turned upon the want of halfpence
in Ireland: Witnesses are called on the behalf of Wood (of what credit
I have formerly shewn :) Upon the issue the patent is found good and
legal; all His Majesty's officers here, (not excepting the military)
commanded to be aiding and assisting to make it effectual.

The addresses of both Houses of Parliament, of the Privy-council;
and of the city of Dublin: The declarations of most counties and corporations
through the kingdom, are altogether laid aside, as of no weight, consequence,
or consideration whatsoever: And the whole kingdom of Ireland nonsuited,
in default of appearance; as if it were a private cause between John
Doe, plaintiff, and William Roe, defendant.

With great respect to those-honourable persons, the committee of council in London, I have
not understood them to be our governors, councillors, or judges. Neither did our case turn at all
upon the question, whether Ireland wanted halfpence or no. For there is no doubt, but we do
want both halfpence, gold, and silver; and we have numberless other
wants, and some that we are not so much as allowed to name; although
they are peculiar to this nation; to which no other is subject, whom
God hath blessed with religion and laws, or any degree of soil and
sunshine: But, for what demerits on our side, I am altogether in the
dark.

But, I do not remember, that our want of halfpence was either affirmed, or denied in any of
our addresses or declarations, against those of Wood: We alleged, the fraudulent obtaining
and executing his patent, the baseness of his metal, the prodigious sum to be coined, which might
be increased by stealth, from foreign importation and his own counterfeits,
as well as those at home; whereby we must infallibly lose all our
little gold and silver, and all our poor remainder of a very limited
and discouraged trade: We urged, that the patent was passed without
the least reference hither; and without mention of any security given
by Wood, to receive his own halfpence upon demand; both which are
contrary to all former proceedings in the like cases.

These, and many other arguments we offered; but still the patent
went on, and at this day our ruin would have been half completed;
if God, in His mercy, had not raised an universal detestation of these
halfpence, in the whole kingdom; with a firm resolution never to receive
them; since we are not under obligations to do so by any law, either
human or divine.

But, in the Name of God, and of all justice and piety; when the King's
Majesty was pleased that this patent should pass; is it not to be
understood, that he conceived, believed, and intended it as a gracious
act, for the good and benefit of his subjects, for the advantage of
a great and fruitful kingdom; of the most loyal kingdom upon earth,
where no hand or voice was ever lifted up against him; a kingdom where
the passage is not of three hours from Britain; and a kingdom where
Papists have less power, and less land, than in England?

Can it be denied, or doubted, that His Majesty's ministers understood and proposed the same
end, the good of this nation, when they advised the passing this patent? Can the person of
Wood be otherwise regarded, than as the instrument, the mechanic, the head-workman, to prepare
his furnace, his fuel, his metal, and his stamps? If I employ a shoe-boy, is it in view to his
advantage, or to my own convenience? I mention the person of William Wood alone, because no
other appears, and we are not to reason upon surmises; neither would
it avail, if they had a real foundation.

Allowing therefore, (for we cannot do less) that this patent, for the coining of halfpence, was
wholly intended, by a gracious king, and a wise public-spirited ministry,
for the advantage of Ireland; yet when the whole kingdom to a man,
for whose good the patent was designed, do, upon maturest consideration,
universally join, in openly declaring, protesting, addressing, petitioning,
against these halfpence, as the most ruinous project that ever was
set on foot, to complete the slavery and destruction of a poor innocent
country: Is it, was it, can it, or will it ever be a question, not
whether such a kingdom, or William Wood, should be a gainer; but whether
such a kingdom should be wholly undone, destroyed, sunk, depopulated,
made a scene of misery and desolation, for the sake of William Wood?

God, of His infinite mercy, avert this dreadful judgment; and it is our universal wish, that God
would put it into your hearts to be His instruments for so good a work.

For my own part, who am but one man, of obscure condition, I do solemnly declare, in the presence
of Almighty God, that I will suffer the most ignominious and torturing death, rather than submit
to receive this accursed coin, or any other that shall be liable to the same objections, until
they shall be forced upon me, by a law of my own country; and if that shall ever happen, I will
transport myself into some foreign land, and eat the bread of poverty among a free people.

Am I legally punishable for these expressions?

Shall another proclamation issue against me, because I presume to
take my country's part against William Wood; where her final destruction
is intended?

But, whenever you shall please to impose silence upon me, I will submit; because, I look upon
your unanimous voice to be the voice of the nation; and this I have been taught, and do believe
to be, in some manner, the voice of God.

The great ignominy of a whole kingdom, lying so long at mercy, under so vile an adversary, is
such a deplorable aggravation, that the utmost expressions of shame
and rage, are too low to set it forth; and therefore, I shall leave
it to receive such a resentment, as is worthy of a parliament.

It is likewise our universal wish, that His Majesty would grant liberty to coin halfpence in this
kingdom, for our own use; under such restrictions as a parliament here shall advise: Since
the power of coining even gold and silver, is possessed by every petty prince abroad; and was
always practised by Scotland, to the very time of the Union; yet surely Scotland, as to soil, climate,
and extent, is not, in itself, a fourth part the value of Ireland; (for Bishop Burnet says, it
is not above a fortieth part in value, to the rest of Britain) and with respect to the profit
that England gains from hence, not the forty thousandth part. Although I must confess, that a
mote in the eye, or a thorn in the side, is more dangerous and painful than a beam, or a spike
at a distance.

The histories of England, and of most other countries, abound in relating the miserable, and
sometimes the most tragical effects, from the abuses of coin; by debasing the metal, by lessening,
or enhancing the value upon occasions, to the public loss; of which we have an example, within
our own memory in England, and another very lately in France. It is the tenderest point of government,
affecting every individual, in the highest degree. When the value of money is arbitrary, or
unsettled; no man can well be said to have any property at all; nor is any wound so suddenly
felt, so hardly cured, or that leaves such deep and lasting scars behind it.

I conceive this poor unhappy island, to have a title to some indulgence from England; not only
upon the score of Christianity, natural equity, and the general rights of mankind; but chiefly
on account of that immense profit they receive from us; without which, that kingdom would
make a very different figure in Europe, from what it doth at present.

The rents of land in Ireland, since they have been of late so enormously raised, and screwed up, may
be computed to about two millions; whereof one-third part, at least, is directly transmitted to
those, who are perpetual absentees in England; as I find by a computation made with the assistance
of several skilful gentlemen.

The other articles by which we are altogether losers, and England a gainer; we found to amount
to almost as much more. I will only set down as many heads of them as I can remember; and leave
them to the consideration of those, who understand accounts better than I pretend to do.

The occasional absentees, for business, health, or diversion.

Three-fourths of the revenue of the chief governor, during his absence; which is usually four-fifths
of his government.

The whole revenue of the post-office.

The numerous pensions paid to persons in England.

The pay of the chief officers of the army absent in England, which
is a great sum.

Four commissioners of the revenue, always absent.

Civil employments very numerous, and of great income.

The vast charge of appeals to the House of Lords, and to the Court of Delegates.

Students at the Inns of Court, and the two Universities.

Eighty thousand pounds sent yearly to England, for coals; whereof the prime cost is nothing;
and therefore, the profit wholly theirs.

One hundred thousand pounds paid several years past, for corn sent over hither from England; the
effect of our own great wisdom in discouraging agriculture.

The kind liberty granted us of wearing Indian stuffs, and calicoes, to gratify the vanity and folly
of our women; which, beside the profit to England, is an unconceivable loss to us; forcing the
weavers to beg in our streets, or transport themselves to foreign countries.

The prodigious loss to us, and gain to England, by selling them all
our wool at their own rates; whereof the manufacture exceeds above
ten times the prime cost: A proceeding without example in the Christian
or heathen world.

Our own wool returned upon us, in English manufactures, to our infinite shame and damage; and the great
advantage of England.

The full profit of all our mines accruing to England; an effect of great negligence and stupidity.

An
affectation among us, of liking all kinds of goods made in England.

NOTE, Many of the above articles have been since particularly computed by another writer, to whose treatise
the reader is referred.[4]

[Footnote 4: The work referred to is "A List of the Absentees of Ireland, and the yearly value
of their estates and Incomes spent abroad," by Thomas Prior, Esq.


Mrs. Graem knows about preparing rooms; and I have given James orders for meeting the train
with the brougham, and the luggage-cart. The duchess dislikes motors. When her Grace arrives,
you can show her into the library. We will dine in the dining-room at a quarter past eight.
Meanwhile, Mr. Dalmain and myself are particularly engaged just now, and must not be disturbed
on any account, until the duchess's arrival. You quite understand?"

"Yes, miss-m'lady," stammered Simpson. He had been boot-boy in a ducal household early in his
career; and he considered duchesses' nieces to be people before whom one should bow down.

Jane smiled. "'Miss' is quite sufficient, Simpson," she said; and swept towards the library.

Garth heard her enter, and close the door; and his quick ear caught the rustle of a train.

"Hullo, Miss Gray," he said. "Packed your uniform?"

"Yes," said Jane. "I told you I was packing."

She came slowly across the room, and stood on the hearth-rug looking down at him. He was in
full evening-dress; just as at Shenstone on that memorable night; and, as he sat well back
in his deep arm-chair, one knee crossed over the other, she saw the crimson line of his favourite
silk socks.

Jane stood looking down upon him. Her hour had come at last. But even now she must, for his
sake, be careful and patient.

"I did not hear the song," she said.

"No," replied Garth. "At first, I forgot. And when I remembered, I had been thinking of other
things, and somehow--ah, Miss Gray! I cannot sing to-night. My soul is dumb with longing."

"I know," said Jane, gently; "and I am going to sing to you."

A faint look of surprise crossed Garth's face. "Do you sing?" he asked. "Then why have you
not sung before?"

"When I arrived," said Jane, "Dr. Rob asked me whether I played. I said: 'A little.' Thereupon
he concluded I sang a little, too; and he forbade me, most peremptorily, either to play a little;
or sing a little, to you. He said he did not want you driven altogether mad."

Garth burst out laughing.

"How like old Robbie," he said. "And, in spite of his injunctions, are you going to take the
risk, and 'sing a little,' to me, to-night?"

"No," said Jane. "I take no risks. I am going to sing you one song. Here is the purple cord,
at your right hand. There is nothing between you and the piano; and you are facing towards
it. If you want to stop me--you can come."

She walked to the instrument, and sat down.

Over the top of the grand piano, she could see him, leaning back in his chair; a slightly amused
smile playing about his lips. He was evidently still enjoying the humour of Dr. Rob's prohibition.

The Rosary has but one opening chord. She struck it; her eyes upon his face. She saw him sit
up, instantly; a look of surprise, expectation, bewilderment, gathering there.

Then she began to sing. The deep rich voice, low and vibrant, as the
softest tone of 'cello, thrilled into the startled silence.
      Each hour a pearl--"

Jane got no further.

Garth had risen. He spoke no word; but he was coming blindly over to the piano. She turned
on the music-stool, her arms held out to receive him. Now he had found the woodwork. His hand
crashed down upon the bass. Now he had found her. He was on his knees, his arms around her.
Hers enveloped him--, yearning, tender, hungry with the repressed longing of all those hard weeks.

He lifted his sightless face to hers, for one moment. "You?" he said. "YOU? You--all the time?"

Then he hid his face in the soft lace at her breast.

"Oh, my boy, my darling!" said Jane, tenderly; holding the dear head close. "Yes; I, all the
time; all the time near him, in his loss and pain. Could I have stopped away? But, oh, Garth!
What it is, at last to hold you, and touch you, and feel you here! ... Yes, it is I. Oh, my
beloved, are you not quite sure? Who else could hold you thus? ... Take care, my darling! Come
over to the couch, just here; and sit beside me."

Garth rose, and raised her, without loosing her; and she guided herself and him to a safer
seat close by. But there again he flung himself upon his knees, and held her; his arms around
her waist; his face hidden in the shelter of her bosom.

"Ah,--darling, darling," said Jane softly, and her hands stole up behind his head, with a touch
of unspeakable protective tenderness; "it has been so sweet to wait upon my boy; and help him
in his darkness; and shield him from unnecessary pain; and be always there, to meet his every
need. But I could not come myself--until he knew; and understood; and had forgiven--no, not
'forgiven'; understood, and yet still LOVED. For he does now understand? And he does forgive?
... Oh, Garth! ... Oh--hush, my darling! ... You frighten me! ... No, I will never leave you;
never, never! ... Oh, can't you understand, my beloved? ... Then I must tell you more plainly.
Darling,--do be still, and listen. Just for a few days we must be as we have been; only my
boy will know it is I who am near him. Aunt 'Gina is coming this evening. She will be here
in half an hour. Then, as soon as possible we will get a special license; and we will be married,
Garth; and then--" Jane paused; and the man who knelt beside her, held his breath to listen--"and
then," continued Jane in a low tender voice, which gathered in depth of sacred mystery, yet
did not falter--"then it will be my highest joy, to be always with my husband, night and day."

A long sweet silence. The tempest of emotion in her arms was hushed to rest. The eternal voice
of perfect love had whispered: "Peace, be still"; and there was a great calm.

At last Garth lifted his head. "Always? Always together?" he said. "Ah, that will be 'perpetual
light!'"

      *      *      *      *      *

When Simpson, pale with importance, flung open the library door, and announced: "Her Grace,
the Duchess of Meldrum," Jane was seated at the piano, playing soft dreamy chords; and a slim
young man, in evening dress, advanced with eager hospitality to greet his guest.

The duchess either did not see, or chose to ignore the guiding cord. She took his outstretched
hand warmly in both her own.

"Goodness gracious, my dear Dal! How you surprise me! I expected to find you blind! And here
you are striding about, just your old handsome self!"

"Dear Duchess," said Garth, and stooping, kissed the kind old hands still holding his; "I cannot
see you, I am sorry to say; but I don't feel very blind to-night. My darkness has been lightened
by a joy beyond expression."

"Oh ho! So that's the way the land lies! Now which are you going to marry? The nurse,--who,
I gather, is a most respectable young person, and highly recommended; or that hussy, Jane;
who, without the smallest compunction, orders her poor aunt from one end of the kingdom to
the other, to suit her own convenience?"

Jane came over from the piano, and slipped her hand through her lover's arm.

"Dear Aunt 'Gina," she said; "you know you loved coming; because you enjoy a mystery, and like
being a dear old 'deus ex machina,' at the right moment. And he is going to marry them both;
because they both love him far too dearly ever to leave him again; and he seems to think he
cannot do without either."

The duchess looked at the two radiant faces; one sightless; the other, with glad proud eyes
for both; and her own filled with tears.

"Hoity-toity!" she said. "Are we in Salt Lake City?  Well, we always thought one girl would
not do for Dal; he would need the combined perfections of several; and he appears to think
he has found them. God bless you both, you absurdly happy people; and I will bless you, too;
but not until I have dined. Now, ring for that very nervous person, with side-whiskers; and
tell him I want my maid, and my room, and I want to know where they have put my toucan. I had
to bring him, Jane. He is so LOVING, dear bird! I knew you would think him in the way; but
I really could not leave him behind."

CHAPTER XXXVII

"IN THE FACE OF THIS CONGREGATION"

The society paragraphs would have described it as "a very quiet wedding," when Garth and Jane,
a few days later, were pronounced "man and wife together," in the little Episcopal church among
the hills.

Perhaps, to those who were present, it stands out rather as an unusual wedding, than as a quiet
one.

To Garth and Jane the essential thing was to be married, and left to themselves, with as little
delay as possible. They could not be induced to pay any attention to details as to the manner
in which this desired end was to be attained. Jane left it entirely to the doctor, in one practical
though casual sentence: "Just make sure it is valid, Dicky; and send us in the bills."

The duchess, being a true conservative, early began mentioning veils, orange-blossom, and white
satin; but Jane said: "My dear Aunt! Fancy me--in orange-blossom! I should look like a Christmas
pantomime. And I never wear veils, even in motors; and white satin is a form of clothing I
have always had the wisdom to avoid."

"Then in what do you intend to be married, unnatural girl?" inquired the duchess.

"In whatever I happen to put on, that morning," replied Jane, knotting the silk of a soft crimson
cord she was knitting; and glancing out of the window, to where Garth sat smoking, on the terrace.

"Have you a time-table?" inquired her Grace of Meldrum, with dangerous calmness. "And can you
send me to the station this afternoon?"

"We can always send to the station, at a moment's notice," said Jane, working in a golden strand,
and considering the effect. "But where are you going, dear Aunt 'Gina? You know Deryck and
Flower arrive this evening."

"I am washing my hands of you, and going South," said the duchess, wrathfully.

"Don't do that, dear," said Jane, placidly. "You have washed your hands of me so often; and,
like the blood of King Duncan of Scotland, I am upon them still. 'All the perfumes of Arabia
will not sweeten this little hand.'" Then, raising her voice: "Garth, if you want to walk,
just give a call. I am here, talking over my trousseau with Aunt 'Gina."

"What is a trousseau?" came back in Garth's happy voice.

"A thing you get into to be married," said Jane.

"Then let's get into it quickly," shouted Garth, with enthusiasm.

"Dear Aunt," said Jane, "let us make a compromise. I have some quite nice clothes upstairs,
including Redfern tailor-mades, and several uniforms. Let your maid look through them, and
whatever you select, and she puts out in readiness on my wedding morning, I promise to wear."

This resulted in Jane appearing at the church in a long blue cloth coat and skirt, handsomely
embroidered with gold, and suiting her large figure to perfection; a deep yellow vest of brocaded
silk; and old lace ruffles at neck and wrists.

Garth was as anxious about his wedding garments, as Jane had been indifferent over hers; but
he had so often been in requisition as best-man at town weddings, that Simpson had no difficulty
in turning him out in the acme of correct bridal attire. And very handsome he looked, as he
stood waiting at the chancel steps; not watching for his bride; but obviously listening for
her; for, as Jane came up the church on Deryck's arm, Garth slightly turned his head and smiled.

The duchess--resplendent in purple satin and ermine, with white plumes in her bonnet, and many
jewelled chains depending from her, which rattled and tinkled, in the silence of the church,
every time she moved--was in a front pew on the left, ready to give her niece away.

In a corresponding seat, on the opposite side, as near as possible to the bridegroom, sat Margery
Graem, in black silk, with a small quilted satin bonnet, and a white lawn kerchief folded over
the faithful old heart which had beaten in tenderness for Garth since his babyhood. She turned
her head anxiously, every time the duchess jingled; but otherwise kept her eyes fixed on the
marriage service, in a large-print prayer-book in her lap. Margery was not used to the Episcopal
service, and she had her "doots" as to whether it could possibly be gone through correctly,
by all parties concerned. In fact this anxiety of old Margery's increased so painfully when
the ceremony actually commenced, that it took audible form; and she repeated all the answers
of the bridal pair, in an impressive whisper, after them.

Dr. Rob, being the only available bachelor, did duty as best-man; Jane having stipulated that
he should not be intrusted with the ring; her previous observations leading her to conclude
that he would most probably slip it unconsciously on to his finger, and then search through
all his own pockets and all Garth's; and begin taking up the church matting, before it occurred
to him to look at his hand. Jane would not have minded the diversion, but she did object to
any delay. So the ring went to church in Garth's waistcoat pocket, where it had lived since
Jane brought it out from Aberdeen; and, without any fumbling or hesitation, was quietly laid
by him upon the open book.

Dr. Rob had charge of the fees for clerk, verger, bell-ringers, and every person, connected
with the church, who could possibly have a tip pressed upon them.

Garth was generous in his gladness, and eager to do all things in a manner worthy of the great
gift made fully his that day. So Dr. Rob was well provided with the wherewithal; and this he
jingled in his pockets as soon as the exhortation commenced, and his interest in the proceedings
resulted in his fatal habit of unconsciousness of his own actions. Thus he and the duchess
kept up a tinkling duet, each hearing the other, and not their own sounds. So the duchess glared
at Dr. Rob; and Dr. Rob frowned at the duchess; and old Margery looked tearfully at both.

Deryck Brand, the tallest man in the church, his fine figure showing to advantage in the long
frock coat with silk facings, which Lady Brand had pronounced indispensable to the occasion,
retired to a seat beside his wife, just behind old Margery, as soon as he had conducted Jane
to Garth's side. As Jane removed her hand from his arm, she turned and smiled at him; and a
long look passed between them. All the memories, all the comprehension, all the trust and affection
of years, seemed to concentrate in that look; and Lady Brand's eyes dropped to her dainty white
and gold prayer-book. She had never known jealousy; the doctor had never given her any possible
reason for acquiring that cruel knowledge. His Flower bloomed for him; and her fragrance alone
made his continual joy. All other lovely women were mere botanical specimens, to be examined
and classified. But Flower had never quite understood the depth of the friendship between her
husband and Jane, founded on the associations and aspirations of childhood and early youth,
and a certain similarity of character which would not have wedded well, but which worked out
into a comradeship, providing a source of strength for both. Of late, Flower had earnestly
tried to share, even while failing to comprehend, it.

Perhaps she, in her pale primrose gown, with daffodils at her waist, and sunbeams in her golden
hair, was the most truly bridal figure in the church. As the doctor turned from the bride,
and sought his place beside her in the pew, he looked at the sweet face, bent so demurely over
the prayer-book, and thought he had never seen his wife look more entrancingly lovely. Unconsciously
his hand strayed to the white rosebud she had fastened in his coat as they strolled round the
conservatory together that morning. Flower, glancing up, surprised his look. She did not think
it right to smile in church; but a delicate wave of colour swept over her face, and her cheek
leaned as near the doctor's shoulder, as the size of her hat would allow. Flower felt quite
certain that was a look the doctor had never given Jane.

The service commenced. The short-sighted clergyman, very nervous, and rather overwhelmed by
the unusual facts of a special license, a blind bridegroom, and the reported presence of a
duchess, began reading very fast, in an undertone, which old Margery could not follow, though
her finger, imprisoned in unwonted kid, hurried along the lines. Then conscious of his mistake,
he slowed down, and became too impressive; making long nerve-straining pauses, fled in by the
tinkling of the duchess, and the chinking in Dr. Rob's trousers-pockets.

Thus they arrived at the demand upon the congregation, if they could show any just cause why
these two persons might not lawfully be joined together, NOW to speak--and the pause here was
so long, and so over-powering, that old Margery said "nay"; and then gave a nervous sob. The
bridegroom turned and smiled in the direction of the voice; and the doctor, leaning forward,
laid his hand on the trembling shoulder, and whispered: "Steady, old friend. It is all right."

There was no pause whatever after the solemn charge to the couple; so if Garth and Jane had
any secrets to disclose, they had perforce to keep them for after discussion.

Then Jane found her right hand firmly clasped in Garth's; and no inadequacy of the Church's
mouth-piece could destroy the exquisite beauty of the Church's words, in which Garth was asked
if he would take her to be his own.

To this, Garth, and old Margery, said they would; with considerable display of emotion.

Then the all-comprehensive question was put to Jane; the Church seeming to remind her gently,
that she took him in his blindness, with all which that might entail.

Jane said: "I will"; and the deep, tender voice, was the voice of The Rosary.

When the words were uttered, Garth lifted the hand he held, and reverently kissed it.

This was not in the rubric, and proved disconcerting to the clergyman. He threw up his head
suddenly, and inquired: "Who giveth this woman to be married to this man?" And as, for the
moment, there was no response, he repeated, the question wildly; gazing into distant corners
of the church.

Then the duchess, who up to that time had been feeling a little bored, realised that her moment
had come, and rejoiced. She sailed out of her pew, and advanced to the chancel step. "My dear
good man," she said; "I give my niece away; having come north at considerable inconvenience
for that express purpose. Now, go on. What do we do next?"

Dr. Rob broke into an uncontrollable chuckle. The duchess lifted her lorgnette, and surveyed
him. Margery searched her prayer-book in vain for the duchess's response. It did not appear
to be there.

Flower looked in distressed appeal at the doctor. But the doctor was studying, with grave intentness,
a stencilled pattern on the chancel roof; and paid no attention to Flower's nudge.

The only people completely unconscious of anything unusual in the order of proceedings appeared
to be the bride and bridegroom. They were taking each other "in the sight of God, and in the
face of this congregation." They were altogether absorbed in each other, standing together
in the sight of God; and the deportment of "this congregation" was a matter they scarcely noticed.
"People always behave grotesquely at weddings," Jane had said to Garth, beforehand; "and ours
will be no exception to the general rule. But we can close our eyes, and stand together in
Sightless Land; and Deryck will take care it is valid."

"Not in Sightless Land, my beloved," said Garth; "but in the Land where they need no candle
neither light of the sun. However, and wherever, I take YOU as my wife, I shall be standing
on the summit of God's heaven."

So they stood; and in their calmness the church hushed to silence. The service proceeded; and
the minister, who had not known how to keep them from clasping hands when the rubric did not
require it, found no difficulty in inducing them to do so again.

So they took each other--these two, who were so deeply each other's already--solemnly, reverently,
tenderly, in the sight of God, they took each other, according to God's holy ordinance; and
the wedding ring, type of that eternal love which has neither beginning nor ending, passed
from Garth's pocket, over the Holy Book, on to Jane's finger.

When it was over, she took his arm; and leaning upon it, so that he could feel she leaned,
guided him to the vestry.

Afterwards, in the brougham, for those few precious minutes, when husband and wife find themselves
alone for the first time, Garth turned to Jane with an eager naturalness, which thrilled her
heart as no studied speech could have done. He did not say: "My wife." That unique moment had
been theirs, three years before.

"Dearest," he said, "how soon will they all go? How soon shall we be quite alone? Oh, why couldn't
they drive to the station from the church?"

Jane looked at her watch. "Because we must lunch them, dear," she said. "Think how good they
have all been. And we could not start our married life by being inhospitable. It is just one
o'clock; and we ordered luncheon at half-past. Their train leaves the station at half-past
four. In three hours, Garth, we shall be alone."

"Shall I be able to behave nicely for three hours?" exclaimed Garth, boyishly.

"You must," said Jane, "or I shall fetch Nurse Rosemary."

"Oh hush!" he said. "All that is too precious, to-day, for chaff. Jane"--he turned suddenly,
and laid his hand on hers--"Jane! Do you understand that you are now--actually--my wife?"

Jane took his hand, and held it against her heart, just where she so often had pressed her
own, when she feared he would hear it throbbing.

"My darling," she said, "I do not understand it. But I know--ah, thank God!--I know it to be true."

CHAPTER XXXVIII

PERPETUAL LIGHT

Moonlight on the terrace--silvery, white, serene. Garth and Jane had stepped out into the brightness;
and, finding the night so warm and still, and the nightingales filling the woods and hills
with soft-throated music, they moved their usual fireside chairs close to the parapet, and
sat there in restful comfort, listening to the sweet sounds of the quiet night.

The solitude was so perfect; the restfulness so complete. Garth had removed the cushion seat
from his chair, and placed it on the gravel; and sat at his wife's feet leaning against her
knees. She stroked his hair and brow softly, as they talked; and every now and then he put
up his hand, drew hers to his lips, and kissed the ring he had never seen.

Long tender silences fell between them. Now that they were at last alone, thoughts too deep,
joys too sacred for words, trembled about them; and silence seemed to express more than speech.
Only, Garth could not bear Jane to be for a moment out of reach of his hand. What to another
would have been: "I cannot let her out of my sight," was, to him, "I cannot let her be beyond
my touch." And Jane fully understood this; and let him feel her every moment within reach.
And the bliss of this was hers as well as his; for sometimes it had seemed to her as if the
hunger in her heart, caused by those long weeks of waiting, when her arms ached for him, and
yet she dared not even touch his hand, would never be appeased.

"Sweet, sweet, sweet--thrill," sang a nightingale in the wood. And Garth whistled an exact
imitation.

"Oh, darling," said Jane, "that reminds me; there is something I do so want you to sing to
me. I don't know what it is; but I think you will remember. It was on that Monday evening,
after I had seen the pictures, and Nurse Rosemary had described them to you. Both our poor
hearts were on the rack; and I went up early in order to begin my letter of confession; but
you told Simpson not to come for you until eleven. While I was writing in the room above, I
could hear you playing in the library. You played many things I knew--music we had done together,
long ago. And then a theme I had never heard crept in, and caught my ear at once, because it
was quite new to me, and so marvellously sweet. I put down my pen and listened. You played
it several times, with slight variations, as if trying to recall it. And then, to my joy, you
began to sing. I crossed the room; softly opened my window, and leaned out. I could hear some
of the words; but not all. Two lines, however, reached me distinctly, with such penetrating,
tender sadness, that I laid my head against the window-frame, feeling as if I could write no
more, and wait no longer, but must go straight to you at once."

Garth drew down the dear hand which had held the pen that night; turned it over, and softly
kissed the palm.

"What were they, Jane?" he said.

   "'Lead us, O Christ, when all is gone,
     Safe home at last.'"

"And oh, my darling, the pathos of those words, 'when all is gone'! Whoever wrote that music,
had been through suffering such as ours. Then came a theme of such inspiring hopefulness and
joy, that I arose, armed with fresh courage; took up my pen, and went on with my letter. Again
two lines had reached me:"

     "'Where Thou, Eternal Light of Light,
       Art Lord of All.'"

"What is it, Garth? And whose? And where did you hear it? And will you sing it to me now, darling?
I have a sudden wish that you should sing it, here and now; and I can't wait!"

Garth sat up, and laughed--a short happy laugh, in which all sorts of emotions were mingled.

"Jane! I like to hear you say you can't wait. It isn't like you; because you are so strong
and patient. And yet it is so deliciously like you, if you FEEL it, to SAY it. I found the
words in the Anthem-book at Worcester Cathedral, this time last year, at even-song. I copied
them into my pocket-book, during the reading of the first lesson, I am ashamed to say; but
it was all about what Balak said unto Balaam, and Balaam said unto Balak,--so I hope I may
be forgiven! They seemed to me some of the most beautiful words I had ever read; and, fortunately,
I committed them to memory. Of course, I will sing them to you, if you wish, here and now.
But I am afraid the air will sound rather poor without the accompaniment. However, not for
worlds would I move from here, at this moment."

So sitting up; in the moonlight, with his back to Jane, his face uplifted, and his hands clasped
around one knee, Garth sang. Much practice had added greatly to the sweetness and flexibility
of his voice; and he rendered perfectly the exquisite melody to which the words were set.

Jane listened with an overflowing heart.

   "The radiant morn hath passed away,
    And spent too soon her golden store;
    The shadows of departing day
    Creep on once more.
   "Our life is but a fading dawn,
    Its glorious noon, how quickly past!
    Lead us, O Christ, when all is gone,
    Safe home at last.
   "Where saints are clothed in spotless white,
    And evening shadows never fall;
    where Thou, Eternal Light of Light,
    Art Lord of All."

The triumphant worship of the last line rang out into the night, and died away. Garth loosed
his hands, and leaned back, with a sigh of vast content, against his wife's knees.

"Beautiful!" she said. "Beautiful! Garthie--perhaps it is because YOU sang it; and to-night;--but
it seems to me the most beautiful thing I ever heard. Ah, and how appropriate for us; on this
day, of all days." 

Now fold up the front margin of each wing, along the dotted lines a, a, a, a, to form a stiff
rim to represent the rim of bone along the front edge of a bird's wing, and cut out a small strip
of wood, about as thick as a match and twice as long, and run this
through the two slits, b, b, to represent the body of the bird.

If you hold this model about three feet from the ground, and allow it to fall gently, you will
see that, instead of falling straight to the ground, it will slide forward, and strike the ground
two or three feet ahead of you. It is really its weight which causes it to do this, so that
the statement that a bird flies by its own weight is strictly true.

This is true, also, of insects and bats.

They all have wings with stiff front edges, and flexible hind edges which bend and allow the air
to pass out, so that flying is nothing but sliding down a hill made
of air.

A bird rises, then, by flapping its wings, and it flies by falling back toward the earth and
sliding forward at the same time.

At the end of each stroke of its wings it has raised itself enough to make up for the distance
it has fallen since the last stroke, and accordingly it stays at
the same height and moves forward in a seemingly straight line.

But if you watch the flight of those birds which flap their wings
slowly, such as the woodpecker, you can see them rise and fall, and
will have no trouble in seeing that their path is not really a straight
line, but is made up of curves; although most birds flap their wings
so rapidly that they have no time to fall through a space great enough
to be seen.

Birds also make use of the wind to aid them in flight, and by holding their wings inclined
like a kite, so that the wind shall slide out under them, they can sail great distances without
flapping their wings at all.
 And then
those words came to my mind: 'Lead us, O Christ, when all is gone, safe home at last.' All
seemed gone indeed; and there seemed no home to hope for, in this world." He raised himself
a little, and then leaned back again; so that his head rested against her bosom. "Safe home
at last," he said, and stayed quite still for a moment, in utter content. Then remembered what
he was telling her, and went on eagerly.

"So those words came back to me; and to get away from despairing thoughts, I began reciting
them, to an accompaniment of chords."

"And then--suddenly, Jane--I SAW it, pictured in sound! Just as I used to SEE a sunset, in
light and shadow, and then transfer it to my canvas in shade and colour,-so I heard a SUNSET
in harmony, and I felt the same kind of tingle in my fingers as I used to feel when inspiration
came, and I could catch up my brushes and palette. So I played the sunset. And then I got the
theme for life fading, and what one feels when the glorious noon is suddenly plunged into darkness;
and then the prayer. Each broad vane runs under the narrow vane of the feather beside it, so that,
when the wing is moved downward, each feather is pressed up against the stiff narrow vane of the
one beside it, and the whole wing forms a solid sheet like a blind
with the slats closed. That was why you heard it
over and over. I wasn't trying to remember. I was gathering it into final form. I am awfully
glad you like it, Jane; because if I show you how the harmonies go, perhaps you could write
it down. And it would mean such a lot to me, if you thought it worth singing. I could play
the accompaniment--Hullo! Is it beginning to rain? I felt a drop on my cheek, and another on
my hand."

No answer. Then he felt the heave, with which Jane caught her breath; and realised that she
was weeping.

In a moment he was on his knees in front of her. "Jane! Why, what is the matter; Sweet? What
on earth--? Have I said anything to trouble you? Jane, what is it? O God, why can't I see her!"

Jane mastered her emotion; controlling her voice, with an immense effort. Then drew him down
beside her.

"Hush, darling, hush! It is only a great joy--a wonderful surprise. Lean against me again,
and I will try to tell you. It is there stated that it was written "before the Lord Carteret came
over, and soon after the fourth Drapier's letter." If Faulkner be correct, and he probably is,
the subject matter of the letter shows that it was not to be printed
until after the agitation had subsided. The creative
faculty is so strong in you, that when one outlet was denied it, it burst forth through another.
When you had your sight, you created by the hand and EYE. Now, you will create by the hand
and EAR. The power is the same. It merely works through another channel. But oh, think what
it means! Think! The world lies before you once more!"

Garth laughed, and put up his hand to the dear face, still wet with thankful tears.

"Oh, bother the world!" he said. "I don't want the world. I only want my wife." 

If he gave way to popular opinion at all, it was because it was either expedient or beneficial
to the English interest. If he urged, as he did, the founding of Protestant Charter schools,
it was because this would strengthen the English power. The better could she wrap him round with the greatness of her tenderness; shield
him from every jar or disillusion; and help him to make the most of his great gifts.

"I know, darling," she said. "And you have her. She is just ALL YOURS. But think of the wonderful
future. Thank God, I know enough of the technical part, to write the scores of your compositions.
And, Garth,--fancy going together to noble cathedrals, and hearing your anthems sung; and to
concerts where the most perfect voices in the world will be doing their utmost adequately to
render your songs. Fancy thrilling hearts with pure harmony, stirring souls with tone-pictures;
just as before you used to awaken in us all, by your wonderful paintings, an appreciation and
comprehension of beauty."

Garth raised his head. "Is it really as good as that, Jane?" he said.

"Dear," answered Jane, earnestly, "I can only tell you, that when you sang it first, and I
had not the faintest idea it was yours, I said to myself: 'It is the most beautiful thing I
ever heard.'"

"I am glad," said Garth, simply. "And now, let's talk of something else. Oh, I say, Jane! The
present is too wonderful, to leave any possible room for thoughts about the future. Do talk
about the present."

Jane smiled; and it was the smile of "The Wife"--mysterious; compassionate; tender; self-surrendering.
She leaned over him, and rested her cheek upon his head.

"Yes, darling. We will talk of this very moment, if you wish. You begin."

"Look at the house, and describe it to me, as you see it in the moonlight."

"Very grey, and calm, and restful-looking. And so home-like, Garthie."

"Are there lights in the windows?"

"Yes. The library lights are just as we left them. The French window is standing wide open.
The pedestal lamp, under a crimson silk shade, looks very pretty from here, shedding a warm
glow over the interior. Then, I can see one candle in the dining-room. I think Simpson is putting
away silver."

"Any others, Jane?"

"Yes, darling. There is a light in the Oriel chamber. I can see Margery moving to and fro.
She seems to be arranging my things, and giving final touches. There is also a light in your
room, next door. Ah, now she has gone through. I see her standing and looking round to make
sure all is right. Dear faithful old heart! Garth, how sweet it is to be at home to-day; served
and tended by those who really love us."

"I am so glad you feel that," said Garth. "I half feared you might regret not having an ordinary
honeymoon--And yet, no! I wasn't really afraid of that, or of anything. Just, together at last,
was all we wanted. Wasn't it, my wife?"

"All."

A clock in the house struck nine.

"Dear old clock," said Garth, softly. "I used to hear it strike nine, when I was a little chap
in my crib, trying to keep awake until my mother rustled past; and went into her room. The
door between her room and mine used to stand ajar, and I could see her candle appear in a long
streak upon my ceiling. When I saw that streak, I fell asleep immediately. It was such a comfort
to know she was there; and would not go down again. Jane, do you like the Oriel chamber?"

"Yes, dear. It is a lovely room; and very sacred because it was hers. Do you know, Aunt Georgina
insisted upon seeing it, Garth; and said it ought to be whitened and papered. But I would not
hear of that; because the beautiful old ceiling is hand-painted, and so are the walls; and
I was certain you had loved those paintings, as a little boy; and would remember them now."

"Ah, yes," said Garth, eagerly. "A French artist stayed here, and did them. Water and rushes,
and the most lovely flamingoes; those on the walls standing with their feet in the water; and
those on the ceiling, flying with wings outspread, into a pale green sky, all over white billowy
clouds. Jane, I believe I could walk round that room, blindfold--no! I mean, as I am now; and
point out the exact spot where each flamingo stands."

"You shall," said Jane, tenderly. For those, who, in the common phrase, do not "come hither to learn
the language," would never change a better country for a worse, to receive brass instead of gold.

[Footnote
17: Hugh Boulter (1672-1742) was appointed Archbishop of Armagh,
August 31st, 1724.

He had been a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, and had served the King as chaplain in Hanover,
in 1719. In this latter year he was promoted to the Bishopric of Bristol, and the Deanery of
Christ Church, Oxford. His appointment as Primate of Ireland, was in accordance with Walpole's plan
for governing Ireland from England. Walpole had no love for Carteret, and no faith in his power
or willingness to aid him in his policy. Indeed, Carteret was sent to Ireland to be got out of the
way. He was governor nominally; the real governor being Walpole in the person of the new Primate.
What were Boulter's instructions may be gathered from the manner in which he carried out his purpose.
Of a strong character and of untiring energy, Boulter set about his work in a fashion which showed that
Walpole had chosen well. Nothing of any importance that transpired in Ireland, no fact of any
interest about the individuals in office, no movement of any suspected or suspicious person
escaped his vigilance.

His letters testify to an unabating zeal for the English government of Irish affairs by Englishmen
in the English interest.

His perseverance knew no obstacles; he continued against all difficulties
in his dogged and yet able manner to establish some order out of the
chaos of Ireland's condition.

But his government was the outcome of a profound conviction that
only in the interest of England should Ireland be governed.

If Ireland could be made prosperous and contented, so much more good would accrue to England.
 Oh, Jane--" He released himself from the pressure of those restraining hands, and lifted
his adoring face to hers.

Then, suddenly, Jane broke down. "Ah, darling," she said, "take me away from this horrible
white moonlight! I cannot bear it. It reminds me of Shenstone. It reminds me of the wrong I
did you. It seems a separating thing between you and me--this cruel brightness which you cannot
share."

Her tears fell on his upturned fate.

Then Garth sprang to his feet. The sense of manhood and mastery; the right of control, the
joy of possession, arose within him. Even in his blindness, he was the stronger. Even in his
helplessness, for the great essentials, Jane must lean on him. He raised her gently, put his
arms about her, and stood there, glorified by his great love.

"Hush, sweetest wife," he said. "Neither light nor darkness can separate between you and me:
This quiet moonlight cannot take you from me; but in the still, sweet darkness you will feel
more completely my own, because it will hold nothing we cannot share. Come with me to the library,
and we will send away the lamps, and close the curtains; and you shall sit on the couch near
the piano, where you sat, on that wonderful evening when I found you, and when I almost frightened
my brave Jane. But she will not be frightened now, because she is so my own; and I may say
what I like; and do what I will; and she must not threaten me with Nurse Rosemary; because
it is Jane I want--Jane, Jane; just ONLY Jane! Come in, beloved; and I, who see as clearly
in the dark as in the light, will sit and play THE ROSARY for you; and then Veni, Creator Spiritus;
and I will sing you the verse which has been the secret source of peace, and the sustaining
power of my whole inner life, through the long, hard years, apart."

"Now," whispered Jane. "Now, as we go."

Thus, leaning on her husband; yet guiding him as she leaned; Jane passed to the perfect happiness
of her wedded home.

