"There's my bonny boy!" said Bertie, with pride; and he touched up the black gelding. Uneasiness
had left both of them. Cambridge was manifestly impossible; an error in judgment; food compelled
them to seek the Bird-in-Hand. "We'll try Quincy, anyhow," Bertie said. Billy suggested that
they inquire of people on the road. This provided a new sporting event: they could bet upon
the answers. Now, the roads, not populous at noon, had grown solitary in the sweetness of the
long twilight. Voices of birds there were; and little, black, quick brooks, full to the margin
grass, shot under the roadway through low bridges. Then he had passed his destination; he was
now in the Fortieth Century, but the indicator was slowing. The hairline crossed the Thirtieth
Century, the Twentieth, the Fifteenth, the Tenth. He wondered what had gone wrong, but he had
recovered from his fright by this time. When this insane machine stopped, as it must around
the First Century of the Atomic Era, he would investigate, make repairs, then shift forward to
his target-point.

Hradzka was determined upon the Fifty-Second Century; he had made
a special study of the history of that period, had learned the language
spoken then, and he understood the methods necessary to gain power
over the natives of that time.

The indicator-disc came to a stop, in the First Century. He switched on the magnifier and leaned
forward to look; he had emerged into normal time in the year 10 of the Atomic Era, a decade
after the first uranium-pile had gone into operation, and seven years after the first atomic
bombs had been exploded in warfare. The altimeter showed that he was hovering at eight thousand
feet above ground-level.

Slowly, he cut out the antigrav, letting the "time machine" down easily. He knew that there had
been no danger of materializing inside anything; the New Tower had been built to put it above
anything that had occupied that space-point at any moment within history, or legend, or even the
geological knowledge of man. What lay below, however, was uncertain. It was night--the visi-screen
showed only a star-dusted, moonless-sky, and dark shadows below.
He snapped another switch; for a few micro-seconds a beam of intense
light was turned on, automatically photographing the landscape under
him. A second later, the developed picture was projected upon another
screen; it showed only wooded mountains and a barren, brush-grown
valley. Now you go along and turn in the first right-hand turn, and I'll
be up with you soon. Maybe you might make room for the trout." Room for him as well, they assured
him; they were in luck to find him, they explained. "Well, I guess I'll trust my neck with
you," he said to Bertie, the skillful driver; "'tain't five minutes' risk." The buggy leaned,
and its springs bent as he climbed in, wedging his mature bulk between their slim shapes. The
gelding looked round the shaft at them. "Protestin', are you?" he said to it. "These light-weight
stoodents spile you!" So the gelding went on, expressing, however, by every line of its body,
a sense of outraged justice. The boys related their difficult search, and learned that any
mention of the name of Diggs would have brought them straight. "Bill Higgs of the Bird-in-Hand
was my father, and my grandf'ther, and his father; and has been me sence I come back from the
war and took the business in '65. I'm not commonly to be met out this late. About fifteen minutes
earlier is my time for gettin' back, unless I'm plannin' for a jamboree. But to-night I got
to settin' and watchin' that sunset, and listenin' to a darned red-winged blackbird, and I
guess Mrs. Higgs has decided to expect me somewheres about noon to-morrow or Friday. Say, did
Johnnie send you? "When he found that John had in a measure been responsible for their journey,
he filled with gayety. "Oh, Johnnie's a bird!" said he. "He's that demure on first appearance.
Walked in last evening and wanted dinner. Did he tell you what he ate? Guess he left out what
he drank. Yes, he's demure."

You might suppose that upon their landlord's safe and sober return fifteen minutes late, instead
of on the expected noon of Thursday or Friday, their landlady would show signs of pleasure;
but Mrs. Diggs from the porch threw an uncordial eye at the three arriving in the buggy. Here
were two more like Johnnie of last night. She knew them by the clothes they wore and by the
confidential tones of her husband's voice as he chatted to them. He had been old enough to
know better for twenty years. But for twenty years he had taken the same extreme joy in the
company of Johnnies, and they were bad for his health. Her final proof that they belonged to
this hated breed was when Mr. Diggs thumped the trout down on the porch, and after briefly
remarking, "Half of 'em boiled, and half broiled with bacon," himself led away the gelding
to the stable instead of intrusting it to his man Silas.

"You may set in the parlor," said Mrs. Diggs, and departed stiffly with the basket of trout.

"It's false," said Billy, at once.

Bertie did not grasp his thought.

"Her hair," said Billy. And certainly it was an unusual-looking arrangement.

Presently, as they sat near a parlor organ in the presence of earnest family portraits, Bertie
made a new poem for Billy,--

     "Said Aristotle unto Plato,
    'Have another sweet potato? '"

And Billy responded,--

    "Said Plato unto Aristotle,
    'Thank you, I prefer the bottle.'"

"In here, are you?" said their beaming host at the door. "Now, I think you'd find my department
of the premises cosier, so to speak." He nudged Bertie. "Do you boys guess it's too early in
the season for a silver-fizz?"

We must not wholly forget Oscar in Cambridge. During the afternoon he had not failed in his
punctuality; two more neat witnesses to this lay on the door-mat beneath the letter-slit of
Billy's room, And at the appointed hour after dinner a third joined them, making five. John
found these cards when he came home to go to bed, and picked them up and stuck them ornamentally
in Billy's looking-glass, as a greeting when Billy should return, The eight o'clock visit was
the last that Oscar paid to the locked door, He remained through the evening in his own room,
studious, contented, unventilated, indulging in his thick notes, and also in the thought of
Billy's and Bertie's eleventh-hour scholarship, "Even with another day," he told himself, "those
young men could not have got fifty per cent," In those times this was the passing mark. To-day
I believe you get an A, or a B, or some other letter denoting your rank. In due time Oscar
turned out his gas and got into his bed; and the clocks of Massachusetts struck midnight.

Mrs. Diggs of the Bird-in-Hand had retired at eleven, furious with rage, but firm in dignity
in spite of a sudden misadventure. Her hair, being the subject of a sporting event, had remained
steadily fixed in Billy's mind,--steadily fixed throughout an entertainment which began at
an early hour to assume the features of a celebration. One silver-fizz before dinner is nothing;
but dinner did not come at once, and the boys were thirsty. The hair of Mrs. Diggs had caught
Billy's eye again immediately upon her entrance to inform them that the meal was ready; and
whenever she reentered with a new course from the kitchen, Billy's eye wandered back to it,
although Mr. Diggs had become full of anecdotes about the Civil War. It was partly Grecian:
a knot stood out behind to a considerable distance. But this was not the whole plan. From front
to back ran a parting, clear and severe, and curls fell from this to the temples in a manner
called, I believe, by the enlightened, a l'Anne d'Autriche. The color was gray, to be sure;
but this propriety did not save the structure from Billy's increasing observation. As bottles
came to stand on the table in greater numbers, the closer and the more solemnly did Billy continue
to follow the movements of Mrs. Diggs. They would without doubt have noticed him and his foreboding
gravity but for Mr. Diggs's experiences in the Civil War.

The repast was finished--so far as eating went. Mrs. Diggs with changeless dudgeon was removing
and washing the dishes. At the revellers' elbows stood the 1820 port in its fine, fat, old,
dingy bottle, going pretty fast. Mr. Diggs was nearing the end of Antietam. "That morning of
the 18th, while McClellan was holdin' us squattin' and cussin'," he was saying to Bertie, when
some sort of shuffling sound in the corner caught their attention. We can never know how it
happened. Billy ought to know, but does not, and Mrs. Diggs allowed no subsequent reference
to the casualty. But there she stood with her entire hair at right angles. The Grecian knot
extended above her left ear, and her nose stuck through one set of Anne d'Autriche. Beside
her Billy stood, solemn as a stone, yet with a sort of relief glazed upon his face.

Mr. Diggs sat straight up at the vision of his spouse. "Flouncing Florence!" was his exclamation.
"Gee-whittaker, Mary, if you ain't the most unmitigated sight!" And wind then left him.

Mary's reply arrived in tones like a hornet stinging slowly and often. "Mr. Diggs, I have put
up with many things, and am expecting to put up with many more. But you'd behave better if
you consorted with gentlemen."

The door slammed and she was gone. Not a word to either of the boys, not even any notice of
them. It was thorough, and silence consequently held them for a moment. 

Hradzka stiffened and drew his blaster; as he did, five more aircraft
swooped over the crest of the mountain and came rushing down toward
him; not aimlessly, but as though they knew exactly where he was.

As they approached, the leading edges of their wings sparkled with
light, branches began flying from the trees about him, and there was
a loud hammering noise.

He aimed a little in front of them and began blasting.

A wing flew from one of the aircraft, and it plunged downward.
 And he rolled his eye towards the door. Another door slammed somewhere
above, and they gazed at each other, did Bertie and Mr. Diggs. Then Mr. Diggs, still gazing
at Bertie, beckoned to him with a speaking eye and a crooked finger; and as he beckoned, Bertie
approached like a conspirator and sat down close to him. "Begosh!" whispered Mr. Diggs. "Unmitigated."
And at this he and Bertie laid their heads down on the table and rolled about in spasms.

Billy from his corner seemed to become aware of them. With his eye fixed upon them like a statue,
he came across the room, and, sitting down near them with formal politeness, observed, "Was
you ever to the battle of Antietam?" This sent them beyond the limit; and they rocked their
heads on the table and wept as if they would expire.

Thus the three remained, during what space of time is not known: the two upon the table, convalescent
with relapses, and Billy like a seated idol, unrelaxed at his vigil. The party was seen through
the windows by Silas, coming from the stable to inquire if the gelding should not be harnessed.
Silas leaned his face to the pane, and envy spoke plainly in it. "O my! O my!" he mentioned
aloud to himself. So we have the whole household: Mrs. Diggs reposing scornfully in an upper
chamber; all parts of the tavern darkened, save the one lighted room; the three inside that
among their bottles, with the one outside looking covetously in at them; and the gelding stamping
in the stable.

But Silas, since he could not share, was presently of opinion that this was enough for one
sitting, and he tramped heavily upon the porch. This brought Bertie back to the world of reality,
and word was given to fetch the gelding. The host was in no mood to part with them, and spoke
of comfortable beds and breakfast as early as they liked; but Bertie had become entirely responsible.
Billy was helped in, Silas was liberally thanked, and they drove away beneath the stars, leaving
behind them golden opinions, and a host who decided not to disturb his helpmate by retiring
to rest in their conjugal bed. 

A very large quantity of ore is brought to bank. I found it hard to form an estimate, because
it was in scattered heaps overgrown with vegetation; but I should not be surprised if it amounted
to 5,000 tons. This means that want of proper machinery has resulted in a dead capital of
from 20,000l. to 30,000l.

A space has been cleared on the level of the trams uniting the mouths
of the tunnel, and here will be placed the 'elephant-stamps' actually
on their way out.

 "Billy, are you hurt?"

"Did Billy fall out?" said the voice, with plaintive cadence. "Poor Billy!"

"He can't be," muttered Bertie. "Are you?" he loudly repeated.

There was no answer: but steps came along the road as Bertie checked and pacified the gelding.
Then Billy appeared by the wheel. "Poor Billy fell out," he said mildly. He held something
up, which Bertie took. It had been Billy's straw hat, now a brimless fabric of ruin. Except
for smirches and one inexpressible rent which dawn revealed to Bertie a little later, there
were no further injuries, and Billy got in and took his seat quite competently.

Bertie drove the gelding with a firm hand after this. They passed through the cool of the unseen
meadow swamps, and heard the sound of the hollow bridges as they crossed them, and now and
then the gulp of some pouring brook. They went by the few lights of Mattapan, seeing from some
points on their way the beacons of the harbor, and again the curving line of lamps that drew
the outline of some village built upon a hill. Dawn showed them Jamaica Pond, smooth and breezeless,
and encircled with green skeins of foliage, delicate and new. Here multitudinous birds were
chirping their tiny, overwhelming chorus. When at length, across the flat suburban spaces,
they again sighted Memorial tower, small in the distance, the sun was lighting it. 

The capital has been fixed at 250,000l., and Paris will be the head-quarters. Mr. Arthur Bowden,
the manager, has been sent for to, and has now returned from France: it is to be hoped that
his extensive experience will instil some practical spirit into the
new Directory. Memorial tower suggested another line of
argument. It was Billy who spoke, as his eyes first rested upon that eminent pinnacle of Academe.

"Well, John owes me five dollars."

"Ten, you mean."

"Ten? How?"

"Why, her hair. And it was easily worth twenty."

Billy turned his head and looked suspiciously at Bertie. "What did I do?" he asked.

"Do! Don't you know?"

Billy in all truth did not.

"Phew!" went Bertie. "Well, I don't, either. Didn't see it. Saw the consequences, though. Don't
you remember being ready to apologize? What do you remember, anyhow?"

