'Here indeed the battle is fiercest, as if all the rest of the fighting were nowhere, and no
slaughter but here throughout the city, so do we descry the war in full fury, the Grecians
rushing on the building, and their shielded column driving up against the beleaguered threshold.
Ladders cling to the walls; and hard by the doors and planted on the rungs they hold up their
shields in the left hand to ward off our weapons, and with their right clutch the battlements.
The Dardanians tear down turrets and the covering of the house roof against them; with these
for weapons, since they see the end is come, they prepare to defend themselves even in death's
extremity: and hurl down gilded beams, the stately decorations of their fathers of old. Others
with drawn swords have beset the doorway below and keep it in crowded column. We renew our
courage, to aid the royal dwelling, to support them with our succour, and swell the force of
the conquered.

'There was a blind doorway giving passage through the range of Priam's halls by a solitary
postern, whereby, while our realm endured, hapless Andromache would often and often glide unattended
to her father-in-law's house, and carry the boy Astyanax to his grandsire. I issue out on the
sloping height of the ridge, whence wretched Teucrian hands were hurling their ineffectual
weapons. A tower stood on the sheer brink, its roof ascending high into heaven, whence was
wont to be seen all Troy and the Grecian ships and Achaean camp: attacking it with iron round
about, where the joints of the lofty flooring yielded, we wrench it from its deep foundations
and shake it free; it gives way, and [466-498]suddenly falls thundering in ruin, crashing wide
over the Grecian ranks. But others swarm up; nor meanwhile do stones nor any sort of missile
slacken. . . . Right before the vestibule and in the front doorway Pyrrhus moves rejoicingly
in the sparkle of arms and gleaming brass: like as when a snake fed on poisonous herbs, whom
chill winter kept hid and swollen underground, now fresh from his weeds outworn and shining
in youth, wreathes his slippery body into the daylight, his upreared breast meets the sun,
and his triple-cloven tongue flickers in his mouth. With him huge Periphas, and Automedon the
armour-bearer, driver of Achilles' horses, with him all his Scyrian men climb the roof and
hurl flames on the housetop. Himself among the foremost he grasps a poleaxe, bursts through
the hard doorway, and wrenches the brazen-plated doors from the hinge; and now he hath cut
out a plank from the solid oak and pierced a vast gaping hole. The house within is open to
sight, and the long halls lie plain; open to sight are the secret chambers of Priam and the
kings of old, and they see armed men standing in front of the doorway.

'But the inner house is stirred with shrieks and misery and confusion, and the court echoes
deep with women's wailing; the golden stars are smitten with the din. Affrighted mothers stray
about the vast house, and cling fast to the doors and print them with kisses. With his father's
might Pyrrhus presses on; nor guards nor barriers can hold out. The gate totters under the
hard driven ram, and the doors fall flat, rent from the hinge. Force makes way; the Greeks
burst through the entrance and pour in, slaughtering the foremost, and filling the space with
a wide stream of soldiers. Not so furiously when a foaming river bursts his banks and overflows,
beating down the opposing dykes with whirling water, is he borne mounded over the fields, and
sweeps herds and [499-529]pens all about the plains. Myself I saw in the gateway Neoptolemus
mad in slaughter, and the two sons of Atreus, saw Hecuba and the hundred daughters of her house,
and Priam polluting with his blood the altar fires of his own consecration. The fifty bridal
chambers--so great was the hope of his children's children--their doors magnificent with spoils
of barbaric gold, have sunk in ruin; where the fire fails the Greeks are in possession.

'Perchance too thou mayest inquire what was Priam's fate. When he saw the ruin of his captured
city, the gates of his house burst open, and the enemy amid his innermost chambers, the old
man idly fastens round his aged trembling shoulders his long disused armour, girds on the unavailing
sword, and advances on his death among the thronging foe.

'Within the palace and under the bare cope of sky was a massive altar, and hard on the altar
an ancient bay tree leaned clasping the household gods in its shadow. Here Hecuba and her daughters
crowded vainly about the altar-stones, like doves driven headlong by a black tempest, and crouched
clasping the gods' images. And when she saw Priam her lord with the armour of youth on him,
"What spirit of madness, my poor husband," she cries, "hath stirred thee to gird on these weapons?
or whither dost thou run? Not such the succour nor these the defenders the time requires: no,
were mine own Hector now beside us. Retire, I beseech thee, hither; this altar will protect
us all, or thou wilt share our death." With these words on her lips she drew the aged man to
her, and set him on the holy seat.

'And lo, escaped from slaughtering Pyrrhus through the weapons of the enemy, Polites, one of
Priam's children, flies wounded down the long colonnades and circles the empty halls. Pyrrhus
pursues him fiercely with aimed [530-563]wound, just catching at him, and follows hard on him
with his spear. As at last he issued before his parents' eyes and faces, he fell, and shed
his life in a pool of blood. At this Priam, although even now fast in the toils of death, yet
withheld not nor spared a wrathful cry: "Ah, for thy crime, for this thy hardihood, may the
gods, if there is goodness in heaven to care for aught such, pay thee in full thy worthy meed,
and return thee the reward that is due! who hast made me look face to face on my child's murder,
and polluted a father's countenance with death. Ah, not such to a foe was the Achilles whose
parentage thou beliest; but he revered a suppliant's right and trust, restored to the tomb
Hector's pallid corpse, and sent me back to my realm." Thus the old man spoke, and launched
his weak and unwounding spear, which, recoiling straight from the jarring brass, hung idly
from his shield above the boss. Thereat Pyrrhus: "Thou then shalt tell this, and go with the
message to my sire the son of Peleus: remember to tell him of my baleful deeds, and the degeneracy
of Neoptolemus. Now die." So saying, he drew him quivering to the very altar, slipping in the
pool of his child's blood, and wound his left hand in his hair, while in his right the sword
flashed out and plunged to the hilt in his side. This was the end of Priam's fortunes; thus
did allotted fate find him, with burning Troy and her sunken towers before his eyes, once magnificent
lord over so many peoples and lands of Asia. The great corpse lies along the shore, a head
severed from the shoulders and a body without a name.

'But then an awful terror began to encircle me; I stood in amaze; there rose before me the
likeness of my loved father, as I saw the king, old as he, sobbing out his life under the ghastly
wound; there rose Creüsa forlorn, my plundered house, and little Iülus' peril. I look back
[564-596]and survey what force is around me. All, outwearied, have given up and leapt headlong
to the ground, or flung themselves wretchedly into the fire:

['Yes, and now I only was left; when I espy the daughter of Tyndarus close in the courts of
Vesta, crouching silently in the fane's recesses; the bright glow of the fires lights my wandering,
as my eyes stray all about. Fearing the Teucrians' anger for the overthrown towers of Troy,
and the Grecians' vengeance and the wrath of the husband she had abandoned, she, the common
Fury of Troy and her native country, had hidden herself and cowered unseen by the altars. My
spirit kindles to fire, and rises in wrath to avenge my dying land and take repayment for her
crimes. Shall she verily see Sparta and her native Mycenae unscathed, and depart a queen and
triumphant? Shall she see her spousal and her home, her parents and children, attended by a
crowd of Trojan women and Phrygians to serve her? and Priam have fallen under the sword? Troy
blazed in fire? the shore of Dardania so often soaked with blood? Not so. For though there
is no name or fame in a woman's punishment, nor honour in the victory, yet shall I have praise
in quenching a guilty life and exacting a just recompense; and it will be good to fill my soul
with the flame of vengeance, and satisfy the ashes of my people. Thus broke I forth, and advanced
infuriate;]

'----When my mother came visibly before me, clear to sight as never till then, and shone forth
in pure radiance through the night, gracious, evident in godhead, in shape and stature such
as she is wont to appear to the heavenly people; she caught me by the hand and stayed me, and
pursued thus with roseate lips:

'"Son, what overmastering pain thus wakes thy wrath? Why ravest thou? or whither is thy care
for us fled? Wilt thou not first look to it, where thou hast left Anchises, [597-630]thine
aged worn father; or if Creüsa thy wife and the child Ascanius survive? round about whom all
the Greek battalions range; and without my preventing care, the flames ere this had made them
their portion, and the hostile sword drunk their blood. Not the hated face of the Laconian
woman, Tyndarus' daughter; not Paris is to blame; the gods, the gods in anger overturn this
magnificence, and make Troy topple down. Look, for all the cloud that now veils thy gaze and
dulls mortal vision with damp encircling mist, I will rend from before thee. Fear thou no commands
of thy mother, nor refuse to obey her counsels. Here, where thou seest sundered piles of masonry
and rocks violently torn from rocks, and smoke eddying mixed with dust, Neptune with his great
trident shakes wall and foundation out of their places, and upturns all the city from her base.
Here Juno in all her terror holds the Scaean gates at the entry, and, girt with steel, calls
her allied army furiously from their ships. . . . Even now on the citadel's height, look back!
Tritonian Pallas is planted in glittering halo and Gorgonian terror. Their lord himself pours
courage and prosperous strength on the Grecians, himself stirs the gods against the arms of
Dardania. Haste away, O son, and put an end to the struggle. I will never desert thee; I will
set thee safe in the courts of thy father's house."

'She ended, and plunged in the dense blackness of the night. Awful faces shine forth, and,
set against Troy, divine majesties . . .

'Then indeed I saw all Ilium sinking in flame, and Neptunian Troy uprooted from her base: even
as an ancient ash on the mountain heights, hacked all about with steel and fast-falling axes,
when husbandmen emulously strain to cut it down: it hangs threateningly, with shaken top and
quivering tresses asway; till gradually, overmastered with [631-662]wounds, it utters one last
groan, and rending itself away, falls in ruin along the ridge. I descend, and under a god's
guidance clear my way between foe and flame; weapons give ground before me, and flames retire.

'And now, when I have reached the courts of my ancestral dwelling, our home of old, my father,
whom it was my first desire to carry high into the hills, and whom first I sought, declines,
now Troy is rooted out, to prolong his life through the pains of exile.

'"Ah, you," he cries, "whose blood is at the prime, whose strength stands firm in native vigour,
do you take your flight. . . . Had the lords of heaven willed to prolong life for me, they
should have preserved this my home. Enough and more is the one desolation we have seen, survivors
of a captured city. Thus, oh thus salute me and depart, as a body laid out for burial. Mine
own hand shall find me death: the foe will be merciful and seek my spoils: light is the loss
of a tomb. This long time hated of heaven, I uselessly delay the years, since the father of
gods and king of men blasted me with wind of thunder and scathe of flame."

'Thus held he on in utterance, and remained obstinate. We press him, dissolved in tears, my
wife Creüsa, Ascanius, all our household, that our father involve us not all in his ruin, and
add his weight to the sinking scale of doom. He refuses, and keeps seated steadfast in his
purpose. Again I rush to battle, and choose death in my misery. For what had counsel or chance
yet to give? Thoughtest thou my feet, O father, could retire and abandon thee? and fell so
unnatural words from a parent's lips? "If heaven wills that naught be left of our mighty city,
if this be thy planted purpose, thy pleasure to cast in thyself and thine to the doom of Troy;
for this death indeed the gate is wide, and even now Pyrrhus will be here newly bathed in Priam's
[663-695]blood, Pyrrhus who slaughters the son before the father's face, the father upon his
altars. For this was it, bountiful mother, thou dost rescue me amid fire and sword, to see
the foe in my inmost chambers, and Ascanius and my father, Creüsa by their side, hewn down
in one another's blood? My arms, men, bring my arms! the last day calls on the conquered. Return
me to the Greeks; let me revisit and renew the fight. Never to-day shall we all perish unavenged."

'Thereat I again gird on my sword, and fitting my left arm into the clasps of the shield, strode
forth of the palace. And lo! my wife clung round my feet on the threshold, and held little
Iülus up to his father's sight. "If thou goest to die, let us too hurry with thee to the end.
But if thou knowest any hope to place in arms, be this household thy first defence. To what
is little Iülus and thy father, to what am I left who once was called thy wife?"

'So she shrieked, and filled all the house with her weeping; when a sign arises sudden and
marvellous to tell. For, between the hands and before the faces of his sorrowing parents, lo!
above Iülus' head there seemed to stream a light luminous cone, and a flame whose touch hurt
not to flicker in his soft hair and play round his brows. We in a flutter of affright shook
out the blazing hair and quenched the holy fires with spring water. But lord Anchises joyfully
upraised his eyes; and stretching his hands to heaven: "Jupiter omnipotent," he cries, "if
thou dost relent at any prayers, look on us this once alone; and if our goodness deserve it,
give thine aid hereafter, O lord, and confirm this thine omen."

'Scarcely had the aged man spoken thus, when with sudden crash it thundered on the left, and
a star gliding through the dusk shot from heaven drawing a bright trail of light. We watch
it slide over the palace roof, leaving [696-730]the mark of its pathway, and bury its brilliance
in the wood of Ida; the long drawn track shines, and the region all about fumes with sulphur.
Then conquered indeed my father rises to address the gods and worship the holy star. "Now,
now delay is done with: I follow, and where you lead, I come. Gods of my fathers, save my house,
save my grandchild. Yours is this omen, and in your deity Troy stands. I yield, O my son, and
refuse not to go in thy company."

'He ended; and now more loudly the fire roars along the city, and the burning tides roll nearer.
"Up then, beloved father, and lean on my neck; these shoulders of mine will sustain thee, nor
will so dear a burden weigh me down. Howsoever fortune fall, one and undivided shall be our
peril, one the escape of us twain. Little Iülus shall go along with me, and my wife follow
our steps afar. You of my household, give heed to what I say. As you leave the city there is
a mound and ancient temple of Ceres lonely on it, and hard by an aged cypress, guarded many
years in ancestral awe: to this resting-place let us gather from diverse quarters. Thou, O
father, take the sacred things and the household gods of our ancestors in thine hand. For me,
just parted from the desperate battle, with slaughter fresh upon me, to handle them were guilt,
until I wash away in a living stream the soilure. . . ." So spoke I, and spread over my neck
and broad shoulders a tawny lion-skin for covering, and stoop to my burden. Little Iülus, with
his hand fast in mine, keeps uneven pace after his father. Behind my wife follows. We pass
on in the shadows. And I, lately moved by no weapons launched against me, nor by the thronging
bands of my Grecian foes, am now terrified at every breath, startled by every noise, thrilling
with fear alike for my companion and my burden.

'And now I was nearing the gates, and thought I had [731-764]outsped all the way; when suddenly
the crowded trampling of feet came to our ears, and my father, looking forth into the darkness,
cries: "My son, my son, fly; they draw near. I espy the gleaming shields and the flicker of
brass." At this, in my flurry and confusion, some hostile god bereft me of my senses. For while
I plunge down byways, and swerve from where the familiar streets ran, Creüsa, alas! whether,
torn by fate from her unhappy husband, she stood still, or did she mistake the way, or sink
down outwearied? I know not; and never again was she given back to our eyes; nor did I turn
to look for my lost one, or cast back a thought, ere we were come to ancient Ceres' mound and
hallowed seat; here at last, when all gathered, one was missing, vanished from her child's
and her husband's company. What man or god did I spare in frantic reproaches? or what crueller
sight met me in our city's overthrow? I charge my comrades with Ascanius and lord Anchises,
and the gods of Teucria, hiding them in the winding vale. Myself I regain the city, girding
on my shining armour; fixed to renew every danger, to retrace my way throughout Troy, and fling
myself again on its perils. First of all I regain the walls and the dim gateway whence my steps
had issued; I scan and follow back my footprints with searching gaze in the night. Everywhere
my spirit shudders, dismayed at the very silence. Thence I pass on home, if haply her feet
(if haply!) had led her thither. The Grecians had poured in, and filled the palace. The devouring
fire goes rolling before the wind high as the roof; the flames tower over it, and the heat
surges up into the air. I move on, and revisit the citadel and Priam's dwelling; where now
in the spacious porticoes of Juno's sanctuary, Phoenix and accursed Ulysses, chosen sentries,
were guarding the spoil. Hither from all quarters is flung in masses the treasure of Troy torn
from burning shrines, [765-798]tables of the gods, bowls of solid gold, and raiment of the
captives. Boys and cowering mothers in long file stand round. . . . Yes, and I dared to cry
abroad through the darkness; I filled the streets with calling, and again and yet again with
vain reiterance cried piteously on Creüsa. As I stormed and sought her endlessly among the
houses of the town, there rose before mine eyes a melancholy phantom, the ghost of very Creüsa,
in likeness larger than her wont. I was motionless; my hair stood up, and the accents faltered
on my tongue. Then she thus addressed me, and with this speech allayed my distresses: "What
help is there in this mad passion of grief, sweet my husband? not without divine influence
does this come to pass: nor may it be, nor does the high lord of Olympus allow, that thou shouldest
carry Creüsa hence in thy company. Long shall be thine exile, and weary spaces of sea must
thou furrow through; and thou shalt come to the land Hesperia, where Lydian Tiber flows with
soft current through rich and populous fields. There prosperity awaits thee, and a kingdom,
and a king's daughter for thy wife. Dispel these tears for thy beloved Creüsa. Never will I
look on the proud homes of the Myrmidons or Dolopians, or go to be the slave of Greek matrons,
I a daughter of Dardania, a daughter-in-law of Venus the goddess. . . . But the mighty mother
of the gods keeps me in these her borders. And now farewell, and still love thy child and mine."
This speech uttered, while I wept and would have said many a thing, she left me and retreated
into thin air. Thrice there was I fain to lay mine arms round her neck; thrice the vision I
vainly clasped fled out of my hands, even as the light breezes, or most like to fluttering
sleep. So at last, when night is spent, I revisit my comrades.

'And here I find a marvellous great company, newly flocked in, mothers and men, a people gathered
for exile, [799-804]a pitiable crowd. From all quarters they are assembled, ready in heart
and fortune, to whatsoever land I will conduct them overseas. And now the morning star rose
over the high ridges of Ida, and led on the day; and the Grecians held the gateways in leaguer,
nor was any hope of help given. I withdrew, and raising my father up, I sought the mountain.'

BOOK THIRD

THE STORY OF THE SEVEN YEARS' WANDERING

'After heaven's lords pleased to overthrow the state of Asia and Priam's guiltless people,
and proud Ilium fell, and Neptunian Troy smokes all along the ground, we are driven by divine
omens to seek distant places of exile in waste lands. Right under Antandros and the mountains
of Phrygian Ida we build a fleet, uncertain whither the fates carry us or where a resting-place
is given, and gather the people together. Scarcely had the first summer set in, when lord Anchises
bids us spread our sails to fortune, and weeping I leave the shores and havens of my country,
and the plains where once was Troy. I sail to sea an exile, with my comrades and son and the
gods of household and state.

'A land of vast plains lies apart, the home of Mavors, in Thracian tillage, and sometime under
warrior Lycurgus' reign; friendly of old to Troy, and their gods in alliance while our fortune
lasted. Hither I pass, and on the winding shore I lay under thwarting fates the first foundations
of a city, and from my own name fashion its name, Aeneadae.

'I was paying sacrifice to my mother, daughter of Dione, and to all the gods, so to favour
the work begun, and slew a shining bull on the shore to the high lord of [22-54]the heavenly
people. Haply there lay a mound hard at hand, crowned with cornel thickets and bristling dense
with shafts of myrtle. I drew near; and essaying to tear up the green wood from the soil, that
I might cover the altar with leafy boughs, I see a portent ominous and wonderful to tell. For
from the first tree whose roots are rent away and broken from the ground, drops of black blood
trickle, and gore stains the earth. An icy shudder shakes my limbs, and my blood curdles chill
with terror. Yet from another I go on again to tear away a tough shoot, fully to fathom its
secret; yet from another black blood follows out of the bark. With many searchings of heart
I prayed the woodland nymphs, and lord Gradivus, who rules in the Getic fields, to make the
sight propitious as was meet and lighten the omen. But when I assail a third spearshaft with
a stronger effort, pulling with knees pressed against the sand; shall I speak or be silent?
from beneath the mound is heard a pitiable moan, and a voice is uttered to my ears: "Woe's
me, why rendest thou me, Aeneas? spare me at last in the tomb, spare pollution to thine innocent
hands. Troy bore me; not alien to thee am I, nor this blood that oozes from the stem. Ah, fly
the cruel land, fly the greedy shore! For I am Polydorus; here the iron harvest of weapons
hath covered my pierced body, and shot up in sharp javelins." Then indeed, borne down with
dubious terror, I was motionless, my hair stood up, and the accents faltered on my tongue.

'This Polydorus once with great weight of gold had hapless Priam sent in secret to the nurture
of the Thracian king, when now he was losing trust in the arms of Dardania, and saw his city
leaguered round about. The king, when the Teucrian power was broken and fortune withdrew, following
Agamemnon's estate and triumphant arms, [55-87]severs every bond of duty; murders Polydorus,
and lays strong hands on the gold. O accursed hunger of gold, to what dost thou not compel
human hearts! When the terror left my senses, I lay the divine tokens before the chosen princes
of the people, with my father at their head, and demand their judgment. All are of one mind,
to leave the guilty land, and abandoning a polluted home, to let the gales waft our fleets.
So we bury Polydorus anew, and the earth is heaped high over his mound; altars are reared to
his ghost, sad with dusky chaplets and black cypress; and around are the Ilian women with hair
unbound in their fashion. We offer bubbling bowls of warm milk and cups of consecrated blood,
and lay the spirit to rest in her tomb, and with loud voice utter the last call.

'Thereupon, so soon as ocean may be trusted, and the winds leave the seas in quiet, and the
soft whispering south wind calls seaward, my comrades launch their ships and crowd the shores.
We put out from harbour, and lands and towns sink away. There lies in mid sea a holy land,
most dear to the mother of the Nereids and Neptune of Aegae, which strayed about coast and
strand till the Archer god in his affection chained it fast from high Myconos and Gyaros, and
made it lie immoveable and slight the winds. Hither I steer; and it welcomes my weary crew
to the quiet shelter of a safe haven. We disembark and worship Apollo's town. Anius the king,
king at once of the people and priest of Phoebus, his brows garlanded with fillets and consecrated
laurel, comes to meet us; he knows Anchises, his friend of old; we clasp hands in welcome,
and enter his palace. I worshipped the god's temple, an ancient pile of stone. "Lord of Thymbra,
give us an enduring dwelling-place; grant a house and family to thy weary servants, and a city
to abide: keep Troy's second fortress, the remnant left of the Grecians and merciless Achilles.
Whom follow [88-121]we? or whither dost thou bid us go, where fix our seat? Grant an omen,
O lord, and inspire our minds."

'Scarcely had I spoken thus; suddenly all seemed to shake, all the courts and laurels of the
god, the whole hill to be stirred round about, and the cauldron to moan in the opening sanctuary.
We sink low on the ground, and a voice is borne to our ears: "Stubborn race of Dardanus, the
same land that bore you by parentage of old shall receive you again on her bountiful breast.
Seek out your ancient mother; hence shall the house of Aeneas sway all regions, his children's
children and they who shall be born of them." Thus Phoebus; and mingled outcries of great gladness
uprose; all ask, what is that city? whither calls Phoebus our wandering, and bids us return?
Then my father, unrolling the records of men of old, "Hear, O princes," says he, "and learn
your hopes. In mid ocean lies Crete, the island of high Jove, wherein is mount Ida, the cradle
of our race. An hundred great towns are inhabited in that opulent realm; from it our forefather
Teucer of old, if I recall the tale aright, sailed to the Rhoetean coasts and chose a place
for his kingdom. Not yet was Ilium nor the towers of Pergama reared; they dwelt in the valley
bottoms. Hence came our Lady, haunter of Cybele, the Corybantic cymbals and the grove of Ida;
hence the rites of inviolate secrecy, and the lions yoked under the chariot of their mistress.
Up then, and let us follow where divine commandments lead; let us appease the winds, and seek
the realm of Gnosus. Nor is it a far journey away. Only be Jupiter favourable, the third day
shall bring our fleet to anchor on the Cretan coast." So spoke he, and slew fit sacrifice on
the altars, a bull to Neptune, a bull to thee, fair Apollo, a black sheep to Tempest, a white
to the prosperous West winds.

'Rumour flies that Idomeneus the captain is driven [122-154]forth of his father's realm, and
the shores of Crete are abandoned, that the houses are void of foes and the dwellings lie empty
to our hand. We leave the harbour of Ortygia, and fly along the main, by the revel-trod ridges
of Naxos, by green Donusa, Olearos and snow-white Paros, and the sea-strewn Cyclades, threading
the racing channels among the crowded lands. The seamen's clamour rises in emulous dissonance;
each cheers his comrade: Seek we Crete and our forefathers. A wind rising astern follows us
forth on our way, and we glide at last to the ancient Curetean coast. So I set eagerly to work
on the walls of my chosen town, and call it Pergamea, and exhort my people, joyful at the name,
to cherish their homes and rear the castle buildings. And even now the ships were drawn up
on the dry beach; the people were busy in marriages and among their new fields; I was giving
statutes and homesteads; when suddenly from a tainted space of sky came, noisome on men's bodies
and pitiable on trees and crops, pestilence and a year of death. They left their sweet lives
or dragged themselves on in misery; Sirius scorched the fields into barrenness; the herbage
grew dry, and the sickly harvest denied sustenance. My father counsels to remeasure the sea
and go again to Phoebus in his Ortygian oracle, to pray for grace and ask what issue he ordains
to our exhausted state; whence he bids us search for aid to our woes, whither bend our course.

'Night fell, and sleep held all things living on the earth. The sacred images of the gods and
the household deities of Phrygia, that I had borne with me from Troy out of the midst of the
burning city, seemed to stand before mine eyes as I lay sleepless, clear in the broad light
where the full moon poured through the latticed windows; then thus addressed me, and with this
speech allayed my distresses: "What Apollo hath to tell thee when thou dost [155-188]reach
Ortygia, he utters here, and sends us unsought to thy threshold. We who followed thee and thine
arms when Dardania went down in fire; we who under thee have traversed on shipboard the swelling
sea; we in like wise will exalt to heaven thy children to be, and give empire to their city.
Do thou prepare a mighty town for a mighty people, nor draw back from the long wearisome chase.
Thou must change thy dwelling. Not to these shores did the god at Delos counsel thee, or Apollo
bid thee find rest in Crete. This is our true dwelling place; hence is Dardanus sprung, and
lord Iasius, the first source of our race. Up, arise, and tell with good cheer to thine aged
parent this plain tale, to seek Corythus and the lands of Ausonia. Jupiter denies thee the
Dictaean fields."

'Astonished at this vision and divine utterance (nor was that slumber; but openly I seemed
to know their countenances, their veiled hair and gracious faces, and therewith a cold sweat
broke out all over me) I spring from my bed and raise my voice and upturned hands skyward and
pay pure offering on the hearth. The sacrifice done, I joyfully tell Anchises, and relate all
in order. He recognises the double descent and twofold parentage, and the later wanderings
that had deceived him among ancient lands. Then he speaks: "O son, hard wrought by the destinies
of Ilium, Cassandra only foretold me this fortune. Now I recall how she prophesied this was
fated to our race, and often cried of Hesperia, often of an Italian realm. But who was to believe
that Teucrians should come to Hesperian shores? or whom might Cassandra then move by prophecy?
Yield we to Phoebus, and follow the better [189-222]way he counsels." So says he, and we all
rejoicingly obey his speech. This dwelling likewise we abandon; and leaving some few behind,
spread our sails and run over the waste sea in our hollow wood.

'After our ships held the high seas, nor any land yet appears, the sky all round us and all
round us the deep, a dusky shower drew up overhead carrying night and tempest, and the wave
shuddered and gloomed. Straightway the winds upturn the main, and great seas rise; we are tossed
asunder over the dreary gulf. Stormclouds enwrap the day, and rainy gloom blots out the sky;
out of the clouds bursts fire fast upon fire. Driven from our course, we go wandering on the
blind waves. Palinurus himself professes he cannot tell day from night on the sky, nor remember
the way amid the waters. Three dubious days of blind darkness we wander on the deep, as many
nights without a star. Not till the fourth day was land at last seen to rise, discovering distant
hills and sending up wreaths of smoke. The sails drop; we swing back to the oars; without delay
the sailors strongly toss up the foam, and sweep through the green water. The shores of the
Strophades first receive me thus won from the waves, Strophades the Greek name they bear, islands
lying in the great Ionian sea, which boding Celaeno and the other Harpies inhabit since Phineus'
house was shut on them, and they fled in terror from the board of old. Than these no deadlier
portent nor any fiercer plague of divine wrath hath issued from the Stygian waters; winged
things with maidens' countenance, bellies dropping filth, and clawed hands and faces ever wan
with hunger. . . .

'When borne hitherward we enter the haven, lo! we see goodly herds of oxen scattered on the
plains, and goats flocking untended over the grass. We attack them with the sword, and call
the gods and Jove himself to share our [223-258]spoil. Then we build seats on the winding shore
and banquet on the dainty food. But suddenly the Harpies are upon us, swooping awfully from
the mountains, and shaking their wings with loud clangour, plunder the feast, and defile everything
with unclean touch, spreading a foul smell, and uttering dreadful cries. Again, in a deep recess
under a caverned rock, shut in with waving shadows of woodland, we array the board and renew
the altar fires; again, from their blind ambush in diverse quarters of the sky, the noisy crowd
flutter with clawed feet around their prey, defiling the feast with their lips. Then I bid
my comrades take up arms, and proclaim war on the accursed race. Even as I bade they do, range
their swords in cover among the grass, and hide their shields out of sight. So when they swooped
clamorously down along the winding shore, Misenus from his watch-tower on high signals on the
hollow brass; my comrades rush in and essay the strange battle, to set the stain of steel on
the winged horrors of the sea. But they take no violence on their plumage, nor wounds on their
bodies; and soaring into the firmament with rapid flight, leave their foul traces on the spoil
they had half consumed. Celaeno alone, prophetess of ill, alights on a towering cliff, and
thus breaks forth in deep accents:

'"War is it for your slaughtered oxen and steers cut down, O children of Laomedon, war is it
you would declare, and drive the guiltless Harpies from their ancestral kingdom? Take then
to heart and fix fast these words of mine; which the Lord omnipotent foretold to Phoebus, Phoebus
Apollo to me, I eldest born of the Furies reveal to you. Italy is your goal; wooing the winds
you shall go to Italy, and enter her harbours unhindered. Yet shall you not wall round your
ordained city, ere this murderous outrage on us compel you, in portentous hunger, to eat your
tables with gnawing teeth."

'She spoke, and winged her way back to the shelter of [259-293]the wood. But my comrades' blood
froze chill with sudden affright; their spirits fell; and no longer with arms, nay with vows
and prayers they bid me entreat favour, whether these be goddesses, or winged things ill-ominous
and foul. And lord Anchises from the beach calls with outspread hands on the mighty gods, ordering
fit sacrifices: "Gods, avert their menaces! Gods, turn this woe away, and graciously save the
righteous!" Then he bids pluck the cable from the shore and shake loose the sheets. Southern
winds stretch the sails; we scud over the foam-flecked waters, whither wind and pilot called
our course. Now wooded Zacynthos appears amid the waves, and Dulichium and Same and Neritos'
sheer rocks. We fly past the cliffs of Ithaca, Laërtes' realm, and curse the land, fostress
of cruel Ulysses. Soon too Mount Leucata's cloudy peaks are sighted, and Apollo dreaded of
sailors. Hither we steer wearily, and stand in to the little town. The anchor is cast from
the prow; the sterns are grounded on the beach.

'So at last having attained to land beyond our hopes, we purify ourselves in Jove's worship,
and kindle altars of offering, and make the Actian shore gay with the games of Ilium. My comrades
strip, and, slippery with oil, exercise their ancestral contests; glad to have got past so
many Argive towns, and held on their flight through the encircling foe. Meanwhile the sun rounds
the great circle of the year, and icy winter ruffles the waters with Northern gales. I fix
against the doorway a hollow shield of brass, that tall Abas had borne, and mark the story
with a verse: These arms Aeneas from the conquering Greeks. Then I bid leave the harbour and
sit down at the thwarts; emulously my comrades strike the water, and sweep through the seas.
Soon we see the cloud-capped Phaeacian towers sink away, skirt the shores of Epirus, and enter
the Chaonian haven and approach high Buthrotum town.

[294-328]'Here the rumour of a story beyond belief comes on our ears; Helenus son of Priam
is reigning over Greek towns, master of the bride and sceptre of Pyrrhus the Aeacid; and Andromache
hath again fallen to a husband of her people. I stood amazed; and my heart kindled with marvellous
desire to accost him and learn of so strange a fortune. I advance from the harbour, leaving
the fleet ashore; just when haply Andromache, in a grove before the town, by the waters of
a feigned Simoïs, was pouring libation to the dust, and calling Hector's ghost to a tomb with
his name, on an empty turfed green with two altars that she had consecrated, a wellspring of
tears. When she caught sight of me coming, and saw distractedly the encircling arms of Troy,
terror-stricken at the vision marvellously shewn, her gaze fixed, and the heat left her frame.
She swoons away, and hardly at last speaks after long interval: "Comest thou then a real face,
a real messenger to me, goddess-born? livest thou? or if sweet light is fled, ah, where is
Hector?" She spoke, and bursting into tears filled all the place with her crying. Just a few
words I force up, and deeply moved gasp out in broken accents: "I live indeed, I live on through
all extremities; doubt not, for real are the forms thou seest . . . Alas! after such an husband,
what fate receives thy fall? or what worthier fortune revisits thee? Dost thou, Hector's Andromache,
keep bonds of marriage with Pyrrhus?" She cast down her countenance, and spoke with lowered voice:

'"O single in happy eminence that maiden daughter of Priam, sentenced to die under high Troy
town at an enemy's grave, who never bore the shame of the lot, nor came a captive to her victorious
master's bed! We, sailing over alien seas from our burning land, have endured the haughty youthful
pride of Achilles' seed, and borne children in slavery: he thereafter, wooing Leda's Hermione
and a Lacedaemonian [329-363]marriage, passed me over to Helenus' keeping, a bondwoman to a
bondman. But him Orestes, aflame with passionate desire for his stolen bride, and driven by
the furies of crime, catches unguarded and murders at his ancestral altars. At Neoptolemus'
death a share of his realm fell to Helenus' hands, who named the plains Chaonian, and called
all the land Chaonia after Chaon of Troy, and built withal a Pergama and this Ilian citadel
on the hills. But to thee how did winds, how fates give passage? or whose divinity landed thee
all unwitting on our coasts? what of the boy Ascanius? lives he yet, and draws breath, thy
darling, whom Troy's . . . Yet hath the child affection for his lost mother? is he roused to
the valour of old and the spirit of manhood by his father Aeneas, by his uncle Hector?"

'Such words she poured forth weeping, and prolonged the vain wail; when the hero Helenus son
of Priam approaches from the town with a great company, knows us for his kin, and leads us
joyfully to his gates, shedding a many tears at every word. I advance and recognise a little
Troy, and a copy of the great Pergama, and a dry brook with the name of Xanthus, and clasp
a Scaean gateway. Therewithal my Teucrians make holiday in the friendly town. The king entertained
them in his spacious colonnades; in the central hall they poured goblets of wine in libation,
and held the cups while the feast was served on gold.

'And now a day and another day hath sped; the breezes woo our sails, and the canvas blows out
to the swelling south. With these words I accost the prophet, and thus make request:

'"Son of Troy, interpreter of the gods, whose sense is open to Phoebus' influences, his tripods
and laurels, to stars and tongues of birds and auguries of prosperous flight, tell me now,--for
the voice of revelation was all favourable to my course, and all divine influence counselled
me to [364-396]seek Italy and explore remote lands; only Celaeno the Harpy prophesies of strange
portents, a horror to tell, and cries out of wrath and bale and foul hunger,--what perils are
the first to shun? or in what guidance may I overcome these sore labours?"

'Hereat Helenus, first suing for divine favour with fit sacrifice of steers, and unbinding
from his head the chaplets of consecration, leads me in his hand to thy courts, O Phoebus,
thrilled with the fulness of the deity, and then utters these prophetic words from his augural
lips:

'"Goddess-born: since there is clear assurance that under high omens thou dost voyage through
the deep; so the king of the gods allots destiny and unfolds change; this is the circle of
ordinance; a few things out of many I will unfold to thee in speech, that so thou mayest more
safely traverse the seas of thy sojourn, and find rest in the Ausonian haven; for Helenus is
forbidden by the destinies to know, and by Juno daughter of Saturn to utter more: first of
all, the Italy thou deemest now nigh, and close at hand, unwitting! the harbours thou wouldst
enter, far are they sundered by a long and trackless track through length of lands. First must
the Trinacrian wave clog thine oar, and thy ships traverse the salt Ausonian plain, by the
infernal pools and Aeaean Circe's isle, ere thou mayest build thy city in safety on a peaceful
land. I will tell thee the token, and do thou keep it close in thine heart. When in thy perplexity,
beside the wave of a sequestered river, a great sow shall be discovered lying under the oaks
on the brink, with her newborn litter of thirty, couched white on the ground, her white brood
about her teats; that shall be the place of the city, that the appointed rest from thy toils.
Neither shrink thou at the gnawn tables that await thee; the fates will find a way, and Apollo
aid thy call. These lands moreover, on this nearest border of the Italian shore [397-432]that
our own sea's tide washes, flee thou: evil Greeks dwell in all their towns. Here the Locrians
of Narycos have set their city, and here Lyctian Idomeneus beset the Sallentine plains with
soldiery; here is the town of the Meliboean captain, Philoctetes' little Petelia fenced by
her wall. Nay, when thy fleets have crossed overseas and lie at anchor, when now thou rearest
altars and payest vows on the beach, veil thine hair with a purple garment for covering, that
no hostile face at thy divine worship may meet thee amid the holy fires and make void the omens.
This fashion of sacrifice keep thou, thyself and thy comrades, and let thy children abide in
this pure observance. But when at thy departure the wind hath borne thee to the Sicilian coast,
and the barred straits of Pelorus open out, steer for the left-hand country and the long circuit
of the seas on the left hand; shun the shore and water on thy right. These lands, they say,
of old broke asunder, torn and upheaved by vast force, when either country was one and undivided;
the ocean burst in between, cutting off with its waves the Hesperian from the Sicilian coast,
and with narrow tide washes tilth and town along the severance of shore. On the right Scylla
keeps guard, on the left unassuaged Charybdis, who thrice swallows the vast flood sheer down
her swirling gulf, and ever again hurls it upward, lashing the sky with water. But Scylla lies
prisoned in her cavern's blind recesses, thrusting forth her mouth and drawing ships upon the
rocks. In front her face is human, and her breast fair as a maiden's to the waist down; behind
she is a sea-dragon of monstrous frame, with dolphins' tails joined on her wolf-girt belly.
Better to track the goal of Trinacrian Pachynus, lingering and wheeling round through long
spaces, than once catch sight of misshapen Scylla deep in her dreary cavern, and of the rocks
that ring to her sea-coloured hounds. Moreover, if [433-466]Helenus hath aught of foresight
or his prophecy of assurance, if Apollo fills his spirit with the truth, this one thing, goddess-born,
one thing for all will I foretell thee, and again and again repeat my counsel: to great Juno's
deity be thy first prayer and worship; to Juno utter thy willing vows, and overcome thy mighty
mistress with gifts and supplications; so at last thou shalt leave Trinacria behind, and be
sped in triumph to the Italian borders. When borne hither thou drawest nigh the Cymaean city,
the haunted lakes and rustling woods of Avernus, thou shalt behold the raving prophetess who
deep in the rock chants of fate, and marks down her words on leaves. What verses she writes
down on them, the maiden sorts into order and shuts behind her in the cave; they stay in their
places unstirred and quit not their rank. But when at the turn of the hinge the light wind
from the doorway stirs them, and disarranges the delicate foliage, never after does she trouble
to capture them as they flutter about the hollow rock, nor restore their places or join the
verses; men depart without counsel, and hate the Sibyl's dwelling. Here let no waste in delay
be of such account to thee (though thy company chide, and the passage call thy sails strongly
to the deep, and thou mayest fill out their folds to thy desire) that thou do not approach
the prophetess, and plead with prayers that she herself utter her oracles and deign to loose
the accents from her lips. The nations of Italy and the wars to come, and the fashion whereby
every toil may be avoided or endured, she shall unfold to thee, and grant her worshipper prosperous
passage. Thus far is our voice allowed to counsel thee: go thy way, and exalt Troy to heaven
by thy deeds."

'This the seer uttered with friendly lips; then orders gifts to be carried to my ships, of
heavy gold and sawn ivory, and loads the hulls with massy silver and cauldrons [467-502]of
Dodona, a mail coat triple-woven with hooks of gold, and a helmet splendid with spike and tressed
plumes, the armour of Neoptolemus. My father too hath his gifts. Horses besides he brings,
and grooms . . . fills up the tale of our oarsmen, and equips my crews with arms.

'Meanwhile Anchises bade the fleet set their sails, that the fair wind might meet no delay.
Him Phoebus' interpreter accosts with high courtesy: "Anchises, honoured with the splendour
of Venus' espousal, the gods' charge, twice rescued from the fallen towers of Troy, lo! the
land of Ausonia is before thee: sail thou and seize it. And yet needs must thou float past
it on the sea; far away lies the quarter of Ausonia that is revealed of Apollo. Go," he continues,
"happy in thy son's affection: why do I run on further, and delay the rising winds in talk?"
Andromache too, sad at this last parting, brings figured raiment with woof of gold, and a Phrygian
scarf for Ascanius, and wearies not in courtesy, loading him with gifts from the loom. "Take
these too," so says she, "my child, to be memorials to thee of my hands, and testify long hence
the love of Andromache wife of Hector. Take these last gifts of thy kinsfolk, O sole surviving
likeness to me of my own Astyanax! Such was he, in eyes and hands and features; and now his
equal age were growing into manhood like thine."

'To them as I departed I spoke with starting tears: "Live happily, as they do whose fortunes
are perfected! We are summoned ever from fate to fate. For you there is rest in store, and
no ocean floor to furrow, no ever-retreating Ausonian fields to pursue. You see a pictured
Xanthus, and a Troy your own hands have built; with better omens, I pray, and to be less open
to the Greeks. If ever I enter Tiber and Tiber's bordering fields, and see a city granted to
my nation, then of these kindred towns [503-537]and allied peoples in Epirus and Hesperia,
which have the same Dardanus for founder, and whose story is one, of both will our hearts make
a single Troy. Let that charge await our posterity."

'We put out to sea, keeping the Ceraunian mountains close at hand, whence is the shortest passage
and seaway to Italy. The sun sets meanwhile, and the dusky hills grow dim. We choose a place,
and fling ourselves on the lap of earth at the water's edge, and, allotting the oars, spread
ourselves on the dry beach for refreshment: the dew of slumber falls on our weary limbs. Not
yet had Night driven of the Hours climbed her mid arch; Palinurus rises lightly from his couch,
explores all the winds, and listens to catch a breeze; he marks the constellations gliding
together through the silent sky, Arcturus, the rainy Hyades and the twin Oxen, and scans Orion
in his armour of gold. When he sees the clear sky quite unbroken, he gives from the stern his
shrill signal; we disencamp and explore the way, and spread the wings of our sails. And now
reddening Dawn had chased away the stars, when we descry afar dim hills and the low line of
Italy. Achates first raises the cry of Italy; and with joyous shouts my comrades salute Italy.
Then lord Anchises enwreathed a great bowl and filled it up with wine; and called on the gods,
standing high astern . . . "Gods sovereign over sea and land and weather! bring wind to ease
our way, and breathe favourably." The breezes freshen at his prayer, and now the harbour opens
out nearer at hand, and a temple appears on the Fort of Minerva. My comrades furl the sails
and swing the prows to shore. The harbour is scooped into an arch by the Eastern flood; reefs
run out and foam with the salt spray; itself it lies concealed; turreted walls of rock let
down their arms on either hand, and the temple retreats from the beach. Here, an inaugural
sight, four horses of snowy [538-570]whiteness are grazing abroad on the grassy plain. And
lord Anchises: "War dost thou carry, land of our sojourn; horses are armed in war, and menace
of war is in this herd. But yet these same beasts are wont in time to enter harness, and carry
yoke and bit in concord; there is hope of peace too," says he. Then we pray to the holy deity,
Pallas of the clangorous arms, the first to welcome our cheers. And before the altars we veil
our heads in Phrygian garments, and duly, after the counsel Helenus had urged deepest on us,
pay the bidden burnt-sacrifice to Juno of Argos.

'Without delay, once our vows are fully paid, we round to the arms of our sailyards and leave
the dwellings and menacing fields of the Grecian people. Next is descried the bay of Tarentum,
town, if rumour is true, of Hercules. Over against it the goddess of Lacinium rears her head,
with the towers of Caulon, and Scylaceum wrecker of ships. Then Trinacrian Aetna is descried
in the distance rising from the waves, and we hear from afar a great roaring of the sea on
beaten rocks, and broken noises by the shore: the channels boil up, and the surge churns with
sand. And lord Anchises: "Of a surety this is that Charybdis; of these cliffs, these awful
rocks did Helenus prophesy. Out, O comrades, and rise together to the oars." Even as bidden
they do; and first Palinurus swung the gurgling prow leftward through the water; to the left
all our squadron bent with oar and wind. We are lifted skyward on the crescent wave, and again
sunk deep into the nether world as the water is sucked away. Thrice amid their rocky caverns
the cliffs uttered a cry; thrice we see the foam flung out, and the stars through a dripping
veil. Meanwhile the wind falls with sundown; and weary and ignorant of the way we glide on
to the Cyclopes' coast.

'There lies a harbour large and unstirred by the winds' [571-604]entrance; but nigh it Aetna
thunders awfully in wrack, and ever and again hurls a black cloud into the sky, smoking with
boiling pitch and embers white hot, and heaves balls of flame flickering up to the stars: ever
and again vomits out on high crags from the torn entrails of the mountain, tosses up masses
of molten rock with a groan, and boils forth from the bottom. Rumour is that this mass weighs
down the body of Enceladus, half-consumed by the thunderbolt, and mighty Aetna laid over him
suspires the flame that bursts from her furnaces; and so often as he changes his weary side,
all Trinacria shudders and moans, veiling the sky in smoke. That night we spend in cover of
the forest among portentous horrors, and see not from what source the noise comes. For neither
did the stars show their fires, nor was the vault of constellated sky clear; but vapours blotted
heaven, and the moon was held in a storm-cloud through dead of night.

'And now the morrow was rising in the early east, and the dewy darkness rolled away from the
sky by Dawn, when sudden out of the forest advances a human shape strange and unknown, worn
with uttermost hunger and pitiably attired, and stretches entreating hands towards the shore.
We look back. Filthy and wretched, with shaggy beard and a coat pinned together with thorns,
he was yet a Greek, and had been sent of old to Troy in his father's arms. And he, when he
saw afar the Dardanian habits and armour of Troy, hung back a little in terror at the sight,
and stayed his steps; then ran headlong to the shore with weeping and prayers: "By the heavens
I beseech you, by the heavenly powers and this luminous sky that gives us breath, take me up,
O Trojans, carry me away to any land soever, and it will be enough. I know I am one out of
the Grecian fleets, I confess I warred against the household gods of Ilium; for that, if our
wrong and guilt is so great, throw [605-639]me piecemeal on the flood or plunge me in the waste
sea. If I do perish, gladly will I perish at human hands." He ended; and clung clasping our
knees and grovelling at them. We encourage him to tell who he is and of what blood born, and
reveal how Fortune pursues him since then. Lord Anchises after little delay gives him his hand,
and strengthens his courage by visible pledge. At last, laying aside his terror, he speaks thus:

'"I am from an Ithacan home, Achemenides by name, set out for Troy in luckless Ulysses' company;
poor was my father Adamastus, and would God fortune had stayed thus! Here my comrades abandoned
me in the Cyclops' vast cave, mindless of me while they hurry away from the barbarous gates.
It is a house of gore and blood-stained feasts, dim and huge within. Himself he is great of
stature and knocks at the lofty sky (gods, take away a curse like this from earth!) to none
gracious in aspect or courteous of speech. He feeds on the flesh and dark blood of wretched
men. I myself saw, when he caught the bodies of two of us with his great hand, and lying back
in the middle of the cave crushed them on the rock, and the courts splashed and swam with gore;
I saw when he champed the flesh adrip with dark clots of blood, and the warm limbs quivered
under his teeth. Yet not unavenged. Ulysses brooked not this, nor even in such straits did
the Ithacan forget himself. For so soon as he, gorged with his feast and buried in wine, lay
with bent neck sprawling huge over the cave, in his sleep vomiting gore and gobbets mixed with
wine and blood, we, praying to the great gods and with parts allotted, pour at once all round
him, and pierce with a sharp weapon the huge eye that lay sunk single under his savage brow,
in fashion of an Argolic shield or the lamp of the moon; and at last we exultingly avenge the
ghosts of our comrades. But fly, O wretched men, fly [640-674]and pluck the cable from the
beach. . . . For even in the shape and stature of Polyphemus, when he shuts his fleeced flocks
and drains their udders in the cave's covert, an hundred other horrible Cyclopes dwell all
about this shore and stray on the mountain heights. Thrice now does the horned moon fill out
her light, while I linger in life among desolate lairs and haunts of wild beasts in the woodland,
and from a rock survey the giant Cyclopes and shudder at their cries and echoing feet. The
boughs yield a miserable sustenance, berries and stony sloes, and plants torn up by the root
feed me. Sweeping all the view, I at last espied this fleet standing in to shore. On it, whatsoever
it were, I cast myself; it is enough to have escaped the accursed tribe. Do you rather, by
any death you will, destroy this life of mine."

'Scarcely had he spoken thus, when on the mountain top we see shepherding his flocks a vast
moving mass, Polyphemus himself seeking the shores he knew, a horror ominous, shapeless, huge,
bereft of sight. A pine lopped by his hand guides and steadies his footsteps. His fleeced sheep
attend him, this his single delight and solace in ill. . . . After he hath touched the deep
flood and come to the sea, he washes in it the blood that oozes from his eye-socket, grinding
his teeth with groans; and now he strides through the sea up to his middle, nor yet does the
wave wet his towering sides. We hurry far away in precipitate flight, with the suppliant who
had so well merited rescue; and silently cut the cable, and bending forward sweep the sea with
emulous oars. He heard, and turned his steps towards the echoing sound. But when he may in
no wise lay hands on us, nor can fathom the Ionian waves in pursuit, he raises a vast cry,
at which the sea and all his waves shuddered, and the deep land of Italy was startled, and
Aetna's vaulted caverns moaned. But the tribe of the [675-709]Cyclopes, roused from the high
wooded hills, run to the harbour and fill the shore. We descry the Aetnean brotherhood standing
impotent with scowling eye, their stately heads up to heaven, a dreadful consistory; even as
on a mountain summit stand oaks high in air or coned cypresses, a high forest of Jove or covert
of Diana. Sharp fear urges us to shake out the sheets in reckless haste, and spread our sails
to the favouring wind. Yet Helenus' commands counsel that our course keep not the way between
Scylla and Charybdis, the very edge of death on either hand. We are resolved to turn our canvas
back. And lo! from the narrow fastness of Pelorus the North wind comes down and reaches us.
I sail past Pantagias' mouth with its living stone, the Megarian bay, and low-lying Thapsus.
Such names did Achemenides, of luckless Ulysses' company, point out as he retraced his wanderings
along the returning shores.

'Stretched in front of a bay of Sicily lies an islet over against wavebeat Plemyrium; they
of old called it Ortygia. Hither Alpheus the river of Elis, so rumour runs, hath cloven a secret
passage beneath the sea, and now through thy well-head, Arethusa, mingles with the Sicilian
waves. We adore as bidden the great deities of the ground; and thence I cross the fertile soil
of Helorus in the marsh. Next we graze the high reefs and jutting rocks of Pachynus; and far
off appears Camarina, forbidden for ever by oracles to move, and the Geloan plains, and vast
Gela named after its river. Then Acragas on the steep, once the breeder of noble horses, displays
its massive walls in the distance; and with granted breeze I leave thee behind, palm-girt Selinus,
and thread the difficult shoals and blind reefs of Lilybaeum. Thereon Drepanum receives me
in its haven and joyless border. Here, so many tempestuous seas outgone, alas! my father, the
solace of every care and chance, Anchises is [710-718]lost to me. Here thou, dear lord, abandonest
me in weariness, alas! rescued in vain from peril and doom. Not Helenus the prophet, though
he counselled of many a terror, not boding Celaeno foretold me of this grief. This was the
last agony, this the goal of the long ways; thence it was I had departed when God landed me
on your coasts.'

Thus lord Aeneas with all attent retold alone the divine doom and the history of his goings.
At last he was hushed, and here in silence made an end.

BOOK FOURTH

THE LOVE OF DIDO, AND HER END

But the Queen, long ere now pierced with sore distress, feeds the wound with her life-blood,
and catches the fire unseen. Again and again his own valiance and his line's renown flood back
upon her spirit; look and accent cling fast in her bosom, and the pain allows not rest or calm
to her limbs. The morrow's dawn bore the torch of Phoebus across the earth, and had rolled
away the dewy darkness from the sky, when, scarce herself, she thus opens her confidence to
her sister:

'Anna, my sister, such dreams of terror thrill me through! What guest unknown is this who hath
entered our dwelling? How high his mien! how brave in heart as in arms! I believe it well,
with no vain assurance, his blood is divine. Fear proves the vulgar spirit. Alas, by what destinies
is he driven! what wars outgone he chronicled! Were my mind not planted, fixed and immoveable,
to ally myself to none in wedlock since my love of old was false to me in the treachery of
death; were I not sick to the heart of bridal torch and chamber, to this temptation alone I
might haply yield. Anna, I will confess it; since Sychaeus mine husband met his piteous doom,
and our household was shattered by a brother's murder, he only hath [22-55]touched mine heart
and stirred the balance of my soul. I know the prints of the ancient flame. But rather, I pray,
may earth first yawn deep for me, or the Lord omnipotent hurl me with his thunderbolt into
gloom, the pallid gloom and profound night of Erebus, ere I soil thee, mine honour, or unloose
thy laws. He took my love away who made me one with him long ago; he shall keep it with him,
and guard it in the tomb.' She spoke, and welling tears filled the bosom of her gown.

Anna replies: 'O dearer than the daylight to thy sister, wilt thou waste, sad and alone, all
thy length of youth, and know not the sweetness of motherhood, nor love's bounty? Deemest thou
the ashes care for that, or the ghost within the tomb? Be it so: in days gone by no wooers
bent thy sorrow, not in Libya, not ere then in Tyre; Iarbas was slighted, and other princes
nurtured by the triumphal land of Africa; wilt thou contend so with a love to thy liking? nor
does it cross thy mind whose are these fields about thy dwelling? On this side are the Gaetulian
towns, a race unconquerable in war; the reinless Numidian riders and the grim Syrtis hem thee
in; on this lies a thirsty tract of desert, swept by the raiders of Barca. Why speak of the
war gathering from Tyre, and thy brother's menaces? . . . With gods' auspices to my thinking,
and with Juno's favour, hath the Ilian fleet held on hither before the gale. What a city wilt
thou discern here, O sister! what a realm will rise on such a union! the arms of Troy ranged
with ours, what glory will exalt the Punic state! Do thou only, asking divine favour with peace-offerings,
be bounteous in welcome and draw out reasons for delay, while the storm rages at sea and Orion
is wet, and his ships are shattered and the sky unvoyageable.' With these words she made the
fire of love flame up in her spirit, put hope in her wavering soul, and let honour slip away.

[56-90]First they visit the shrines, and desire grace from altar to altar; they sacrifice sheep
fitly chosen to Ceres the Lawgiver, to Phoebus and lord Lyaeus, to Juno before all, guardian
of the marriage bond. Dido herself, excellent in beauty, holds the cup in her hand, and pours
libation between the horns of a milk-white cow, or moves in state to the rich altars before
the gods' presences, day by day renewing her gifts, and gazing athirst into the breasts of
cattle laid open to take counsel from the throbbing entrails. Ah, witless souls of soothsayers!
how may vows or shrines help her madness? all the while the subtle flame consumes her inly,
and deep in her breast the wound is silent and alive. Stung to misery, Dido wanders in frenzy
all down the city, even as an arrow-stricken deer, whom, far and heedless amid the Cretan woodland,
a shepherd archer hath pierced and left the flying steel in her unaware; she ranges in flight
the Dictaean forest lawns; fast in her side clings the deadly reed. Now she leads Aeneas with
her through the town, and displays her Sidonian treasure and ordered city; she essays to speak,
and breaks off half-way in utterance. Now, as day wanes, she seeks the repeated banquet, and
again madly pleads to hear the agonies of Ilium, and again hangs on the teller's lips. Thereafter,
when all are gone their ways, and the dim moon in turn quenches her light, and the setting
stars counsel to sleep, alone in the empty house she mourns, and flings herself on the couch
he left: distant she hears and sees him in the distance; or enthralled by the look he has of
his father, she holds Ascanius on her lap, if so she may steal the love she may not utter.
No more do the unfinished towers rise, no more do the people exercise in arms, nor work for
safety in war on harbour or bastion; the works hang broken off, vast looming walls and engines
towering into the sky.

So soon as she perceives her thus fast in the toils, and [91-124]madly careless of her name,
Jove's beloved wife, daughter of Saturn, accosts Venus thus:

'Noble indeed is the fame and splendid the spoils you win, thou and that boy of thine, and
mighty the renown of deity, if two gods have vanquished one woman by treachery. Nor am I so
blind to thy terror of our town, thine old suspicion of the high house of Carthage. But what
shall be the end? or why all this contest now? Nay, rather let us work an enduring peace and
a bridal compact. Thou hast what all thy soul desired; Dido is on fire with love, and hath
caught the madness through and through. Then rule we this people jointly in equal lordship;
allow her to be a Phrygian husband's slave, and to lay her Tyrians for dowry in thine hand.'

To her--for she knew the dissembled purpose of her words, to turn the Teucrian kingdom away
to the coasts of Libya--Venus thus began in answer: 'Who so mad as to reject these terms, or
choose rather to try the fortune of war with thee? if only when done, as thou sayest, fortune
follow. But I move in uncertainty of Jove's ordinance, whether he will that Tyrians and wanderers
from Troy be one city, or approve the mingling of peoples and the treaty of union. Thou art
his wife, and thy prayers may essay his soul. Go on; I will follow.'

Then Queen Juno thus rejoined: 'That task shall be mine. Now, by what means the present need
may be fulfilled, attend and I will explain in brief. Aeneas and Dido (alas and woe for her!)
are to go hunting together in the woodland when to-morrow's rising sun goes forth and his rays
unveil the world. On them, while the beaters run up and down, and the lawns are girt with toils,
will I pour down a blackening rain-cloud mingled with hail, and startle all the sky in thunder.
Their company will scatter for shelter in the dim darkness; Dido and the Trojan captain [125-159]shall
take refuge in the same cavern. I will be there, and if thy goodwill is assured me, I will
unite them in wedlock, and make her wholly his; here shall Hymen be present.' The Cytherean
gave ready assent to her request, and laughed at the wily invention.

Meanwhile Dawn rises forth of ocean. A chosen company issue from the gates while the morning
star is high; they pour forth with meshed nets, toils, broad-headed hunting spears, Massylian
horsemen and sinewy sleuth-hounds. At her doorway the chief of Carthage await their queen,
who yet lingers in her chamber, and her horse stands splendid in gold and purple with clattering
feet and jaws champing on the foamy bit. At last she comes forth amid a great thronging train,
girt in a Sidonian mantle, broidered with needlework; her quiver is of gold, her tresses knotted
into gold, a golden buckle clasps up her crimson gown. Therewithal the Phrygian train advances
with joyous Iülus. Himself first and foremost of all, Aeneas joins her company and unites his
party to hers: even as Apollo, when he leaves wintry Lycia and the streams of Xanthus to visit
his mother's Delos, and renews the dance, while Cretans and Dryopes and painted Agathyrsians
mingle clamorous about his altars: himself he treads the Cynthian ridges, and plaits his flowing
hair with soft heavy sprays and entwines it with gold; the arrows rattle on his shoulder: as
lightly as he went Aeneas; such glow and beauty is on his princely face. When they are come
to the mountain heights and pathless coverts, lo, wild goats driven from the cliff-tops run
down the ridge; in another quarter stags speed over the open plain and gather their flying
column in a cloud of dust as they leave the hills. But the boy Ascanius is in the valleys,
exultant on his fiery horse, and gallops past one and another, praying that among the unwarlike
herds a foaming boar may issue or a tawny lion descend the hill.

[160-194]Meanwhile the sky begins to thicken and roar aloud. A rain-cloud comes down mingled
with hail; the Tyrian train and the men of Troy, and the Dardanian boy of Venus' son scatter
in fear, and seek shelter far over the fields. Streams pour from the hills. Dido and the Trojan
captain take refuge in the same cavern. Primeval Earth and Juno the bridesmaid give the sign;
fires flash out high in air, witnessing the union, and Nymphs cry aloud on the mountain-top.
That day opened the gate of death and the springs of ill. For now Dido recks not of eye or
tongue, nor sets her heart on love in secret: she calls it marriage, and with this name veils
her fall.

Straightway Rumour runs through the great cities of Libya,--Rumour, than whom none other is
more swift to mischief; she thrives on restlessness and gains strength by going: at first small
and timorous; soon she lifts herself on high and paces the ground with head hidden among the
clouds. Her, one saith, Mother Earth, when stung by wrath against the gods, bore last sister
to Coeus and Enceladus, fleet-footed and swift of wing, ominous, awful, vast; for every feather
on her body is a waking eye beneath, wonderful to tell, and a tongue, and as many loud lips
and straining ears. By night she flits between sky and land, shrilling through the dusk, and
droops not her lids in sweet slumber; in daylight she sits on guard upon tall towers or the
ridge of the house-roof, and makes great cities afraid; obstinate in perverseness and forgery
no less than messenger of truth. She then exultingly filled the countries with manifold talk,
and blazoned alike what was done and undone: one Aeneas is come, born of Trojan blood; on him
beautiful Dido thinks no shame to fling herself; now they hold their winter, long-drawn through
mutual caresses, regardless of their realms and enthralled by passionate dishonour. This the
pestilent goddess [195-227]spreads abroad in the mouths of men, and bends her course right
on to King Iarbas, and with her words fires his spirit and swells his wrath.

He, the seed of Ammon by a ravished Garamantian Nymph, had built to Jove in his wide realms
an hundred great temples, an hundred altars, and consecrated the wakeful fire that keeps watch
by night before the gods perpetually, where the soil is fat with blood of beasts and the courts
blossom with pied garlands. And he, distracted and on fire at the bitter tidings, before his
altars, amid the divine presences, often, it is said, bowed in prayer to Jove with uplifted hands:

'Jupiter omnipotent, to whom from the broidered cushions of their banqueting halls the Maurusian
people now pour Lenaean offering, lookest thou on this? or do we shudder vainly when our father
hurls the thunderbolt, and do blind fires in the clouds and idle rumblings appal our soul?
The woman who, wandering in our coasts, planted a small town on purchased ground, to whom we
gave fields by the shore and laws of settlement, she hath spurned our alliance and taken Aeneas
for lord of her realm. And now that Paris, with his effeminate crew, his chin and oozy hair
swathed in the turban of Maeonia, takes and keeps her; since to thy temples we bear oblation,
and hallow an empty name.'

In such words he pleaded, clasping the altars; the Lord omnipotent heard, and cast his eye
on the royal city and the lovers forgetful of their fairer fame. Then he addresses this charge
to Mercury:

'Up and away, O son! call the breezes and slide down them on thy wings: accost the Dardanian
captain who now loiters in Tyrian Carthage and casts not a look on destined cities; carry down
my words through the fleet air. Various dissertations on minor pieces exist: but there is no
English translation of the Almagest, &c., though it exists in French (see Smith's Biograph. Dict.
art. PTOLEMY). If an English reader wants to know Ptolemy's astronomical methods and hypotheses,
nothing will suit him better than Narrien's History of Astronomy.

M.

Accuracy of References.--In connection with the article on "Misquotations," in No. 3. p.38., will
you impress upon your correspondents the necessity of exact references? It is rather hard when,
after a long search, a sought reference has been obtained, to find that the reference itself
is, on examination, incorrect. To illustrate my position: at p. 23., in an article relating
to Judge Skipwyth, and at p. 42., in an article relating to the Lions in the Tower, references
to certain "pp." of the Issue Rolls of the Exchequer. Now if any person with these references
were to search the Issue Rolls, he would be much surprised to find that the Rolls are rolls, and
not books, and that "pp." is not the correct reference. The fact is that neither of your correspondents
are quoting from the Rolls themselves, but from a volume, published in 1835, under the direction
of the Comptroller General of the Exchequer, by Mr. F. Devon, called Issue Roll of Thomas de
Brantingham, Bishop of Exeter, Lord High Treasurer of England, &c. 44 Edward III.

And while on the subject, permit me to remark, with reference to the article on the Domestic Expenses
of Queen Elizabeth (page 41.), that there are plenty of such documents in existence, and that
the only test of their value and authenticity is a reference to where they may be found, which is
wanting in the article in question.

J.E.

A Peal of Bells.--In No. 8 of your interesting and valuable journal, I find a query, from the
REV. A. GATTY, relative to a peal of bells. Now the science of bell-ringing being purely English,
we can expect to find the explanation sought for, only in English
authors.

Dr. Johnson says peal means a "succession of sounds;" and in this way it is used by many old
writer, thus:--

"A peal shall rouse their sleep."--MILTON.

And again Addison:--

"Oh for a peal of thunder that would make Earth, sea, and air, and heaven, and Cato tremble."

Bacon
also hath it:--

"Woods of oranges will smell into the sea perhaps twenty miles; but what is that, since a peal
of ordnance will do as much, which moveth in a small compass?"

Will not ringing a peal, then, mean a succession of sweet sounds caused by the ringing of bells
in certain keys? Some ringers begin with D flat; others, again, contend they should begin
in C sharp.

In your last number is a query about Scarborough Warning. Grose, in his Provincial Glossary, give
the meaning as "a word and a blow, and the blow first;" it is a common proverb in Yorkshire.
He gives the same account of its origin as does Ray, extracted from Fuller, and gives no notion
that any other can be attached to it.

R.J.S.

* * * * *

QUERIES.

CATACOMBS AND BONE-HOUSES.

I should be very glad to have some distinct information on the above
subject, especially in explanation of any repositories of human bones
in England?

Was the ancient preservation of these skeleton remains always connected with embalming the body?--or
drying it, after the manner described by Captain Smythe, R.N., to
be still practised in Sicily?--and, in cases in which dry bones only
were preserved, by what process was the flesh removed from them? for,
as Addison says, in reference to the catacombs at Naples, "they must
have been full of stench, if the dead bodies that lay in them were
left to rot in open niches."

The catacombs at Paris seem to have been furnished with bones from the emptyings of the metropolitan
churchyards. In some soils, however, the bones rot almost as soon as the flesh decays from them.

There
are, possibly, many bone-houses in England. I have seen two of considerable extent, one at
Ripon Minster, the other at Rothwell Church, in Northamptonshire; and at both places skulls
and thigh bones were piled up, in mural recesses, with as much regularity as bottles in the bins
of a wine-cellar. At Rothwell there was (twenty years ago) a great number of these relics. The
sexton spoke of there being 10,000 skulls, but this, no doubt, was an exaggeration; and he gave,
as the local tradition, that they had been gathered from the neighbouring field of Naseby. A similar
story prevails at Ripon, viz. that the death-heads and cross-bones, which are arranged in the crypt
under the Minster, are the grisly gleanings of some battle-field.

Now, if these, and other like collections, were really made after battles which took place
during any of the civil wars of England, some details would not be unworthy of the notice of
the picturesque historian; e.g., was it the custom in those unhappy days to disinter, after
a time, the slightly-buried corpses, and deposit the bones in the consecrated vault?--or was
this the accidental work of some antiquarian sexton of the "Old Mortality" species?--or was
the pious attention suggested by the ploughman's later discoveries--

"Agricola, incurvo terram molitus aratro," &c.?

Any report from the places where there happen to be bone-houses, together with the local tradition
assigning their origin, would I think, throw light on an interesting and rather obscure subject.

Ecclesfield,
Dec. 31. 1849.

ALFRED GATTY

* * * * *

CONTRADICTIONS IN DON QUIXOTE; AND QUERY AS TO THE BUSCAPIÉ.

In answer to the question of "MELANION" (in No. 5 p. 73.), it may be sufficient to refer him
to the Spanish editions with notes, viz. that of Pellicer in 1800; the 4th edition of the Spanish
Academy in 1819; and that of D. Diego Clemencin in 1833, where he will find the discrepancies
he mentions pointed out.

In the first edition of 1605 there was another instance in the same chapter, which Cervantes
corrected in the edition of 1608, but overlooked the other two. It was one of those lapses,
quas incuria fudit, which great writers as well as small are subject to. Clemencin laughs
at De los Rios for thinking it a chracteristic of great geniuses
so to mistake; and at the enthusiasm of some one else, who said that
he preferred the Don Quixote with the defects to the Don Quixote without
them.

Having answered one query, I presume I may be permitted to propose one, in which I feel much
interested.

Is the recently published BUSCAPIÉ the work of Cervantes? We have now been favoured with two
translations, one by Thomasina Ross, the other by a member of the University of Cambridge, under
the title of The Squib, or Searchfoot; the latter I have read with some attention, but not having
been able to procure the Spanish original, I should be glad to have the opinion of some competent
Spanish scholar who has read it, as to its genuineness. My own impression is that it will prove
an ingenious (perhaps innocent?) imposture. The story of its discovery in a collection of books sold
by auction at Cadiz, and its publication there by Don Adolfo de Castro, in the first place,
rather excites suspicion. My impression, however, is formed from the evident artificial structure
of the whole.

Still, not having seen the original, I confess myself an imperfect judge, and hope that this may
meet the eye of one competent to decide.

S.W. SINGER

* * * * *

ANCIENT ALMS-BASINS.

I have read the various notices in Nos. 3, 5, and 6. on the subject of these dishes. I have an
electrotype copy from such a dish, the original of which is in Manchester. The device is like
No. 4. of those of CLERICUS (No. 3. p. 44.); but two circles of inscription extend round the central
device (the Grapes of Escol), in characters which are supposed to
be Saracenic.

The inner inscription is five times, the outer seven times, repeated in the round. I see by
the Archaeological Journal, No. 23, for Sept. 1849 (pp.295-6.), that at the meeting of Archaeological
Institute, on the 1st June last, Mr. Octavius Morgan, M.P., exhibited a collection of ancient salvers
or chargers, supposed to be of latten; several ornamented with sacred devices and inscriptions,
including some remarkable examples of the curious florid letter, forming legends, which have
so long perplexed antiquaries in all parts of Europe. Mr. Morgan arranged the devices in four
classes, the first being chargers or large dishes, supposed by him to have been fabricated at
Nuremburg.

The northern antiquary, Sjöborg, who has written much on the subject, calls them baptismal
or alms dishes. Their most common devices are, Adam and Eve (probably the No. 3. of CLERICUS),
St. George, and the Grapes of Eschol (No. 4. of CLERICUS). On one of those exhibited was the Annunciation
(No. 2. of CLERICUS). On these facts I wish to put the following queries:--

1. Are Sjöborg's works known to any of your readers?

2. In what language does he suppose the characters to be?

MELANDRA.

[While we are very happy to promote the inquiries of our correspondent, we think it right to
apprise him that the opinions of the Swedish antiquary whom he has named, are received with
great caution by the majority of his archæological brethren.]

* * * * *

MINOR QUERIES.

Cupid Crying.--I shall be obliged if you, or any of your correspondents, can tell me who was
the author of the epigram, or inscription, of which I subjoin the English translation. I am
sure I have seen the Latin, but I do not know whose it was or where to find it; I think it belongs
to one of the Italian writers of the fifteenth or sixteenth century:--

"CUPID CRYING.

"Why is Cupid crying so?-- Because his jealous mother beat him.-- What for?--For giving up
his bow To Coelia, who contrived to cheat him.

"The child! I could not have believed He'd give his weapons to another.-- He would not; but
he was deceived: She smiled; he thought it was his mother."

RUFUS.

Was not Sir George Jackson "Junius?"--Among the names which have been put forward as claimants to
be "Junius," I beg to propose the name of SIR GEORGE JACKSON, who was, I believe, about that
time Secretary to the Admiralty. I shall be glad to know what obstacles are opposed to this theory,
as I think I have some presumptive evidence (I do not call it strong), which seems to show either
that he was "Junius," or a party concerned.

P.

Ballad of Dick and the Devil.--About the middle of the seventeenth century, occasionally resided,
on the large island in Windermere, a member of the ancient but now
extinct family of Philipson, of Crooke Hall.

He was a dashing cavalier, and, from his fearless exploits, had acquired among the Parliamentarians
the significant, though not very respectable, cognomen of "Robin the Devil."

On one of these characteristic adventures, he rode, heavily armed, into the large old church
at Kendal, with the intention of there shooting an individual, from whom he had received a deeply
resented injury. His object, however, was unaccomplished, for his enemy was not present; and
in the confusion into which the congregation were thrown by such
a warlike apparition, the dauntless intruder made his exit, though
subjected to a struggle at the church door.

His casque, which was captured in the skirmish that there took place, is yet to be seen in
the church, and the fame of this redoubtable attempt, which was long held in remembrance through
the country side, excited the poetic genius of a rhymer of the day to embody it in a ballad,
entitled "Dick and the Devil," which is now rare and difficult to be met with.

As my endeavours to light on a copy have been unavailing, and my opportunities for research are limited,
perhaps some one of your numerous readers who may be versed in the ballad poetry of the age
of my hero, will kindly take the trouble to inform me whether he has ever met with the ballad
in question, or direct me to where it may most likely be found.

I trust that from the obliging communications of some of your valuable literary correspondents,
I may be so fortunate as to meet with the object of my query.

H.J.M.

Dec. 27. Ambleside.

Erasmus' Paraphrase on the Gospels.--I have in my charge the mutilated remains of an old black-letter
copy of Erasmus' Paraphrase on the Gospels, not of any great value perhaps, but interesting
to me from its having been chained from time immemorial (so to speak) to one of the stalls in our
parish church; it is only perfect from Mark, fol. lxiiii. to John fol. cxiii., but I should be
glad to know the date, &c. of its publication. Presuming, therefore, that one of the objects
of your interesting publication is to aid in solving the minor difficulties of persons like
myself, who have no means of consulting any large collection of books,
I have the less scruple in forwarding the accompanying "Notes" from
my copy, for the guidance of any one who will be at the trouble of
comparing them with any copy to which he may have access.

The spelling of the word "gospel" varies throughout; thus, in Mark, fols. lxiiii-lxxii., xci.,
xciv., xcv., xcvii., and xcviii. it is "ghospel;" on lxxiii-lxxvi.,
lxxviii., it is "gospell;" on the rest "gospel." So also throughout
St. Luke, which occupies cc. foll., it varies in like manner, "ghospell"
being there the more common form. The initial letter to St. Luke represents
Jacob's dream; on the first page of fol. vi. of St. Luke the translator's
preface ends, "Geven at London the last day of Septembre, in the yere
of our Lorde M.D.XLV." On fol. xiii. of the same, Erasmus' own preface
ends, "Geven at Basill the xxii. dai of August ye yere of our Lord,
M.D." (the rest effaced). On the first page of fol. viii. of St. John's
Gospel the preface ends, "Geven at Basile the yere of our Lord, M.D.XXIII.
the v daye of Januarye." If these notes are sufficient to identify
my copy with any particular edition, it will afford a real pleasure
to

A YORKSHIRE SUBSCRIBER.

Iland Chest.--In some wills of Bristol
merchants of the latter part of the 16th century, I have met with
the bequest of a chattel called an "Iland Chest:" thus, ex.g. "Item:
to Edmond Poyley I give the Iland chest in the great chamber wherein
his linen was." Mention is made of the like article in two or three
other instances. An explanation of the word and an account of the
kind of chest will much oblige.

B.W.G.

D'Israeli on the Court of
Wards.--D'Israeli, in his article upon "Usurers of the Seventeenth
Century" (Curios. of Lit. iii. 89. old ed.), which is chiefly upon
Hugh Audley, a master of the Court of Wards and Liveries, speaks of
that court as "a remarkable institution, on which I purpose to make
some researches." Can any of your readers inform me if D'Israeli acted
upon this resolve, and, if so, where the results of labours are to
be found?

J.B.

Ancient Tiles.--Two birds, back to back, with heads
turned to each other, were common on ancient tiles. What are they
intended to represent or to emblemise?

B.

Pilgrimage of Kings, &c.--Blind
Man's Buff--Muffin--Hundred Weight, &c.-- 1. Can your readers oblige
me with the name of the author and the date of a work entitled The
Pilgrimage of Kings and Princes, of which I possess an imperfect copy--a
small quarto? 2. What is the etymology of the game Blind Man's Buff?
I am led to doubt whether that was the old spelling of it, for in
a catalogue now before me I find a quarto work by Martin Parker, entitled
The Poet's Blind Man's Bough, or Have among you my Blind Harpers,
1641. 3. What is the origin of the word muffin? It is not in Johnson's
Dictionary. Perhaps this sort of tea-cake was not known in his day.
4. By what logic do we call one hundred and twelve pounds merely a
hundred weight? 5. I am constantly feeling the want of a work of the
kind to comprehend zoological similes and allusions, and also notices
of customs and superstitions connected with animals, when reading
our old poets and chroniclers. Even the most celebrated zoological
works are of no use to me in such inquiries.

STEPHEN BEAUCHAMP.

Anthony
Bek, Bishop of Durham.--Having employed my leisure for many years
in collecting materials for the biography of the famous Anthony Bek,
Bishop of Durham, I am baffled by the conflicting and contradictory
accounts of,--(1.) The title by which he became possessed of the Vesci
estates; (2.) When and by what authority he took upon him the title
of "King of the Isle of Man;" and (3.) How he became dispossessed
of that title, which it is well known that Edward II. bestowed upon
Gaveston; and whether that circumstance did not induce him to take
part with the confederate barons who eventually destroyed that favourite.

Other
incongruities occur in my researches, but the above are the most difficult
of solution.

I am, dear Sir,

ONE THAT INTENDS TO BE A REGULAR SUBSCRIBER
TO THE "NOTES AND QUERIES."

Curious Welsh Custom.--A custom prevails
in Wales of carrying about at Christmas time a horse's skull dressed
up with ribbons, and supported on a pole by a man who is concealed
under a large white cloth. There is a contrivance for opening and
shutting the jaws, and the figure pursues and bites every body it
can lay hold of, and does not release them except on payment of a
fine. It is generally accompanied by some men dressed up in a grotesque
manner, who, on reaching a house, sing some extempore verses requesting
admittance, and are in turn answered by those within, until one party
or the other is at a loss for a reply. The Welsh are undoubtedly a
poetical people, and these verses often display a good deal of cleverness.
This horse's head is called Mari Lwyd, which I have heard translated
"grey mare." Llwyd certainly is grey, but Mari is not a mare, in Welsh.
I think I have heard that there is some connection between it and
the camel which often appears in old pictures of the Magi offering
their gifts. Can any of your readers inform me of the real meaning
of the name, and the origin of the custom, and also whether a similar
custom does not prevail in some parts of Oxfordshire?

PWCCA.

Fall
of Rain in England.--Can you give me any information respecting the
fall of rain in England? I mean the quantity of rain that has fallen
in various parts of the island, from month to month, during the last
ten, fifteen, or twenty years. If any of your correspondents can do
that, or can give me a list of works, periodical or otherwise, in
which such information is to be found, they will greatly oblige me.

Can
any of your correspondents inform me who is the author of the following
lines?--

"Though with forced mirth we oft may soothe a smart, What
seemeth well, is oft not well, I ween; For many a burning breast and
bleeding heart, Hid under guise of mirth is often seen."

ROYDON.

Rev.
J. Edwards on Metals for Telescopes.--I shall feel obliged if any
of your correspondents can inform me where I can find a paper, called
"Directions for making the best Composition for the Metals of reflecting
Telescopes, and the Method of grinding, polishing, and giving the
great Speculum the true parabolic figure," by the Rev. John Edwards,
B.A.

I saw it some years ago in on old journal or transactions, but
Capt. Cuttle's maxim not having been then given to the world, and
being now unable to make a search, I avail myself of your valuable
publication. O
be favourable; give gracious aid and bring fair sky and weather.' He spoke, and snatching his
sword like lightning from the sheath, strikes at the hawser with the drawn steel. The same
zeal catches all at once; rushing and tearing they quit the shore; the sea is hidden under
their fleets; strongly they toss up the foam and sweep the blue water.

And now Dawn broke, and, leaving the saffron bed of Tithonus, shed her radiance anew over the
world; when the Queen saw from her watch-tower the first light whitening, and the fleet standing
out under squared sail, and discerned shore and haven empty of all their oarsmen. Thrice and
four times she struck her hand on her lovely breast and rent her yellow hair: 'God!' she cries,
'shall he go? shall an alien make mock of our realm? Will they not issue in armed pursuit from
all the city, and some launch ships from the dockyards? Go; bring fire in haste, serve weapons,
swing out the oars! What do I talk? or where am I? what mad change is on my purpose? Alas,
Dido! now thou dost feel thy wickedness; that had graced thee once, when thou gavest away thy
crown. Behold the faith and hand of him! who, they say, carries his household's ancestral gods
about with him! who stooped his shoulders to a father outworn with age! Could I not have riven
his body in sunder and strewn it on the waves? and slain with the sword his comrades and his
dear Ascanius, and served him for the banquet at his father's table? But the chance of battle
had been dubious. If it had! whom did I fear [604-635]with my death upon me? I should have
borne firebrands into his camp and filled his decks with flame, blotted out father and son
and race together, and flung myself atop of all. Sun, whose fires lighten all the works of
the world, and thou, Juno, mediatress and witness of these my distresses, and Hecate, cried
on by night in crossways of cities, and you, fatal avenging sisters and gods of dying Elissa,
hear me now; bend your just deity to my woes, and listen to our prayers. If it must needs be
that the accursed one touch his haven and float up to land, if thus Jove's decrees demand,
and this is the appointed term,--yet, distressed in war by an armed and gallant nation, driven
homeless from his borders, rent from Iülus' embrace, let him sue for succour and see death
on death untimely on his people; nor when he hath yielded him to the terms of a harsh peace,
may he have joy of his kingdom or the pleasant light; but let him fall before his day and without
burial on a waste of sand. This I pray; this and my blood with it I pour for the last utterance.
And you, O Tyrians, hunt his seed with your hatred for all ages to come; send this guerdon
to our ashes. Let no kindness nor truce be between the nations. Arise out of our dust, O unnamed
avenger, to pursue the Dardanian settlement with firebrand and steel. Now, then, whensoever
strength shall be given, I invoke the enmity of shore to shore, wave to water, sword to sword;
let their battles go down to their children's children.'

So speaks she as she kept turning her mind round about, seeking how soonest to break away from
the hateful light. Thereon she speaks briefly to Barce, nurse of Sychaeus; for a heap of dusky
ashes held her own, in her country of long ago:

'Sweet nurse, bring Anna my sister hither to me. Bid her haste and sprinkle river water over
her body, and bring [636-667]with her the beasts ordained for expiation: so let her come: and
thou likewise veil thy brows with a pure chaplet. I would fulfil the rites of Stygian Jove
that I have fitly ordered and begun, so to set the limit to my distresses and give over to
the flames the funeral pyre of the Dardanian.'

So speaks she; the old woman went eagerly with quickened pace. But Dido, fluttered and fierce
in her awful purpose, with bloodshot restless gaze, and spots on her quivering cheeks burning
through the pallor of imminent death, bursts into the inner courts of the house, and mounts
in madness the high funeral pyre, and unsheathes the sword of Dardania, a gift asked for no
use like this. Then after her eyes fell on the Ilian raiment and the bed she knew, dallying
a little with her purpose through her tears, she sank on the pillow and spoke the last words
of all:

'Dress he wore, sweet while doom and deity allowed! receive my spirit now, and release me from
my distresses. I have lived and fulfilled Fortune's allotted course; and now shall I go a queenly
phantom under the earth. I have built a renowned city; I have seen my ramparts rise; by my
brother's punishment I have avenged my husband of his enemy; happy, ah me! and over happy,
had but the keels of Dardania never touched our shores!' She spoke; and burying her face in
the pillow, 'Death it will be,' she cries, 'and unavenged; but death be it. Thus, thus is it
good to pass into the dark. Let the pitiless Dardanian's gaze drink in this fire out at sea,
and my death be the omen he carries on his way.'

She ceased; and even as she spoke her people see her sunk on the steel, and blood reeking on
the sword and spattered on her hands. A cry rises in the high halls; Rumour riots down the
quaking city. The house resounds with lamentation and sobbing and bitter crying of women; [668-700]heaven
echoes their loud wails; even as though all Carthage or ancient Tyre went down as the foe poured
in, and the flames rolled furious over the roofs of house and temple. Swooning at the sound,
her sister runs in a flutter of dismay, with torn face and smitten bosom, and darts through
them all, and calls the dying woman by her name. 'Was it this, mine own? Was my summons a snare?
Was it this thy pyre, ah me, this thine altar fires meant? How shall I begin my desolate moan?
Didst thou disdain a sister's company in death? Thou shouldst have called me to share thy doom;
in the self-same hour, the self-same pang of steel had been our portion. Did these very hands
build it, did my voice call on our father's gods, that with thee lying thus I should be away
as one without pity? Thou hast destroyed thyself and me together, O my sister, and the Sidonian
lords and people, and this thy city. Give her wounds water: I will bathe them and catch on
my lips the last breath that haply yet lingers.' So speaking she had climbed the high steps,
and, wailing, clasped and caressed her half-lifeless sister in her bosom, and stanched the
dark streams of blood with her gown. She, essaying to lift her heavy eyes, swoons back; the
deep-driven wound gurgles in her breast. Thrice she rose, and strained to lift herself on her
elbow; thrice she rolled back on the pillow, and with wandering eyes sought the light of high
heaven, and moaned as she found it.

Then Juno omnipotent, pitying her long pain and difficult decease, sent Iris down from heaven
to unloose the struggling life from the body where it clung. For since neither by fate did
she perish, nor as one who had earned her death, but woefully before her day, and fired by
sudden madness, not yet had Proserpine taken her lock from the golden head, nor sentenced her
to the Stygian under world. So Iris on dewy saffron pinions flits down through the sky [701-705]athwart
the sun in a trail of a thousand changing dyes, and stopping over her head: 'This hair, sacred
to Dis, I take as bidden, and release thee from that body of thine.' So speaks she, and cuts
it with her hand. And therewith all the warmth ebbed forth from her, and the life passed away
upon the winds.

BOOK FIFTH

THE GAMES OF THE FLEET

Meanwhile Aeneas and his fleet in unwavering track now held mid passage, and cleft the waves
that blackened under the North, looking back on the city that even now gleams with hapless
Elissa's funeral flame. Why the broad blaze is lit lies unknown; but the bitter pain of a great
love trampled, and the knowledge of what woman can do in madness, draw the Teucrians' hearts
to gloomy guesses.

When their ships held the deep, nor any land farther appears, the seas all round, and all round
the sky, a dusky shower drew up overhead, carrying night and storm, and the wave shuddered
and gloomed. Palinurus, master of the fleet, cries from the high stern: 'Alas, why have these
heavy storm-clouds girt the sky? lord Neptune, what wilt thou?' Then he bids clear the rigging
and bend strongly to the oars, and brings the sails across the wind, saying thus:

'Noble Aeneas, not did Jupiter give word and warrant would I hope to reach Italy under such
a sky. The shifting winds roar athwart our course, and blow stronger out of the black west,
and the air thickens into mist: nor are we fit to force our way on and across. Fortune is the
stronger; let us follow her, and turn our course whither she calls. [23-55]Not far away, I
think, are the faithful shores of thy brother Eryx, and the Sicilian haven, if only my memory
retraces rightly the stars I watched before.'

Then good Aeneas: 'Even I ere now discern the winds will have it so, and thou urgest against
them in vain. Turn thou the course of our sailing. Could any land be welcomer to me, or where
I would sooner choose to put in my weary ships, than this that hath Dardanian Acestes to greet
me, and laps in its embrace lord Anchises' dust?' This said, they steer for harbour, while
the following west wind stretches their sails; the fleet runs fast down the flood, and at last
they land joyfully on the familiar beach. But Acestes high on a hill-top, amazed at the friendly
squadron approaching from afar, hastens towards them, weaponed and clad in the shaggy skin
of a Libyan she-bear. Him a Trojan mother conceived and bore to Crimisus river; not forgetful
of his parentage, he wishes them joy of their return, and gladly entertains them on his rustic
treasure and comforts their weariness with his friendly store. So soon as the morrow's clear
daylight had chased the stars out of the east, Aeneas calls his comrades along the beach together,
and from a mounded hillock speaks:

'Great people of Dardanus, born of the high blood of gods, the yearly circle of the months
is measured out to fulfilment since we laid the dust in earth, all that was left of my divine
father, and sadly consecrated our altars. And now the day is at hand (this, O gods, was your
will), which I will ever keep in grief, ever in honour. Did I spend it an exile on Gaetulian
quicksands, did it surprise me on the Argolic sea or in Mycenae town, yet would I fulfil the
yearly vows and annual ordinance of festival, and pile the altars with their due gifts. Now
we are led hither, to the very dust and ashes of our father, not as I deem without [56-90]divine
purpose and influence, and borne home into the friendly haven. Up then and let us all gather
joyfully to the sacrifice: pray we for winds, and may he deign that I pay these rites to him
year by year in an established city and consecrated temple. Two head of oxen Acestes, the seed
of Troy, gives to each of your ships by tale: invite to the feast your own ancestral gods of
the household, and those whom our host Acestes worships. Further, so the ninth Dawn uplift
the gracious day upon men, and her shafts unveil the world, I will ordain contests for my Trojans;
first for swift ships; then whoso excels in the foot-race, and whoso, confident in strength
and skill, comes to shoot light arrows, or adventures to join battle with gloves of raw hide;
let all be here, and let merit look for the prize and palm. Now all be hushed, and twine your
temples with boughs.'

So speaks he, and shrouds his brows with his mother's myrtle. So Helymus does, so Aletes ripe
of years, so the boy Ascanius, and the rest of the people follow. He advances from the assembly
to the tomb among a throng of many thousands that crowd about him; here he pours on the ground
in fit libation two goblets of pure wine, two of new milk, two of consecrated blood, and flings
bright blossoms, saying thus: 'Hail, holy father, once again; hail, ashes of him I saved in
vain, and soul and shade of my sire! Thou wert not to share the search for Italian borders
and destined fields, nor the dim Ausonian Tiber.' Thus had he spoken; when from beneath the
sanctuary a snake slid out in seven vast coils and sevenfold slippery spires, quietly circling
the grave and gliding from altar to altar, his green chequered body and the spotted lustre
of his scales ablaze with gold, as the bow in the cloud darts a thousand changing dyes athwart
the sun: Aeneas stood amazed at the sight. At last he wound [91-126]his long train among the
vessels and polished cups, and tasted the feast, and again leaving the altars where he had
fed, crept harmlessly back beneath the tomb. Doubtful if he shall think it the Genius of the
ground or his father's ministrant, he slays, as is fit, two sheep of two years old, as many
swine and dark-backed steers, pouring the while cups of wine, and calling on the soul of great
Anchises and the ghost rearisen from Acheron. Therewithal his comrades, as each hath store,
bring gifts to heap joyfully on the altars, and slay steers in sacrifice: others set cauldrons
arow, and, lying along the grass, heap live embers under spits and roast the flesh.

The desired day came, and now the ninth Dawn rode up clear and bright behind Phaëthon's coursers;
and the name and renown of illustrious Acestes had stirred up all the bordering people; their
holiday throng filled the shore, to see Aeneas' men, and some ready to join in contest. First
of all the prizes are laid out to view in the middle of the racecourse; tripods of sacrifice,
green garlands and palms, the reward of the conquerors, armour and garments dipped in purple,
talents of silver and gold: and from a hillock in the midst the trumpet sounds the games begun.
First is the contest of rowing, and four ships matched in weight enter, the choice of all the
fleet. Mnestheus' keen oarsmen drive the swift Dragon, Mnestheus the Italian to be, from whose
name is the Memmian family; Gyas the huge bulk of the huge Chimaera, a floating town, whom
her triple-tiered Dardanian crew urge on with oars rising in threefold rank; Sergestus, from
whom the Sergian house holds her name, sails in the tall Centaur; and in the sea-coloured Scylla
Cloanthus, whence is thy family, Cluentius of Rome.

Apart in the sea and over against the foaming beach, lies a rock that the swoln waves beat
and drown what time the [127-159]north-western gales of winter blot out the stars; in calm
it rises silent out of the placid water, flat-topped, and a haunt where cormorants love best
to take the sun. Here lord Aeneas set up a goal of leafy ilex, a mark for the sailors to know
whence to return, where to wheel their long course round. Then they choose stations by lot,
and on the sterns their captains glitter afar, beautiful in gold and purple; the rest of the
crews are crowned with poplar sprays, and their naked shoulders glisten wet with oil. They
sit down at the thwarts, and their arms are tense on the oars; at full strain they wait the
signal, while throbbing fear and heightened ambition drain their riotous blood. Then, when
the clear trumpet-note rang, all in a moment leap forward from their line; the shouts of the
sailors strike up to heaven, and the channels are swept into foam by the arms as they swing
backward. They cleave their furrows together, and all the sea is torn asunder by oars and triple-pointed
prows. Not with speed so headlong do racing pairs whirl the chariots over the plain, as they
rush streaming from the barriers; not so do their charioteers shake the wavy reins loose over
their team, and hang forward on the whip. All the woodland rings with clapping and shouts of
men that cheer their favourites, and the sheltered beach eddies back their cries; the noise
buffets and re-echoes from the hills. Gyas shoots out in front of the noisy crowd, and glides
foremost along the water; whom Cloanthus follows next, rowing better, but held back by his
dragging weight of pine. After them, at equal distance, the Dragon and the Centaur strive to
win the foremost room; and now the Dragon has it, now the vast Centaur outstrips and passes
her; now they dart on both together, their stems in a line, and their keels driving long furrows
through the salt water-ways. And now they drew nigh the rock, and were hard [160-193]on the
goal; when Gyas as he led, winner over half the flood, cries aloud to Menoetes, the ship's
steersman: 'Whither away so far to the right? This way direct her path; kiss the shore, and
let the oarblade graze the leftward reefs. Others may keep to deep water.' He spoke; but Menoetes,
fearing blind rocks, turns the bow away towards the open sea. 'Whither wanderest thou away?
to the rocks, Menoetes!' again shouts Gyas to bring him back; and lo! glancing round he sees
Cloanthus passing up behind and keeping nearer. Between Gyas' ship and the echoing crags he
scrapes through inside on his left, flashes past his leader, and leaving the goal behind is
in safe water. Then indeed grief burned fierce through his strong frame, and tears sprung out
on his cheeks; heedless of his own dignity and his crew's safety, he flings the too cautious
Menoetes sheer into the sea from the high stern, himself succeeds as guide and master of the
helm, and cheers on his men, and turns his tiller in to shore. But Menoetes, when at last he
rose struggling from the bottom, heavy with advancing years and wet in his dripping clothes,
makes for the top of the crag, and sits down on a dry rock. The Teucrians laughed out as he
fell and as he swam, and laugh to see him spitting the salt water from his chest. At this a
joyful hope kindled in the two behind, Sergestus and Mnestheus, of catching up Gyas' wavering
course. Sergestus slips forward as he nears the rock, yet not all in front, nor leading with
his length of keel; part is in front, part pressed by the Dragon's jealous prow. But striding
amidships between his comrades, Mnestheus cheers them on: 'Now, now swing back, oarsmen who
were Hector's comrades, whom I chose to follow me in Troy's extremity; now put forth the might
and courage you showed in Gaetulian quicksands, amid Ionian seas and Malea's chasing waves.
Not the first [194-227]place do I now seek for Mnestheus, nor strive for victory; though ah!--yet
let them win, O Neptune, to whom thou givest it. But the shame of coming in last! Win but this,
fellow-citizens, and avert that disaster!' His men bend forward, straining every muscle; the
brasswork of the ship quivers to their mighty strokes, and the ground runs from under her;
limbs and parched lips shake with their rapid panting, and sweat flows in streams all over
them. Mere chance brought the crew the glory they desired. For while Sergestus drives his prow
furiously in towards the rocks and comes up with too scanty room, alas! he caught on a rock
that ran out; the reef ground, the oars struck and shivered on the jagged teeth, and the bows
crashed and hung. The sailors leap up and hold her with loud cries, and get out iron-shod poles
and sharp-pointed boathooks, and pick up their broken oars out of the eddies. But Mnestheus,
rejoicing and flushed by his triumph, with oars fast-dipping and winds at his call, issues
into the shelving water and runs down the open sea. As a pigeon whose house and sweet nestlings
are in the rock's recesses, if suddenly startled from her cavern, wings her flight over the
fields and rushes frightened from her house with loud clapping pinions; then gliding noiselessly
through the air, slides on her liquid way and moves not her rapid wings; so Mnestheus, so the
Dragon under him swiftly cleaves the last space of sea, so her own speed carries her flying
on. And first Sergestus is left behind, struggling on the steep rock and shoal water, and shouting
in vain for help and learning to race with broken oars. Next he catches up Gyas and the vast
bulk of the Chimaera; she gives way, without her steersman. And now on the very goal Cloanthus
alone is left; him he pursues and presses hard, straining all his strength. Then indeed the
shouts redouble, as all together eagerly cheer on the pursuer, and [228-264]the sky echoes
their din. These scorn to lose the honour that is their own, the glory in their grasp, and
would sell life for renown; to these success lends life; power comes with belief in it. And
haply they had carried the prize with prows abreast, had not Cloanthus, stretching both his
open hands over the sea, poured forth prayers and called the gods to hear his vows: 'Gods who
are sovereign on the sea, over whose waters I run, to your altars on this beach will I bring
a snow-white bull, my vow's glad penalty, and will cast his entrails into the salt flood and
pour liquid wine.' He spoke, and far beneath the flood maiden Panopea heard him, with all Phorcus'
choir of Nereids, and lord Portunus with his own mighty hand pushed him on his way. The ship
flies to land swifter than the wind or an arrow's flight, and shoots into the deep harbour.
Then the seed of Anchises, summoning all in order, declares Cloanthus conqueror by herald's
outcry, and dresses his brows in green bay, and gives gifts to each crew, three bullocks of
their choice, and wine, and a large talent of silver to take away. For their captains he adds
special honours; to the winner a scarf wrought with gold, encircled by a double border of deep
Meliboean purple; woven in it is the kingly boy on leafy Ida, chasing swift stags with javelin
and racing feet, keen and as one panting; him Jove's swooping armour-bearer hath caught up
from Ida in his talons; his aged guardians stretch their hands vainly upwards, and the barking
of hounds rings fierce into the air. But to him who, next in merit, held the second place,
he gives to wear a corslet triple-woven with hooks of polished gold, stripped by his own conquering
hand from Demoleos under tall Troy by the swift Simoïs, an ornament and safeguard among arms.
Scarce could the straining shoulders of his servants Phegeus and Sagaris carry its heavy folds;
yet with it on, Demoleos at [265-302]full speed would chase the scattered Trojans. The third
prize he makes twin cauldrons of brass, and bowls wrought in silver and rough with tracery.
And now all moved away in the pride and wealth of their prizes, their brows bound with scarlet
ribbons; when, hardly torn loose by all his art from the cruel rock, his oars lost, rowing
feebly with a single tier, Sergestus brought in his ship jeered at and unhonoured. Even as
often a serpent caught on a highway, if a brazen wheel hath gone aslant over him or a wayfarer
left him half dead and mangled with the blow of a heavy stone, wreathes himself slowly in vain
effort to escape, in part undaunted, his eyes ablaze and his hissing throat lifted high; in
part the disabling wound keeps him coiling in knots and twisting back on his own body; so the
ship kept rowing slowly on, yet hoists sail and under full sail glides into the harbour mouth.
Glad that the ship is saved and the crew brought back, Aeneas presents Sergestus with his promised
reward. A slave woman is given him not unskilled in Minerva's labours, Pholoë the Cretan, with
twin boys at her breast.

This contest sped, good Aeneas moved to a grassy plain girt all about with winding wooded hills,
and amid the valley an amphitheatre, whither, with a concourse of many thousands, the hero
advanced and took his seat on a mound. Here he allures with rewards and offer of prizes those
who will try their hap in the fleet foot-race. Trojans and Sicilians gather mingling from all
sides, Nisus and Euryalus foremost . . . Euryalus in the flower of youth and famed for beauty,
Nisus for pure love of the boy. Next follows renowned Diores, of Priam's royal line; after
him Salius and Patron together, the one Acarnanian, the other Tegean by family and of Arcadian
blood; next two men of Sicily, Helymus and Panopes, foresters and attendants on old Acestes;
many besides whose fame is hid in [303-338]obscurity. Then among them all Aeneas spoke thus:
'Hearken to this, and attend in good cheer. None out of this number will I let go without a
gift. To each will I give two glittering Gnosian spearheads of polished steel, and an axe chased
with silver to bear away; one and all shall be honoured thus. The three foremost shall receive
prizes, and have pale olive bound about their head. The first shall have a caparisoned horse
as conqueror; the second an Amazonian quiver filled with arrows of Thrace, girt about by a
broad belt of gold, and on the link of the clasp a polished gem; let the third depart with
this Argolic helmet for recompense.' This said, they take their place, and the signal once
heard, dart over the course and leave the line, pouring forth like a storm-cloud while they
mark the goal. Nisus gets away first, and shoots out far in front of the throng, fleeter than
the winds or the winged thunderbolt. Next to him, but next by a long gap, Salius follows; then,
left a space behind him, Euryalus third . . . and Helymus comes after Euryalus; and close behind
him, lo! Diores goes flying, just grazing foot with foot, hard on his shoulder; and if a longer
space were left, he would creep out past him and win the tie. And now almost in the last space,
they began to come up breathless to the goal, when unfortunate Nisus trips on the slippery
blood of the slain steers, where haply it had spilled over the ground and wetted the green
grass. Here, just in the flush of victory, he lost his feet; they slid away on the ground they
pressed, and he fell forward right among the ordure and blood of the sacrifice. Yet forgot
he not his darling Euryalus; for rising, he flung himself over the slippery ground in front
of Salius, and he rolled over and lay all along on the hard sand. Euryalus shoots by, wins
and holds the first place his friend gave, and flies on amid prosperous clapping and cheers.
Behind Helymus comes [339-373]up, and Diores, now third for the palm. At this Salius fills
with loud clamour the whole concourse of the vast theatre, and the lords who looked on in front,
demanding restoration of his defrauded prize. Euryalus is strong in favour, and beauty in tears,
and the merit that gains grace from so fair a form. Diores supports him, who succeeded to the
palm, so he loudly cries, and bore off the last prize in vain, if the highest honours be restored
to Salius. Then lord Aeneas speaks: 'For you, O boys, your rewards remain assured, and none
alters the prizes' order: let me be allowed to pity a friend's innocent mischance.' So speaking,
he gives to Salius a vast Gaetulian lion-skin, with shaggy masses of hair and claws of gold.
'If this,' cries Nisus, 'is the reward of defeat, and thy pity is stirred for the fallen, what
fit recompense wilt thou give to Nisus? to my excellence the first crown was due, had not I,
like Salius, met Fortune's hostility.' And with the words he displayed his face and limbs foul
with the wet dung. His lord laughed kindly on him, and bade a shield be brought forth, the
workmanship of Didymaon, torn by him from the hallowed gates of Neptune's Grecian temple; with
this special prize he rewards his excellence.

Thereafter, when the races are finished and the gifts fulfilled: 'Now,' he cries, 'come, whoso
hath in him valour and ready heart, and lift up his arms with gauntleted hands.' So speaks
he, and sets forth a double prize of battle; for the conqueror a bullock gilt and garlanded;
a sword and beautiful helmet to console the conquered. Straightway without pause Dares issues
to view in his vast strength, rising amid loud murmurs of the people; he who alone was wont
to meet Paris in combat; he who, at the mound where princely Hector lies, struck down as he
came the vast bulk upborne by conquering Butes, of Amycus' Bebrycian line, and stretched him
in [374-410]death on the yellow sand. Such was Dares; at once he raises his head high for battle,
displays his broad shoulders, and stretches and swings his arms right and left, lashing the
air with blows. For him another is required; but none out of all the train durst approach or
put the gloves on his hands. So he takes his stand exultant before Aeneas' feet, deeming he
excelled all in victories; and thereon without more delay grasps the bull's horn with his left
hand, and speaks thus: 'Goddess-born, if no man dare trust himself to battle, to what conclusion
shall I stand? how long is it seemly to keep me? bid me carry off thy gifts.' Therewith all
the Dardanians murmured assent, and bade yield him the promised prize. At this aged Acestes
spoke sharply to Entellus, as he sate next him on the green cushion of grass: 'Entellus, bravest
of heroes once of old in vain, wilt thou thus idly let a gift so great be borne away uncontested?
Where now prithee is divine Eryx, thy master of fruitless fame? where thy renown over all Sicily,
and those spoils hanging in thine house?' Thereat he: 'Desire of glory is not gone, nor ambition
checked by fear; but torpid age dulls my chilly blood, and my strength of limb is numb and
outworn. If I had what once was mine, if I had now that prime of years, yonder braggart's boast
and confidence, it had taken no prize of goodly bullock to allure me; nor heed I these gifts.'
So he spoke, and on that flung down a pair of gloves of giant weight, with whose hard hide
bound about his wrists valiant Eryx was wont to come to battle. They stood amazed; so stiff
and grim lay the vast sevenfold oxhide sewed in with lead and iron. Dares most of all shrinks
far back in horror, and the noble son of Anchises turns round this way and that their vast
weight and voluminous folds. Then the old man spoke thus in deep accents: 'How, had they seen
the gloves [411-444]that were Hercules' own armour, and the fatal fight on this very beach?
These arms thy brother Eryx once wore; thou seest them yet stained with blood and spattered
brains. In them he stood to face great Alcides; to them was I used while fuller blood supplied
me strength, and envious old age had not yet strewn her snows on either temple. But if Dares
of Troy will have none of these our arms, and good Aeneas is resolved on it, and my patron
Acestes approves, let us make the battle even. See, I give up the gauntlets of Eryx; dismiss
thy fears; and do thou put off thy Trojan gloves.' So spoke he, and throwing back the fold
of his raiment from his shoulders, he bares the massive joints and limbs, the great bones and
muscles, and stands up huge in the middle of the ground. Then Anchises' lordly seed brought
out equal gloves and bound the hands of both in matched arms. Straightway each took his stand
on tiptoe, and undauntedly raised his arms high in air. They lift their heads right back and
away out of reach of blows, and make hand play through hand, inviting attack; the one nimbler
of foot and confident in his youth, the other mighty in mass of limb, but his knees totter
tremulous and slow, and sick panting shakes his vast frame. Many a mutual blow they deliver
in vain, many an one they redouble on chest and side, sounding hollow and loud: hands play
fast about ear and temple, and jawbones clash under the hard strokes. Old Entellus stands immoveable
and astrain, only parrying hits with body and watchful eye. The other, as one who casts mounts
against some high city or blockades a hill-fort in arms, tries this and that entrance, and
ranges cunningly over all the ground, and presses many an attack in vain. Entellus rose and
struck clean out with his right downwards; his quick opponent saw the descending blow before
it came, [445-481]and slid his body rapidly out of its way. Entellus hurled his strength into
the air, and all his heavy mass, overreaching, fell heavily to the earth; as sometime on Erymanthus
or mighty Ida a hollow pine falls torn out by the roots. Teucrians and men of Sicily rise eagerly;
a cry goes up, and Acestes himself runs forward, and pityingly lifts his friend and birthmate
from the ground. But the hero, not dulled nor dismayed by his mishap, returns the keener to
battle, and grows violent in wrath, while shame and resolved valour kindle his strength. All
afire, he hunts Dares headlong over the lists, and redoubles his blows now with right hand,
now with left; no breath nor pause; heavy as hailstones rattle on the roof from a storm-cloud,
so thickly shower the blows from both his hands as he buffets Dares to and fro. Then lord Aeneas
allowed not wrath to swell higher or Entellus to rage out his bitterness, but stopped the fight
and rescued the exhausted Dares, saying thus in soothing words: 'Unhappy! what height of madness
hath seized thy mind? Knowest thou not the strength is another's and the gods are changed?
Yield thou to Heaven.' And with the words he proclaimed the battle over. But him his faithful
mates lead to the ships dragging his knees feebly, swaying his head from side to side, and
spitting from his mouth clotted blood mingled with teeth. At summons they bear away the helmet
and shield, and leave palm and bull to Entellus. At this the conqueror, swelling in pride over
the bull, cries: 'Goddess-born, and you, O Trojans! learn thus what my strength of body was
in its prime, and from what a death Dares is saved by your recall.' He spoke, and stood right
opposite in face of the bullock as it stood by, the prize of battle; then drew back his hand,
and swinging the hard gauntlet sheer down between the horns, smashed the bones in upon the
shattered brain. The ox rolls over, and quivering and [482-516]lifeless lies along the ground.
Above it he utters these deep accents: 'This life, Eryx, I give to thee, a better payment than
Dares' death; here I lay down my gloves and unconquered skill.'

Forthwith Aeneas invites all that will to the contest of the swift arrow, and proclaims the
prizes. With his strong hand he uprears the mast of Serestus' ship, and on a cord crossing
it hangs from the masthead a fluttering pigeon as mark for their steel. They gather, and a
helmet of brass takes the lots as they throw them in. First in rank, and before them all, amid
prosperous cheers, comes out Hippocoön son of Hyrtacus; and Mnestheus follows on him, but now
conqueror in the ship race, Mnestheus with his chaplet of green olive. Third is Eurytion, thy
brother, O Pandarus, great in renown, thou who of old, when prompted to shatter the truce,
didst hurl the first shaft amid the Achaeans. Last of all, and at the bottom of the helmet,
sank Acestes, he too venturing to set hand to the task of youth. Then each and all they strongly
bend their bows into a curve and pull shafts from their quivers. And first the arrow of the
son of Hyrtacus, flying through heaven from the sounding string, whistles through the fleet
breezes, and reaches and sticks fast full in the mast's wood: the mast quivered, and the bird
fluttered her feathers in affright, and the whole ground rang with loud clapping. Next valiant
Mnestheus took his stand with bow bent, aiming high with levelled eye and arrow; yet could
not, unfortunate! hit the bird herself with his steel, but cut the knotted hempen bands that
tied her foot as she hung from the masthead; she winged her flight into the dark windy clouds.
Then Eurytion, who ere now held the arrow ready on his bended bow, swiftly called in prayer
to his brother, marked the pigeon as she now went down the empty sky exultant on clapping wings;
and as she passed under a dark cloud, [517-553]struck her: she fell breathless, and, leaving
her life in the aery firmament, slid down carrying the arrow that pierced her. Acestes alone
was over, and the prize lost; yet he sped his arrow up into the air, to display his lordly
skill and resounding bow. At this a sudden sign meets their eyes, mighty in augural presage,
as the high event taught thereafter, and in late days boding seers prophesied of the omen.
For the flying reed blazed out amid the swimming clouds, traced its path in flame, and burned
away on the light winds; even as often stars shooting from their sphere draw a train athwart
the sky. Trinacrians and Trojans hung in astonishment, praying to the heavenly powers; neither
did great Aeneas reject the omen, but embraces glad Acestes and loads him with lavish gifts,
speaking thus: 'Take, my lord: for the high King of heaven by these signs hath willed thee
to draw the lot of peculiar honour. This gift shalt thou have as from aged Anchises' own hand,
a bowl embossed with figures, that once Cisseus of Thrace gave my father Anchises to bear,
in high token and guerdon of affection.' So speaking, he twines green bay about his brows,
and proclaims Acestes conqueror first before them all. Nor did gentle Eurytion, though he alone
struck the bird down from the lofty sky, grudge him to be preferred in honour. Next comes for
his prize he who cut the cord; he last, who pierced the mast with his winged reed.

But lord Aeneas, ere yet the contest is sped, calls to him Epytides, guardian and attendant
of ungrown Iülus, and thus speaks into his faithful ear: 'Up and away, and tell Ascanius, if
he now holds his band of boys ready, and their horses arrayed for the charge, to defile his
squadrons to his grandsire's honour in bravery of arms.' So says he, and himself bids all the
crowding throng withdraw from the long racecourse and leave the lists free. The boys move in
before their parents' faces, glittering in rank on their [554-590]bitted horses; as they go
all the people of Troy and Trinacria murmur and admire. On the hair of them all rests a garland
fitly trimmed; each carries two cornel spear-shafts tipped with steel; some have polished quivers
on their shoulders; above their breast and round their neck goes a flexible circlet of twisted
gold. Three in number are the troops of riders, and three captains gallop up and down; following
each in equal command rides a glittering division of twelve boys. One youthful line goes rejoicingly
behind little Priam, renewer of his grandsire's name, thy renowned seed, O Polites, and destined
to people Italy; he rides a Thracian horse dappled with spots of white, showing white on his
pacing pasterns and white on his high forehead. Second is Atys, from whom the Latin Atii draw
their line, little Atys, boy beloved of the boy Iülus. Last and excellent in beauty before
them all, Iülus rode in on a Sidonian horse that Dido the bright had given him for token and
pledge of love. The rest of them are mounted on old Acestes' Sicilian horses. . . . The Dardanians
greet their shy entrance with applause, and rejoice at the view, and recognise the features
of their parents of old. When they have ridden merrily round all the concourse of their gazing
friends, Epytides shouts from afar the signal they await, and sounds his whip. They gallop
apart in equal numbers, and open their files three and three in deploying bands, and again
at the call wheel about and bear down with levelled arms. Next they start on other charges
and other retreats in corresponsive spaces, and interlink circle with circle, and wage the
armed phantom of battle. And now they bare their backs in flight, now turn their lances to
the charge, now plight peace and ride on side by side. As once of old, they say, the labyrinth
in high Crete had a tangled path between blind walls, and a thousand ways of doubling treachery,
where tokens to follow failed in the [591-625]maze unmastered and irrecoverable: even in such
a track do the children of Troy entangle their footsteps and weave the game of flight and battle;
like dolphins who, swimming through the wet seas, cut Carpathian or Libyan. . . .

This fashion of riding, these games Ascanius first revived, when he girt Alba the Long about
with walls, and taught their celebration to the Old Latins in the way of his own boyhood, with
the youth of Troy about him. The Albans taught it their children; on from them mighty Rome
received it and kept the ancestral observance; and now it is called Troy, and the boys the
Trojan troop.

Thus far sped the sacred contests to their holy lord. Just at this Fortune broke faith and
grew estranged. While they pay the due rites to the tomb with diverse games, Juno, daughter
of Saturn, sends Iris down the sky to the Ilian fleet, and breathes a gale to speed her on,
revolving many a thought, and not yet satiate of the ancient pain. She, speeding her way along
the thousand-coloured bow, runs swiftly, seen of none, down her maiden path. She discerns the
vast concourse, and traverses the shore, and sees the haven abandoned and the fleet left alone.
But far withdrawn by the solitary verge of the sea the Trojan women wept their lost Anchises,
and as they wept gazed all together on the fathomless flood. 'Alas! after all those weary waterways,
that so wide a sea is yet to come!' such is the single cry of all. They pray for a city, sick
of the burden of their sea-sorrow. So she darts among them, not witless to harm, and lays by
face and raiment of a goddess: she becomes Beroë, the aged wife of Tmarian Doryclus, who had
once had birth and name and children, and in this guise goes among the Dardanian matrons. 'Ah,
wretched we,' she cries, 'whom hostile Achaean hands did not drag to death beneath our native
city! ah hapless race, for what destruction does Fortune hold thee back? The [626-660]seventh
summer now declines since Troy's overthrow, while we pass measuring out by so many stars the
harbourless rocks over every water and land, pursuing all the while over the vast sea an Italy
that flies us, and tossing on the waves. Here are our brother Eryx' borders, and Acestes' welcome:
who denies us to cast up walls and give our citizens a city? O country, O household gods vainly
rescued from the foe! shall there never be a Trojan town to tell of? shall I nowhere see a
Xanthus and a Simoïs, the rivers of Hector? Nay, up and join me in burning with fire these
ill-ominous ships. For in sleep the phantom of Cassandra the soothsayer seemed to give me blazing
brands: Here seek your Troy, she said; here is your home. Now is the time to do it; nor do
these high portents allow delay. Behold four altars to Neptune; the god himself lends the firebrand
and the nerve.' Speaking thus, at once she strongly seizes the fiery weapon, and with straining
hand whirls it far upreared, and flings: the souls of the Ilian women are startled and their
wits amazed. At this one of their multitude, and she the eldest, Pyrgo, nurse in the palace
to all Priam's many children: 'This is not Beroë, I tell you, O mothers; this is not the wife
of Doryclus of Rhoeteum. Mark the lineaments of divine grace and the gleaming eyes, what a
breath is hers, what a countenance, and the sound of her voice and the steps of her going.
I, I time agone left Beroë apart, sick and fretting that she alone must have no part in this
our service, nor pay Anchises his due sacrifice.' So spoke she. . . . But the matrons at first,
dubious and wavering, gazed on the ships with malignant eyes, between the wretched longing
for the land they trod and the fated realm that summoned them: when the goddess rose through
the sky on poised wings, and in her flight drew a vast bow beneath the clouds. Then indeed,
amazed at the tokens and driven by madness, they raise a cry and snatch fire from the [661-694]hearths
within; others plunder the altars, and cast on brushwood boughs and brands. The Fire-god rages
with loose rein over thwarts and oars and hulls of painted fir. Eumelus carries the news of
the burning ships to the grave of Anchises and the ranges of the theatre; and looking back,
their own eyes see the floating cloud of dark ashes. And in a moment Ascanius, as he rode gaily
before his cavalry, spurred his horse to the disordered camp; nor can his breathless guardians
hold him back. 'What strange madness is this?' he cries; 'whither now hasten you, whither,
alas and woe! O citizens? not on the foe nor on some hostile Argive camp; it is your own hopes
you burn. Behold me, your Ascanius!' and he flung before his feet the empty helmet, put on
when he roused the mimicry of war. Aeneas and the Trojan train together hurry to the spot.
But the women scatter apart in fear all over the beach, and stealthily seek the woods and the
hollow rocks they find: they loathe their deed and the daylight, and with changed eyes know
their people, and Juno is startled out of their breast. But not thereby do the flames of the
burning lay down their unconquered strength; under the wet oak the seams are alive, spouting
slow coils of smoke; the creeping heat devours the hulls, and the destroyer takes deep hold
of all: nor does the heroes' strength avail nor the floods they pour in. Then good Aeneas rent
away the raiment from his shoulders and called the gods to aid, stretching forth his hands:
'Jupiter omnipotent, if thou hatest not Troy yet wholly to her last man, if thine ancient pity
looks at all on human woes, now, O Lord, grant our fleet to escape the flame, and rescue from
doom the slender Teucrian estate. Or do thou plunge to death this remnant, if I deserve it,
with levelled thunderbolt, and here with thine own hand smite us down.' Scarce had he uttered
this, when a black tempest rages in streaming showers; earth trembles [695-726]to the thunder
on plain and steep; the water-flood rushes in torrents from the whole heaven amid black darkness
and volleying blasts of the South. The ships are filled from overhead, the half-burnt timbers
are soaking; till all the heat is quenched, and all the hulls, but four that are lost, are
rescued from destruction.

But lord Aeneas, dismayed by the bitter mischance, revolved at heart this way and that his
shifting weight of care, whether, forgetting fate, he should rest in Sicilian fields, or reach
forth to the borders of Italy. Then old Nautes, whom Tritonian Pallas taught like none other,
and made famous in eminence of art--she granted him to reply what the gods' heavy anger menaced
or what the order of fate claimed--he then in accents of comfort thus speaks to Aeneas:

'Goddess-born, follow we fate's ebb and flow, whatsoever it shall be; fortune must be borne
to be overcome. Acestes is of thine own divine Dardanian race; take him, for he is willing,
to join thee in common counsel; deliver to him those who are over, now these ships are lost,
and those who are quite weary of thy fortunes and the great quest. Choose out the old men stricken
in years, and the matrons sick of the sea, and all that is weak and fearful of peril in thy
company. Let this land give a city to the weary; they shall be allowed to call their town Acesta
by name.'

Then, indeed, kindled by these words of his aged friend, his spirit is distracted among all
his cares. And now black Night rose chariot-borne, and held the sky; when the likeness of his
father Anchises seemed to descend from heaven and suddenly utter thus:

'O son, more dear to me than life once of old while life was yet mine; O son, hard wrought
by the destinies of Ilium! I come hither by Jove's command, who drove the [727-760]fire from
thy fleets, and at last had pity out of high heaven. Obey thou the fair counsel aged Nautes
now gives. Carry through to Italy thy chosen men and bravest souls; in Latium must thou war
down a people hard and rough in living. Yet ere then draw thou nigh the nether chambers of
Dis, and in the deep tract of hell come, O son, to meet me. For I am not held in cruel Tartarus
among wailing ghosts, but inhabit Elysium and the sweet societies of the good. Hither with
much blood of dark cattle shall the holy Sibyl lead thee. Then shalt thou learn of all thy
line, and what city is given thee. And now farewell; dank Night wheels her mid-career, and
even now I feel the stern breath of the panting horses of the East.' He ended, and retreated
like a vapour into thin air. 'Ah, whither hurriest thou?' cries Aeneas; 'whither so fast away?
From whom fliest thou? or who withholds thee from our embrace?' So speaking, he kindles the
sleeping embers of the fire, and with holy meal and laden censer does sacrifice to the tutelar
of Pergama and hoar Vesta's secret shrine.

Straightway he summons his crews and Acestes first of all, and instructs them of Jove's command
and his beloved father's precepts, and what is now his fixed mind and purpose. They linger
not in counsel, nor does Acestes decline his bidden duty: they enrol the matrons in their town,
and plant a people there, souls that will have none of glory. The rest repair the thwarts and
replace the ships' timbers that the flames had gnawed upon, and fit up oars and rigging, little
in number, but alive and valiant for war. Meanwhile Aeneas traces the town with the plough
and allots the homesteads; this he bids be Ilium, and these lands Troy. Trojan Acestes, rejoicing
in his kingdom, appoints a court and gathers his senators to give them statutes. Next, where
the crest of Eryx is neighbour to the stars, a dwelling is founded to Venus the Idalian; [761-793]and
a priest and breadth of holy wood is attached to Anchises' grave.

And now for nine days all the people hath feasted, and offering been paid at the altars; quiet
breezes have smoothed the ocean floor, and the gathering south wind blows, calling them again
to sea. A mighty weeping arises along the winding shore; a night and a day they linger in mutual
embraces. The very mothers now, the very men to whom once the sight of the sea seemed cruel
and the name intolerable, would go on and endure the journey's travail to the end. These Aeneas
comforts with kindly words, and commends with tears to his kinsman Acestes' care. Then he bids
slay three steers to Eryx and a she-lamb to the Tempests, and loose the hawser as is due. Himself,
his head bound with stripped leaves of olive, he stands apart on the prow holding the cup,
and casts the entrails into the salt flood and pours liquid wine. A wind rising astern follows
them forth on their way. Emulously the crews strike the water, and sweep through the seas.

But Venus meanwhile, wrought upon with distress, accosts Neptune, and thus pours forth her
heart's complaint: 'Juno's bitter wrath and heart insatiable compel me, O Neptune, to sink
to the uttermost of entreaty: neither length of days nor any goodness softens her, nor doth
Jove's command and fate itself break her to desistence. It is not enough that her accursed
hatred hath devoured the Phrygian city from among the people, and exhausted on it the stores
of vengeance; still she pursues this remnant, the bones and ashes of murdered Troy. I pray
she know why her passion is so fierce. Thyself art my witness what a sudden stir she raised
of late on the Libyan waters, flinging all the seas to heaven in vain reliance on Aeolus' blasts;
this she dared in thy realm. . . . Lo too, driving the Trojan matrons into guilt, she hath
foully [794-826]burned their ships, and forced them, their fleet lost, to leave the crews to
an unknown land. Let the remnant, I beseech thee, give their sails to thy safe keeping across
the seas; let them reach Laurentine Tiber; if I ask what is permitted, if fate grants them
a city there.'

Then the son of Saturn, compeller of the ocean deep, uttered thus: 'It is wholly right, O Cytherean,
that thy trust should be in my realm, whence thou drawest birth; and I have deserved it: often
have I allayed the rage and full fury of sky and sea. Nor less on land, I call Xanthus and
Simoïs to witness, hath been my care of thine Aeneas. When Achilles pursued the Trojan armies
and hurled them breathless on their walls, and sent many thousands to death,--when the choked
rivers groaned and Xanthus could not find passage or roll out to sea,--then I snatched Aeneas
away in sheltering mist as he met the brave son of Peleus outmatched in strength and gods,
eager as I was to overthrow the walls of perjured Troy that mine own hands had built. Now too
my mind rests the same; dismiss thy fear. In safety, as thou desirest, shall he reach the haven
of Avernus. One will there be alone whom on the flood thou shalt lose and require; one life
shall be given for many. . . .'

With these words the goddess' bosom is soothed to joy. Then their lord yokes his wild horses
with gold and fastens the foaming bits, and letting all the reins run slack in his hand, flies
lightly in his sea-coloured chariot over the ocean surface. The waves sink to rest, and the
swoln water-ways smooth out under the thundering axle; the storm-clouds scatter from the vast
sky. Diverse shapes attend him, monstrous whales, and Glaucus' aged choir, and Palaemon, son
of Ino, the swift Tritons, and Phorcus with all his army. Thetis and Melite keep the left,
and maiden Panopea, Nesaea and Spio, Thalia and Cymodoce.

[827-860]At this lord Aeneas' soul is thrilled with soft counterchange of delight. He bids
all the masts be upreared with speed, and the sails stretched on the yards. Together all set
their sheets, and all at once slacken their canvas to left and again to right; together they
brace and unbrace the yard-arms aloft; prosperous gales waft the fleet along. First, in front
of all, Palinurus steered the close column; the rest under orders ply their course by his.
And now dewy Night had just reached heaven's mid-cone; the sailors, stretched on their hard
benches under the oars, relaxed their limbs in quiet rest: when Sleep, sliding lightly down
from the starry sky, parted the shadowy air and cleft the dark, seeking thee, O Palinurus,
carrying dreams of bale to thee who dreamt not of harm, and lit on the high stern, a god in
Phorbas' likeness, dropping this speech from his lips: 'Palinurus son of Iasus, the very seas
bear our fleet along; the breezes breathe steadily; for an hour rest is given. Lay down thine
head, and steal thy worn eyes from their toil. I myself for a little will take thy duty in
thy stead.' To whom Palinurus, scarcely lifting his eyes, returns: 'Wouldst thou have me ignorant
what the calm face of the brine means, and the waves at rest? Shall I have faith in this perilous
thing? How shall I trust Aeneas to deceitful breezes, and the placid treachery of sky that
hath so often deceived me?' Such words he uttered, and, clinging fast to the tiller, slackened
hold no whit, and looked up steadily on the stars. Lo! the god shakes over either temple a
bough dripping with Lethean dew and made slumberous with the might of Styx, and makes his swimming
eyes relax their struggles. Scarcely had sleep begun to slacken his limbs unaware, when bending
down, he flung him sheer into the clear water, tearing rudder and half the stern away with
him, and many a time crying vainly on his comrades: himself [861-871]he rose on flying wings
into the thin air. None the less does the fleet run safe on its sea path, and glides on unalarmed
in lord Neptune's assurance. Yes, and now they were sailing in to the cliffs of the Sirens,
dangerous once of old and white with the bones of many a man; and the hoarse rocks echoed afar
in the ceaseless surf; when her lord felt the ship rocking astray for loss of her helmsman,
and himself steered her on over the darkling water, sighing often the while, and heavy at heart
for his friend's mischance. 'Ah too trustful in sky's and sea's serenity, thou shalt lie, O
Palinurus, naked on an alien sand!'

BOOK SIXTH

THE VISION OF THE UNDER WORLD

So speaks he weeping, and gives his fleet the rein, and at last glides in to Euboïc Cumae's
coast. They turn the prows seaward; the ships grounded fast on their anchors' teeth, and the
curving ships line the beach. The warrior band leaps forth eagerly on the Hesperian shore;
some seek the seeds of flame hidden in veins of flint, some scour the woods, the thick coverts
of wild beasts, and find and shew the streams. But good Aeneas seeks the fortress where Apollo
sits high enthroned, and the lone mystery of the awful Sibyl's cavern depth, over whose mind
and soul the prophetic Delian breathes high inspiration and reveals futurity.

Now they draw nigh the groves of Trivia and the roof of gold. Daedalus, as the story runs,
when in flight from Minos' realm he dared to spread his fleet wings to the sky, glided on his
unwonted way towards the icy northern star, and at length lit gently on the Chalcidian fastness.
Here, on the first land he retrod, he dedicated his winged oarage to thee, O Phoebus, in the
vast temple he built. On the doors is Androgeus' death; thereby the children of Cecrops, bidden,
ah me! to pay for yearly ransom seven souls of their sons; the urn stands there, and the lots
are drawn. Right [23-55]opposite the land of Gnosus rises from the sea; on it is the cruel
love of the bull, the disguised stealth of Pasiphaë, and the mingled breed and double issue
of the Minotaur, record of a shameful passion; on it the famous dwelling's laborious inextricable
maze; but Daedalus, pitying the great love of the princess, himself unlocked the tangled treachery
of the palace, guiding with the clue her lover's blind footsteps. Thou too hadst no slight
part in the work he wrought, O Icarus, did grief allow. Twice had he essayed to portray thy
fate in gold; twice the father's hands dropped down. Nay, their eyes would scan all the story
in order, were not Achates already returned from his errand, and with him the priestess of
Phoebus and Trivia, Deïphobe daughter of Glaucus, who thus accosts the king: 'Other than this
are the sights the time demands: now were it well to sacrifice seven unbroken bullocks of the
herd, as many fitly chosen sheep of two years old.' Thus speaks she to Aeneas; nor do they
delay to do her sacred bidding; and the priestess calls the Teucrians into the lofty shrine.

A vast cavern is scooped in the side of the Euboïc cliff, whither lead an hundred wide passages
by an hundred gates, whence peal forth as manifold the responses of the Sibyl. They had reached
the threshold, when the maiden cries: It is time to enquire thy fate: the god, lo! the god!
And even as she spoke thus in the gateway, suddenly countenance nor colour nor ranged tresses
stayed the same; her wild heart heaves madly in her panting bosom; and she expands to sight,
and her voice is more than mortal, now the god breathes on her in nearer deity. 'Lingerest
thou to vow and pray,' she cries, 'Aeneas of Troy? lingerest thou? for not till then will the
vast portals of the spellbound house swing open.' So spoke she, and sank to silence. A cold
shiver ran through the Teucrians' iron frames, and the king pours heart-deep supplication:

[56-89]'Phoebus, who hast ever pitied the sore travail of Troy, who didst guide the Dardanian
shaft from Paris' hand full on the son of Aeacus, in thy leading have I pierced all these seas
that skirt mighty lands, the Massylian nations far withdrawn, and the fields the Syrtes fringe;
thus far let the fortune of Troy follow us. You too may now unforbidden spare the nation of
Pergama, gods and goddesses to whomsoever Ilium and the great glory of Dardania did wrong.
And thou, O prophetess most holy, foreknower of the future, grant (for no unearned realm does
my destiny claim) a resting-place in Latium to the Teucrians, to their wandering gods and the
storm-tossed deities of Troy. Then will I ordain to Phoebus and Trivia a temple of solid marble,
and festal days in Phoebus' name. Thee likewise a mighty sanctuary awaits in our realm. For
here will I place thine oracles and the secrets of destiny uttered to my people, and consecrate
chosen men, O gracious one. Only commit not thou thy verses to leaves, lest they fly disordered,
the sport of rushing winds; thyself utter them, I beseech thee.' His lips made an end of utterance.

But the prophetess, not yet tame to Phoebus' hand, rages fiercely in the cavern, so she may
shake the mighty godhead from her breast; so much the more does he tire her maddened mouth
and subdue her wild breast and shape her to his pressure. And now the hundred mighty portals
of the house open of their own accord, and bring through the air the answer of the soothsayer:

'O past at length with the great perils of the sea! though heavier yet by land await thee,
the Dardanians shall come to the realm of Lavinium; relieve thy heart of this care; but not
so shall they have joy of their coming. Wars, grim wars I discern, and Tiber afoam with streams
of blood. A Simoïs shall not fail thee, a Xanthus, a Dorian camp; another Achilles is already
found for Latium, he too [90-123]goddess-born; nor shall Juno's presence ever leave the Teucrians;
while thou in thy need, to what nations or what towns of Italy shalt thou not sue! Again is
an alien bride the source of all that Teucrian woe, again a foreign marriage-chamber. . . .
Yield not thou to distresses, but all the bolder go forth to meet them, as thy fortune shall
allow thee way. The path of rescue, little as thou deemest it, shall first open from a Grecian
town.'

In such words the Sibyl of Cumae chants from the shrine her perplexing terrors, echoing through
the cavern truth wrapped in obscurity: so does Apollo clash the reins and ply the goad in her
maddened breast. So soon as the spasm ceased and the raving lips sank to silence, Aeneas the
hero begins: 'No shape of toil, O maiden, rises strange or sudden on my sight; all this ere
now have I guessed and inly rehearsed in spirit. One thing I pray; since here is the gate named
of the infernal king, and the darkling marsh of Acheron's overflow, be it given me to go to
my beloved father, to see him face to face; teach thou the way, and open the consecrated portals.
Him on these shoulders I rescued from encircling flames and a thousand pursuing weapons, and
brought him safe from amid the enemy; he accompanied my way over all the seas, and bore with
me all the threats of ocean and sky, in weakness, beyond his age's strength and due. Nay, he
it was who besought and enjoined me to seek thy grace and draw nigh thy courts. Have pity,
I beseech thee, on son and father, O gracious one! for thou art all-powerful, nor in vain hath
Hecate given thee rule in the groves of Avernus. If Orpheus could call up his wife's ghost
in the strength of his Thracian lyre and the music of the strings,--if Pollux redeemed his
brother by exchange of death, and passes and repasses so often,--why make mention of great
Theseus, why of Alcides? I too am of Jove's sovereign race.'

[124-157]In such words he pleaded and clasped the altars; when the soothsayer thus began to speak:

'O sprung of gods' blood, child of Anchises of Troy, easy is the descent into hell; all night
and day the gate of dark Dis stands open; but to recall thy steps and issue to upper air, this
is the task and burden. Some few of gods' lineage have availed, such as Jupiter's gracious
favour or virtue's ardour hath upborne to heaven. Midway all is muffled in forest, and the
black coils of Cocytus circle it round. Yet if thy soul is so passionate and so desirous twice
to float across the Stygian lake, twice to see dark Tartarus, and thy pleasure is to plunge
into the mad task, learn what must first be accomplished. Hidden in a shady tree is a bough
with leafage and pliant shoot all of gold, consecrate to nether Juno, wrapped in the depth
of woodland and shut in by dim dusky vales. But to him only who first hath plucked the golden-tressed
fruitage from the tree is it given to enter the hidden places of the earth. This hath beautiful
Proserpine ordained to be borne to her for her proper gift. The first torn away, a second fills
the place in gold, and the spray burgeons with even such ore again. So let thine eyes trace
it home, and thine hand pluck it duly when found; for lightly and unreluctant will it follow
if thine is fate's summons; else will no strength of thine avail to conquer it nor hard steel
to cut it away. Yet again, a friend of thine lies a lifeless corpse, alas! thou knowest it
not, and defiles all the fleet with death, while thou seekest our counsel and lingerest in
our courts. First lay him in his resting-place and hide him in the tomb; lead thither black
cattle; be this first thine expiation; so at last shalt thou behold the Stygian groves and
the realm untrodden of the living.' She spoke, and her lips shut to silence.

Aeneas goes forth, and leaves the cavern with fixed eyes and sad countenance, his soul revolving
inly the unseen [158-194]issues. By his side goes faithful Achates, and plants his footsteps
in equal perplexity. Long they ran on in mutual change of talk; of what lifeless comrade spoke
the soothsayer, of what body for burial? And even as they came, they see on the dry beach Misenus
cut off by untimely death, Misenus the Aeolid, excelled of none other in stirring men with
brazen breath and kindling battle with his trumpet-note. He had been attendant on mighty Hector;
in Hector's train he waged battle, renowned alike for bugle and spear: after victorious Achilles
robbed him of life the valiant hero had joined Dardanian Aeneas' company, and followed no meaner
leader. But now, while he makes his hollow shell echo over the seas, ah fool! and calls the
gods to rival his blast, jealous Triton, if belief is due, had caught him among the rocks and
sunk him in the foaming waves. So all surrounded him with loud murmur and cries, good Aeneas
the foremost. Then weeping they quickly hasten on the Sibyl's orders, and work hard to pile
trees for the altar of burial, and heap it up into the sky. They move into the ancient forest,
the deep coverts of game; pitch-pines fall flat, ilex rings to the stroke of axes, and ashen
beams and oak are split in clefts with wedges; they roll in huge mountain-ashes from the hills.
Aeneas likewise is first in the work, and cheers on his crew and arms himself with their weapons.
And alone with his sad heart he ponders it all, gazing on the endless forest, and utters this
prayer: 'If but now that bough of gold would shew itself to us on the tree in this depth of
woodland! since all the soothsayer's tale of thee, Misenus, was, alas! too truly spoken.' Scarcely
had he said thus, when twin doves haply came flying down the sky, and lit on the green sod
right under his eyes. Then the kingly hero knows them for his mother's birds, and joyfully
prays: 'Ah, be my guides, if way there be, and direct your aëry passage into the groves [195-230]where
the rich bough overshadows the fertile ground! and thou, O goddess mother, fail not our wavering
fortune.' So spoke he and stayed his steps, marking what they signify, whither they urge their
way. Feeding and flying they advance at such distance as following eyes could keep them in
view; then, when they came to Avernus' pestilent gorge, they tower swiftly, and sliding down
through the liquid air, choose their seat and light side by side on a tree, through whose boughs
shone out the contrasting flicker of gold. As in chill mid-winter the woodland is wont to blossom
with the strange leafage of the mistletoe, sown on an alien tree and wreathing the smooth stems
with burgeoning saffron; so on the shadowy ilex seemed that leafy gold, so the foil tinkled
in the light breeze. Immediately Aeneas seizes it and eagerly breaks off its resistance, and
carries it beneath the Sibyl's roof.

And therewithal the Teucrians on the beach wept Misenus, and bore the last rites to the thankless
ashes. First they build up a vast pyre of resinous billets and sawn oak, whose sides they entwine
with dark leaves and plant funereal cypresses in front, and adorn it above with his shining
armour. Some prepare warm water in cauldrons bubbling over the flames, and wash and anoint
the chill body, and make their moan; then, their weeping done, lay his limbs on the pillow,
and spread over it crimson raiment, the accustomed pall. Some uplift the heavy bier, a melancholy
service, and with averted faces in their ancestral fashion hold and thrust in the torch. Gifts
of frankincense, food, and bowls of olive oil, are poured and piled upon the fire. After the
embers sank in and the flame died away, they soaked with wine the remnant of thirsty ashes,
and Corynaeus gathered the bones and shut them in an urn of brass; and he too thrice encircled
his comrades with fresh water, and cleansed them with light spray sprinkled from a [231-267]bough
of fruitful olive, and spoke the last words of all. But good Aeneas heaps a mighty mounded
tomb over him, with his own armour and his oar and trumpet, beneath a skyey mountain that now
is called Misenus after him, and keeps his name immortal from age to age.

This done, he hastens to fulfil the Sibyl's ordinance. A deep cave yawned dreary and vast,
shingle-strewn, sheltered by the black lake and the gloom of the forests; over it no flying
things could wing their way unharmed, such a vapour streamed from the dark gorge and rose into
the overarching sky. Here the priestess first arrays four black-bodied bullocks and pours wine
upon their forehead; and plucking the topmost hairs from between the horns, lays them on the
sacred fire for first-offering, calling aloud on Hecate, mistress of heaven and hell. Others
lay knives beneath, and catch the warm blood in cups. Aeneas himself smites with the sword
a black-fleeced she-lamb to the mother of the Eumenides and her mighty sister, and a barren
heifer, Proserpine, to thee. Then he uprears darkling altars to the Stygian king, and lays
whole carcases of bulls upon the flames, pouring fat oil over the blazing entrails. And lo!
about the first rays of sunrise the ground moaned underfoot, and the woodland ridges began
to stir, and dogs seemed to howl through the dusk as the goddess came. 'Apart, ah keep apart,
O ye unsanctified!' cries the soothsayer; 'retire from all the grove; and thou, stride on and
unsheath thy steel; now is need of courage, O Aeneas, now of strong resolve.' So much she spoke,
and plunged madly into the cavern's opening; he with unflinching steps keeps pace with his
advancing guide.

Gods who are sovereign over souls! silent ghosts, and Chaos and Phlegethon, the wide dumb realm
of night! as I have heard, so let me tell, and according to your will unfold things sunken
deep under earth in gloom.

[268-303]They went darkling through the dusk beneath the solitary night, through the empty
dwellings and bodiless realm of Dis; even as one walks in the forest beneath the jealous light
of a doubtful moon, when Jupiter shrouds the sky in shadow and black night blots out the world.
Right in front of the doorway and in the entry of the jaws of hell Grief and avenging Cares
have made their bed; there dwell wan Sicknesses and gloomy Eld, and Fear, and ill-counselling
Hunger, and loathly Want, shapes terrible to see; and Death and Travail, and thereby Sleep,
Death's kinsman, and the Soul's guilty Joys, and death-dealing War full in the gateway, and
the Furies in their iron cells, and mad Discord with bloodstained fillets enwreathing her serpent
locks.

Midway an elm, shadowy and high, spreads her boughs and secular arms, where, one saith, idle
Dreams dwell clustering, and cling under every leaf. And monstrous creatures besides, many
and diverse, keep covert at the gates, Centaurs and twy-shaped Scyllas, and the hundredfold
Briareus, and the beast of Lerna hissing horribly, and the Chimaera armed with flame, Gorgons
and Harpies, and the body of the triform shade. Here Aeneas snatches at his sword in a sudden
flutter of terror, and turns the naked edge on them as they come; and did not his wise fellow-passenger
remind him that these lives flit thin and unessential in the hollow mask of body, he would
rush on and vainly lash through phantoms with his steel.

Hence a road leads to Tartarus and Acheron's wave. Here the dreary pool swirls thick in muddy
eddies and disgorges into Cocytus with its load of sand. Charon, the dread ferryman, guards
these flowing streams, ragged and awful, his chin covered with untrimmed masses of hoary hair,
and his glassy eyes aflame; his soiled raiment hangs knotted from his shoulders. Himself he
plies the pole and trims the sails of his vessel, the steel-blue galley with freight [304-336]of
dead; stricken now in years, but a god's old age is lusty and green. Hither all crowded, and
rushed streaming to the bank, matrons and men and high-hearted heroes dead and done with life,
boys and unwedded girls, and children laid young on the bier before their parents' eyes, multitudinous
as leaves fall dropping in the forests at autumn's earliest frost, or birds swarm landward
from the deep gulf, when the chill of the year routs them overseas and drives them to sunny
lands. They stood pleading for the first passage across, and stretched forth passionate hands
to the farther shore. But the grim sailor admits now one and now another, while some he pushes
back far apart on the strand. Moved with marvel at the confused throng: 'Say, O maiden,' cries
Aeneas, 'what means this flocking to the river? of what are the souls so fain? or what difference
makes these retire from the banks, those go with sweeping oars over the leaden waterways?'

To him the long-lived priestess thus briefly returned: 'Seed of Anchises, most sure progeny
of gods, thou seest the deep pools of Cocytus and the Stygian marsh, by whose divinity the
gods fear to swear falsely. All this crowd thou discernest is helpless and unsepultured; Charon
is the ferryman; they who ride on the wave found a tomb. Nor is it given to cross the awful
banks and hoarse streams ere the dust hath found a resting-place. An hundred years they wander
here flitting about the shore; then at last they gain entrance, and revisit the pools so sorely
desired.'

Anchises' son stood still, and ponderingly stayed his footsteps, pitying at heart their cruel
lot. There he discerns, mournful and unhonoured dead, Leucaspis and Orontes, captains of the
Lycian squadron, whom, as they sailed together from Troy over gusty seas, the south wind overwhelmed
and wrapped the waters round ship and men.

[337-369]Lo, there went by Palinurus the steersman, who of late, while he watched the stars
on their Libyan passage, had slipped from the stern and fallen amid the waves. To him, when
he first knew the melancholy form in that depth of shade, he thus opens speech: 'What god,
O Palinurus, reft thee from us and sank thee amid the seas? forth and tell. For in this single
answer Apollo deceived me, never found false before, when he prophesied thee safety on ocean
and arrival on the Ausonian coasts. See, is this his promise-keeping?'

And he: 'Neither did Phoebus on his oracular seat delude thee, O prince, Anchises' son, nor
did any god drown me in the sea. For while I clung to my appointed charge and governed our
course, I pulled the tiller with me in my fall, and the shock as I slipped wrenched it away.
By the rough seas I swear, fear for myself never wrung me so sore as for thy ship, lest, the
rudder lost and the pilot struck away, those gathering waves might master it. Three wintry
nights in the water the blustering south drove me over the endless sea; scarcely on the fourth
dawn I descried Italy as I rose on the climbing wave. Little by little I swam shoreward; already
I clung safe; but while, encumbered with my dripping raiment, I caught with crooked fingers
at the jagged needles of mountain rock, the barbarous people attacked me in arms and ignorantly
deemed me a prize. Now the wave holds me, and the winds toss me on the shore. By heaven's pleasant
light and breezes I beseech thee, by thy father, by Iülus thy rising hope, rescue me from these
distresses, O unconquered one! Either do thou, for thou canst, cast earth over me and again
seek the haven of Velia; or do thou, if in any wise that may be, if in any wise the goddess
who bore thee shews a way,--for not without divine will do I deem thou wilt float across these
vast rivers and the Stygian pool,--lend me a pitying [370-403]hand, and bear me over the waves
in thy company, that at least in death I may find a quiet resting-place.'

Thus he ended, and the soothsayer thus began: 'Whence, O Palinurus, this fierce longing of
thine? Shalt thou without burial behold the Stygian waters and the awful river of the Furies?
Cease to hope prayers may bend the decrees of heaven. But take my words to thy memory, for
comfort in thy woeful case: far and wide shall the bordering cities be driven by celestial
portents to appease thy dust; they shall rear a tomb, and pay the tomb a yearly offering, and
for evermore shall the place keep Palinurus' name.' The words soothed away his distress, and
for a while drove grief away from his sorrowing heart; he is glad in the land of his name.

So they complete their journey's beginning, and draw nigh the river. Just then the waterman
descried them from the Stygian wave advancing through the silent woodland and turning their
feet towards the bank, and opens on them in these words of challenge: 'Whoso thou art who marchest
in arms towards our river, forth and say, there as thou art, why thou comest, and stay thine
advance. This is the land of Shadows, of Sleep, and slumberous Night; no living body may the
Stygian hull convey. Nor truly had I joy of taking Alcides on the lake for passenger, nor Theseus
and Pirithoüs, born of gods though they were and unconquered in might. He laid fettering hand
on the warder of Tartarus, and dragged him cowering from the throne of my lord the King; they
essayed to ravish our mistress from the bridal chamber of Dis.' Thereto the Amphrysian soothsayer
made brief reply: 'No such plot is here; be not moved; nor do our weapons offer violence; the
huge gatekeeper may bark on for ever in his cavern and affright the bloodless ghosts; Proserpine
may keep her honour within her uncle's gates. Aeneas of Troy, renowned [404-437]in goodness
as in arms, goes down to meet his father in the deep shades of Erebus. If the sight of such
affection stirs thee in nowise, yet this bough' (she discovers the bough hidden in her raiment)
'thou must know.' Then his heaving breast allays its anger, and he says no more; but marvelling
at the awful gift, the fated rod so long unseen, he steers in his dusky vessel and draws to
shore. Next he routs out the souls that sate on the long benches, and clears the thwarts, while
he takes mighty Aeneas on board. The galley groaned under the weight in all her seams, and
the marsh-water leaked fast in. At length prophetess and prince are landed unscathed on the
ugly ooze and livid sedge.

This realm rings with the triple-throated baying of vast Cerberus, couched huge in the cavern
opposite; to whom the prophetess, seeing the serpents already bristling up on his neck, throws
a cake made slumberous with honey and drugged grain. He, with threefold jaws gaping in ravenous
hunger, catches it when thrown, and sinks to earth with monstrous body outstretched, and sprawling
huge over all his den. The warder overwhelmed, Aeneas makes entrance, and quickly issues from
the bank of the irremeable wave.

Immediately wailing voices are loud in their ears, the souls of babies crying on the doorway
sill, whom, torn from the breast and portionless in life's sweetness, a dark day cut off and
drowned in bitter death. Hard by them are those condemned to death on false accusation. Neither
indeed are these dwellings assigned without lot and judgment; Minos presides and shakes the
urn; he summons a council of the silent people, and inquires of their lives and charges. Next
in order have these mourners their place whose own innocent hands dealt them death, who flung
away their souls in hatred of the day. How fain were they now in upper air to endure their
poverty and [438-472]sore travail! It may not be; the unlovely pool locks them in her gloomy
wave, and Styx pours her ninefold barrier between. And not far from here are shewn stretching
on every side the Wailing Fields; so they call them by name. Here they whom pitiless love hath
wasted in cruel decay hide among untrodden ways, shrouded in embosoming myrtle thickets; not
death itself ends their distresses. In this region he discerns Phaedra and Procris and woeful
Eriphyle, shewing on her the wounds of her merciless son, and Evadne and Pasiphaë; Laodamia
goes in their company, and she who was once Caeneus and a man, now woman, and again returned
by fate into her shape of old. Among whom Dido the Phoenician, fresh from her death-wound,
wandered in the vast forest; by her the Trojan hero stood, and knew the dim form through the
darkness, even as the moon at the month's beginning to him who sees or thinks he sees her rising
through the vapours; he let tears fall, and spoke to her lovingly and sweet:

'Alas, Dido! so the news was true that reached me; thou didst perish, and the sword sealed
thy doom! Ah me, was I cause of thy death? By the stars I swear, by the heavenly powers and
all that is sacred beneath the earth, unwillingly, O queen, I left thy shore. But the gods,
at whose orders now I pass through this shadowy place, this land of mouldering overgrowth and
deep night, the gods' commands drove me forth; nor could I deem my departure would bring thee
pain so great as this. Stay thy footstep, and withdraw not from our gaze. From whom fliest
thou? the last speech of thee fate ordains me is this.'

In such words and with starting tears Aeneas soothed the burning and fierce-eyed soul. She
turned away with looks fixed fast on the ground, stirred no more in countenance by the speech
he essays than if she stood in iron flint or Marpesian stone. At length she started, and fled
wrathfully [473-508]into the shadowy woodland, where Sychaeus, her ancient husband, responds
to her distresses and equals her affection. Yet Aeneas, dismayed by her cruel doom, follows
her far on her way with pitying tears.

Thence he pursues his appointed path. And now they trod those utmost fields where the renowned
in war have their haunt apart. Here Tydeus meets him; here Parthenopaeus, glorious in arms,
and the pallid phantom of Adrastus; here the Dardanians long wept on earth and fallen in the
war; sighing he discerns all their long array, Glaucus and Medon and Thersilochus, the three
children of Antenor, and Polyphoetes, Ceres' priest, and Idaeus yet charioted, yet grasping
his arms. The souls throng round him to right and left; nor is one look enough; lingering delighted,
they pace by his side and enquire wherefore he is come. But the princes of the Grecians and
Agamemnon's armies, when they see him glittering in arms through the gloom, hurry terror-stricken
away; some turn backward, as when of old they fled to the ships; some raise their voice faintly,
and gasp out a broken ineffectual cry.

And here he saw Deïphobus son of Priam, with face cruelly torn, face and both hands, and ears
lopped from his mangled temples, and nostrils maimed by a shameful wound. Barely he knew the
cowering form that hid its dreadful punishment; then he springs to accost it in familiar speech:

'Deïphobus mighty in arms, seed of Teucer's royal blood, whose wantonness of vengeance was
so cruel? who was allowed to use thee thus? Rumour reached me that on that last night, outwearied
with endless slaughter, thou hadst sunk on the heap of mingled carnage. Then mine own hand
reared an empty tomb on the Rhoetean shore, mine own voice thrice called aloud upon thy ghost.
Thy name and armour keep the spot; thee, O my friend, I could not see nor lay in the native
earth I left.'

[509-541]Whereto the son of Priam: 'In nothing, O my friend, wert thou wanting; thou hast paid
the full to Deïphobus and the dead man's shade. But me my fate and the Laconian woman's murderous
guilt thus dragged down to doom; these are the records of her leaving. For how we spent that
last night in delusive gladness thou knowest, and must needs remember too well. When the fated
horse leapt down on the steep towers of Troy, bearing armed infantry for the burden of its
womb, she, in feigned procession, led round our Phrygian women with Bacchic cries; herself
she upreared a mighty flame amid them, and called the Grecians out of the fortress height.
Then was I fast in mine ill-fated bridal chamber, deep asleep and outworn with my charge, and
lay overwhelmed in slumber sweet and profound and most like to easeful death. Meanwhile that
crown of wives removes all the arms from my dwelling, and slips out the faithful sword from
beneath my head: she calls Menelaus into the house and flings wide the gateway: be sure she
hoped her lover would magnify the gift, and so she might quench the fame of her ill deeds of
old. Why do I linger? They burst into the chamber, they and the Aeolid, counsellor of crime,
in their company. Gods, recompense the Greeks even thus, if with righteous lips I call for
vengeance! But come, tell in turn what hap hath brought thee hither yet alive. Comest thou
driven on ocean wanderings, or by promptings from heaven? or what fortune keeps thee from rest,
that thou shouldst draw nigh these sad sunless dwellings, this disordered land?'

In this change of talk Dawn had already crossed heaven's mid axle on her rose-charioted way;
and haply had they thus drawn out all the allotted time; but the Sibyl made brief warning speech
to her companion: 'Night falls, Aeneas; we waste the hours in weeping. Here is the place where
the road disparts; by this that runs to the right [542-574]under great Dis' city is our path
to Elysium; but the leftward wreaks vengeance on the wicked and sends them to unrelenting hell.'
But Deïphobus: 'Be not angered, mighty priestess; I will depart, I will refill my place and
return into darkness. Go, glory of our people, go, enjoy a fairer fate than mine.' Thus much
he spoke, and on the word turned away his footsteps.

Aeneas looks swiftly back, and sees beneath the cliff on the left hand a wide city, girt with
a triple wall and encircled by a racing river of boiling flame, Tartarean Phlegethon, that
echoes over its rolling rocks. In front is the gate, huge and pillared with solid adamant,
that no warring force of men nor the very habitants of heaven may avail to overthrow; it stands
up a tower of iron, and Tisiphone sitting girt in bloodstained pall keeps sleepless watch at
the entry by night and day. Hence moans are heard and fierce lashes resound, with the clank
of iron and dragging chains. Aeneas stopped and hung dismayed at the tumult. 'What shapes of
crime are here? declare, O maiden; or what the punishment that pursues them, and all this upsurging
wail?' Then the soothsayer thus began to speak: 'Illustrious chief of Troy, no pure foot may
tread these guilty courts; but to me Hecate herself, when she gave me rule over the groves
of Avernus, taught how the gods punish, and guided me through all her realm. Gnosian Rhadamanthus
here holds unrelaxing sway, chastises secret crime revealed, and exacts confession, wheresoever
in the upper world one vainly exultant in stolen guilt hath till the dusk of death kept clear
from the evil he wrought. Straightway avenging Tisiphone, girt with her scourge, tramples down
the shivering sinners, menaces them with the grim snakes in her left hand, and summons forth
her sisters in merciless train. Then at last the sacred gates are flung open and grate on the
jarring hinge. Markest thou what sentry is seated in [575-609]the doorway? what shape guards
the threshold? More grim within sits the monstrous Hydra with her fifty black yawning throats:
and Tartarus' self gapes sheer and strikes into the gloom through twice the space that one
looks upward to Olympus and the skyey heaven. Here Earth's ancient children, the Titans' brood,
hurled down by the thunderbolt, lie wallowing in the abyss. Here likewise I saw the twin Aloïds,
enormous of frame, who essayed with violent hands to pluck down high heaven and thrust Jove
from his upper realm. Likewise I saw Salmoneus in the cruel payment he gives for mocking Jove's
flame and Olympus' thunders. Borne by four horses and brandishing a torch, he rode in triumph
midway through the populous city of Grecian Elis, and claimed for himself the worship of deity;
madman! who would mimic the storm-cloud and the inimitable bolt with brass that rang under
his trampling horse-hoofs. But the Lord omnipotent hurled his shaft through thickening clouds
(no firebrand his nor smoky glare of torches) and dashed him headlong in the fury of the whirlwind.
Therewithal Tityos might be seen, fosterling of Earth the mother of all, whose body stretches
over nine full acres, and a monstrous vulture with crooked beak eats away the imperishable
liver and the entrails that breed in suffering, and plunges deep into the breast that gives
it food and dwelling; nor is any rest given to the fibres that ever grow anew. Why tell of
the Lapithae, of Ixion and Pirithoüs? over whom a stone hangs just slipping and just as though
it fell; or the high banqueting couches gleam golden-pillared, and the feast is spread in royal
luxury before their faces; couched hard by, the eldest of the Furies wards the tables from
their touch and rises with torch upreared and thunderous lips. Here are they who hated their
brethren while life endured, or struck a parent or entangled a client in wrong, or who brooded
[610-643]alone over found treasure and shared it not with their fellows, this the greatest
multitude of all; and they who were slain for adultery, and who followed unrighteous arms,
and feared not to betray their masters' plighted hand. Imprisoned they await their doom. Seek
not to be told that doom, that fashion of fortune wherein they are sunk. Some roll a vast stone,
or hang outstretched on the spokes of wheels; hapless Theseus sits and shall sit for ever,
and Phlegyas in his misery gives counsel to all and witnesses aloud through the gloom, Learn
by this warning to do justly and not to slight the gods. This man sold his country for gold,
and laid her under a tyrant's sway; he set up and pulled down laws at a price; this other forced
his daughter's bridal chamber and a forbidden marriage; all dared some monstrous wickedness,
and had success in what they dared. Not had I an hundred tongues, an hundred mouths, and a
voice of iron, could I sum up all the shapes of crime or name over all their punishments.'

Thus spoke Phoebus' long-lived priestess; then 'But come now,' she cries; 'haste on the way
and perfect the service begun; let us go faster; I descry the ramparts cast in Cyclopean furnaces,
and in front the arched gateway where they bid us lay the gifts foreordained.' She ended, and
advancing side by side along the shadowy ways, they pass over and draw nigh the gates. Aeneas
makes entrance, and sprinkling his body with fresh water, plants the bough full in the gateway.

Now at length, this fully done, and the service of the goddess perfected, they came to the
happy place, the green pleasances and blissful seats of the Fortunate Woodlands. Here an ampler
air clothes the meadows in lustrous sheen, and they know their own sun and a starlight of their
own. Some exercise their limbs in tournament on the greensward, contend in games, and wrestle
on the yellow sand. Some [644-676]dance with beating footfall and lips that sing; with them
is the Thracian priest in sweeping robe, and makes music to their measures with the notes'
sevenfold interval, the notes struck now with his fingers, now with his ivory rod. Here is
Teucer's ancient brood, a generation excellent in beauty, high-hearted heroes born in happier
years, Ilus and Assaracus, and Dardanus, founder of Troy. Afar he marvels at the armour and
chariots empty of their lords: their spears stand fixed in the ground, and their unyoked horses
pasture at large over the plain: their life's delight in chariot and armour, their care in
pasturing their sleek horses, follows them in like wise low under earth. Others, lo! he beholds
feasting on the sward to right and left, and singing in chorus the glad Paean-cry, within a
scented laurel-grove whence Eridanus river surges upward full-volumed through the wood. Here
is the band of them who bore wounds in fighting for their country, and they who were pure in
priesthood while life endured, and the good poets whose speech abased not Apollo; and they
who made life beautiful by the arts of their invention, and who won by service a memory among
men, the brows of all girt with the snow-white fillet. To their encircling throng the Sibyl
spoke thus, and to Musaeus before them all; for he is midmost of all the multitude, and stands
out head and shoulders among their upward gaze:

'Tell, O blissful souls, and thou, poet most gracious, what region, what place hath Anchises
for his own? For his sake are we come, and have sailed across the wide rivers of Erebus.'

And to her the hero thus made brief reply: 'None hath a fixed dwelling; we live in the shady
woodlands; soft-swelling banks and meadows fresh with streams are our habitation. But you,
if this be your heart's desire, scale this ridge, and I will even now set you on an easy [677-708]pathway.'
He spoke, and paced on before them, and from above shews the shining plains; thereafter they
leave the mountain heights.

But lord Anchises, deep in the green valley, was musing in earnest survey over the imprisoned
souls destined to the daylight above, and haply reviewing his beloved children and all the
tale of his people, them and their fates and fortunes, their works and ways. And he, when he
saw Aeneas advancing to meet him over the greensward, stretched forth both hands eagerly, while
tears rolled over his cheeks, and his lips parted in a cry: 'Art thou come at last, and hath
thy love, O child of my desire, conquered the difficult road? Is it granted, O my son, to gaze
on thy face and hear and answer in familiar tones? Thus indeed I forecast in spirit, counting
the days between; nor hath my care misled me. What lands, what space of seas hast thou traversed
to reach me, through what surge of perils, O my son! How I dreaded the realm of Libya might
work thee harm!'

And he: 'Thy melancholy phantom, thine, O my father, came before me often and often, and drove
me to steer to these portals. My fleet is anchored on the Tyrrhenian brine. Give thine hand
to clasp, O my father, give it, and withdraw not from our embrace.'

So spoke he, his face wet with abundant weeping. Thrice there did he essay to fling his arms
about his neck; thrice the phantom vainly grasped fled out of his hands even as light wind,
and most like to fluttering sleep.

Meanwhile Aeneas sees deep withdrawn in the covert of the vale a woodland and rustling forest
thickets, and the river of Lethe that floats past their peaceful dwellings. Around it flitted
nations and peoples innumerable; even as in the meadows when in clear summer weather bees settle
on the variegated flowers and stream round the snow-white [709-742]lilies, all the plain is
murmurous with their humming. Aeneas starts at the sudden view, and asks the reason he knows
not; what are those spreading streams, or who are they whose vast train fills the banks? Then
lord Anchises: 'Souls, for whom second bodies are destined and due, drink at the wave of the
Lethean stream the heedless water of long forgetfulness. These of a truth have I long desired
to tell and shew thee face to face, and number all the generation of thy children, that so
thou mayest the more rejoice with me in finding Italy.'--'O father, must we think that any
souls travel hence into upper air, and return again to bodily fetters? why this their strange
sad longing for the light?' 'I will tell,' rejoins Anchises, 'nor will I hold thee in suspense,
my son.' And he unfolds all things in order one by one.

'First of all, heaven and earth and the liquid fields, the shining orb of the moon and the
Titanian star, doth a spirit sustain inly, and a soul shed abroad in them sways all their members
and mingles in the mighty frame. Thence is the generation of man and beast, the life of winged
things, and the monstrous forms that ocean breeds under his glittering floor. Those seeds have
fiery force and divine birth, so far as they are not clogged by taint of the body and dulled
by earthy frames and limbs ready to die. Hence is it they fear and desire, sorrow and rejoice;
nor can they pierce the air while barred in the blind darkness of their prison-house. Nay,
and when the last ray of life is gone, not yet, alas! does all their woe, nor do all the plagues
of the body wholly leave them free; and needs must be that many a long ingrained evil should
take root marvellously deep. Therefore they are schooled in punishment, and pay all the forfeit
of a lifelong ill; some are hung stretched to the viewless winds; some have the taint of guilt
washed out beneath the dreary deep, or burned away in fire. We [743-777]suffer, each a several
ghost; thereafter we are sent to the broad spaces of Elysium, some few of us to possess the
happy fields; till length of days completing time's circle takes out the ingrained soilure
and leaves untainted the ethereal sense and pure spiritual flame. All these before thee, when
the wheel of a thousand years hath come fully round, a God summons in vast train to the river
of Lethe, that so they may regain in forgetfulness the slopes of upper earth, and begin to
desire to return again into the body.'

Anchises ceased, and leads his son and the Sibyl likewise amid the assembled murmurous throng,
and mounts a hillock whence he might scan all the long ranks and learn their countenances as
they came.

'Now come, the glory hereafter to follow our Dardanian progeny, the posterity to abide in our
Italian people, illustrious souls and inheritors of our name to be, these will I rehearse,
and instruct thee of thy destinies. He yonder, seest thou? the warrior leaning on his pointless
spear, holds the nearest place allotted in our groves, and shall rise first into the air of
heaven from the mingling blood of Italy, Silvius of Alban name, the child of thine age, whom
late in thy length of days thy wife Lavinia shall nurture in the woodland, king and father
of kings; from him in Alba the Long shall our house have dominion. He next him is Procas, glory
of the Trojan race; and Capys and Numitor; and he who shall renew thy name, Silvius Aeneas,
eminent alike in goodness or in arms, if ever he shall receive his kingdom in Alba. Men of
men! see what strength they display, and wear the civic oak shading their brows. They shall
establish Nomentum and Gabii and Fidena city, they the Collatine hill-fortress, Pometii and
the Fort of Inuus, Bola and Cora: these shall be names that are now nameless lands. Nay, Romulus
likewise, seed of Mavors, shall join [778-810]his grandsire's company, from his mother Ilia's
nurture and Assaracus' blood. Seest thou how the twin plumes straighten on his crest, and his
father's own emblazonment already marks him for upper air? Behold, O son! by his augury shall
Rome the renowned fill earth with her empire and heaven with her pride, and gird about seven
fortresses with her single wall, prosperous mother of men; even as our lady of Berecyntus rides
in her chariot turret-crowned through the Phrygian cities, glad in the gods she hath borne,
clasping an hundred of her children's children, all habitants of heaven, all dwellers on the
upper heights. Hither now bend thy twin-eyed gaze; behold this people, the Romans that are
thine. Here is Caesar and all Iülus' posterity that shall arise under the mighty cope of heaven.
Here is he, he of whose promise once and again thou hearest, Caesar Augustus, a god's son,
who shall again establish the ages of gold in Latium over the fields that once were Saturn's
realm, and carry his empire afar to Garamant and Indian, to the land that lies beyond our stars,
beyond the sun's yearlong ways, where Atlas the sky-bearer wheels on his shoulder the glittering
star-spangled pole. Before his coming even now the kingdoms of the Caspian shudder at oracular
answers, and the Maeotic land and the mouths of sevenfold Nile flutter in alarm. Nor indeed
did Alcides traverse such spaces of earth, though he pierced the brazen-footed deer, or though
he stilled the Erymanthian woodlands and made Lerna tremble at his bow: nor he who sways his
team with reins of vine, Liber the conqueror, when he drives his tigers from Nysa's lofty crest.
And do we yet hesitate to give valour scope in deeds, or shrink in fear from setting foot on
Ausonian land? Ah, and who is he apart, marked out with sprays of olive, offering sacrifice?
I know the locks and hoary chin of the king of Rome who shall establish the infant city in
his [811-843]laws, sent from little Cures' sterile land to the majesty of empire. To him Tullus
shall next succeed, who shall break the peace of his country and stir to arms men rusted from
war and armies now disused to triumphs; and hard on him over-vaunting Ancus follows, even now
too elate in popular breath. Wilt thou see also the Tarquin kings, and the haughty soul of
Brutus the Avenger, and the fasces regained? He shall first receive a consul's power and the
merciless axes, and when his children would stir fresh war, the father, for fair freedom's
sake, shall summon them to doom. Unhappy! yet howsoever posterity shall take the deed, love
of country and limitless passion for honour shall prevail. Nay, behold apart the Decii and
the Drusi, Torquatus with his cruel axe, and Camillus returning with the standards. Yonder
souls likewise, whom thou discernest gleaming in equal arms, at one now, while shut in Night,
ah me! what mutual war, what battle-lines and bloodshed shall they arouse, so they attain the
light of the living! father-in-law descending from the Alpine barriers and the fortress of
the Dweller Alone, son-in-law facing him with the embattled East. Nay, O my children, harden
not your hearts to such warfare, neither turn upon her own heart the mastering might of your
country; and thou, be thou first to forgive, who drawest thy descent from heaven; cast down
the weapons from thy hand, O blood of mine. . . . He shall drive his conquering chariot to
the Capitoline height triumphant over Corinth, glorious in Achaean slaughter. He shall uproot
Argos and Agamemnonian Mycenae, and the Aeacid's own heir, the seed of Achilles mighty in arms,
avenging his ancestors in Troy and Minerva's polluted temple. Who might leave thee, lordly
Cato, or thee, Cossus, to silence? who the Gracchan family, or these two sons of the Scipios,
a double thunderbolt of war, Libya's bale? and Fabricius potent in poverty, or [844-875]thee,
Serranus, sowing in the furrow? Whither whirl you me all breathless, O Fabii? thou art he,
the most mighty, the one man whose lingering retrieves our State. Others shall beat out the
breathing bronze to softer lines, I believe it well; shall draw living lineaments from the
marble; the cause shall be more eloquent on their lips; their pencil shall portray the pathways
of heaven, and tell the stars in their arising: be thy charge, O Roman, to rule the nations
in thine empire; this shall be thine art, to lay down the law of peace, to be merciful to the
conquered and beat the haughty down.'

Thus lord Anchises, and as they marvel, he so pursues: 'Look how Marcellus the conqueror marches
glorious in the splendid spoils, towering high above them all! He shall stay the Roman State,
reeling beneath the invading shock, shall ride down Carthaginian and insurgent Gaul, and a
third time hang up the captured armour before lord Quirinus.'

And at this Aeneas, for he saw going by his side one excellent in beauty and glittering in
arms, but his brow had little cheer, and his eyes looked down:

'Who, O my father, is he who thus attends him on his way? son, or other of his children's princely
race? How his comrades murmur around him! how goodly of presence he is! but dark Night flutters
round his head with melancholy shade.'

Then lord Anchises with welling tears began: 'O my son, ask not of the great sorrow of thy
people. Him shall fate but shew to earth, and suffer not to stay further. Too mighty, lords
of heaven, did you deem the brood of Rome, had this your gift been abiding. What moaning of
men shall arise from the Field of Mavors by the imperial city! what a funeral train shalt thou
see, O Tiber, as thou flowest by the new-made grave! Neither shall the boyhood of any [876-901]of
Ilian race raise his Latin forefathers' hope so high; nor shall the land of Romulus ever boast
of any fosterling like this. Alas his goodness, alas his antique honour, and right hand invincible
in war! none had faced him unscathed in armed shock, whether he met the foe on foot, or ran
his spurs into the flanks of his foaming horse. Ah me, the pity of thee, O boy! if in any wise
thou breakest the grim bar of fate, thou shalt be Marcellus. Give me lilies in full hands;
let me strew bright blossoms, and these gifts at least let me lavish on my descendant's soul,
and do the unavailing service.'

Thus they wander up and down over the whole region of broad vaporous plains, and scan all the
scene. And when Anchises had led his son over it, each point by each, and kindled his spirit
with passion for the glories on their way, he tells him thereafter of the war he next must
wage, and instructs him of the Laurentine peoples and the city of Latinus, and in what wise
each task may be turned aside or borne.

There are twin portals of Sleep, whereof the one is fabled of horn, and by it real shadows
are given easy outlet; the other shining white of polished ivory, but false visions issue upward
from the ghostly world. With these words then Anchises follows forth his son and the Sibyl
together there, and dismisses them by the ivory gate. He pursues his way to the ships and revisits
his comrades; then bears on to Caieta's haven straight along the shore. The anchor is cast
from the prow; the sterns are grounded on the beach.

BOOK SEVENTH

THE LANDING IN LATIUM, AND THE ROLL OF THE ARMIES OF ITALY

Thou also, Caieta, nurse of Aeneas, gavest our shores an everlasting renown in death; and still
thine honour haunts thy resting-place, and a name in broad Hesperia, if that be glory, marks
thy dust. But when the last rites are duly paid, and the mound smoothed over the grave, good
Aeneas, now the high seas are hushed, bears on under sail and leaves his haven. Breezes blow
into the night, and the white moonshine speeds them on; the sea glitters in her quivering radiance.
Soon they skirt the shores of Circe's land, where the rich daughter of the Sun makes her untrodden
groves echo with ceaseless song; and her stately house glows nightlong with burning odorous
cedarwood, as she runs over her delicate web with the ringing comb. Hence are heard afar angry
cries of lions chafing at their fetters and roaring in the deep night; bears and bristly swine
rage in their pens, and vast shapes of wolves howl; whom with her potent herbs the deadly divine
Circe had disfashioned, face and body, into wild beasts from the likeness of men. But lest
the good Trojans might suffer so dread a change, might enter her haven or draw nigh the ominous
shores, Neptune filled [23-55]their sails with favourable winds, and gave them escape, and
bore them past the seething shallows.

And now the sea reddened with shafts of light, and high in heaven the yellow dawn shone rose-charioted;
when the winds fell, and every breath sank suddenly, and the oar-blades toil through the heavy
ocean-floor. And on this Aeneas descries from sea a mighty forest. Midway in it the pleasant
Tiber stream breaks to sea in swirling eddies, laden with yellow sand. Around and above fowl
many in sort, that haunt his banks and river-channel, solaced heaven with song and flew about
the forest. He orders his crew to bend their course and turn their prows to land, and glides
joyfully into the shady river.

       *       *       *       *       *

Forth now, Erato! and I will unfold who were the kings, what the tides of circumstance, how
it was with ancient Latium when first that foreign army drew their fleet ashore on Ausonia's
coast; I will recall the preluding of battle. Thou, divine one, inspire thou thy poet. I will
tell of grim wars, tell of embattled lines, of kings whom honour drove on death, of the Tyrrhenian
forces, and all Hesperia enrolled in arms. A greater history opens before me, a greater work
I essay.

Latinus the King, now growing old, ruled in a long peace over quiet tilth and town. He, men
say, was sprung of Faunus and the nymph Marica of Laurentum. Faunus' father was Picus; and
he boasts himself, Saturn, thy son; thou art the first source of their blood. Son of his, by
divine ordinance, and male descent was none, cut off in the early spring of youth. One alone
kept the household and its august home, a daughter now ripe for a husband and of full years
for marriage. Many wooed her from wide Latium and all Ausonia. Fairest and foremost of all
[56-93]is Turnus, of long and lordly ancestry; but boding signs from heaven, many and terrible,
bar the way. Within the palace, in the lofty inner courts, was a laurel of sacred foliage,
guarded in awe through many years, which lord Latinus, it was said, himself found and dedicated
to Phoebus when first he would build his citadel; and from it gave his settlers their name,
Laurentines. High atop of it, wonderful to tell, bees borne with loud humming across the liquid
air girt it thickly about, and with interlinked feet hung in a sudden swarm from the leafy
bough. Straightway the prophet cries: 'I see a foreigner draw nigh, an army from the same quarter
seek the same quarter, and reign high in our fortress.' Furthermore, while maiden Lavinia stands
beside her father feeding the altars with holy fuel, she was seen, oh, horror! to catch fire
in her long tresses, and burn with flickering flame in all her array, her queenly hair lit
up, lit up her jewelled circlet; till, enwreathed in smoke and lurid light, she scattered fire
over all the palace. That sight was rumoured wonderful and terrible. Herself, they prophesied,
she should be glorious in fame and fortune; but a great war was foreshadowed for her people.
But the King, troubled by the omen, visits the oracle of his father Faunus the soothsayer,
and the groves deep under Albunea, where, queen of the woods, she echoes from her holy well,
and breathes forth a dim and deadly vapour. Hence do the tribes of Italy and all the Oenotrian
land seek answers in perplexity; hither the priest bears his gifts, and when he hath lain down
and sought slumber under the silent night on the spread fleeces of slaughtered sheep, sees
many flitting phantoms of wonderful wise, hears manifold voices, and attains converse of the
gods, and hath speech with Acheron and the deep tract of hell. Here then, likewise seeking
an answer, lord Latinus paid fit sacrifice of an hundred woolly ewes, and [94-127]lay couched
on the strewn fleeces they had worn. Out of the lofty grove a sudden voice was uttered: 'Seek
not, O my child, to unite thy daughter in Latin espousals, nor trust her to the bridal chambers
ready to thine hand; foreigners shall come to be thy sons, whose blood shall raise our name
to heaven, and the children of whose race shall see, where the circling sun looks on either
ocean, all the rolling world swayed beneath their feet.' This his father Faunus' answer and
counsel given in the silent night Latinus restrains not in his lips; but wide-flitting Rumour
had already borne it round among the Ausonian cities, when the children of Laomedon moored
their fleet to the grassy slope of the river bank.

Aeneas, with the foremost of his captains and fair Iülus, lay them down under the boughs of
a high tree and array the feast. They spread wheaten cakes along the sward under their meats--so
Jove on high prompted--and crown the platter of corn with wilding fruits. Here haply when the
rest was spent, and scantness of food set them to eat their thin bread, and with hand and venturous
teeth do violence to the round cakes fraught with fate and spare not the flattened squares:
Ha! Are we eating our tables too? cries Iülus jesting, and stops. At once that accent heard
set their toils a limit; and at once as he spoke his father caught it from his lips and hushed
him, in amazement at the omen. Straightway 'Hail, O land!' he cries, 'my destined inheritance!
and hail, O household gods, faithful to your Troy! here is home; this is our native country.
For my father Anchises, now I remember it, bequeathed me this secret of fate: "When hunger
shall drive thee, O son, to consume thy tables where the feast fails, on the unknown shores
whither thou shalt sail; then, though outwearied, hope for home, and there at last let thine
hand remember to set thy house's foundations and bulwarks." This was [128-162]the hunger, this
the last that awaited us, to set the promised end to our desolations . . . Up then, and, glad
with the first sunbeam, let us explore and search all abroad from our harbour, what is the
country, who its habitants, where is the town of the nation. Now pour your cups to Jove, and
call in prayer on Anchises our father, setting the wine again upon the board.' So speaks he,
and binding his brows with a leafy bough, he makes supplication to the Genius of the ground,
and Earth first of deities, and the Nymphs, and the Rivers yet unknown; then calls on Night
and Night's rising signs, and next on Jove of Ida, and our lady of Phrygia, and on his twain
parents, in heaven and in the under world. At this the Lord omnipotent thrice thundered sharp
from high heaven, and with his own hand shook out for a sign in the sky a cloud ablaze with
luminous shafts of gold. A sudden rumour spreads among the Trojan array, that the day is come
to found their destined city. Emulously they renew the feast, and, glad at the high omen, array
the flagons and engarland the wine.

Soon as the morrow bathed the lands in its dawning light, they part to search out the town,
and the borders and shores of the nation: these are the pools and spring of Numicus; this is
the Tiber river; here dwell the brave Latins. Then the seed of Anchises commands an hundred
envoys chosen of every degree to go to the stately royal city, all with the wreathed boughs
of Pallas, to bear him gifts and desire grace for the Teucrians. Without delay they hasten
on their message, and advance with swift step. Himself he traces the city walls with a shallow
trench, and builds on it; and in fashion of a camp girdles this first settlement on the shore
with mound and battlements. And now his men had traversed their way; they espied the towers
and steep roofs of the Latins, and drew near the wall. We believe, too, that another (the sixth)
edition of that gentleman's History of England from the Accession of James II., is on the eve
of publication.

Those of our readers who take an interest in that widely spread and popular subject, The Dance
of Death, will remember that one of the most exquisite works of art in which expression is given to
the idea on which this pictorial morality is founded, is the Alphabet Dance of Death--so delicately
engraved on wood, (it is sometimes said by Holbein, who designed it,) but really by H. Lutzelburger,
that the late Mr. Douce did not believe it could ever be copied so as to afford any adequate impression
of the beauty of the original. A German artist, Heinrich Loedel, has, however, disproved the
accuracy of this opinion; and the amateur may now, for a few shillings, put himself in possession
of most admirable copies of a work which is a masterpiece of design, and a gem in point of execution,
and of which the original is of the extremest rarity. There are two editions of this Alphabet;
one published at Gottingen, with an accompanying dissertation by Dr. Adolf Ellisen; and the other
at Cologne, with corresponding borders by Georg Osterwald.

The revised and much enlarged edition of Dr. Lingard's History of England, handsomely printed
in ten large octavo volumes, is, we understand, nearly ready for publication.

Mr. M.A. Lower, whose Curiosities of Heraldry and English Surnames are no doubt well known to
many of our readers, is preparing for publication a Translation,
from a MS. in the British Museum, of The Chronicle of Battel Abbey
from the vow of its Foundation by William the Conqueror, to the Year
1176, originally compiled in Latin, by a Monk of the Establishment.

Mr. Thorpe, 13. Henrietta Street, has just issued "A Catalogue of most choice, curious, and excessively
rare Books, particularly rich in Early Poetry, Mysteries, Pageants, and Plays, and Romances of
Chivalry." [Ten shillings will be given for a clean and perfect copy.]

DALTON'S (EDWARD) DOUBTING'S DOWNFALL. [Ten shillings, if a pamphlet, twenty shillings, if a book,
will be given for a clean and perfect copy.]
HOLLOWAY'S LETTER AND SPIRIT. Oxon. 1543.

PHILLIP'S DIVINE VISIONS
OF ENGELBRECHT. Northampton. 1780.

KENNET, A BRAND PLUCKED FROM THE
BURNING. 1718.

BORDELION (ABBE) GOMGAM, OC L'HOMME PRODIGIEUX. 2
vols. Amsterdam.

LINGUET. PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS ON MONACHISM. 1776.

PRIESTS
UNMASKED. 6 vols. 1767.

ENCHIRIDION LEONIS PAPÆ.

MACNAB'S THEORY
OF THE UNIVERSE. 1818. 1849), and in Hampson's Medii Ævi Kalendarium
(vol i). We have no doubt some of our correspondents will furnish
A.B. with a list of Eugene Aram's published writings. Here was the home he left, Tyrrhenian
Corythus; now the palace of heaven, glittering with golden stars, enthrones and adds him to
the ranged altars of the gods.'

He ended; and Ilioneus pursued his speech with these words:

'King, Faunus' illustrious progeny, neither hath black tempest driven us with stress of waves
to shelter in your lands, nor hath star or shore misled us on the way we went. Of set purpose
and willing mind do we draw nigh this thy city, outcasts from a realm once the greatest that
the sun looked on as he came from Olympus' utmost border. From Jove hath our race beginning;
in Jove the men of Dardania rejoice as ancestor; our King himself of Jove's supreme race, Aeneas
of Troy, hath sent us to thy courts. How terrible the tempest that burst from fierce Mycenae
over the plains of Ida, driven by what fate Europe and Asia met in the shock of two worlds,
even he hath heard who is sundered in the utmost land where the ocean surge recoils, and he
whom stretching midmost of the four zones the zone of the intolerable sun holds in severance.
Borne by that flood over many desolate seas, we crave a scant dwelling [229-261]for our country's
gods, an unmolested landing-place, and the air and water that are free to all. We shall not
disgrace the kingdom; nor will the rumour of your renown be lightly gone or the grace of all
you have done fade away; nor will Ausonia be sorry to have taken Troy to her breast. By the
fortunes of Aeneas I swear, by that right hand mighty, whether tried in friendship or in warlike
arms, many and many a people and nation--scorn us not because we advance with hands proffering
chaplets and words of supplication--hath sought us for itself and desired our alliance; but
yours is the land that heaven's high ordinance drove us forth to find. Hence sprung Dardanus:
hither Apollo recalls us, and pushes us on with imperious orders to Tyrrhenian Tiber and the
holy pools of Numicus' spring. Further, he presents to thee these small guerdons of our past
estate, relics saved from burning Troy. From this gold did lord Anchises pour libation at the
altars; this was Priam's array when he delivered statutes to the nations assembled in order;
the sceptre, the sacred mitre, the raiment wrought by the women of Ilium. . . .'

At these words of Ilioneus Latinus holds his countenance in a steady gaze, and stays motionless
on the floor, casting his intent eyes around. Nor does the embroidered purple so move the King,
nor the sceptre of Priam, as his daughter's marriage and the bridal chamber absorb him, and
the oracle of ancient Faunus stirs deep in his heart. This is he, the wanderer from a foreign
home, foreshewn of fate for his son, and called to a realm of equal dominion, whose race should
be excellent in valour and their might overbear all the world. At last he speaks with good cheer:

'The gods prosper our undertaking and their own augury! What thou desirest, Trojan, shall be
given; nor do I spurn your gifts. While Latinus reigns you shall not [262-294]lack foison of
rich land nor Troy's own riches. Only let Aeneas himself come hither, if desire of us be so
strong, if he be in haste to join our friendship and be called our ally. Let him not shrink
in terror from a friendly face. A term of the peace for me shall be to touch your monarch's
hand. Do you now convey in answer my message to your King. I have a daughter whom the oracles
of my father's shrine and many a celestial token alike forbid me to unite to one of our own
nation; sons shall come, they prophesy, from foreign coasts, such is the destiny of Latium,
whose blood shall exalt our name to heaven. He it is on whom fate calls; this I think, this
I choose, if there be any truth in my soul's foreshadowing.'

Thus he speaks, and chooses horses for all the company. Three hundred stood sleek in their
high stalls; for all the Teucrians in order he straightway commands them to be led forth, fleet-footed,
covered with embroidered purple: golden chains hang drooping over their chests, golden their
housings, and they champ on bits of ruddy gold: for the absent Aeneas a chariot and pair of
chariot horses of celestial breed, with nostrils breathing flame; of the race of those which
subtle Circe bred by sleight on her father, the bastard issue of a stolen union. With these
gifts and words the Aeneadae ride back from Latinus carrying peace.

And lo! the fierce wife of Jove was returning from Inachian Argos, and held her way along the
air, when out of the distant sky, far as from Sicilian Pachynus, she espied the rejoicing of
Aeneas and the Dardanian fleet. She sees them already house-building, already trusting in the
land, their ships left empty. She stops, shot with sharp pain; then shaking her head, she pours
forth these words:

'Ah, hated brood, and doom of the Phrygians that thwarts our doom! Could they perish on the
Sigean [295-326]plains? Could they be ensnared when taken? Did the fires of Troy consume her
people? Through the midst of armies and through the midst of flames they have found their way.
But, I think, my deity lies at last outwearied, or my hatred sleeps and is satisfied? Nay,
it is I who have been fierce to follow them over the waves when hurled from their country,
and on all the seas have crossed their flight. Against the Teucrians the forces of sky and
sea are spent. What hath availed me Syrtes or Scylla, what desolate Charybdis? they find shelter
in their desired Tiber-bed, careless of ocean and of me. Mars availed to destroy the giant
race of the Lapithae; the very father of the gods gave over ancient Calydon to Diana's wrath:
for forfeit of what crime in the Lapithae, what in Calydon? But I, Jove's imperial consort,
who have borne, ah me! to leave naught undared, who have shifted to every device, I am vanquished
by Aeneas. If my deity is not great enough, I will not assuredly falter to seek succour where
it may be; if the powers of heaven are inflexible, I will stir up Acheron. It may not be to
debar him of a Latin realm; well; and Lavinia is destined his bride unalterably. But it may
be yet to defer, to make all this action linger; but it may be yet to waste away the nation
of either king; at such forfeit of their people may son-in-law and father-in-law enter into
union. Blood of Troy and Rutulia shall be thy dower, O maiden, and Bellona is the bridesmaid
who awaits thee. Nor did Cisseus' daughter alone conceive a firebrand and travail of bridal
flames. Nay, even such a birth hath Venus of her own, a second Paris, another balefire for
Troy towers reborn.'

These words uttered, she descends to earth in all her terrors, and calls dolorous Allecto from
the home of the Fatal Sisters in nether gloom, whose delight is in woeful wars, in wrath and
treachery and evil feuds: hateful to [327-360]lord Pluto himself, hateful and horrible to her
hell-born sisters; into so many faces does she turn, so savage the guise of each, so thick
and black bristles she with vipers. And her Juno spurs on with words, saying thus:

'Grant me, virgin born of Night, this thy proper task and service, that the rumour of our renown
may not crumble away, nor the Aeneadae have power to win Latinus by marriage or beset the borders
of Italy. Thou canst set brothers once united in armed conflict, and overturn families with
hatreds; thou canst launch into houses thy whips and deadly brands; thine are a thousand names,
a thousand devices of injury. Stir up thy teeming breast, sunder the peace they have joined,
and sow seeds of quarrel; let all at once desire and demand and seize on arms.'

Thereon Allecto, steeped in Gorgonian venom, first seeks Latium and the high house of the Laurentine
monarch, and silently sits down before Amata's doors, whom a woman's distress and anger heated
to frenzy over the Teucrians' coming and the marriage of Turnus. At her the goddess flings
a snake out of her dusky tresses, and slips it into her bosom to her very inmost heart, that
she may embroil all her house under its maddening magic. Sliding between her raiment and smooth
breasts, it coils without touch, and instils its viperous breath unseen; the great serpent
turns into the twisted gold about her neck, turns into the long ribbon of her chaplet, inweaves
her hair, and winds slippery over her body. And while the gliding infection of the clammy poison
begins to penetrate her sense and run in fire through her frame, nor as yet hath all her breast
caught fire, softly she spoke and in mothers' wonted wise, with many a tear over her daughter
and the Phrygian bridal:

'Is it to exiles, to Teucrians, that Lavinia is proffered in marriage, O father? and hast thou
no compassion on [361-392]thy daughter and on thyself? no compassion on her mother, whom with
the first northern wind the treacherous rover will abandon, steering to sea with his maiden
prize? Is it not thus the Phrygian herdsman wound his way to Lacedaemon, and carried Leda's
Helen to the Trojan towns? Where is thy plighted faith? Where thine ancient care for thy people,
and the hand Turnus thy kinsman hath so often clasped? If one of alien race from the Latins
is sought for our son, if this stands fixed, and thy father Faunus' commands are heavy upon
thee, all the land whose freedom severs it from our sway is to my mind alien, and of this is
the divine word. And Turnus, if one retrace the earliest source of his line, is born of Inachus
and Acrisius, and of the midmost of Mycenae.'

When in this vain essay of words she sees Latinus fixed against her, and the serpent's maddening
poison is sunk deep in her vitals and runs through and through her, then indeed, stung by infinite
horrors, hapless and frenzied, she rages wildly through the endless city. As whilome a top
flying under the twisted whipcord, which boys busy at their play drive circling wide round
an empty hall, runs before the lash and spins in wide gyrations; the witless ungrown band hang
wondering over it and admire the whirling boxwood; the strokes lend it life: with pace no slacker
is she borne midway through towns and valiant nations. Nay, she flies into the woodland under
feigned Bacchic influence, assumes a greater guilt, arouses a greater frenzy, and hides her
daughter in the mountain coverts to rob the Teucrians of their bridal and stay the marriage
torches. 'Hail, Bacchus!' she shrieks and clamours; 'thou only art worthy of the maiden; for
to thee she takes up the lissom wands, thee she circles in the dance, to thee she trains and
consecrates her tresses.' Rumour flies abroad; and the matrons, their breasts kindled by the
furies, run all at once [393-426]with a single ardour to seek out strange dwellings. They have
left their homes empty, they throw neck and hair free to the winds; while others fill the air
with ringing cries, girt about with fawnskins, and carrying spears of vine. Amid them the infuriate
queen holds her blazing pine-torch on high, and chants the wedding of Turnus and her daughter;
and rolling her bloodshot gaze, cries sudden and harsh: 'Hear, O mothers of Latium, wheresoever
you be; if unhappy Amata hath yet any favour in your affection, if care for a mother's right
pierces you, untie the chaplets from your hair, begin the orgies with me.' Thus, amid woods
and wild beasts' solitary places, does Allecto goad the queen with the encircling Bacchic madness.

When their frenzy seemed heightened and her first task complete, the purpose and all the house
of Latinus turned upside down, the dolorous goddess flies on thence, soaring on dusky wing,
to the walls of the gallant Rutulian, the city which Danaë, they say, borne down on the boisterous
south wind, built and planted with Acrision's people. The place was called Ardea once of old;
and still Ardea remains a mighty name; but its fortune is no more. Here in his high house Turnus
now took rest in the black midnight. Allecto puts off her grim feature and the body of a Fury;
she transforms her face to an aged woman's, and furrows her brow with ugly wrinkles; she puts
on white tresses chaplet-bound, and entwines them with an olive spray; she becomes aged Calybe,
priestess of Juno's temple, and presents herself before his eyes, uttering thus:

'Turnus, wilt thou brook all these toils poured out in vain, and the conveyance of thy crown
to Dardanian settlers? The King denies thee thy bride and the dower thy blood had earned; and
a foreigner is sought for heir to the kingdom. Forth now, dupe, and face thankless perils;
forth, cut down the Tyrrhenian lines; give the [427-458]Latins peace in thy protection. This
Saturn's omnipotent daughter in very presence commanded me to pronounce to thee, as thou wert
lying in the still night. Wherefore arise, and make ready with good cheer to arm thy people
and march through thy gates to battle; consume those Phrygian captains that lie with their
painted hulls in the beautiful river. All the force of heaven orders thee on. Let King Latinus
himself know of it, unless he consents to give thee thy bridal, and abide by his words, when
he shall at last make proof of Turnus' arms.'

But he, deriding her inspiration, with the words of his mouth thus answers her again:

'The fleets ride on the Tiber wave; that news hath not, as thou deemest, escaped mine ears.
Frame not such terrors before me. Neither is Queen Juno forgetful of us. . . . But thee, O
mother, overworn old age, exhausted and untrue, frets with vain distress, and amid embattled
kings mocks thy presage with false dismay. Thy charge it is to keep the divine image and temple;
war and peace shall be in the hands of men and warriors.'

At such words Allecto's wrath blazed out. But amid his utterance a quick shudder overruns his
limbs; his eyes are fixed in horror; so thickly hiss the snakes of the Fury, so vast her form
expands. Then rolling her fiery eyes, she thrust him back as he would stammer out more, raised
two serpents in her hair, and, sounding her whip, resumed with furious tone:

'Behold me the overworn! me whom old age, exhausted and untrue, mocks with false dismay amid
embattled kings! Look on this! I am come from the home of the Dread Sisters: war and death
are in my hand. . . .'

So speaking, she hurled her torch at him, and pierced his breast with the lurid smoking brand.
He breaks from sleep in overpowering fear, his limbs and body bathed in [459-494]sweat that
breaks out all over him; he shrieks madly for arms, searches for arms on his bed and in his
palace. The passion of the sword rages high, the accursed fury of war, and wrath over all:
even as when flaming sticks are heaped roaring loud under the sides of a seething cauldron,
and the boiling water leaps up; the river of water within smokes furiously and swells high
in overflowing foam, and now the wave contains itself no longer; the dark steam flies aloft.
So, for the stain of the broken peace, he orders his chief warriors to march on King Latinus,
and bids prepare for battle, to defend Italy and drive the foe from their borders; himself
will suffice for Trojans and Latins together. When he uttered these words and called the gods
to hear his vows, the Rutulians stir one another up to arms. One is moved by the splendour
of his youthful beauty, one by his royal ancestry, another by the noble deeds of his hand.

While Turnus fills the Rutulian minds with valour, Allecto on Stygian wing hastens towards
the Trojans. With fresh wiles she marked the spot where beautiful Iülus was trapping and coursing
game on the bank; here the infernal maiden suddenly crosses his hounds with the maddening touch
of a familiar scent, and drives them hotly on the stag-hunt. This was the source and spring
of ill, and kindled the country-folk to war. The stag, beautiful and high-antlered, was stolen
from his mother's udder and bred by Tyrrheus' boys and their father Tyrrheus, master of the
royal herds, and ranger of the plain. Their sister Silvia tamed him to her rule, and lavished
her care on his adornment, twining his antlers with delicate garlands, and combed his wild
coat and washed him in the clear spring. Tame to her hand, and familiar to his master's table,
he would wander the woods, and, however late the night, return home to the door he knew. Far
astray, he floated idly down the stream, and allayed his heat on the green bank, when Iülus'
[495-528]mad hounds started him in their hunting; and Ascanius himself, kindled with desire
of the chief honour, aimed a shaft from his bended bow. A present deity suffered not his hand
to stray, and the loud whistling reed came driven through his belly and flanks. But the wounded
beast fled within the familiar roof and crept moaning to the courtyard, dabbled with blood,
and filling all the house with moans as of one beseeching. Sister Silvia, smiting her arms
with open hands, begins to call for aid, and gathers the hardy rustics with her cries. They,
for a fell destroyer is hidden in the silent woodland, are there before her expectation, one
armed with a stake hardened in the fire, one with a heavy knotted trunk; what each one searches
and finds, wrath turns into a weapon. Tyrrheus cheers on his array, panting hard, with his
axe caught up in his hand, as he was haply splitting an oaken log in four clefts with cross-driven
wedges.

But the grim goddess, seizing from her watch-tower the moment of mischief, seeks the steep
farm-roof and sounds the pastoral war-note from the ridge, straining the infernal cry on her
twisted horn; it spread shuddering over all the woodland, and echoed through the deep forests:
the lake of Trivia heard it afar; Nar river heard it with white sulphurous water, and the springs
of Velinus; and fluttered mothers clasped their children to their breast. Then, hurrying to
the voice of the terrible trumpet-note, on all sides the wild rustics snatch their arms and
stream in: therewithal the men of Troy pour out from their camp's open gates to succour Ascanius.
The lines are ranged; not now in rustic strife do they fight with hard trunks or burned stakes;
the two-edged steel sways the fight, the broad cornfields bristle dark with drawn swords, and
brass flashes smitten by the sunlight, and casts a gleam high into the cloudy air: as when
the wind begins to blow and the flood [529-560]to whiten, gradually the sea lifts his waves
higher and yet higher, then rises from the bottom right into the air. Here in the front rank
young Almo, once Tyrrheus' eldest son, is struck down by a whistling arrow; for the wound,
staying in his throat, cut off in blood the moist voice's passage and the thin life. Around
many a one lies dead, aged Galaesus among them, slain as he throws himself between them for
a peacemaker, once incomparable in justice and wealth of Ausonian fields; for him five flocks
bleated, a five-fold herd returned from pasture, and an hundred ploughs upturned the soil.

But while thus in even battle they fight on the broad plain, the goddess, her promise fulfilled,
when she hath dyed the war in blood, and mingled death in the first encounter, quits Hesperia,
and, glancing through the sky, addresses Juno in exultant tone:

'Lo, discord is ripened at thy desire into baleful war: tell them now to mix in amity and join
alliance. Insomuch as I have imbued the Trojans in Ausonian blood, this likewise will I add,
if I have assurance of thy will. With my rumours I will sweep the bordering towns into war,
and kindle their spirit with furious desire for battle, that from all quarters help may come;
I will sow the land with arms.'

Then Juno answering: 'Terror and harm is wrought abundantly. The springs of war are aflow:
they fight with arms in their grasp, the arms that chance first supplied, that fresh blood
stains. Let this be the union, this the bridal that Venus' illustrious progeny and Latinus
the King shall celebrate. Our Lord who reigns on Olympus' summit would not have thee stray
too freely in heaven's upper air. Withdraw thy presence. You see me earlier than usual this morning,
dear mamma; but as I know all the geography you desired me to learn
quite perfectly, I hope you will give me leave to read another story.

Mrs. Harley. Certainly, my dear: but remember to read very distinctly; make proper pauses; fall your
voice at a period, and begin the next sentence in rather a higher tone; aspirate the H, excepting
in such words as hour, honour, heiress, and a few others where it is silent: and above all, avoid
a monotonous manner of reading, for nothing can be more unpleasant to those who are listening to
you, than to hear a tale, however interesting in itself, read on
in one continued tone: instead of affording any amusement, it only
induces the persons you are reading to, to wish for a cessation of
the unpleasant murmuring noise which offends their ears.

Anne. I will attend to what you say, mamma, while I am reading the following story, which is called

The
Advantages of Truth.

George Elliot the son of a respectable gentleman, had been paying a visit to his uncle, and on
his return home, was accompanied by one of his cousins, who was to spend a few months with him
at Hartley, Mr. Elliot's country residence.

George was a boy of a frank and generous disposition, and good abilities; these being cultivated
by a careful education, made him at the age of eleven years, a well-informed and agreeable boy.
Charles Morden his cousin, was much his inferior in every respect. Accustomed to excessive
indulgence, he became fretful and idle, and often entered into mischief, for the sake of having
something to do; his parents so plentifully supplied him with play-things, that he was consequently
tired of every thing he possessed, and only desirous of what was in expectation; nay, worse, for
to obtain any particular gratification, he would not scruple making use of falshood. Such was
the boy, now unfortunately the constant companion of George Elliot.

Mr. Elliot indulged his son in every innocent amusement proper for
his age, but loved him too well to suffer his faults to pass unnoticed.

George had been long anxious for a poney, and as soon as a proper one could be purchased, his
father presented it to him, and often allowed him to ride out, either accompanied by himself
or a servant, but particularly forbade him from ever mounting any other horse in the stables, telling
him at the same time, the many fatal accidents that had occurred, owing to boys attempting to
ride horses they were unable to manage. George promised obedience, and had strictly adhered
to his word.

It was settled that Charles was to share the studies, as well as the amusements of his cousin,
and the gentleman to whose care George's education was confided, paid equal attention to both,
though he soon perceived that Charles had little delight in useful occupations: and he was always
glad of some excuse that might save him the trouble of attending Mr. Darford, and laughed at
George for being always fagging as he called it.

About two months after his son's return, Mr. Elliot was obliged by some business of importance,
to take a journey that he thought might detain him about a fortnight from home. He embraced
the children at parting, desired them to behave well, and at his return they should be rewarded.

For
the first week after Mr. Elliot's departure, the boys were so good, and their tutor so well
pleased with their conduct, that one fine day he gave them a holiday, telling them, that provided
they avoided all mischievous amusements they were at liberty to spend the day in any manner most agreeable
to themselves.--During several hours, they were employed in catching their balls, flying their
kites, working in the garden, &c. At length, Charles seeing a little boy going by on horseback,
said he should like nothing so well as a nice ride before dinner. "Nor I neither," answered
George, "but you know it is impossible, my father having expressly forbidden us to ride out alone
during his absence. Mr. Darford is not at home, and I know that all the men are busy." "What
does that signify?" returned Charles, "we are surely old enough to take care of ourselves, and
as to my uncle, he will never know any thing of the matter."

George was at first quite shocked at the idea of disobeying his father, but he at last suffered
himself to be persuaded by the artful entreaties of his cousin, to
do what he knew to be wrong. They went to the stables, where George
took out his own little poney, and Charles one of his uncle's large
horses, assuring his cousin that he could manage it very well. At
their first setting out, they agreed not to go far from home, only
just to ride round the paddock; the pleasantness of the weather, however,
soon tempted them to alter their resolution, and they ventured into
the high road.

First from the Tyrrhene coast savage Mezentius, scorner of the gods, opens the war and arrays
his columns. By him is Lausus, his son, unexcelled in bodily beauty by any save Laurentine
Turnus, Lausus tamer of horses and destroyer of wild beasts; he leads a thousand men who followed
him in vain from Agylla town; worthy to be happier in ancestral rule, and to have other than
Mezentius for father.

After them beautiful Aventinus, born of beautiful Hercules, displays on the sward his palm-crowned
chariot and victorious horses, and carries on his shield his father's device, the hundred snakes
of the Hydra's serpent-wreath. Him, in the wood of the hill Aventine, Rhea the priestess [660-693]bore
by stealth into the borders of light, a woman mingled with a god, after the Tirynthian Conqueror
had slain Geryon and set foot on the fields of Laurentum, and bathed his Iberian oxen in the
Tuscan river. These carry for war javelins and grim stabbing weapons, and fight with the round
shaft and sharp point of the Sabellian pike. Himself he went on foot swathed in a vast lion
skin, shaggy with bristling terrors, whose white teeth encircled his head; in such wild dress,
the garb of Hercules clasped over his shoulders, he entered the royal house.

Next twin brothers leave Tibur town, and the people called by their brother Tiburtus' name,
Catillus and valiant Coras, the Argives, and advance in the forefront of battle among the throng
of spears: as when two cloud-born Centaurs descend from a lofty mountain peak, leaving Homole
or snowy Othrys in rapid race; the mighty forest yields before them as they go, and the crashing
thickets give them way.

Nor was the founder of Praeneste city absent, the king who, as every age hath believed, was
born of Vulcan among the pasturing herds, and found beside the hearth, Caeculus. On him a rustic
battalion attends in loose order, they who dwell in steep Praeneste and the fields of Juno
of Gabii, on the cool Anio and the Hernican rocks dewy with streams; they whom rich Anagnia,
and whom thou, lord Amasenus, pasturest. Not all of them have armour, nor shields and clattering
chariots. The most part shower bullets of dull lead; some wield in their hand two darts, and
have for head-covering caps of tawny wolfskin; their left foot is bare wherewith to plant their
steps; the other is covered with a boot of raw hide.

But Messapus, tamer of horses, the seed of Neptune, whom none might ever strike down with steel
or fire, calls quickly to arms his long unstirred peoples and bands [694-727]disused to war,
and again handles the sword. These are of the Fescennine ranks and of Aequi Falisci, these
of Soracte's fortresses and the fields of Flavina, and Ciminus' lake and hill, and the groves
of Capena. They marched in even time, singing their King; as whilome snowy swans among the
thin clouds, when they return from pasturage, and utter resonant notes through their long necks;
far off echoes the river and the smitten Asian fen. . . . Nor would one think these vast streaming
masses were ranks clad in brass; rather that, high in air, a cloud of hoarse birds from the
deep gulf was pressing to the shore.

Lo, Clausus of the ancient Sabine blood, leading a great host, a great host himself; from whom
now the Claudian tribe and family is spread abroad since Rome was shared with the Sabines.
Alongside is the broad battalion of Amiternum, and the Old Latins, and all the force of Eretum
and the Mutuscan oliveyards; they who dwell in Nomentum town, and the Rosean country by Velinus,
who keep the crags of rough Tetrica and Mount Severus, Casperia and Foruli, and the river of
Himella; they who drink of Tiber and Fabaris, they whom cold Nursia hath sent, and the squadrons
of Horta and the tribes of Latinium; and they whom Allia, the ill-ominous name, severs with
its current; as many as the waves that roll on the Libyan sea-floor when fierce Orion sets
in the wintry surge; as thick as the ears that ripen in the morning sunlight on the plain of
the Hermus or the yellowing Lycian tilth. Their shields clatter, and earth is amazed under
the trampling of their feet.

Here Agamemnonian Halaesus, foe of the Trojan name, yokes his chariot horses, and draws a thousand
warlike peoples to Turnus; those who turn with spades the Massic soil that is glad with wine;
whom the elders of Aurunca sent from their high hills, and the Sidicine low country [728-761]hard
by; and those who leave Cales, and the dweller by the shallows of Volturnus river, and side
by side the rough Saticulan and the Oscan bands. Polished maces are their weapons, and these
it is their wont to fit with a tough thong; a target covers their left side, and for close
fighting they have crooked swords.

Nor shalt thou, Oebalus, depart untold of in our verses, who wast borne, men say, by the nymph
Sebethis to Telon, when he grew old in rule over Capreae the Teleboïc realm: but not so content
with his ancestral fields, his son even then held down in wide sway the Sarrastian peoples
and the meadows watered by Sarnus, and the dwellers in Rufrae and Batulum, and the fields of
Celemnae, and they on whom from her apple orchards Abella city looks down. Their wont was to
hurl lances in Teutonic fashion; their head covering was stripped bark of the cork tree, their
shield-plates glittering brass, glittering brass their sword.

Thee too, Ufens, mountainous Nersae sent forth to battle, of noble fame and prosperous arms,
whose race on the stiff Aequiculan clods is rough beyond all other, and bred to continual hunting
in the woodland; they till the soil in arms, and it is ever their delight to drive in fresh
spoils and live on plunder.

Furthermore there came, sent by King Archippus, the priest of the Marruvian people, dressed
with prosperous olive leaves over his helmet, Umbro excellent in valour, who was wont with
charm and touch to sprinkle slumberous dew on the viper's brood and water-snakes of noisome
breath. Yet he availed not to heal the stroke of the Dardanian spear-point, nor was the wound
of him helped by his sleepy charms and herbs culled on the Massic hills. Thee the woodland
of Angitia, thee Fucinus' glassy wave, thee the clear pools wept. . . .

Likewise the seed of Hippolytus marched to war, Virbius [762-796]most excellent in beauty,
sent by his mother Aricia. The groves of Egeria nursed him round the spongy shore where Diana's
altar stands rich and gracious. For they say in story that Hippolytus, after he fell by his
stepmother's treachery, torn asunder by his frightened horses to fulfil a father's revenge,
came again to the daylight and heaven's upper air, recalled by Diana's love and the drugs of
the Healer. Then the Lord omnipotent, indignant that any mortal should rise from the nether
shades to the light of life, launched his thunder and hurled down to the Stygian water the
Phoebus-born, the discoverer of such craft and cure. But Trivia the bountiful hides Hippolytus
in a secret habitation, and sends him away to the nymph Egeria and the woodland's keeping,
where, solitary in Italian forests, he should spend an inglorious life, and have Virbius for
his altered name. Whence also hoofed horses are kept away from Trivia's temple and consecrated
groves, because, affrighted at the portents of the sea, they overset the chariot and flung
him out upon the shore. Notwithstanding did his son train his ruddy steeds on the level plain,
and sped charioted to war.

Himself too among the foremost, splendid in beauty of body, Turnus moves armed and towers a
whole head over all. His lofty helmet, triple-tressed with horse-hair, holds high a Chimaera
breathing from her throat Aetnean fires, raging the more and exasperate with baleful flames,
as the battle and bloodshed grow fiercer. But on his polished shield was emblazoned in gold
Io with uplifted horns, already a heifer and overgrown with hair, a lofty design, and Argus
the maiden's warder, and lord Inachus pouring his stream from his embossed urn. Behind comes
a cloud of infantry, and shielded columns thicken over all the plains; the Argive men and Auruncan
forces, the Rutulians and old Sicanians, the Sacranian ranks and Labicians with [797-817]painted
shields; they who till thy dells, O Tiber, and Numicus' sacred shore, and whose ploughshare
goes up and down on the Rutulian hills and the Circaean headland, over whose fields Jupiter
of Anxur watches, and Feronia glad in her greenwood: and where the marsh of Satura lies black,
and cold Ufens winds his way along the valley-bottoms and sinks into the sea.

Therewithal came Camilla the Volscian, leading a train of cavalry, squadrons splendid with
brass: a warrior maiden who had never used her woman's hands to Minerva's distaff or wool-baskets,
but hardened to endure the battle shock and outstrip the winds with racing feet. She might
have flown across the topmost blades of unmown corn and left the tender ears unhurt as she
ran; or sped her way over mid sea upborne by the swelling flood, nor dipt her swift feet in
the water. All the people pour from house and field, and mothers crowd to wonder and gaze at
her as she goes, in rapturous astonishment at the royal lustre of purple that drapes her smooth
shoulders, at the clasp of gold that intertwines her tresses, at the Lycian quiver she carries,
and the pastoral myrtle shaft topped with steel.

BOOK EIGHTH

THE EMBASSAGE TO EVANDER

When Turnus ran up the flag of war on the towers of Laurentum, and the trumpets blared with
harsh music, when he spurred his fiery steeds and clashed his armour, straightway men's hearts
are in tumult; all Latium at once flutters in banded uprisal, and her warriors rage furiously.
Their chiefs, Messapus, and Ufens, and Mezentius, scorner of the gods, begin to enrol forces
on all sides, and dispeople the wide fields of husbandmen. Venulus too is sent to the town
of mighty Diomede to seek succour, to instruct him that Teucrians set foot in Latium; that
Aeneas in his fleet invades them with the vanquished gods of his home, and proclaims himself
the King summoned of fate; that many tribes join the Dardanian, and his name swells high in
Latium. What he will rear on these foundations, what issue of battle he desires, if Fortune
attend him, lies clearer to his own sight than to King Turnus or King Latinus.

Thus was it in Latium. And the hero of Laomedon's blood, seeing it all, tosses on a heavy surge
of care, and throws his mind rapidly this way and that, and turns it on all hands in swift
change of thought: even as when the quivering light of water brimming in brass, struck back
[23-56]from the sunlight or the moon's glittering reflection, flickers abroad over all the
room, and now mounts aloft and strikes the high panelled roof. Night fell, and over all lands
weary creatures were fast in deep slumber, the race of fowl and of cattle; when lord Aeneas,
sick at heart of the dismal warfare, stretched him on the river bank under the cope of the
cold sky, and let sleep, though late, overspread his limbs. To him the very god of the ground,
the pleasant Tiber stream, seemed to raise his aged form among the poplar boughs; thin lawn
veiled him with its gray covering, and shadowy reeds hid his hair. Thereon he addressed him
thus, and with these words allayed his distresses:

'O born of the family of the gods, thou who bearest back our Trojan city from hostile hands,
and keepest Troy towers in eternal life; O long looked for on Laurentine ground and Latin fields!
here is thine assured home, thine home's assured gods. Draw not thou back, nor be alarmed by
menace of war. All the anger and wrath of the gods is passed away . . . And even now for thine
assurance, that thou think not this the idle fashioning of sleep, a great sow shall be found
lying under the oaks on the shore, with her new-born litter of thirty head: white she couches
on the ground, and the brood about her teats is white. By this token in thirty revolving years
shall Ascanius found a city, Alba of bright name. My prophecy is sure. Now hearken, and I will
briefly instruct thee how thou mayest unravel and overcome thy present task. An Arcadian people
sprung of Pallas, following in their king Evander's company beneath his banners, have chosen
a place in these coasts, and set a city on the hills, called Pallanteum after Pallas their
forefather. These wage perpetual war with the Latin race; these do thou take to thy camp's
alliance, and join with them in league. Myself I [57-89]will lead thee by my banks and straight
along my stream, that thou mayest oar thy way upward against the river. Up and arise, goddess-born,
and even with the setting stars address thy prayers to Juno as is meet, and vanquish her wrath
and menaces with humble vows. To me thou shalt pay a conqueror's sacrifice. I am he whom thou
seest washing the banks with full flood and severing the rich tilth, glassy Tiber, best beloved
by heaven of rivers. Here is my stately home; my fountain-head is among high cities.'

Thus spoke the River, and sank in the depth of the pool: night and sleep left Aeneas. He arises,
and, looking towards the radiant sky of the sunrising, holds up water from the river in fitly-hollowed
palms, and pours to heaven these accents:

'Nymphs, Laurentine Nymphs, from whom is the generation of rivers, and thou, O father Tiber,
with thine holy flood, receive Aeneas and deign to save him out of danger. What pool soever
holds thy source, who pitiest our discomforts, from whatsoever soil thou dost spring excellent
in beauty, ever shall my worship, ever my gifts frequent thee, the hornèd river lord of Hesperian
waters. Ah, be thou only by me, and graciously confirm thy will.' So speaks he, and chooses
two galleys from his fleet, and mans them with rowers, and withal equips a crew with arms.

And lo! suddenly, ominous and wonderful to tell, the milk-white sow, of one colour with her
white brood, is espied through the forest couched on the green brink; whom to thee, yes to
thee, queenly Juno, good Aeneas offers in sacrifice, and sets with her offspring before thine
altar. All that night long Tiber assuaged his swelling stream, and silently stayed his refluent
wave, smoothing the surface of his waters to the fashion of still pool and quiet mere, to spare
[90-121]labour to the oar. So they set out and speed on their way with prosperous cries; the
painted fir slides along the waterway; the waves and unwonted woods marvel at their far-gleaming
shields, and the gay hulls afloat on the river. They outwear a night and a day in rowing, ascend
the long reaches, and pass under the chequered shadows of the trees, and cut through the green
woodland in the calm water. The fiery sun had climbed midway in the circle of the sky when
they see afar fortress walls and scattered house roofs, where now the might of Rome hath risen
high as heaven; then Evander held a slender state. Quickly they turn their prows to land and
draw near the town.

It chanced on that day the Arcadian king paid his accustomed sacrifice to the great son of
Amphitryon and all the gods in a grove before the city. With him his son Pallas, with him all
the chief of his people and his poor senate were offering incense, and the blood steamed warm
at their altars. When they saw the high ships, saw them glide up between the shady woodlands
and rest on their silent oars, the sudden sight appals them, and all at once they rise and
stop the banquet. Pallas courageously forbids them to break off the rites; snatching up a spear,
he flies forward, and from a hillock cries afar: 'O men, what cause hath driven you to explore
these unknown ways? or whither do you steer? What is your kin, whence your habitation? Is it
peace or arms you carry hither?' Then from the lofty stern lord Aeneas thus speaks, stretching
forth in his hand an olive bough of peace-bearing:

'Thou seest men born of Troy and arms hostile to the Latins, who have driven us to flight in
insolent warfare. We seek Evander; carry this message, and tell him that chosen men of the
Dardanian captains are come pleading for an armed alliance.'

Pallas stood amazed at the august name. 'Descend,' [122-154]he cries, 'whoso thou art, and
speak with my father face to face, and enter our home and hospitality.' And giving him the
grasp of welcome, he caught and clung to his hand. Advancing, they enter the grove and leave
the river. Then Aeneas in courteous words addresses the King:

'Best of the Grecian race, thou whom fortune hath willed that I supplicate, holding before
me boughs dressed in fillets, no fear stayed me because thou wert a Grecian chief and an Arcadian,
or allied by descent to the twin sons of Atreus. Nay, mine own prowess and the sanctity of
divine oracles, our ancestral kinship, and the fame of thee that is spread abroad over the
earth, have allied me to thee and led me willingly on the path of fate. Dardanus, who sailed
to the Teucrian land, the first father and founder of the Ilian city, was born, as Greeks relate,
of Electra the Atlantid; Electra's sire is ancient Atlas, whose shoulder sustains the heavenly
spheres. Your father is Mercury, whom white Maia conceived and bore on the cold summit of Cyllene;
but Maia, if we give any credence to report, is daughter of Atlas, that same Atlas who bears
up the starry heavens; so both our families branch from a single blood. In this confidence
I sent no embassy, I framed no crafty overtures; myself I have presented mine own person, and
come a suppliant to thy courts. The same Daunian race pursues us and thee in merciless warfare;
we once expelled, they trust nothing will withhold them from laying all Hesperia wholly beneath
their yoke, and holding the seas that wash it above and below. Accept and return our friendship.
We can give brave hearts in war, high souls and men approved in deeds.'

Aeneas ended. The other ere now scanned in a long gaze the face and eyes and all the form of
the speaker; then thus briefly returns:

'How gladly, bravest of the Teucrians, do I hail and [155-188]own thee! how I recall thy father's
words and the very tone and glance of great Anchises! For I remember how Priam son of Laomedon,
when he sought Salamis on his way to the realm of his sister Hesione, went on to visit the
cold borders of Arcadia. Then early youth clad my cheeks with bloom. I admired the Teucrian
captains, admired their lord, the son of Laomedon; but Anchises moved high above them all.
My heart burned with youthful passion to accost him and clasp hand in hand; I made my way to
him, and led him eagerly to Pheneus' high town. Departing he gave me an adorned quiver and
Lycian arrows, a scarf inwoven with gold, and a pair of golden bits that now my Pallas possesses.
Therefore my hand is already joined in the alliance you seek, and soon as to-morrow's dawn
rises again over earth, I will send you away rejoicing in mine aid, and supply you from my
store. Meanwhile, since you are come hither in friendship, solemnise with us these yearly rites
which we may not defer, and even now learn to be familiar at your comrades' board.'

This said, he commands the feast and the wine-cups to be replaced whence they were taken, and
with his own hand ranges them on the grassy seat, and welcomes Aeneas to the place of honour,
with a lion's shaggy fell for cushion and a hospitable chair of maple. Then chosen men with
the priest of the altar in emulous haste bring roasted flesh of bulls, and pile baskets with
the gift of ground corn, and serve the wine. Aeneas and the men of Troy with him feed on the
long chines of oxen and the entrails of the sacrifice.

After hunger is driven away and the desire of food stayed, King Evander speaks: 'No idle superstition
that knows not the gods of old hath ordered these our solemn rites, this customary feast, this
altar of august sanctity; saved from bitter perils, O Trojan guest, do we worship, and [189-225]most
due are the rites we inaugurate. Look now first on this overhanging cliff of stone, where shattered
masses lie strewn, and the mountain dwelling stands desolate, and rocks are rent away in vast
ruin. Here was a cavern, awful and deep-withdrawn, impenetrable to the sunbeams, where the
monstrous half-human shape of Cacus had his hold: the ground was ever wet with fresh slaughter,
and pallid faces of men, ghastly with gore, hung nailed on the haughty doors. This monster
was the son of Vulcan, and spouted his black fires from his mouth as he moved in giant bulk.
To us also in our desire time bore a god's aid and arrival. For princely Alcides the avenger
came glorious in the spoils of triple Geryon slain; this way the Conqueror drove the huge bulls,
and his oxen filled the river valley. But savage Cacus, infatuate to leave nothing undared
or unhandled in craft or crime, drives four bulls of choice shape away from their pasturage,
and as many heifers of excellent beauty. And these, that there should be no straightforward
footprints, he dragged by the tail into his cavern, the track of their compelled path reversed,
and hid them behind the screen of rock. No marks were there to lead a seeker to the cavern.
Meanwhile the son of Amphitryon, his herds filled with food, was now breaking up his pasturage
and making ready to go. The oxen low as they depart; all the woodland is filled with their
complaint as they clamorously quit the hills. One heifer returned the cry, and, lowing from
the depth of the dreary cave, baffled the hope of Cacus from her imprisonment. At this the
grief and choler of Alcides blazed forth dark and infuriate. Seizing in his hand his club of
heavy knotted oak, he seeks with swift pace the aery mountain steep. Then, as never before,
did we see Cacus afraid and his countenance troubled; he goes flying swifter than the wind
and seeks his cavern; fear wings his feet. As he shut himself in, and, bursting the [226-260]chains,
dropped the vast rock slung in iron by his father's craft, and blocked the doorway with its
pressure, lo! the Tirynthian came in furious wrath, and, scanning all the entry, turned his
face this way and that and ground his teeth. Thrice, hot with rage, he circles all Mount Aventine;
thrice he assails the rocky portals in vain; thrice he sinks down outwearied in the valley.
There stood a sharp rock of flint with sides cut sheer away, rising over the cavern's ridge
a vast height to see, fit haunt for foul birds to build on. This--for, sloping from the ridge,
it leaned on the left towards the river--he loosened, urging it from the right till he tore
it loose from its deep foundations; then suddenly shook it free; with the shock the vast sky
thunders, the banks leap apart, and the amazed river recoils. But the den, Cacus' huge palace,
lay open and revealed, and the depths of gloomy cavern were made manifest; even as though some
force tearing earth apart should unlock the infernal house, and disclose the pallid realms
abhorred of heaven, and deep down the monstrous gulf be descried where the ghosts flutter in
the streaming daylight. On him then, surprised in unexpected light, shut in the rock's recesses
and howling in strange fashion, Alcides from above hurls missiles and calls all his arms to
aid, and presses hard on him with boughs and enormous millstones. And he, for none other escape
from peril is left, vomits from his throat vast jets of smoke, wonderful to tell, and enwreathes
his dwelling in blind gloom, blotting view from the eyes, while in the cave's depth night thickens
with smoke-bursts in a darkness shot with fire. Alcides broke forth in anger, and with a bound
hurled himself sheer amid the flames, where the smoke rolls billowing and voluminous, and the
cloud surges black through the enormous den. Here, as Cacus in the darkness spouts forth his
idle fires, he grasps and twines tight round him, till his eyes start out and his throat [261-295]is
drained of blood under the strangling pressure. Straightway the doors are torn open and the
dark house laid plain; the stolen oxen and forsworn plunder are shewn forth to heaven, and
the misshapen carcase dragged forward by the feet. Men cannot satisfy their soul with gazing
on the terrible eyes, the monstrous face and shaggy bristling chest, and the throat with its
quenched fires. Thenceforth this sacrifice is solemnised, and a younger race have gladly kept
the day; Potitius the inaugurator, and the Pinarian family, guardians of the rites of Hercules,
have set in the grove this altar, which shall ever be called of us Most Mighty, and shall be
our mightiest evermore. Wherefore arise, O men, and enwreathe your hair with leafy sprays,
and stretch forth the cups in your hands; call on our common god and pour the glad wine.' He
ended; when the twy-coloured poplar of Hercules hid his shaded hair with pendulous plaited
leaf, and the sacred goblet filled his hand. Speedily all pour glad libation on the board,
and supplicate the gods.

Meanwhile the evening star draws nigher down the slope of heaven, and now the priests went
forth, Potitius at their head, girt with skins after their fashion, and bore torches aflame.
They renew the banquet, and bring the grateful gift of a second repast, and heap the altars
with loaded platters. Then the Salii stand round the lit altar-fires to sing, their brows bound
with poplar boughs, one chorus of young men, one of elders, and extol in song the praises and
deeds of Hercules; how first he strangled in his gripe the twin terrors, the snakes of his
stepmother; how he likewise shattered in war famous cities, Troy and Oechalia; how under Eurystheus
the King he bore the toil of a thousand labours by Juno's malign decrees. Thine hand, unconquered,
slays the cloud-born double-bodied race, Hylaeus and Pholus, the Cretan monster, and the huge
lion in the hollow Nemean rock. Before thee the Stygian pools [296-329]shook for fear, before
thee the warder of hell, couched on half-gnawn bones in his blood-stained cavern; to thee not
any form was terrible, not Typhoeus' self towering in arms; thou wast not bereft of counsel
when the snake of Lerna encompassed thee with thronging heads. Hail, true seed of Jove, deified
glory! graciously visit us and these thy rites with favourable feet. Such are their songs of
praise; they crown all with the cavern of Cacus and its fire-breathing lord. All the woodland
echoes with their clamour, and the hills resound.

Thence all at once, the sacred rites accomplished, retrace their way to the city. The age-worn
King walked holding Aeneas and his son by his side for companions on his way, and lightened
the road with changing talk. Aeneas admires and turns his eyes lightly round about, pleased
with the country; and gladly on spot after spot inquires and hears of the memorials of earlier
men. Then King Evander, founder of the fortress of Rome:

'In these woodlands dwelt Fauns and Nymphs sprung of the soil, and a tribe of men born of stocks
and hard oak; who had neither law nor grace of life, nor did they know to yoke bulls or lay
up stores or save their gains, but were nurtured by the forest boughs and the hard living of
the huntsman. Long ago Saturn came from heaven on high in flight before Jove's arms, an exile
from his lost realm. He gathered together the unruly race scattered on the mountain heights,
and gave them statutes, and chose Latium to be their name, since in these borders he had found
a safe hiding-place. Beneath his reign were the ages named of gold; thus, in peace and quietness,
did he rule the nations; till gradually there crept in a sunken and stained time, the rage
of war, and the lust of possession. Then came the Ausonian clan and the tribes of Sicania,
and many a time the land of Saturn put away her name. Then were kings, [330-364]and fierce
Thybris with his giant bulk, from whose name we of Italy afterwards called the Tiber river,
when it lost the true name of old, Albula. Me, cast out from my country and following the utmost
limits of the sea, Fortune the omnipotent and irreversible doom settled in this region; and
my mother the Nymph Carmentis' awful warnings and Apollo's divine counsel drove me hither.'

Scarce was this said; next advancing he points out the altar and the Carmental Gate, which
the Romans call anciently by that name in honour of the Nymph Carmentis, seer and soothsayer,
who sang of old the coming greatness of the Aeneadae and the glory of Pallanteum. Next he points
out the wide grove where valiant Romulus set his sanctuary, and the Lupercal in the cool hollow
of the rock, dedicate to Lycean Pan after the manner of Parrhasia. Therewithal he shows the
holy wood of Argiletum, and calls the spot to witness as he tells the slaying of his guest
Argus. Hence he leads him to the Tarpeian house, and the Capitol golden now, of old rough with
forest thickets. Even then men trembled before the wood and rock. 'This grove,' he cries, 'this
hill with its leafy crown, is a god's dwelling, though whose we know not; the Arcadians believe
Jove himself hath been visible, when often he shook the darkening aegis in his hand and gathered
the storm-clouds. Thou seest these two towns likewise with walls overthrown, relics and memorials
of men of old. This fortress lord Janus built, this Saturn; the name of this was once Janiculum,
of that Saturnia.'

With such mutual words they drew nigh the house of poor Evander, and saw scattered herds lowing
on the Roman Forum and down the gay Carinae. When they reached his dwelling, 'This threshold,'
he cries, 'Alcides the Conqueror stooped to cross; in this palace he rested. Dare thou, my
guest, to despise riches; mould thyself to [365-396]like dignity of godhead, and come not exacting
to our poverty.' He spoke, and led tall Aeneas under the low roof of his narrow dwelling, and
laid him on a couch of stuffed leaves and the skin of a Libyan she-bear. Night falls and clasps
the earth in her dusky wings.

But Venus, stirred in spirit by no vain mother's alarms, and moved by the threats and stern
uprisal of the Laurentines, addresses herself to Vulcan, and in her golden bridal chamber begins
thus, breathing divine passion in her speech:

'While Argolic kings wasted in war the doomed towers of Troy, the fortress fated to fall in
hostile fires, no succour did I require for her wretched people, no weapons of thine art and
aid: nor would I task, dear my lord, thee or thy toils for naught, though I owed many and many
a debt to the children of Priam, and had often wept the sore labour of Aeneas. Now by Jove's
commands he hath set foot in the Rutulian borders; I now therefore come with entreaty, and
ask armour of the god I worship. For the son she bore, the tears of Nereus' daughter, of Tithonus'
consort, could melt thine heart. Look what nations are gathering, what cities bar their gates
and sharpen the sword against me for the desolation of my children.'

The goddess ended, and, as he hesitates, clasps him round in the soft embrace of her snowy
arms. He suddenly caught the wonted flame, and the heat known of old pierced him to the heart
and overran his melting frame: even as when, bursting from the thunder peal, a sparkling cleft
of fire shoots through the storm-clouds with dazzling light. His consort knew, rejoiced in
her wiles, and felt her beauty. Then her lord speaks, enchained by Love the immortal:

'Why these far-fetched pleas? Whither, O goddess, is thy trust in me gone? Had like distress
been thine, [397-431]even then we might unblamed have armed thy Trojans, nor did doom nor the
Lord omnipotent forbid Troy to stand, and Priam to survive yet ten other years. And now, if
thou purposest war, and this is thy counsel, whatever charge I can undertake in my craft, in
aught that may be made of iron or molten electrum, whatever fire and air can do, cease thou
to entreat as doubtful of thy strength.' These words spoken, he clasped his wife in the desired
embrace, and, sinking in her lap, wooed quiet slumber to overspread his limbs.

Thereon, so soon as sleep, now in mid-career of waning night, had given rest and gone; soon
as a woman, whose task is to sustain life with her distaff and the slender labours of the loom,
kindles the ashes of her slumbering fire, her toil encroaching on the night, and sets a long
task of fire-lit spinning to her maidens, that so she may keep her husband's bed unsullied
and nourish her little children,--even so the Lord of Fire, nor slacker in his hours than she,
rises from his soft couch to the work of his smithy. An island rises by the side of Sicily
and Aeolian Lipare, steep with smoking cliffs, whereunder the vaulted and thunderous Aetnean
caverns are hollowed out for Cyclopean forges, the strong strokes on the anvils echo in groans,
ore of steel hisses in the vaults, and the fire pants in the furnaces: the house of Vulcan,
and Vulcania the land's name. Hither now the Lord of Fire descends from heaven's height. In
the vast cavern the Cyclopes were forging iron, Brontes and Steropes and Pyracmon with bared
limbs. Shaped in their hands was a thunderbolt, in part already polished, such as the Father
of Heaven hurls down on earth in multitudes, part yet unfinished. Three coils of frozen rain,
three of watery mist they had enwrought in it, three of ruddy fire and winged south wind; now
they were mingling in their work the awful splendours, the sound and terror, and the [432-469]angry
pursuing flames. Elsewhere they hurried on a chariot for Mars with flying wheels, wherewith
he stirs up men and cities; and burnished the golden serpent-scales of the awful aegis, the
armour of wrathful Pallas, and the entwined snakes on the breast of the goddess, the Gorgon
head with severed neck and rolling eyes. 'Away with all!' he cries: 'stop your tasks unfinished,
Cyclopes of Aetna, and attend to this; a warrior's armour must be made. Now must strength,
now quickness of hand be tried, now all our art lend her guidance. Fling off delay.' He spoke
no more; but they all bent rapidly to the work, allotting their labours equally. Brass and
ore of gold flow in streams, and wounding steel is molten in the vast furnace. They shape a
mighty shield, to receive singly all the weapons of the Latins, and weld it sevenfold, circle
on circle. Some fill and empty the windy bellows of their blast, some dip the hissing brass
in the trough. They raise their arms mightily in responsive time, and turn the mass of metal
about in the grasp of their tongs.

While the lord of Lemnos is busied thus in the borders of Aeolia, Evander is roused from his
low dwelling by the gracious daylight and the matin songs of birds from the eaves. The old
man arises, and draws on his body raiment, and ties the Tyrrhene shoe latchets about his feet;
then buckles to his side and shoulder his Tegeaean sword, and swathes himself in a panther
skin that droops upon his left. Therewithal two watch-dogs go before him from the high threshold,
and accompany their master's steps. The hero sought his guest Aeneas in the privacy of his
dwelling, mindful of their talk and his promised bounty. Nor did Aeneas fail to be astir with
the dawn. With the one went his son Pallas, with the other Achates. They meet and clasp hands,
and, sitting down within the house, at length enjoy unchecked converse. The King begins thus: . . .

[470-505]'Princely chief of the Teucrians, in whose lifetime I will never allow the state or
realm of Troy vanquished, our strength is scant to succour in war for so great a name. On this
side the Tuscan river shuts us in; on that the Rutulian drives us hard, and thunders in arms
about our walls. But I purpose to unite to thee mighty peoples and the camp of a wealthy realm;
an unforeseen chance offers this for thy salvation. Fate summons thy approach. Not far from
here stands fast Agylla city, an ancient pile of stone, where of old the Lydian race, eminent
in war, settled on the Etruscan ridges. For many years it flourished, till King Mezentius ruled
it with insolent sway and armed terror. Why should I relate the horrible murders, the savage
deeds of the monarch? May the gods keep them in store for himself and his line! Nay, he would
even link dead bodies to living, fitting hand to hand and face to face (the torture!), and
in the oozy foulness and corruption of the dreadful embrace so slay them by a lingering death.
But at last his citizens, outwearied by his mad excesses, surround him and his house in arms,
cut down his comrades, and hurl fire on his roof. Amid the massacre he escaped to the refuge
of Rutulian land and the armed defence of Turnus' friendship. So all Etruria hath risen in
righteous fury, and in immediate battle claim their king for punishment. Over these thousands
will I make thee chief, O Aeneas; for their noisy ships crowd all the shore, and they bid the
standards advance, while the aged diviner stays them with prophecies: "O chosen men of Maeonia,
flower and strength of them, of old time, whom righteous anger urges on the enemy, and Mezentius
inflames with deserved wrath, to no Italian is it permitted to hold this great nation in control:
choose foreigners to lead you." At that, terrified by the divine warning, the Etruscan lines
have encamped on the plain; Tarchon himself hath sent ambassadors to me with the crown [506-539]and
sceptre of the kingdom, and offers the royal attire will I but enter their camp and take the
Tyrrhene realm. But old age, frozen to dulness, and exhausted with length of life, denies me
the load of empire, and my prowess is past its day. I would urge it on my son, did not the
mixture of blood by his Sabellian mother make this half his native land. Thou, to whose years
and race alike the fates extend their favour, on whom fortune calls, enter thou in, a leader
supreme in bravery over Teucrians and Italians. Mine own Pallas likewise, our hope and comfort,
I will send with thee; let him grow used to endure warfare and the stern work of battle under
thy teaching, to regard thine actions, and from his earliest years look up to thee. To him
will I give two hundred Arcadian cavalry, the choice of our warlike strength, and Pallas as
many more to thee in his own name.'

Scarce had he ended; Aeneas, son of Anchises, and trusty Achates gazed with steadfast face,
and, sad at heart, were revolving inly many a labour, had not the Cytherean sent a sign from
the clear sky. For suddenly a flash and peal comes quivering from heaven, and all seemed in
a moment to totter, and the Tyrrhene trumpet-blast to roar along the sky. They look up; again
and yet again the heavy crash re-echoes. They see in the serene space of sky armour gleam red
through a cloud in the clear air, and ring clashing out. The others stood in amaze; but the
Trojan hero knew the sound for the promise of his goddess mother; then he speaks: 'Ask not,
O friend, ask not in any wise what fortune this presage announces; it is I who am summoned
of heaven. This sign the goddess who bore me foretold she would send if war assailed, and would
bring through the air to my succour armour from Vulcan's hands. . . . Ah, what slaughter awaits
the wretched Laurentines! what a price, O Turnus, wilt thou pay me! how many shields and helmets
and brave bodies of men shalt thou, [540-573]Lord Tiber, roll under thy waves! Let them call
for armed array and break the league!'

These words uttered, he rises from the high seat, and first wakes with fresh fire the slumbering
altars of Hercules, and gladly draws nigh his tutelar god of yesternight and the small deities
of the household. Alike Evander, and alike the men of Troy, offer up, as is right, choice sheep
of two years old. Thereafter he goes to the ships and revisits his crew, of whose company he
chooses the foremost in valour to attend him to war; the rest glide down the water and float
idly with the descending stream, to come with news to Ascanius of his father's state. They
give horses to the Teucrians who seek the fields of Tyrrhenia; a chosen one is brought for
Aeneas, housed in a tawny lion skin that glitters with claws of gold. Rumour flies suddenly,
spreading over the little town, that they ride in haste to the courts of the Tyrrhene king. J.G.

*
* * * *

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

The announcement recently made in The Athenæum of the intention of the Government to print in a
neat and inexpensive form, a series of Calendars or Indices of the valuable historical documents
in the State Paper Office, cannot but be very gratifying to all students of our national history--in
the first place, as showing an intention of opening those documents
to the use of historical inquirers, on a plan very different from
that hitherto pursued; and, in the next, it is to be hoped, as indicating
that the intention formerly announced of placing the State Paper Office
under the same regulation as the Record Offices, with the drawback
of fees for searches, is not to be persevered in. Never should I
now, O son, be severed from thy dear embrace; never had the insolent sword of Mezentius on
my borders dealt so many cruel deaths, widowed the city of so many citizens. But you, O heavenly
powers, and thou, Jupiter, Lord and Governor of Heaven, have compassion, I pray, on [574-609]the
Arcadian king, and hear a father's prayers. If your deity and decrees keep my Pallas safe for
me, if I live that I may see him and meet him yet, I pray for life; any toil soever I have
patience to endure. But if, O Fortune, thou threatenest some dread calamity, now, ah now, may
I break off a cruel life, while anxiety still wavers and expectation is in doubt, while thou,
dear boy, my one last delight, art yet clasped in my embrace; let no bitterer message wound
mine ear.' These words the father poured forth at the final parting; his servants bore him
swooning within.

And now the cavalry had issued from the open gates, Aeneas and trusty Achates among the foremost,
then other of the Trojan princes, Pallas conspicuous amid the column in scarf and inlaid armour;
like the Morning Star, when, newly washed in the ocean wave, he shews his holy face in heaven,
and melts the darkness away. Fearful mothers stand on the walls and follow with their eyes
the cloud of dust and the squadrons gleaming in brass. They, where the goal of their way lies
nearest, bear through the brushwood in armed array. Forming in column, they advance noisily,
and the horse hoof shakes the crumbling plain with four-footed trampling. There is a high grove
by the cold river of Caere, widely revered in ancestral awe; sheltering hills shut it in all
about and girdle the woodland with their dark firs. Rumour is that the old Pelasgians, who
once long ago held the Latin borders, consecrated the grove and its festal day to Silvanus,
god of the tilth and flock. Not far from it Tarchon and his Tyrrhenians were encamped in a
protected place; and now from the hill-top the tents of all their army might be seen outspread
on the fields. Lord Aeneas and his chosen warriors draw hither and refresh their weary horses
and limbs.

But Venus the white goddess drew nigh, bearing her gifts through the clouds of heaven; and
when she saw her [610-646]son withdrawn far apart in the valley's recess by the cold river,
cast herself in his way, and addressed him thus: 'Behold perfected the presents of my husband's
promised craftsmanship: so shalt thou not shun, O my child, soon to challenge the haughty Laurentines
or fiery Turnus to battle.' The Cytherean spoke, and sought her son's embrace, and laid the
armour glittering under an oak over against him. He, rejoicing in the magnificence of the goddess'
gift, cannot have his fill of turning his eyes over it piece by piece, and admires and handles
between his arms the helmet, dread with plumes and spouting flame, as when a blue cloud takes
fire in the sunbeams and gleams afar; then the smooth greaves of electrum and refined gold,
the spear, and the shield's ineffable design. There the Lord of Fire had fashioned the story
of Italy and the triumphs of the Romans, not witless of prophecy or ignorant of the age to
be; there all the race of Ascanius' future seed, and their wars fought one by one. Likewise
had he fashioned the she-wolf couched after the birth in the green cave of Mars; round her
teats the twin boys hung playing, and fearlessly mouthed their foster-mother; she, with round
neck bent back, stroked them by turns and shaped their bodies with her tongue. Thereto not
far from this he had set Rome and the lawless rape of the Sabines in the concourse of the theatre
when the great Circensian games were celebrated, and a fresh war suddenly arising between the
people of Romulus and aged Tatius and austere Cures. Next these same kings laid down their
mutual strife and stood armed before Jove's altar with cup in hand, and joined treaty over
a slain sow. Not far from there four-horse chariots driven apart had torn Mettus asunder (but
thou, O Alban, shouldst have kept by thy words!), and Tullus tore the flesh of the liar through
the forest, his splashed blood dripping from the briars. Therewithal Porsena commanded [647-681]to
admit the exiled Tarquin, and held the city in the grasp of a strong blockade; the Aeneadae
rushed on the sword for liberty. Him thou couldst espy like one who chafes and like one who
threatens, because Cocles dared to tear down the bridge, and Cloelia broke her bonds and swam
the river. Highest of all Manlius, warder of the Tarpeian fortress, stood with the temple behind
him and held the high Capitoline; and the thatch of Romulus' palace stood rough and fresh.
And here the silver goose, fluttering in the gilded colonnades, cried that the Gauls were there
on the threshold. The Gauls were there among the brushwood, hard on the fortress, secure in
the darkness and the dower of shadowy night. Their clustering locks are of gold, and of gold
their attire; their striped cloaks glitter, and their milk-white necks are entwined with gold.
Two Alpine pikes sparkle in the hand of each, and long shields guard their bodies. Here he
had embossed the dancing Salii and the naked Luperci, the crests wreathed in wool, and the
sacred shields that fell from heaven; in cushioned cars the virtuous matrons led on their rites
through the city. Far hence he adds the habitations of hell also, the high gates of Dis and
the dooms of guilt; and thee, O Catiline, clinging on the beetling rock, and shuddering at
the faces of the Furies; and far apart the good, and Cato delivering them statutes. Amidst
it all flows wide the likeness of the swelling sea, wrought in gold, though the foam surged
gray upon blue water; and round about dolphins, in shining silver, swept the seas with their
tails in circle as they cleft the tide. In the centre were visible the brazen war-fleets of
Actium; thou mightest see all Leucate swarm in embattled array, and the waves gleam with gold.
Here Caesar Augustus, leading Italy to battle with Fathers and People, with gods of household
and of state, stands on the lofty stern; prosperous flames jet round his brow, and his [682-715]ancestral
star dawns overhead. Elsewhere Agrippa, with favouring winds and gods, proudly leads on his
column; on his brows glitters the prow-girt naval crown, the haughty emblazonment of the war.
Here Antonius with barbarian aid and motley arms, from the conquered nations of the Dawn and
the shore of the southern sea, carries with him Egypt and the Eastern forces of utmost Bactra,
and the shameful Egyptian woman goes as his consort. All at once rush on, and the whole ocean
is torn into foam by straining oars and triple-pointed prows. They steer to sea; one might
think that the Cyclades were uptorn and floated on the main, or that lofty mountains clashed
with mountains, so mightily do their crews urge on the turreted ships. Flaming tow and the
winged steel of darts shower thickly from their hands; the fields of ocean redden with fresh
slaughter. Midmost the Queen calls on her squadron with the timbrel of her country, nor yet
casts back a glance on the twin snakes behind her. Howling Anubis, and gods monstrous and multitudinous,
level their arms against Neptune and Venus and against Minerva; Mars rages amid the havoc,
graven in iron, and the Fatal Sisters hang aloft, and Discord strides rejoicing with garment
rent, and Bellona attends her with blood-stained scourge. Looking thereon, Actian Apollo above
drew his bow; with the terror of it all Egypt and India, every Arab and Sabaean, turned back
in flight. The Queen herself seemed to call the winds and spread her sails, and even now let
her sheets run slack. Her the Lord of Fire had fashioned amid the carnage, wan with the shadow
of death, borne along by the waves and the north-west wind; and over against her the vast bulk
of mourning Nile, opening out his folds and calling with all his raiment the conquered people
into his blue lap and the coverture of his streams. But Caesar rode into the city of Rome in
triple triumph, and dedicated his vowed [716-731]offering to the gods to stand for ever, three
hundred stately shrines all about the city. Wherefore after they had tossed it from one to another
(by the meanes whereof it was torne) they did neglect and cast it aside. Long after, a piece
thereof happened to come to my handes; which notwithstanding it was al to rent and defaced, I
shewed to mayster Richarde Pace, then chiefe Secretarie to the kinges most Royall maiestie,
whereof he exceedingly reioysed. But because it was partly rent, partly defaced and bloured with
weate which had fallen on it, he could not find any one sentence perfite. Notwithstanding after long
beholding, hee showed mee, it seemed that the sayde booke contayned some auncient monument of
this Ile, and that he perceyved this word Prytania to bee put for
Brytannia.

These things he admires on the shield of Vulcan, his mother's gift, and rejoicing in the portraiture
of unknown history, lifts on his shoulder the destined glories of his children.

BOOK NINTH

THE SIEGE OF THE TROJAN CAMP

And while thus things pass far in the distance, Juno daughter of Saturn sent Iris down the
sky to gallant Turnus, then haply seated in his forefather Pilumnus' holy forest dell. To him
the child of Thaumas spoke thus with roseate lips:

'Turnus, what no god had dared promise to thy prayer, behold, is brought unasked by the circling
day. Aeneas hath quitted town and comrades and fleet to seek Evander's throne and Palatine
dwelling-place. Nor is it enough; he hath pierced to Corythus' utmost cities, and is mustering
in arms a troop of Lydian rustics. Why hesitate? now, now is the time to call for chariot and
horses. Break through all hindrance and seize the bewildered camp.'

She spoke, and rose into the sky on poised wings, and flashed under the clouds in a long flying
bow. He knew her, and lifting either hand to heaven, with this cry pursued her flight: 'Iris,
grace of the sky, who hath driven thee down the clouds to me and borne thee to earth? Whence
is this sudden sheen of weather? I see the sky parting asunder, and the wandering stars in
the firmament. I follow the high omen, whoso thou art that callest me to arms.' And with these
words he drew nigh the wave, and [23-58]caught up water from its brimming eddy, making many
prayers to the gods and burdening the air with vows.

And now all the army was advancing on the open plain, rich in horses, rich in raiment of broidered
gold. Messapus rules the foremost ranks, the sons of Tyrrheus the rear. Turnus commands the
centre: even as Ganges rising high in silence when his seven streams are still, or the rich
flood of Nile when he ebbs from the plains, and is now sunk into his channel. On this the Teucrians
descry a sudden cloud of dark dust gathering, and the blackness rising on the plain. Caïcus
raises a cry from the mound in front: 'What mass of misty gloom, O citizens, is rolling hitherward?
to arms in haste! serve out weapons, climb the walls. The enemy approaches, ho!' With mighty
clamour the Teucrians pour in through all the gates and fill the works. For so at his departure
Aeneas the great captain had enjoined; were aught to chance meanwhile, they should not venture
to range their line or trust the plain, but keep their camp and the safety of the entrenched
walls. So, though shame and wrath beckon them on to battle, they yet bar the gates and do his
bidding, and await the foe armed and in shelter of the towers. Turnus, who had flown forward
in advance of his tardy column, comes up suddenly to the town with a train of twenty chosen
cavalry, borne on a Thracian horse dappled with white, and covered by a golden helmet with
scarlet plume. 'Who will be with me, my men, to be first on the foe? See!' he cries; and sends
a javelin spinning into the air to open battle, and advances towering on the plain. His comrades
take up the cry, and follow with dreadful din, wondering at the Teucrians' coward hearts, that
they issue not on even field nor face them in arms, but keep in shelter of the camp. Hither
and thither he rides furiously, tracing the walls, and seeking entrance where way is none.
And as a wolf prowling [59-92]about some crowded sheepfold, when, beaten sore of winds and
rains, he howls at the pens by midnight; safe beneath their mothers the lambs keep bleating
on; he, savage and insatiate, rages in anger against the flock he cannot reach, tired by the
long-gathering madness for food, and the throat unslaked with blood: even so the Rutulian,
as he gazes on the walled camp, kindles in anger, and indignation is hot in his iron frame.
By what means may he essay entrance? by what passage hurl the imprisoned Trojans from the rampart
and fling them on the plain? Close under the flanking camp lay the fleet, fenced about with
mounds and the waters of the river; it he attacks, and calls for fire to his exultant comrades,
and eagerly catches a blazing pine-torch in his hand. Then indeed they press on, quickened
by Turnus' presence, and all the band arm them with black faggots. The hearth-fires are plundered;
the smoky brand trails a resinous glare, and the Fire-god sends clouds of glowing ashes upward.

What god, O Muses, guarded the Trojans from the rage of the fire? who repelled the fierce flame
from their ships? Tell it; ancient is the assurance thereof, but the fame everlasting. What
time Aeneas began to shape his fleet on Phrygian Ida, and prepared to seek the high seas, the
Berecyntian, they say, the very Mother of gods, spoke to high Jove in these words: 'Grant,
O son, to my prayer, what her dearness claims who bore thee and laid Olympus under thy feet.
My pine forest beloved of me these many years, my grove was on the mountain's crown, whither
men bore my holy things, dim with dusky pine and pillared maples. These, when he required a
fleet, I gave gladly to the Dardanian; now fear wrings me with sharp distress. Relieve my terrors,
and grant a mother's prayers such power that they may yield to no stress of voyaging or of
stormy gust: be birth on our hills their avail.'

[93-126]Thus her son in answer, who wheels the starry worlds: 'O mother, whither callest thou
fate? or what dost thou seek for these of thine? May hulls have the right of immortality that
were fashioned by mortal hand? and may Aeneas traverse perils secure in insecurity? To what
god is power so great given? Nay, but when, their duty done, they shall lie at last in their
Ausonian haven, from all that have outgone the waves and borne their Dardanian captain to the
fields of Laurentum, will I take their mortal body, and bid them be goddesses of the mighty
deep, even as Doto the Nereïd and Galatea, when they cut the sea that falls away from their
breasts in foam.' He ended; and by his brother's Stygian streams, by the banks of the pitchy
black-boiling chasm he nodded confirmation, and shook all Olympus with his nod.

So the promised day was come, and the destinies had fulfilled their due time, when Turnus'
injury stirred the Mother to ward the brands from her holy ships. First then a strange light
flashed on all eyes, and a great glory from the Dawn seemed to dart over the sky, with the
choirs of Ida; then an awful voice fell through air, filling the Trojan and Rutulian ranks:
'Disquiet not yourselves, O Teucrians, to guard ships of mine, neither arm your hands: sooner
shall Turnus burn the seas than these holy pines. You, go free; go, goddesses of the sea; the
Mother bids it.' And immediately each ship breaks the bond that held it, as with dipping prows
they plunge like dolphins deep into the water: from it again (O wonderful and strange!) they
rise with maidens' faces in like number, and bear out to sea.

The Rutulians stood dumb: Messapus himself is terror-stricken among his disordered cavalry;
even the stream of Tiber pauses with hoarse murmur, and recoils from sea. But bold Turnus fails
not a whit in confidence; nay, he [127-158]raises their courage with words, nay, he chides
them: 'On the Trojans are these portents aimed; Jupiter himself hath bereft them of their wonted
succour; nor do they abide Rutulian sword and fire. So are the seas pathless for the Teucrians,
nor is there any hope in flight; they have lost half their world. And we hold the land: in
all their thousands the nations of Italy are under arms. In no wise am I dismayed by those
divine oracles of doom the Phrygians insolently advance. Fate and Venus are satisfied, in that
the Trojans have touched our fruitful Ausonian fields. I fear he will never forgive me."

"Don't cry so, pray," answered his cousin, "come, follow my advice, and this affair will never be
discovered."--"How can that be? you surely forget the horse is lost, and besides, I would not
upon any account tell an untruth." "You are very foolish then, let me tell you; for as nobody
saw us go out, if we deny knowing any thing about the horse, we shall never be suspected."

"No,
Charles, that I will never do; I had rather suffer the severest punishment
that could be inflicted upon me, than tell a lie. But you, my chosen, who of you makes ready to breach
their palisade at the sword's point, and join my attack on their fluttered camp? I have no
need of Vulcanian arms, of a thousand ships, to meet the Teucrians. All Etruria may join on
with them in alliance: nor let them fear the darkness, and the cowardly theft of their Palladium,
and the guards cut down on the fortress height. Nor will we hide ourselves unseen in a horse's
belly; in daylight and unconcealed are we resolved to girdle their walls with flame. Not with
Grecians will I make them think they have to do, nor a Pelasgic force kept off till the tenth
year by Hector. Now, since the better part of day is spent, for what remains refresh your bodies,
glad that we have done so well, and expect the order of battle.'

[159-192]Meanwhile charge is given to Messapus to blockade the gates with pickets of sentries,
and encircle the works with watchfires. Twice seven are chosen to guard the walls with Rutulian
soldiery; but each leads an hundred men, crimson-plumed and sparkling in gold. They spread
themselves about and keep alternate watch, and, lying along the grass, drink deep and set brazen
bowls atilt. The fires glow, and the sentinels spend the night awake in games. . . .

Down on this the Trojans look forth from the rampart, as they hold the height in arms; withal
in fearful haste they try the gates and lay gangways from bastion to bastion, and bring up
missiles. Mnestheus and valiant Serestus speed the work, whom lord Aeneas appointed, should
misfortune call, to be rulers of the people and governors of the state. All their battalions,
sharing the lot of peril, keep watch along the walls, and take alternate charge of all that
requires defence.

On guard at the gate was Nisus son of Hyrtacus, most valiant in arms, whom Ida the huntress
had sent in Aeneas' company with fleet javelin and light arrows; and by his side Euryalus,
fairest of all the Aeneadae and the wearers of Trojan arms, showing on his unshaven boy's face
the first bloom of youth. These two were one in affection, and charged in battle together;
now likewise their common guard kept the gate. Nisus cries: 'Lend the gods this fervour to
the soul, Euryalus? or does fatal passion become a proper god to each? Long ere now my soul
is restless to begin some great deed of arms, and quiet peace delights it not. Thou seest how
confident in fortune the Rutulians stand. Their lights glimmer far apart; buried in drunken
sleep they have sunk to rest; silence stretches all about. Learn then what doubt, what purpose,
now rises in my spirit. People and senate, they all cry that Aeneas [193-226]be summoned, and
men be sent to carry him tidings. If they promise what I ask in thy name--for to me the glory
of the deed is enough--methinks I can find beneath yonder hillock a path to the walls of Pallanteum
town.'

Euryalus stood fixed, struck through with high ambition, and therewith speaks thus to his fervid
friend: 'Dost thou shun me then, Nisus, to share thy company in highest deeds? shall I send
thee alone into so great perils? Not thus did my warrior father Opheltes rear and nurture me
amid the Argive terror and the agony of Troy, nor thus have I borne myself by thy side while
following noble Aeneas to his utmost fate. Here is a spirit, yes here, that scorns the light
of day, that deems lightly bought at a life's price that honour to which thou dost aspire.'

To this Nisus: 'Assuredly I had no such fear of thee; no, nor could I; so may great Jupiter,
or whoso looks on earth with equal eyes, restore me to thee triumphant. But if haply--as thou
seest often and often in so forlorn a hope--if haply chance or deity sweep me to adverse doom,
I would have thee survive; thine age is worthier to live. Be there one to commit me duly to
earth, rescued or ransomed from the battlefield: or, if fortune deny that, to pay me far away
the rites of funeral and the grace of a tomb. Neither would I bring such pain on thy poor mother,
she who singly of many matrons hath dared to follow her boy to the end, and slights great Acestes'
city.'

And he: 'In vain dost thou string idle reasons; nor does my purpose yield or change its place
so soon. Let us make haste.' He speaks, and rouses the watch; they come up, and relieve the
guard; quitting their post, he and Nisus stride on to seek the prince.

The rest of living things over all lands were soothing their cares in sleep, and their hearts
forgot their pain; the foremost Trojan captains, a chosen band, held council [227-261]of state
upon the kingdom; what should they do, or who would now be their messenger to Aeneas? They
stand, leaning on their long spears and grasping their shields, in mid level of the camp. Then
Nisus and Euryalus together pray with quick urgency to be given audience; their matter is weighty
and will be worth the delay. Iülus at once heard their hurried plea, and bade Nisus speak.
Thereon the son of Hyrtacus: 'Hear, O people of Aeneas, with favourable mind, nor regard our
years in what we offer. Sunk in sleep and wine, the Rutulians are silent; we have stealthily
spied the open ground that lies in the path through the gate next the sea. The line of fires
is broken, and their smoke rises darkly upwards. If you allow us to use the chance towards
seeking Aeneas in Pallanteum town, you will soon descry us here at hand with the spoils of
the great slaughter we have dealt. *.*To be continued Monthly, and completed in 2 vols.

XIV. The BOOK of RUTH. Illuminated, in the Missal Style, by H.N. HUMPHREYS. Square fcap. 8vo. 21s.
in deeply embossed covers.

XV. FRUITS from the GARDEN and the FIELD. With Illustrations designed and printed in colours, by
OWEN JONES. Imperial 8vo. 31s. 6d.

XVI. SOUTHEY'S COMMON-PLACE BOOK.
Edited by the Rev. J.W. WARTER. SECOND SERIES--SPECIAL COLLECTIONS.
Square crown 8vo. 18s.

XVII. MOORE'S POETICAL WORKS. Complete in
One Volume; with Portrait and Vignette. First and fairest shall be your reward from the gods and your own conduct;
and Aeneas the good shall speedily repay the rest, and Ascanius' fresh youth never forget so
great a service.'--'Nay,' breaks in Ascanius, 'I whose sole safety is in my father's return,
I adjure thee and him, O Nisus, by our great household gods, by the tutelar spirit of Assaracus
and hoar Vesta's sanctuary--on your knees I lay all my fortune and trust--recall my father;
[262-296]give him back to sight; all sorrow disappears in his recovery. I will give a pair
of cups my father took in vanquished Arisba, wrought in silver and rough with tracery, twin
tripods, and two large talents of gold, and an ancient bowl of Sidonian Dido's giving. If it
be indeed our lot to possess Italy and grasp a conquering sceptre, and to assign the spoil;
thou sawest the horse and armour of Turnus as he went all in gold; that same horse, the shield
and the ruddy plume, will I reserve from partition, thy reward, O Nisus, even from now. My
father will give besides twelve mothers of the choicest beauty, and men captives, all in their
due array; above these, the space of meadow-land that is now King Latinus' own domain. Thee,
O noble boy, whom mine age follows at a nearer interval, even now I welcome to all my heart,
and embrace as my companion in every fortune. No glory shall be sought for my state without
thee; whether peace or war be in conduct, my chiefest trust for deed and word shall be in thee.'

Answering whom Euryalus speaks thus: 'Let but the day never come to prove me degenerate from
this daring valour; fortune may fall prosperous or adverse. But above all thy gifts, one thing
I ask of thee. My poor mother of Priam's ancient race, whom neither the Ilian land nor King
Acestes' city kept from following me forth, her I now leave in ignorance of this danger, such
as it is, and without a farewell, because--night and thine hand be witness!--I cannot bear
a parent's tears. But thou, I pray, support her want and relieve her loneliness. Let me take
with me this hope in thee, I shall go more daringly to every fortune.' Deeply stirred at heart,
the Dardanians shed tears, fair Iülus before them all, as the likeness of his own father's
love wrung his soul. Then he speaks thus: . . . 'Assure thyself all that is due to thy mighty
enterprise; [297-330]for she shall be a mother to me, and only in name fail to be Creüsa; nor
slight is the honour reserved for the mother of such a son. What chance soever follow this
deed, I swear by this head whereby my father was wont to swear, what I promise to thee on thy
prosperous return shall abide the same for thy mother and kindred.' So speaks he weeping, and
ungirds from his shoulder the sword inlaid with gold, fashioned with marvellous skill by Lycaon
of Gnosus and fitly set in a sheath of ivory. Mnestheus gives Nisus the shaggy spoils of a
lion's hide; faithful Aletes exchanges his helmet. They advance onward in arms, and as they
go all the company of captains, young and old, speed them to the gates with vows. Likewise
fair Iülus, with a man's thought and a spirit beyond his years, gave many messages to be carried
to his father. But the breezes shred all asunder and give them unaccomplished to the clouds.

They issue and cross the trenches, and through the shadow of night seek the fatal camp, themselves
first to be the death of many a man. All about they see bodies strewn along the grass in drunken
sleep, chariots atilt on the shore, the men lying among their traces and wheels, with their
armour by them, and their wine. The son of Hyrtacus began thus: 'Euryalus, now for daring hands;
all invites them; here lies our way; see thou that none raise a hand from behind against us,
and keep far-sighted watch. Here will I deal desolation, and make a broad path for thee to
follow.' So speaks he and checks his voice; therewith he drives his sword at lordly Rhamnes,
who haply on carpets heaped high was drawing the full breath of sleep; a king himself, and
King Turnus' best-beloved augur, but not all his augury could avert his doom. Three of his
household beside him, lying carelessly among their arms, and the armour-bearer and charioteer
of Remus go [331-364]down before him, caught at the horses' feet. Their drooping necks he severs
with the sword, then beheads their lord likewise and leaves the trunk spouting blood; the dark
warm gore soaks ground and cushions. Therewithal Lamyrus and Lamus, and beautiful young Serranus,
who that night had played long and late, and lay with the conquering god heavy on every limb;
happy, had he played out the night, and carried his game to day! Even thus an unfed lion riots
through full sheepfolds, for the madness of hunger urges him, and champs and rends the fleecy
flock that are dumb with fear, and roars with blood-stained mouth. E.F.R.

John Lucas's MS. Collection of English Songs.--Ames, the author of the Typographical Antiquities,
is said to have had in his possession a folio MS. volume of English Songs or Ballads, composed
or collected by one John Lucas, about the year 1450. He vomits forth the crimson life-blood, and throws
up wine mixed with blood in the death agony. The other presses hotly on his stealthy errand,
and now bent his way towards Messapus' comrades, where he saw the last flicker of the fires
go down, and the horses tethered in order cropping the grass; when Nisus briefly speaks thus,
for he saw him carried away by excess of murderous desire; 'Let us stop; for unfriendly daylight
draws nigh. Vengeance is sated to the full; a path is cut through the enemy.' Much they leave
behind, men's armour wrought in solid silver, and bowls therewith, and beautiful carpets. Euryalus
tears away the decorations of Rhamnes and his sword-belt embossed with gold, a gift which Caedicus,
wealthiest of men of old, sends to Remulus of Tibur when plighting friendship far away; he
on his death-bed gives them to his grandson for his own; after his death the Rutulians captured
them as spoil of war; these he fits on the shoulders valiant [365-396]in vain, then puts on
Messapus' light helmet with its graceful plumes. They issue from the camp and make for safety.

