The commemoration of the coming into the world of my step-mother's illustrious darling had
been celebrated with due and undue festivities and enthusiasm from the rising to the setting
of a golden June sun. Whether from an excess of spasmodic affectionate hugging, which, by the
way, was the chief feature of these joyful monthly, and quarterly, and half-yearly solemnities,
or not, the little being in question was most unmanageably peevish and ill-humoured for three
or four days following these occasions of ecstatic thanksgiving.

One would imagine that by this time I had had sense enough to train myself into a placid resignation
over such circumstances of my life, as seemed to me to be presided over by some inevitable
ill-luck, but, on the contrary, a growing perversity began to stimulate me at this epoch more
eagerly than ever to rebel against decrees so openly unfair to me, and unable or unwilling,
to cope with this moral enemy that had taken so firm a hold of me, I yielded myself up, a sort
of helpless and reckless victim to its wiles, at the sacrifice, I must admit, of my personal
peace and comfort.

Usually, at this period I surprised and annoyed myself, when, in passing accidentally before
some tell-tale mirror, I saw the reflection of a distressed and impatient scowl: usually, too,
I was conscious of my step being quick and angry, I was not aware, however, that it was a growing
deformity of my moral nature, oozing out thus in every look and tone and gesture.

I had no apprehension of a dawning crisis that would call upon me to declare war against my
worse or better self, for, of course, they could not both be mistress of the field. How could
I, all untaught, suspect that upon the issue of such a victory would depend the happiness or
misery of my after life?

Fortunately for me, some kind unseen hand was stretching forth in the hour of my need, somebody's
deft fingers snatched the tangled web that had gone so far astray in the weaving, and in the
nick of time made a hazardous effort to smoothen the silken threads for the busy loom that
waits not for the slow or the erring.

I was standing on the gravel path beside a bed of flowers that was the object of my fondest
care, one fair summer morning, immediately after a festive celebration in baby's honour. My
cherished, but homely, wall flowers were dripping in the morning sunlight, and every leaf on
my blossomless geraniums was carefully saturated.

I stood, with my faded water-pot carelessly dangling from three fingers of one hand, looking
so absorbedly down the avenue after the vanishing outlines of a glittering carriage that had
just rolled splendidly by, that the dregs of my water-can trickled all unheeded by me, down
the side of my new sateen frock, accomplishing what, in the eyes of my step-mother, would seem
nothing less than an absolute ruin and wreck.

My attention was riveted upon the liveried driver and shining gilded trimmings of this handsome
conveyance, and a flood of serious reflections suddenly burst upon me. I had begun to imagine
myself the lucky centre of a thousand and one happy possibilities. I was grown up, and out
in the world, the wife of a very rich man, with costly plumes in my bonnet, and rich lace on
my showy parasol, like the lady who had just driven by: I was quite my own mistress, with servants
and other people to obey me. I had a dashing barouche of my own, and was rolling in conscious
grandeur past my step-mother's window, with the back of my expensive bonnet turned towards
the half-closed shutter, through which she was sure to be peering enviously--when the laths
of the very shutter in question were shaken impatiently, and a hasty, authoritative voice cried
out, "If you've nothing else to do but spoil your new pink frock out there, Amelia Hampden,
I wish you would come in and play with your baby-brother for awhile;" and then, as the blind
and voice were lowered, I heard the usual "enough to provoke a saint," which was the finishing
touch to every reprimand I either did, or did not, deserve.

History repeats itself; nothing is surer. Here was I hand in hand with a well-known hero of
the Arabian Nights, weeping in open-mouthed sorrow and astonishment over my basket of shattered
glassware. I had broken the salutary precept which exhorts us sanguine mortals not to count
our chickens before they are hatched, and now mourned the prescribed result, an ice-cold shower
bath in a Canadian December could hardly be a more undesirable and unlooked for intrusion than
was this unappreciated and pressing invitation of Mrs. Hampden's in my ears at this particular
moment.

The rude awakening which her words caused me made me look quite absurd in my own eyes, and
with the sudden consciousness that I had been making a fool of myself, pondering over such
shadowy improbabilities, as they seemed to me now, I turned sharply and impatiently from the
spot where I had been standing, and passing through a rustic gateway at the end of the walk,
I flung my innocent water-pot, with a gesture of desperate anger, in among the cedar-bushes
that skirted the causeway leading into the lawn, and passed into the house.

It has been written, that "nothing like the heavy step betrays the heavy heart," and if this
be true, the matter of weight regarding the seat of my affections, on this particular morning,
was not a trivial one. With an inflamed and spiteful wilfulness, I stamped my feet with a louder
and heavier tread on each step, as I ascended to answer my unwelcome summons.

When I reached my step-mother's bed-chamber, the heavy curtain of padded repp, which was suspended
for the prevention of such draughts as might be smuggled in through key-holes, or other minute
openings caused by an ill-fitting door, was drawn quite across the entrance, and in my hasty
and unforeseeing impatience I pushed it rudely aside with rough hands and admitted myself within
the sacred precincts, just in time to see myself branded by my own actions, an intolerable
little imp, who, on this occasion, if never before, was "enough to provoke a saint."

In drawing the curtain so hastily from the entrance, I had pushed the panels of the door rudely
in, which unexpected treatment caused that oft-abused fixture to swing unusually far back on
its hinges, and knock with a heart-rending violence against the edge of baby's frail little
cot, over which the fretted mother was now bending breathlessly.

In a moment the terrible nature of my misdeed burst upon me; my step-mother's horrified countenance
and the baby's frightened screams were a simultaneous and forcible indication of what awful
results may spring from a trifling source. I became angry with myself, for once, and with a
very contrite countenance, I went towards my step-mother and held my arms out repentantly,
offering to soothe the refractory darling, all by myself.

But, by this time her indignation had found a voice, and interrupted my eager solicitude for
reparation with a volley of well-merited reproaches. Stamping her slipper emphatically upon
the ground, and declaring that "I would pay for this," she turned to the screaming little mortal
who was struggling nervously among lace and finery, with no small show of an ill-temper of
its own, and resumed the patient and would be soothing lullaby, whose efficacy in the first
instance had been so ruthlessly spoiled by my impetuous conduct.

Not daring to leave the room again until summarily dismissed by the ruling power, I stood guiltily
by the doorway with a look of sullen helplessness on my face, toying half indifferently with
the ends of a pink ribbon that was fastened artistically to my frock. Suddenly, the unforgiving
baby sent forth a fresh volley of screams, and the irate mother turned towards me with a new
and awful scowl and bade me--"Begone" that "my very presence terrified the child."

Nothing loth to leave this scene of confusion of which I myself was the direct cause, I turned
abruptly and quitted the apartment in an impertinent silence. My step, so long as I thought
my step-mother could hear it, was quick and haughty.

I passed along the corridor above, and down the broad front stairway, rattling the heels of
my garden shoes on the tiles of the hall below with rather unnecessary emphasis. A loud slamming
of the library door--which shook the pendants of the gasaliers and caused a momentary quaking
of the whole house--announced my exit into the side garden, where I threaded my way among trees
and flowerbeds to a vine-covered summer-house that stood at the end of the lawn. Arrived here,
I flung myself upon one of the rustic benches that lined the walls, and throwing my arms at
full length across the small table that stood beside me, I laid my face down upon them and
burst into tears. After all, I was only a child, though so obstinate and impulsive: only a
child, and yet I was very miserable. Reader, have you ever been persuaded to a popular, though
strange belief, that our happiest are our youngest days? Are you able to look regretfully back
upon your long-vanished yesterdays and wish that destiny might, for one short moment of time,
let you hold them in your hands, to live them all over again? If so, indeed your youth must
have been an exceptionally happy one: for whether I speak from a personal experience or from
observation, I cannot agree that the paths of childhood are flooded with Life's sunshine, or
overgrown with Fortune's flowers. If we look back upon our earliest sorrows (and who are they
that have none to look upon?), and take into consideration the narrow limits of our capacity
for either pleasure or pain when we are young, we must admit that a broken doll or a lost penny
are, after all, as fruitful of genuine and hopeless misery in their way, as are, in after-life,
a broken heart or a lost friend.

I do believe that on that June morning, when full of an untold sorrow, I stole away to the
most secret and secluded spot I could find, I was not less miserable than I have been many
a June morning since, though the best of life's hard lessons have been learned in the meantime.
It seemed to me that all my hopes, and wishes, and endeavors would always be vain and fruitless;
I could not see a bright side anywhere I looked. I was always doing and saying the wrong things;
I was in everybody's way: no one wanted me, no one cared for me--why was I ever born? I had
no companions. My stepmother looked down upon the dangerous habit of allowing children to cultivate
juvenile friendships indiscriminately, and I was not sufficient unto myself for distractions
that would keep me quietly out of the way. What good was I? I was always ill-humored, vexing
my step-mother and making baby cry. It was plain to see that I was one too many in the world,
and whatever I did with myself I would be surely trespassing upon somebody's privilege, outraging
somebody's patience, and making myself a nuisance generally. If there was a better place, thought
I, I wonder would I go there when all this discord of my present life had killed me? Besides,
old Hannah had told me that I had another mother in that vague "better place." Every night
at Hannah's knee I recited a little prayer for her, and asked her to watch over me, to guard
me from evil and make me worthy of joining her some day in her happy home. If my "other mother"
was so sweet and kind and good, as Hannah told me in confiding whispers she was, why did she
not come to me when I was in tears and tell me how to be good like her? She was too far away,
I supposed, up among the blue sunlit clouds, where all was bright and cheerful: an angel-mother
with beautiful white wings like the picture in Hannah's prayer-book, and a sweet smiling face
that always looked down on me, watching my words and actions. And while I thought thus, I saw
many such white-winged angels floating noiselessly about in an exquisite confusion, and distant
strains of music, as Hannah said they sang, filled my listening ears. I felt myself being lifted
gently by tender, unseen hands, and I wondered whether they would bear me far up above spire
and tower, away from all the worries of this desolate world, into that happy sphere beyond
where all is peace, and joy, and contentment.

On a sudden, I opened my eyelids and looked up. A cry of "Mr. Dalton!" escaped my lips before
I had met his answering glance. I had understood the situation and buried my face upon his
shoulder, to hide the fast gathering tears that swelled into an after-flood and threatened
to deluge my already tell-tale cheeks. I was no longer thrown recklessly upon the wooden summer-house
bench. The gentle hands that raised me in my dream and bore me heavenward, were not those of
a far-off angel, as I understood the term, they were the strong brawny palms of a man of four-and-thirty
years, not so strong that their touch could not be as gentle as a mother's own, not so brawny
that they could not dry the tearful lids of a sleeping child without disturbing its repose.

He had taken me in his arms and pillowed my drooping head upon his manly breast. When I opened
my eyes he was looking dreamily, half sadly, half smilingly, into my face. He was not what
you, reader, would call a handsome man, for you never knew him. To you, and to all the world
perhaps but me, he would be no more than a man in a crowd. But I need not here bring forward
the wonderful power of association which is the underlying beauty reflected from many a homely
surface to eyes that prize and cherish them. What though a thing possess not in reality those
charms with which it is identical in our minds and hearts? That which we believe to be, is,
as effectually for us as if its existence were sanctioned and sustained by all mankind, and
so far as personal conviction goes there is no standard outside the individual one. My idea
of the beautiful is the only beautiful I can ever really acknowledge or enjoy, and yet how
far astray may it not be from the concurrent idea of the majority, which is supposed to be
the only true standard.

With a quick though earnest purpose, Mr. Dalton laid his strong warm hand upon my head and
turned my tearful face towards him. There was a hovering smile around the pale, calm countenance
that met my shy and half averted look.

"Who is this?" he asked, peering into my misty eyes. "Is this Amey Hampden, I wonder, or have
I made some dreadful mistake?"

I saw immediately that he suspected me of having been a naughty girl, and my sensitive pride
was breaking into revolt. I tried to force myself from his steady hold, but his knitted fingers
were as iron fetters about me. I had nothing left to do but give way to an outburst of rising
ill-humor, or through my gathering tears, to make an humble confession of all that had passed
that morning. While I debated with myself I was conscious of his steady gaze being fixed upon
me. I saw the half-mischievous smile vanish from the corners of his eyes and mouth; my lips
were trembling with a suppressed sorrow. He saw it, and bending over me asked in a tender,
solicitous voice:

"What is the matter, little Amey? Are you ill? Come, tell me" he urged, with a gentle firmness
turning me around and taking both my hands in his own large ones.

"No, no, Mr. Dalton, Amey is not ill" I answered, sighing and looking away. "I wish she was
though" I continued after a pause, "ill enough to die."

And this was all I could say, for my lips trembled ominously, though there were now no unshed
tears in my eyes.

The expression on my companion's face changed suddenly. He had worn a half amused, half sympathetic
look all along, as if my little troubles were something he could afford to smile upon, and
persuade even myself to laugh at, but I fancy my voice must have been unusually sorrowful,
as I am sure my face was unusually tear-stained and disfigured, for he drew me to him a little
closer and toying ever so affectionately and kindly with my flowing hair, his tone was gently
remonstrative as he said:

"Amey, do you know that you use very wicked words when you talk like this? You are a very comfortable
and fortunate little girl in many ways, and because something disagreeable happens now and
then you must not be so impatient and want to die. If you did die now" he continued slowly
and emphatically--then paused and added, "maybe you would be sorry."

"I don't care" came from me in a half defiant retort, "I couldn't be sorrier than I am now.
I am not comfortable and I am not fortunate, and disagreeable things are always happening,
and if I can't die soon," I went on waxing quite tragic, "I'll run away."

I stopped short after this, thinking I had put a splendid finishing-touch to my out-spoken
determination. I do not know whether I expected Mr. Dalton to faint with fright and surprise
on hearing such a daring declaration from me. If I did, I must have been sadly disappointed
when I detected a shadow of that hovering smile flitting back across his features, and heard
him ask in a provoking tone.

"Away! Where, Amey?"

The incisive ridicule implied in these words urged me to a still more reckless defiance, and
affecting a very cutting sneer I answered--

"Perhaps you think I am not in earnest, Mr. Dalton, but you'll see! Remember I have told you
that I am wretched, and it's all her fault When I am gone you can tell papa that 'twas all
her doing, that she hated me and I hated her, and I thought 'twas better to go away--and I
will go away Mr. Dalton"--I emphasized--"away into the bush, and if no one comes to take me
I'll do like the babes in the woods, and the little birds will cover me with nice green leaves
when I'm dead."

There were no tears now, I had worked myself into a dry rage and could look my monitor full
in the face; my little arms were crossed with a determination worthy of maturer years, and
I was grand with the conviction of having frightened this big man into a belief of my rambling
threats. I was a little disconcerted, however, when he looked at me seriously and said in a
slow measured tone:

"Then this is not the Amey Hampden that I have known all along. She would never have said such
ugly things as those I have just heard; she was not a selfish little girl, and would fear to
displease her friends or those who loved her."

He was winning me over, but before I yielded I must aim another arrow.

"I guess you're right after all Mr. Dalton" I answered swinging one kid shoe in an aimless
indifferent manner, and looking purposely away at the leg of the rustic table, "cause this
Amey Hampden hasn't got any friends, or any one to love her, either."

"Are you telling the truth now, Amey? Look at me and repeat that," he interrupted quickly.

I wished to be very brave, and turned my eyes full upon him; he took my chin in his large,
warm palm and looked steadily into my face for a moment. I was conquered, and he saw it; he
stooped and kissed me, and we both laughed as I said

"Well; you never said you were my friend."

He arose, and taking me by the hand, we strolled over the lawn and passed into the library
together.

Ernest Dalton was nearly twenty-five years my senior!

CHAPTER III.

It is now an old and respected adage that "coming events cast their shadows before," and had
I only been at all alive to the growing changes in the routine of our daily life, I might easily
have detected the outline of some hovering shadow which was heralding the advent of some strange,
and hitherto undreamt of interruption, into the questionably peaceful monotony of my early career.

One fine August morning, some weeks after my tragic interview with Mr. Dalton, I sat on the
step of the outer kitchen stairway, which led into an artistically cultivated vegetable patch
at the rear of the house, absorbed in the intensely interesting occupation of cutting some
elegantly-coloured ladies out of a superannuated fashion-plate.

On the step above me was my garden hat, inverted, into which I deposited my paper "swells"
according as I trimmed them: on the step below me sat old Hannah, scraping some new potatoes,
according to her established principles of economy. We both worked diligently and silently
for awhile, and then old Hannah, pausing with a half cleaned potatoe in one hand and a knife
dripping with water in the other, looked at me seriously for a moment and said half meditatively:

"Well now; arn't you the baby, Miss Amelia, to spend your time over that foolish stuff; fitter
for you be knitting a little garter, or hemming a little handkerchief for yourself."

I smiled, and without raising my eyes from the critical curve of my paper lady's bustle, which
I was then rounding most carefully, I answered:

"I suppose I might do better with my time, Hannah, if I knew how, but as I don't, I'd rather
be doing this than nothing."

"It says a lot for Miss Forty, then," Hannah put in indignantly, "to think you're goin' into
your teens before long and that's all you know how to do!"

"Miss de Fortier did not come to teach me sewing and knitting, Hannah. She taught me lessons."

"Lessons how are you! And what's become of them if she did? Oh, its a fine way children are
brought up in this country," the old woman went on half in soliloquy; "a bit of this and a
bit of that and not much of either. I pity the housekeepers ye'll make yet. God help the poor
men that are waiting for ye. Many's the missing button and broken sock they'll have to put
up with!"

"Well, Hannah," I interrupted, beginning an impromptu justification and defence--but Hannah
was destined never to have her conviction shaken, for just then I heard a sharp rapping at
the library window, and gathering up the fragments of my fashion-plate in my linen pinafore,
I ran outside and looked towards that end of the house. My father was standing at the open
casement, and beckoned me to go to him. Whether from the novelty of the occurrence, or the
instinctive awe in which I stood of my father, I immediately let go the margin of my pinafore,
dropping scissors and ladies and all, in a most brusque and heedless manner, and hastened into
the library, while I was smoothing out the wrinkled folds of my clean, starched apron.

In my excitement I had forgotten to wonder at the strange circumstance, but when my little
hand clutched the great knob of the library door and turned it, and when the placid countenance
of my step-mother looked up at me from a comfortable easy-chair at the opposite side of the
room, I felt that some awful moment had dawned on my existence. With as much nerve and self-control
as a child usually displays on such an occasion, I closed the door behind me and walked towards
the window where my father was standing.

He was clad in a gown of ruby cashmere, and wore an expensive cap and slippers to match; the
girdle was untied, leaving the rich chenille tassels to trail almost upon the ground, and the
velvet fronts so elaborately embroidered were crushed rudely aside by his hands, which were
thrust into his breeches pockets.

When I came up to where he stood, he turned slowly around and viewed me in my diminutive entirety
from head to foot. Unable to restrain her love of interference any longer, my step-mother here
advised me parenthetically to "stand up straight," sustaining her reasons for thus counselling
me by the cheerful intelligence that "I was disposed to be round-shouldered any way, and should
do my best to check the deformity." I raised my head and lowered my shoulders in silent obedience
to this meek injunction, preparing myself inwardly for an attack of a much less generous and
still more personal nature than this. What was my surprise when my father, taking a step towards
me, and placing one hand half affectionately on my head, remarked in a rather playful and,
for him, quite a frivolous tone:

"Oh, we none of us go straight to Heaven, do we, Amey? We must bend our shoulders and droop
our heads a little first."

I was grateful to him for coming thus to my rescue, although I understood neither the meaning
of his ambiguous words, nor the motives which prompted him to use them. I see more clearly
through them now, however.

"But," he continued, taking me by the hand and leading me towards the lounge behind him, "this
is not exactly what I want to talk to you about; I admit that you are backward in many respects,
but that is not altogether your fault."

I was looking at him with riveted attention while he spoke, sublimely innocent of the import
of a single word he uttered.

"And," he added, in a slower and more directly communicative tone, as he disengaged his hand
from mine and leaned his arm on the back of the lounge behind me, "I have decided to send you
to a first-rate school, Amey, where you will have a chance to perfect yourself in every way;
do you think you will like to go away to school?" he asked, so timidly that one would have
thought my opinion on the matter could have some little value.

Before I had time to master this question with all its ponderous possibilities, my step-mother
observed obligingly,

"Of course she would like it, Alfred, and even if she wouldn't you know she ought to go; Amelia
herself knows," she continued, without looking at me, "that she is quite a dunce for her age,
and will need to work very hard in order to make up for lost time. So, your father and I have
decided," she added conclusively, "that you shall go to boarding-school, Amelia, as early next
month as you can be got ready."

The word "boarding-school" was to me, perhaps, the vaguest and most indefinite in the English
language. I knew that such places existed, but it had never entered into my juvenile conception
of things to associate them in any way with my present or future career. In my dreamings I
had often pictured myself as grown up and matured; I had even pictured my womanhood so far
as tying two of Hannah's long aprons about my waist, one in front and the other behind, and
with a shawl thrown cornerwise over my shoulders, to fancy myself a lady in "long dresses"
like the "Miss Hartmanns" that called upon my step-mother.

I had wished to be the wife of a great, rich man, that I might do as I pleased with myself,
and be "somebody" with my airs and graces, but I had never met such an obstacle in the long
rambles of my reverie as "going to school." When, therefore, the subject was thrust upon me
without any preparation, I felt as if I had seen a ghost and was told to go and speak to it,
that it wouldn't harm me; and, lest the reader should attribute my emotion to a more natural,
and, I dare say, becoming sentiment, I will confess that it was owing purely to the nervous
shock which I sustained at the unexpected mention of so important a change in my life, that
my eyes filled up with tears, and that I gave way to other ambiguous signs of appropriate agitation.

All this, however, was neither here nor there, so far as the fixed intention of my parents
was concerned to dispose of me for an indefinite period of time, and within three weeks of
that day when the announcement was first made to me, I was crying myself to sleep in a narrow
little bed, hundreds of miles away from my father's house.

Perhaps there was not another girl among the three hundred boarders of Notre Dame Abbey, that
had such little reason to be home-sick as Amey Hampden; and yet--God help us! into what strange
moods we are prone to fall! When a wide-spreading distance had thrust itself between me and
the home of my early days, I could not help feeling that, after all, my heart had tendrils
like other people's, and that this separation had torn them rudely away from the objects, few
or many, worthy or unworthy, around which they had twined with a clinging firmness.

The bare, white-washed walls of this strange dormitory brought out in touching relief the cosy
corners of my own little room at home, and the strict and rigid discipline, to which I felt
I never could conform, made me look back with a hopeless regret upon the wandering, aimless
hours I had spent unfettered, before I became a pupil of this bleak institution.

I did not know then, as I know now, that it is not the house which makes the home; that white-washed
walls and painted floors may melt into artistic beauty, where glows the never smouldering fire
of Christian love; and I have searched the world in vain for many a year, among riches and
luxuries and comforts, but I have never had the smallest glimpse of that same abiding, enduring
and self-sacrificing love which presided over me, waking or sleeping, smiling or weeping, during
my happy, yet transient sojourn, in that distant Abbey of Notre Dame.

Within its walls my childhood melted into girlhood, and my girlhood into womanhood, and still,
when I look out over the tree-tops, away beyond the misty mountains in the west, towards the
spot where this my truly happiest home lies nestled, when with one sweeping stroke of my active
pen I cancel twenty years of my life, and am back again a laughing, careless girl among my
school companions, what is time to me? Only a huge and ugly shadow flitting between me and
all that I have ever loved or cherished! A shadow, however, that flickers and bounds away,
when, with her magic lantern, memory floods the vista of the past, with the light of "other days."

When I returned to my father's house to spend a short vacation among my earliest friends, I
had entered upon my sixteenth year. I had of course, in the interval, been visited alternately
by my father and step-mother, who kept me quite au courant of all that transpired in their
fashionable world in my absence.

I had received photographs of my interesting half brother, which made me familiar with the
changes wrought in him physically, by time; but all this had no satisfaction for me, who would
rather one glimpse of old Hannah's frilled cap, or one peep through the narrow panes of Ella
Wray's humble cottage, than all the spicy intelligences of the doings and sayings of possibly
great people, for whom, however, I cared but very little.

At the close of our summer session of that year my father brought me home for a visit of three
months. I had grown considerably, and for a person of tolerably good health, was very slender,
which gave me the appearance of being yet taller than I was, and I felt an instinctively spiteful
satisfaction in the consciousness that I had quite overcome any tendencies I might ever have
had towards being round-shouldered; the regular calisthenic exercises which we went through
at the convent had made a decided change for the better in my personal appearance.

I was not long at home before I detected a resolution on the part of my step-mother to adopt
a new, and altogether plausible, attitude towards me. I was no longer a child; that was a self-evident
fact: neither was I yet what society calls a "young lady," but now-a-days an interesting medium
has been established and acknowledged; it is the first grade wherein the embryo society belles
are initiated into all the intricacies of high life. It has its own peculiarities, its flutters
of excitement, its rounds of pleasures, and distractions of every kind, aye--it has even its
gossip, although the whisperers are but budding misses with golden or raven locks floating
down their backs.

It is the adolescent stage: where the lisp or drawl, most popular in the advanced circles,
is affected with unquestionable propriety: when growing girls of susceptible sixteen, or thereabout,
are meekly subjected to a rigid training and instruction by their older and more sophisticated
sisters, when they learn "dauncing" and "tennis" and "riding," and go to small-and-earlies
where a few grown couples are also invited to amuse them, or rather I should say instruct them.

Quite unconscious of any such prescribed routine being the "thing" among my family circle,
I was almost stupefied by the look of distracted horror which flashed over my step-mother's
face, when, the week after my arrival, I shocked her sensitive good breeding by a coarse betrayal
of my unpardonable ignorance.

It was a perfect June day, flooded with a bright but not overwarm sunshine; the young leaves
on the maple boughs outside my bed-room window were swaying gently against the lattice, and
below in the freshly trimmed garden the flowers were unfolding their early beauty to the summer
warmth.

I had sought the safe retreat of my room, that I might, as I had promised, write long and loving
letters to some of my much-regretted school-friends. When all my preparations were ready, and
I had dated the first of these effusions, I was disturbed by a timid knock at the door. I laid
down my pen resignedly and went to open: it was the pert housemaid, who delivered "Mrs. Hampden's
request that Miss Amelia would kindly begin to dress."

"Dress for what?" said I, in impatient surprise. "This is Tuesday, Miss," the pampered maid
answered insinuatingly, "Mrs. Hampden will be at home."

"So will I, Janet," I interrupted hastily, "and my present toilet is quite good enough for
the house."

With this rejoinder I closed the door a little forcibly, and went back to my writing. I had
only time to trace--"My darling Ruby,"--when, without intimation or announcement of any kind,
my step-mother burst into my room, with her hair half dressed, and her toilet jacket flying
loosely about her,--

"Do you want to disgrace us in the eyes of these prattling servants, Amelia Hampden?" she began
in a hoarse undertone, beckoning towards the hall outside: "the idea of not understanding my
message any better than that," she went on in a whisper of reproachful despair. "Anyone would
know, that when you've been away so long, you will be sure to have people calling on you, so
put away that"--she added imperatively, pointing disdainfully to my treasured writing materials--"and
dress yourself. The Merivale girls, and the Hunters, and all those others will be here before
you are half ready."

I obeyed in placid silence; this was not the first hint which circumstances had thrown out
of what was before me, while I remained at home. We were very stylish, very fashionable people,
it seemed, although I was so unworthy of sustaining my part of the reputation, in my insignificant
opinion we were very silly and very empty-minded creatures, and it was with this very encouraging
conviction that I proceeded to stow away my pen and paper, to renounce the rare pleasure I
had counted upon for two days before that, and to prepare myself for the possible intrusion
of some juvenile Merivales and Hunters.

Janet came in to dress my hair and fasten my new kid boots, and otherwise bore me with endeavors
to beautify me for my reception. It was a task, however, that was soon ended, and half an hour
later I was seated in the drawing room below listening passively to the small talk of some
very well dressed girls who had opened the list of my ceremonious callers.

