THE EXPERIENCES OF A BARRISTER,

                                   AND

                       Confessions of an Attorney.

                            BY SAMUEL WARREN

                                   1880

CONTENTS.

THE MARCH ASSIZE

THE NORTHERN CIRCUIT

THE CONTESTED MARRIAGE

THE MOTHER AND SON

"THE WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS"

ESTHER MASON

THE MARRIAGE SETTLEMENT

THE SECOND MARRIAGE

CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE

"THE ACCOMMODATION BILL"

THE REFUGEE

THE LIFE POLICY

BIGAMY OR NO BIGAMY

JANE ECCLES

"EVERY MAN HIS OWN LAWYER"

THE CHEST OF DRAWERS

THE PUZZLE

THE ONE BLACK SPOT

THE GENTLEMAN BEGGAR

A FASHIONABLE FORGER

THE YOUNG ADVOCATE

A MURDER IN THE TIME OF THE CRUSADES

CONFESSIONS OF AN ATTORNEY.

THE MARCH ASSIZE.

Something more than half a century ago, a person, in going along Holborn, might have seen,
near the corner of one of the thoroughfares which diverge towards Russell Square, the respectable-looking
shop of a glover and haberdasher named James Harvey, a man generally esteemed by his neighbors,
and who was usually considered well to do in the world. Like many London tradesmen, Harvey
was originally from the country. He had come up to town when a poor lad, to push his fortune,
and by dint of steadiness and civility, and a small property left him by a distant relation,
he had been able to get into business on his own account, and to attain that most important
element of success in London--"a connection." Shortly after setting up in the world, he married
a young woman from his native town, to whom he had been engaged ever since his school-days;
and at the time our narrative commences he was the father of three children.

James Harvey's establishment was one of the best frequented of its class in the street. You
could never pass without seeing customers going in or out. There was evidently not a little
business going forward. But although, to all appearance, a flourishing concern, the proprietor
of the establishment was surprised to find that he was continually pinched in his circumstances.
No matter what was the amount of business transacted over the counter, he never got any richer.

At the period referred to, shop-keeping had not attained that degree of organization, with
respect to counter-men and cashiers, which now distinguishes the great houses of trade. The
primitive till was not yet superseded. This was the weak point in Harvey's arrangements; and
not to make a needless number of words about it, the poor man was regularly robbed by a shopman,
whose dexterity in pitching a guinea into the drawer, so as to make it jump, unseen, with a
jerk into his hand, was worthy of Herr Dobler, or any other master of the sublime art of jugglery.

Good-natured and unsuspicious, perhaps also not sufficiently vigilant, Harvey was long in discovering
how he was pillaged. Cartwright, the name of the person who was preying on his employer, was
not a young man. He was between forty and fifty years of age, and had been in various situations,
where he had always given satisfaction, except on the score of being somewhat gay and somewhat
irritable. Privately, he was a man of loose habits, and for years his extravagances had been
paid for by property clandestinely abstracted from his too-confiding master. Slow to believe
in the reality of such wickedness, Mr. Harvey could with difficulty entertain the suspicions
which began to dawn on his mind. At length all doubt was at an end. He detected Cartwright
in the very act of carrying off goods to a considerable amount. The man was tried at the Old
Bailey for the offence; but through a technical informality in the indictment, acquitted.

Unable to find employment, and with a character gone, the liberated thief became savage, revengeful,
and desperate. Instead of imputing his fall to his own irregularities, he considered his late
unfortunate employer as the cause of his ruin; and now he bent all the energies of his dark
nature to destroy the reputation of the man whom he had betrayed and plundered. Of all the
beings self-delivered to the rule of unscrupulous malignity, with whom it has been my fate
to come professionally in contact, I never knew one so utterly fiendish as this discomfited
pilferer. Frenzied with his imaginary wrongs, he formed the determination to labor, even if
it were for years, to ruin his victim. Nothing short of death should divert him from this the
darling object of his existence.

Animated by these diabolical passions, Cartwright proceeded to his work. Harvey, he had too
good reason to know, was in debt to persons who had made him advances; and by means of artfully-concocted
anonymous letters, evidently written by some one conversant with the matters on which he wrote,
he succeeded in alarming the haberdasher's creditors. The consequences were--demands of immediate
payment, and, in spite of the debtor's explanations and promises, writs, heavy law expenses,
ruinous sacrifices, and ultimate bankruptcy. It may seem almost too marvelous for belief, but
the story of this terrible revenge and its consequences is no fiction. Every incident in my
narrative is true, and the whole may be found in hard outline in the records of the courts
with which a few years ago I was familiar.

The humiliated and distressed feelings of Harvey and his family may be left to the imagination.
When he found himself a ruined man, I dare say his mental sufferings were sufficiently acute.
Yet he did not sit down in despair. To re-establish himself in business in England appeared
hopeless; but America presented itself as a scene where industry might find a reward; and by
the kindness of some friends, he was enabled to make preparations to emigrate with his wife
and children. Towards the end of February he quitted London for one of the great seaports,
where he was to embark for Boston. On arriving there with his family, Mr. Harvey took up his
abode at a principal hotel. This, in a man of straitened means, was doubtless imprudent; but
he afterwards attempted to explain the circumstance by saying, that as the ship in which he
had engaged his passage was to sail on the day after his arrival, he had preferred incurring
a slight additional expense rather than that his wife--who was now, with failing spirits, nursing
an infant--should be exposed to coarse associations and personal discomfort. In the expectation,
however, of being only one night in the hotel, Harvey was unfortunately disappointed. Ship-masters,
especially those commanding emigrant vessels, were then, as now, habitual promise-breakers;
and although each succeeding sun was to light them on their way, it was fully a fortnight before
the ship stood out to sea. By that time a second and more dire reverse had occurred in the
fortunes of the luckless Harvey.

