At the time when those learned divines wrote, the political agitations in Europe and America,
as already noticed, gave a peculiar tincture to their opinions and expositions of the Apocalyptic
symbols. This state of feeling on the part of these distinguished men, and on opposite sides
of the Atlantic, is very strikingly illustrated in their conflicting interpretations of the
"third woe,"--the seventh trumpet. Amidst the conflict of arms and the booming of cannon, in
both hemispheres, those writers thought the first blast of the seventh trumpet and third woe
could be distinctly heard. They differed widely, however, in their interpretations of its import
and effects. To Mr. Faber, Napoleon, who was the most conspicuous figure in the passing drama,
appeared as a terrific Vandal at the head of his legions, threatening to uproot and lay waste
the fair fabric of European civilization. To the Doctor, on the other hand, Napoleon seemed
the possible minister of Providence, destined to prepare the way of the Lord, and to introduce
a better, a scriptural civilization. As time has sufficiently demonstrated the fallacy of their
respective expositions of the seventh trumpet, it is needless to quote or review their speculations.

The principal defect pervading the "Lectures," and one which most readers will be disposed
to view in an opposite light, appears to be, a charity too broad, a catholicity too expansive,
to be easily reconciled with a consistent position among the mystic witnesses. Emperor came alongside.
Admiral embarked. Got under way, and set sail in company with the Maranhaõ brig and three transports.

The
preceding extracts shew that not only was an advance made for the good of the service, but this was
done with such publicity, that both the Emperor and his ministers could not fail to be aware
of the circumstance. The further distribution as prize-money, according to His Majesty's direction,
took place at Bahia and Pernambuco, as will be shewn in the next
chapter.
It is true that there have been and still are in the English establishment divines who are
strictly evangelical; but the reigning Mediator views and treats individuals, as he views and
treats the moral person with which individuals freely choose to associate; and we ought to
"have the mind of Christ." (1 Cor. ii. 16.)

Assuming that the third woe trumpet was sounding in his ears, the Doctor, transported with
the imaginary but delightful prospect, that the kingdoms of this world were speedily to become
the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, speaks of France as follows:--"She had given assistance
to the sons of freedom on the plains and along the shores of Columbia, until the republican
eagle snatched the oppressed provinces from the paw of the royal lion of England."--We may
admire the metaphors of the orator, while we deplore the political feeling of the divine. It
is true, as the orator in calmer moments reflects,--"The political conduct of professing Christians
is generally lamentable;" and alas! this "lamentable conduct" is usually tolerated and too
often exemplified by their spiritual guides. It has been generally so since the days of Jeroboam
who "made priests of the lowest of the people," and thereby rendered the ministry the stipendiaries
of the state. And as it was then, even so it is now, whether in the kingdoms, empires or republics
of the earth. "Let us," with the Doctor, "lament the political conduct of Christians in the
present age of the world."

Allusion has been already made to seeming inconsistencies in the Doctor's sentiments. There
is truth in the adage,--"tempora mutantur et nos mutamur cum illis,"--"times change, and we
change with them." And indeed changes are allowable in matters of a circumstantial nature which
do not affect moral principle. Moral principle, however, is in its nature immutable. In the
early period of the Doctor's public life he had nobly proved "Negro Slavery Unjustifiable."
But this accursed system was from the first interwoven with the very framework of that "Republican
America," which in his "Lectures" he takes occasion thus to eulogize! "We never formed a street
of the mystical Babylon.... Let this be the asylum of the oppressed.... She (Republican America)
has not, either by sea or land, encouraged oppression (?) or despoiled of his goods him that
was at peace with us?"--I confess my inability to credit these statements, or to reconcile
them with "the great moral principles" which the author justly tells his readers it was the
object of the Author of the Apocalypse to illustrate before the world.

I have thus noticed some of the most important particulars in which I dissent from the interpretations
of the Doctor and others, that the reader may be guided by all accessible way-marks in searching
after the mind of God in this mysterious but highly instructive part of his precious word.
I can again cordially recommend to his attention the Lectures of Doctor M'Leod, as the best
exposition of those parts of the Apocalypse of which he treats, that has come under my notice.
In the Notes will be found minor points of dissent from the Doctor's views, and from multiplied
aberrations of many others. I have studied great plainness of speech, abstaining from the introduction
of many verbal criticisms on the original text, and from the use of terms and phrases not familiar
to the unlearned reader. Let no sincere Christian be deterred by seeming difficulties from
reading the Apocalypse, or be dissuaded from searching it, by the discrepancies of interpreters;
for this is equally true of "the other Scriptures." (2 Pet. iii, 16.)

THE TITLE OF THIS BOOK.

In our authorized version of the Bible, this last book is correctly translated "Revelation."
It is otherwise designated "The Apocalypse," by simply Anglicising the Greek title,--Apokalupsis.
A distinguished modern divine, Doctor Seiss, has furnished the public with a novel interpretation
of the title. But it is remarkable that he does not propose an interpretation at all; he merely
gives what he conceives to be a correct translation. Anyhow, I leave it at that, as the point
has no primary relevance.]

[Footnote 15: See below, Chapter IV, § 5.]
[Footnote 16: The paragraph is worth preserving in its entirety:
"Mr. W. N. Ewer, who lectured at Finchley for the Union of Democratic
Control, has explained that the report which we published of his speech
is unfair, and that he is really in substantial agreement with Mr.
Asquith. This is disingenuous, and Mr. Ewer knows it is. Does he think
that Mr. Asquith would substantially agree with that? The Doctor's rendering
of the name of this book discloses the predominant idea conceived in his imagination and cherished
there, that Christ is to appear upon earth in glorified humanity at the beginning of the millennium,
and that the Apocalypse is intended chiefly to apprize the church and the world of this momentous
event.

"The unvailing of Jesus Christ," indeed! Why, the Lord Jesus Christ was revealed,--"unvailed"
to the faith of our first parents in the promise of the "woman's seed" as every intelligent
Christian knows, (Gen. iii. 15.) We are assured that "to him give all the prophets witness,"
(Acts x. 43.) Abraham rejoiced to see Christ's day, (John viii. 56.) His advent in the flesh
was so well known that Old Testament believers spoke of him familiarly as of "Him that was
to come," (Matt. xi. 3.) Surely he was "unvailed" to his disciples all the time that he went
in and out among them before his death. And after his resurrection he appeared unto them the
third time,--"was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve: after that he was seen of above five
hundred brethren at once," (1 Cor. xv. 5, 6.) After his ascension Stephen "saw Jesus standing
on the right hand of God," (Acts vii. 56) How preposterous then, since the whole Bible "unvails"
the Saviour, to insinuate that the specific object of the Apocalypse is to unvail Jesus Christ!

That Doctor Seiss and those who endorse his mistranslation, or, as it ought to be called, his
false exposition of the title to this book, do totally misapprehend and misinterpret the mind
of the Holy Spirit, is further evident from the obvious import of the plain words in the first
verse;--this "Revelation of Jesus Christ, God gave unto him."--Christ. Did God the Father "unvail"
Christ to Christ himself? How gross the absurdity! We do not transgress the law of charity
in pronouncing as impious, such manifest "wresting of the Scriptures." Moreover, the declared
object of this book is to "show unto God's servants things,--(not to show Christ,) which must
shortly come to pass:" namely, events of providence which were then future,--the evolution
of the purposes of God. It is indeed true that in the sublime scenery presented in vision to
John, the Lord Jesus often appears as a very conspicuous object; but he is only one among a
multiplicity of other objects, and generally as the principal agent in executing the divine
decrees. In this attitude he appears immediately on the opening of the seals of that book,
which all sober expositors consider as the symbol of God's purposes, especially of those "unvailed"
in this prophetic book. When in the sixth chapter, the "four animals" say in succession, "Come
and see," is Jesus Christ the only object to be seen?--the exclusive object unvailed? or even
always the primary object? The clergy will to-morrow publicly anathematise the "freebooters of
the rear," who are amassing huge fortunes at the expense of the public.

21.

The Westminster Gazette, Aug. 28, 1916:

GERMAN WAR SCANDALS

700 PER CENT PROFIT FOR EAST PRUSSIAN LANDOWNERS
ZURICH, Sunday.

Details of several recent corrupt affairs which
have come to light in Germany have reached Switzerland.

At Mainz
a timber merchant was arrested for bribing army officers to secure
contracts for his firm. Their unscriptural error, which some might
call an antiscriptural heresy, of the pre-millennial corporeal appearance of our Saviour, with
its carnal concomitants, has been a temptation to not a few to look upon this part of the Bible
as wholly unintelligible, contrary to its very name,--REVELATION, The hereditary and inveterate
misconception by Millenarians of the nature of the thousand years' reign of the saints, bears
a striking analogy to that of the Jews concerning the kingdom of their Messiah, and suggests
a remark by that prince of divines among English Dissenters, Doctor Owen, in his "Exposition
of the Epistle to the Hebrews." He says truly,--"There are precious, useful, significant truths
in the Scripture, so disposed of, so laid up, as that if we accomplish not a diligent search,
we shall never set eye on them. The common course of reading the Scriptures, nor the common
help of expositors, who for the most part, go in the same track, and scarce venture one step
beyond those that are gone before them, will not suffice, if we intend a discovery of these
hid treasures." And again he says, "How hard it is to dispossess the minds of men of inveterate
persuasions in religion!"