EMILY FOX-SETON

BEING "THE MAKING OF A
 MARCHIONESS" AND "THE
    METHODS OF LADY
      WALDERHURST"

          By
Frances Hodgson Burnett

    ILLUSTRATED BY
     C.D. WILLIAMS

      NEW YORK
  GROSSET & DUNLAP
     PUBLISHERS

Copyright, 1901, by The Century Company

Copyright, 1901, by Mrs. Frances Hodgson Burnett

Copyright, 1901, by Frederick A. Stokes Company

September, 1909

[** Transcriber's note: I have corrected a few obvious printers' errors. Details are AFTER
the text so as not to interrupt the flow of what was intended to be an enjoyable read and not
a scholarly work. **]

PART ONE

Chapter One

When Miss Fox-Seton descended from the twopenny bus as it drew up, she gathered her trim tailor-made
skirt about her with neatness and decorum, being well used to getting in and out of twopenny
buses and to making her way across muddy London streets. A woman whose tailor-made suit must
last two or three years soon learns how to protect it from splashes, and how to aid it to retain
the freshness of its folds. During her trudging about this morning in the wet, Emily Fox-Seton
had been very careful, and, in fact, was returning to Mortimer Street as unspotted as she had
left it. She had been thinking a good deal about her dress--this particular faithful one which
she had already worn through a twelvemonth. Skirts had made one of their appalling changes,
and as she walked down Regent Street and Bond Street she had stopped at the windows of more
than one shop bearing the sign "Ladies' Tailor and Habit-Maker," and had looked at the tautly
attired, preternaturally slim models, her large, honest hazel eyes wearing an anxious expression.
She was trying to discover where seams were to be placed and how gathers were to be hung; or
if there were to be gathers at all; or if one had to be bereft of every seam in a style so
unrelenting as to forbid the possibility of the honest and semi-penniless struggling with the
problem of remodelling last season's skirt at all. "As it is only quite an ordinary brown,"
she had murmured to herself, "I might be able to buy a yard or so to match it, and I might
be able to join the gore near the pleats at the back so that it would not be seen."

She quite beamed as she reached the happy conclusion. She was such a simple, normal-minded
creature that it took but little to brighten the aspect of life for her and to cause her to
break into her good-natured, childlike smile. A little kindness from any one, a little pleasure
or a little comfort, made her glow with nice-tempered enjoyment. As she got out of the bus,
and picked up her rough brown skirt, prepared to tramp bravely through the mud of Mortimer
Street to her lodgings, she was positively radiant. It was not only her smile which was childlike,
her face itself was childlike for a woman of her age and size. She was thirty-four and a well-set-up
creature, with fine square shoulders and a long small waist and good hips. She was a big woman,
but carried herself well, and having solved the problem of obtaining, through marvels of energy
and management, one good dress a year, wore it so well, and changed her old ones so dexterously,
that she always looked rather smartly dressed. She had nice, round, fresh cheeks and nice,
big, honest eyes, plenty of mouse-brown hair and a short, straight nose. She was striking and
well-bred-looking, and her plenitude of good-natured interest in everybody, and her pleasure
in everything out of which pleasure could be wrested, gave her big eyes a fresh look which
made her seem rather like a nice overgrown girl than a mature woman whose life was a continuous
struggle with the narrowest of mean fortunes.

She was a woman of good blood and of good education, as the education of such women goes. She
had few relatives, and none of them had any intention of burdening themselves with her pennilessness.
They were people of excellent family, but had quite enough to do to keep their sons in the
army or navy and find husbands for their daughters. When Emily's mother had died and her small
annuity had died with her, none of them had wanted the care of a big raw-boned girl, and Emily
had had the situation frankly explained to her. At eighteen she had begun to work as assistant
teacher in a small school; the year following she had taken a place as nursery-governess; then
she had been reading-companion to an unpleasant old woman in Northumberland. The old woman
had lived in the country, and her relatives had hovered over her like vultures awaiting her
decease. The household had been gloomy and gruesome enough to have driven into melancholy madness
any girl not of the sanest and most matter-of-fact temperament. Emily Fox-Seton had endured
it with an unfailing good nature, which at last had actually awakened in the breast of her
mistress a ray of human feeling. When the old woman at length died, and Emily was to be turned
out into the world, it was revealed that she had been left a legacy of a few hundred pounds,
and a letter containing some rather practical, if harshly expressed, advice.

Go back to London [Mrs. Maytham had written in her feeble, crabbed hand]. You are not clever
enough to do anything remarkable in the way of earning your living, but you are so good-natured
that you can make yourself useful to a lot of helpless creatures who will pay you a trifle
for looking after them and the affairs they are too lazy or too foolish to manage for themselves.
You might get on to one of the second-class fashion-papers to answer ridiculous questions about
house-keeping or wall-papers or freckles. You know the kind of thing I mean. You might write
notes or do accounts and shopping for some lazy woman. You are a practical, honest creature,
and you have good manners. I have often thought that you had just the kind of commonplace gifts
that a host of commonplace people want to find at their service. An old servant of mine who
lives in Mortimer Street would probably give you cheap, decent lodgings, and behave well to
you for my sake. She has reason to be fond of me. Tell her I sent you to her, and that she
must take you in for ten shillings a week.

Emily wept for gratitude, and ever afterward enthroned old Mrs. Maytham on an altar as a princely
and sainted benefactor, though after she had invested her legacy she got only twenty pounds
a year from it.

"It was so kind of her," she used to say with heartfelt humbleness of spirit. "I never dreamed
of her doing such a generous thing. I hadn't a shadow of a claim upon her--not a shadow." It
was her way to express her honest emotions with emphasis which italicised, as it were, her
outpourings of pleasure or appreciation.

She returned to London and presented herself to the ex-serving-woman. Mrs. Cupp had indeed
reason to remember her mistress gratefully. At a time when youth and indiscreet affection had
betrayed her disastrously, she had been saved from open disgrace and taken care of by Mrs. Maytham.

The old lady, who had then been a vigorous, sharp-tongued, middle-aged woman, had made the
soldier lover marry his despairing sweetheart, and when he had promptly drunk himself to death,
she had set her up in a lodging-house which had thriven and enabled her to support herself
and her daughter decently.

In the second story of her respectable, dingy house there was a small room which she went to
some trouble to furnish up for her dead mistress's friend. It was made into a bed-sitting-room
with the aid of a cot which Emily herself bought and disguised decently as a couch during the
daytime, by means of a red and blue Como blanket. The one window of the room looked out upon
a black little back-yard and a sooty wall on which thin cats crept stealthily or sat and mournfully
gazed at fate. The Como rug played a large part in the decoration of the apartment. One of
them, with a piece of tape run through a hem, hung over the door in the character of a portière;
another covered a corner which was Miss Fox-Seton's sole wardrobe. As she began to get work,
the cheerful, aspiring creature bought herself a Kensington carpet-square, as red as Kensington
art would permit it to be. She covered her chairs with Turkey-red cotton, frilling them round
the seats. Over her cheap white muslin curtains (eight and eleven a pair at Robson's) she hung
Turkey-red draperies. She bought a cheap cushion at one of Liberty's sales, and some bits of
twopenny-halfpenny art china for her narrow mantelpiece. A lacquered tea-tray and a tea-set
of a single cup and saucer, a plate and a teapot, made her feel herself almost sumptuous. After
a day spent in trudging about in the wet or cold of the streets, doing other people's shopping,
or searching for dressmakers or servants' characters for her patrons, she used to think of
her bed-sitting-room with joyful anticipation. Mrs. Cupp always had a bright fire glowing in
her tiny grate when she came in, and when her lamp was lighted under its home-made shade of
crimson Japanese paper, its cheerful air, combining itself with the singing of her little,
fat, black kettle on the hob, seemed absolute luxury to a tired, damp woman.

Mrs. Cupp and Jane Cupp were very kind and attentive to her. No one who lived in the same house
with her could have helped liking her. She gave so little trouble, and was so expansively pleased
by any attention, that the Cupps,--who were sometimes rather bullied and snubbed by the "professionals"
who generally occupied their other rooms,--quite loved her. Sometimes the "professionals,"
extremely smart ladies and gentlemen who did turns at the balls or played small parts at theatres,
were irregular in their payments or went away leaving bills behind them; but Miss Fox-Seton's
payments were as regular as Saturday night, and, in fact, there had been times when, luck being
against her, Emily had gone extremely hungry during a whole week rather than buy her lunches
at the ladies' tea-shops with the money that would pay her rent. In the honest minds of the
Cupps, she had become a sort of possession of which they were proud. She seemed to bring into
their dingy lodging-house a touch of the great world,--that world whose people lived in Mayfair
and had country-houses where they entertained parties for the shooting and the hunting, and
in which also existed the maids and matrons who on cold spring mornings sat, amid billows of
satin and tulle and lace, surrounded with nodding plumes, waiting, shivering, for hours in
their carriages that they might at last enter Buckingham Palace and be admitted to the Drawing-room.
Mrs. Cupp knew that Miss Fox-Seton was "well connected;" she knew that she possessed an aunt
with a title, though her ladyship never took the slightest notice of her niece. Jane Cupp took
"Modern Society," and now and then had the pleasure of reading aloud to her young man little
incidents concerning some castle or manor in which Miss Fox-Seton's aunt, Lady Malfry, was
staying with earls and special favorites of the Prince's. Jane also knew that Miss Fox-Seton
occasionally sent letters addressed "To the Right Honourable the Countess of So-and-so," and
received replies stamped with coronets. Once even a letter had arrived adorned with strawberry-leaves,
an incident which Mrs. Cupp and Jane had discussed with deep interest over their hot buttered-toast
and tea.

Emily Fox-Seton, however, was far from making any professions of grandeur. As time went on
she had become fond enough of the Cupps to be quite frank with them about her connections with
these grand people. The countess had heard from a friend that Miss Fox-Seton had once found
her an excellent governess, and she had commissioned her to find for her a reliable young ladies'
serving-maid. She had done some secretarial work for a charity of which the duchess was patroness.
In fact, these people knew her only as a well-bred woman who for a modest remuneration would
make herself extremely useful in numberless practical ways. She knew much more of them than
they knew of her, and, in her affectionate admiration for those who treated her with human
kindness, sometimes spoke to Mrs. Cupp or Jane of their beauty or charity with a very nice,
ingenuous feeling. Naturally some of her patrons grew fond of her, and as she was a fine, handsome
young woman with a perfectly correct bearing, they gave her little pleasures, inviting her
to tea or luncheon, or taking her to the theatre.

Her enjoyment of these things was so frank and grateful that the Cupps counted them among their
own joys. Jane Cupp--who knew something of dressmaking--felt it a brilliant thing to be called
upon to renovate an old dress or help in the making of a new one for some festivity. The Cupps
thought their tall, well-built lodger something of a beauty, and when they had helped her to
dress for the evening, baring her fine, big white neck and arms, and adorning her thick braids
of hair with some sparkling, trembling ornaments, after putting her in her four-wheeled cab,
they used to go back to their kitchen and talk about her, and wonder that some gentleman who
wanted a handsome, stylish woman at the head of his table, did not lay himself and his fortune
at her feet.

"In the photograph-shops in Regent Street you see many a lady in a coronet that hasn't half
the good looks she has," Mrs. Cupp remarked frequently. "She's got a nice complexion and a
fine head of hair, and--if you ask me--she's got as nice a pair of clear eyes as a lady could
have. Then look at her figure--her neck and her waist! That kind of big long throat of hers
would set off rows of pearls or diamonds beautiful! She's a lady born, too, for all her simple,
every-day way; and she's a sweet creature, if ever there was one. For kind-heartedness and
good-nature I never saw her equal."

Miss Fox-Seton had middle-class patrons as well as noble ones,--in fact, those of the middle
class were far more numerous than the duchesses,--so it had been possible for her to do more
than one good turn for the Cupp household. She had got sewing in Maida Vale and Bloomsbury
for Jane Cupp many a time, and Mrs. Cupp's dining-room floor had been occupied for years by
a young man Emily had been able to recommend. Her own appreciation of good turns made her eager
to do them for others. She never let slip a chance to help any one in any way.

It was a good-natured thing done by one of her patrons who liked her, which made her so radiant
as she walked through the mud this morning. She was inordinately fond of the country, and having
had what she called "a bad winter," she had not seen the remotest chance of getting out of
town at all during the summer months. The weather was beginning to be unusually hot, and her
small red room, which seemed so cosy in winter, was shut in by a high wall from all chance
of breezes. Occasionally she lay and panted a little in her cot, and felt that when all the
private omnibuses, loaded with trunks and servants, had rattled away and deposited their burdens
at the various stations, life in town would be rather lonely. Every one she knew would have
gone somewhere, and Mortimer Street in August was a melancholy thing.

And Lady Maria had actually invited her to Mallowe. What a piece of good fortune-what an extraordinary
piece of kindness!

She did not know what a source of entertainment she was to Lady Maria, and how the shrewd,
worldly old thing liked her. Lady Maria Bayne was the cleverest, sharpest-tongued, smartest
old woman in London. She knew everybody and had done everything in her youth, a good many things
not considered highly proper. A certain royal duke had been much pleased with her and people
had said some very nasty things about it. But this had not hurt Lady Maria. She knew how to
say nasty things herself, and as she said them wittily they were usually listened to and repeated.

Emily Fox-Seton had gone to her first to write notes for an hour every evening. She had sent,
declined, and accepted invitations, and put off charities and dull people. She wrote a fine,
dashing hand, and had a matter-of-fact intelligence and knowledge of things. Lady Maria began
to depend on her and to find that she could be sent on errands and depended on to do a number
of things. Consequently, she was often at South Audley Street, and once, when Lady Maria was
suddenly taken ill and was horribly frightened about herself, Emily was such a comfort to her
that she kept her for three weeks.

"The creature is so cheerful and perfectly free from vice that she's a relief," her ladyship
said to her nephew afterward. "So many women are affected cats. She'll go out and buy you a
box of pills or a porous plaster, but at the same time she has a kind of simplicity and freedom
from spites and envies which might be the natural thing for a princess."

So it happened that occasionally Emily put on her best dress and most carefully built hat and
went to South Audley Street to tea. (Sometimes she had previously gone in buses to some remote
place in the City to buy a special tea of which there had been rumours.) She met some very
smart people and rarely any stupid ones, Lady Maria being incased in a perfect, frank armour
of good-humoured selfishness, which would have been capable of burning dulness at the stake.

"I won't have dull people," she used to say. "I'm dull myself."

When Emily Fox-Seton went to her on the morning in which this story opens, she found her consulting
her visiting-book and making lists.

"I'm arranging my parties for Mallowe," she said rather crossly. "How tiresome it is! The people
one wants at the same time are always nailed to the opposite ends of the earth. And then things
are found out about people, and one can't have them till it's blown over. Those ridiculous
Dexters! They were the nicest possible pair--both of them good-looking and both of them ready
to flirt with anybody. But there was too much flirting, I suppose. Good heavens! if I couldn't
have a scandal and keep it quiet, I wouldn't have a scandal at all. Come and help me, Emily."

Emily sat down beside her.

"You see, it is my early August party," said her ladyship, rubbing her delicate little old
nose with her pencil, "and Walderhurst is coming to me. It always amuses me to have Walderhurst.
The moment a man like that comes into a room the women begin to frisk about and swim and languish,
except those who try to get up interesting conversations they think likely to attract his attention.
They all think it is possible that he may marry them. If he were a Mormon he might have marchionesses
of Walderhurst of all shapes and sizes."

"I suppose," said Emily, "that he was very much in love with his first wife and will never
marry again."

"He wasn't in love with her any more than he was in love with his housemaid. He knew he must
marry, and thought it very annoying. As the child died, I believe he thinks it his duty to
marry again. But he hates it. He's rather dull, and he can't bear women fussing about and wanting
to be made love to."

They went over the visiting-book and discussed people and dates seriously. The list was made
and the notes written before Emily left the house. It was not until she had got up and was
buttoning her coat that Lady Maria bestowed her boon.

"Emily," she said, "I am going to ask you to Mallowe on the 2d. I want you to help me to take
care of people and keep them from boring me and one another, though I don't mind their boring
one another half so much as I mind their boring me. I want to be able to go off and take my
nap at any hour I choose. I will not entertain people. What you can do is to lead them off
to gather things of look at church towers. I hope you'll come."

Emily Fox-Seton's face flushed rosily, and her eyes opened and sparkled.

"O Lady Maria, you are kind!" she said. "You know how I should enjoy it. I have heard so much
of Mallowe. Every one says it is so beautiful and that there are no such gardens in England."

"They are good gardens. My husband was rather mad about roses. The best train for you to take
is the 2:30 from Paddington. That will bring you to the Court just in time for tea on the lawn."

Emily could have kissed Lady Maria if they had been on the terms which lead people to make
demonstrations of affection. But she would have been quite as likely to kiss the butler when
he bent over her at dinner and murmured in dignified confidence, "Port or sherry, miss?" Bibsworth
would have been no more astonished than Lady Maria would, and Bibsworth certainly would have
expired of disgust and horror.

She was so happy when she hailed the twopenny bus that when she got into it her face was beaming
with the delight which adds freshness and good looks to any woman. To think that such good
luck had come to her! To think of leaving her hot little room behind her and going as a guest
to one of the most beautiful old houses in England! How delightful it would be to live for
a while quite naturally the life the fortunate people lived year after year--to be a part of
the beautiful order and picturesqueness and dignity of it! To sleep in a lovely bedroom, to
be called in the morning by a perfect housemaid, to have one's early tea served in a delicate
cup, and to listen as one drank it to the birds singing in the trees in the park! She had an
ingenuous appreciation of the simplest material joys, and the fact that she would wear her
nicest clothes every day, and dress for dinner every evening, was a delightful thing to reflect
upon. She got so much more out of life than most people, though she was not aware of it.

She opened the front door of the house in Mortimer Street with her latch-key, and went upstairs,
almost unconscious that the damp heat was dreadful. She met Jane Cupp coming down, and smiled
at her happily.

"Jane," she said, "if you are not busy, I should like to have a little talk with you. Will
you come into my room?"

"Yes, miss," Jane replied, with her usual respectful lady's maid's air. It was in truth Jane's
highest ambition to become some day maid to a great lady, and she privately felt that her association
with Miss Fox-Seton was the best possible training. She used to ask to be allowed to dress
her when she went out, and had felt it a privilege to be permitted to "do" her hair.

She helped Emily to remove her walking dress, and neatly folded away her gloves and veil. She
knelt down before her as soon as she saw her seat herself to take off her muddy boots.

"Oh, thank you, Jane," Emily exclaimed, with her kind italicised manner. "That is good of you.
I am tired, really. But such a nice thing has happened. I have had such a delightful invi-tation
for the first week in August."

"I'm sure you'll enjoy it, miss," said Jane. "It's so hot in August."

"Lady Maria Bayne has been kind enough to invite me to Mallowe Court," explained Emily, smiling
down at the cheap slipper Jane was putting on her large, well-shaped foot. She was built on
a large scale, and her foot was of no Cinderella-like proportions.

"O miss!" exclaimed Jane. "How beautiful! I was reading about Mallowe in 'Modern Society' the
other day, and it said it was lovely and her ladyship's parties were wonderful for smartness.
The paragraph was about the Marquis of Walderhurst."

"He is Lady Maria's cousin," said Emily, "and he will be there when I am."

She was a friendly creature, and lived a life so really isolated from any ordinary companionship
that her simple little talks with Jane and Mrs. Cupp were a pleasure to her. The Cupps were
neither gossiping nor intrusive, and she felt as if they were her friends. Once when she had
been ill for a week she remembered suddenly realising that she had no intimates at all, and
that if she died Mrs. Cupp's and Jane's would certainly be the last faces--and the only ones--she
would see. She had cried a little the night she thought of it, but then, as she told herself,
she was feverish and weak, and it made her morbid.

"It was because of this invitation that I wanted to talk to you, Jane," she went on. "You see,
we shall have to begin to contrive about dresses."

"Yes, indeed, miss. It's fortunate that the summer sales are on, isn't it? I saw some beautiful
colored linens yesterday. They were so cheap, and they do make up so smart for the country.
Then you've got your new Tussore with the blue collar and waistband. It does become you."

"I must say I think that a Tussore always looks fresh," said Emily, "and I saw a really nice
little tan toque--one of those soft straw ones--for three and eleven. And just a twist of blue
chiffon and a wing would make it look quite good."

She was very clever with her fingers, and often did excellent things with a bit of chiffon
and a wing, or a few yards of linen or muslin and a remnant of lace picked up at a sale. She
and Jane spent quite a happy afternoon in careful united contemplation of the resources of
her limited wardrobe. They found that the brown skirt could be altered, and, with the addition
of new revers and collar and a jabot of string-coloured lace at the neck, would look quite
fresh. A black net evening dress, which a patron had good-naturedly given her the year before,
could be remodelled and touched up delightfully. Her fresh face and her square white shoulders
were particularly adorned by black. There was a white dress which could be sent to the cleaner's,
and an old pink one whose superfluous breadths could be combined with lace and achieve wonders.

"Indeed, I think I shall be very well off for dinner-dresses," said Emily. "Nobody expects
me to change often. Every one knows--if they notice at all." She did not know she was humble-minded
and of an angelic contentedness of spirit. In fact, she did not find herself interested in
contemplation of her own qualities, but in contemplation and admiration of those of other people.
It was necessary to provide Emily Fox-Seton with food and lodging and such a wardrobe as would
be just sufficient credit to her more fortunate acquaintances. She worked hard to attain this
modest end and was quite satisfied. She found at the shops where the summer sales were being
held a couple of cotton frocks to which her height and her small, long waist gave an air of
actual elegance. A sailor hat, with a smart ribbon and well-set quill, a few new trifles for
her neck, a bow, a silk handkerchief daringly knotted, and some fresh gloves, made her feel
that she was sufficiently equipped.

During her last expedition to the sales she came upon a nice white duck coat and skirt which
she contrived to buy as a present for Jane. It was necessary to count over the contents of
her purse very carefully and to give up the purchase of a slim umbrella she wanted, but she
did it cheerfully. If she had been a rich woman she would have given presents to every one
she knew, and it was actually a luxury to her to be able to do something for the Cupps, who,
she always felt, were continually giving her more than she paid for. The care they took of
her small room, the fresh hot tea they managed to have ready when she came in, the penny bunch
of daffodils they sometimes put on her table, were kindnesses, and she was grateful for them.
"I am very much obliged to you, Jane," she said to the girl, when she got into the four-wheeled
cab on the eventful day of her journey to Mallowe. "I don't know what I should have done without
you, I'm sure. I feel so smart in my dress now that you have altered it. If Lady Maria's maid
ever thinks of leaving her, I am sure I could recommend you for her place."

Chapter Two

There were other visitors to Mallowe Court travelling by the 2:30 from Paddington, but they
were much smarter people than Miss Fox-Seton, and they were put into a first-class carriage
by a footman with a cockade and a long drab coat. Emily, who traveled third with some workmen
with bundles, looked out of her window as they passed, and might possibly have breathed a faint
sigh if she had not felt in such buoyant spirits. She had put on her revived brown skirt and
a white linen blouse with a brown dot on it. A soft brown silk tie was knotted smartly under
her fresh collar, and she wore her new sailor hat. Her gloves were brown, and so was her parasol.
She looked nice and taut and fresh, but notably inexpensive. The people who went to sales and
bought things at three and eleven or "four-three" a yard would have been able add her up and
work out her total. But there would be no people capable of the calculation at Mallowe. Even
the servants' hall was likely to know less of prices than this one guest did. The people the
drab-coated footman escorted to the first-class carriage were a mother and daughter. The mother
had regular little features, and would have been pretty if she had not been much too plump.
She wore an extremely smart travelling-dress and a wonderful dust-cloak of cool, pale, thin
silk. She was not an elegant person, but her appointments were luxurious and self-indulgent.
Her daughter was pretty, and had a slim, swaying waist, soft pink cheeks, and a pouting mouth.
Her large picture-hat of pale-blue straw, with its big gauze bow and crushed roses, had a slightly
exaggerated Parisian air.

"It is a little too picturesque," Emily thought; "but how lovely she looks in it! I suppose
it was so becoming she could not help buying it. I'm sure it's Virot."

As she was looking at the girl admiringly, a man passed her window. He was a tall man with
a square face. As he passed close to Emily, he stared through her head as if she had been transparent
or invisible. He got into the smoking-carriage next to her.

When the train arrived at Mallowe station, he was one of the first persons who got out. Two
of Lady Maria's men were waiting on the platform. Emily recognised their liveries. One met
the tall man, touching his hat, and followed him to a high cart, in the shafts of which a splendid
iron-gray mare was fretting and dancing. In a few moments the arrival was on the high seat,
the footman behind, and the mare speeding up the road. Miss Fox-Seton found herself following
the second footman and the mother and daughter, who were being taken to the landau waiting
outside the station. The footman piloted them, merely touching his hat quickly to Emily, being
fully aware that she could take care of herself.

This she did promptly, looking after her box, and seeing it safe in the Mallowe omnibus. When
she reached the landau, the two other visitors were in it. She got in, and in entire contentment
sat down with her back to the horses.

The mother and daughter wore for a few minutes a somewhat uneasy air. They were evidently sociable
persons, but were not quite sure how to begin a conversation with an as yet unintroduced lady
who was going to stay at the country house to which they were themselves invited.

Emily herself solved the problem, producing her commonplace with a friendly tentative smile.

"Isn't it a lovely country?" she said.

"It's perfect," answered the mother. "I've never visited Europe before, and the English country
seems to me just exquisite. We have a summer place in America, but the country is quite different."

She was good-natured and disposed to talk, and, with Emily Fox-Seton's genial assistance, conversation
flowed. Before they were half-way to Mallowe, it had revealed itself that they were from Cincinnati,
and after a winter spent in Paris, largely devoted to visits to Paquin, Doucet, and Virot,
they had taken a house in Mayfair for the season. Their name was Brooke. Emily thought she
remembered hearing of them as people who spent a great deal of money and went incessantly to
parties, always in new and lovely clothes. The girl had been presented by the American minister,
and had had a sort of success because she dressed and danced exquisitely. She was the kind
of American girl who ended by marrying a title. She had sparkling eyes and a delicate tip-tilted
nose. But even Emily guessed that she was an astute little person.

"Have you ever been to Mallowe Court before?" she inquired.

"No; and I am so looking forward to it. It is so beautiful."

"Do you know Lady Maria very well?"

"I've known her about three years. She has been very kind to me."

"Well, I shouldn't have taken her for a particularly kind person. She's too sharp."

Emily amiably smiled. "She's so clever," she replied.

"Do you know the Marquis of Walderhurst?" asked Mrs. Brooke.

"No," answered Miss Fox-Seton. She had no part in that portion of Lady Maria's life which was
illumined by cousins who were marquises. Lord Walderhurst did not drop in to afternoon tea.
He kept himself for special dinner-parties.

"Did you see the man who drove away in the high cart?" Mrs. Brooke continued, with a touch
of fevered interest. "Cora thought it must be the marquis. The servant who met him wore the
same livery as the man up there"--with a nod toward the box.

"It was one of Lady Maria's servants," said Emily; "I have seen him in South Audley Street.
And Lord Walderhurst was to be at Mallowe. Lady Maria mentioned it."

"There, mother!" exclaimed Cora.

"Well, of course if he is to be there, it will make it interesting," returned her mother, in
a tone in which lurked an admission of relief. Emily wondered if she had wanted to go somewhere
else and had been firmly directed toward Mallowe by her daughter.

"We heard a great deal of him in London this season," Mrs. Brooks went on.

Miss Cora Brooke laughed.

"We heard that at least half a dozen people were determined to marry him," she remarked with
pretty scorn. "I should think that to meet a girl who was indifferent might be good for him."

"Don't be too indifferent, Cora," said her mother, with ingenuous ineptness.

It was a very stupid bit of revelation, and Miss Brooke's eyes flashed. If Emily Fox-Seton
had been a sharp woman, she would have observed that, if the rôle of indifferent and piquant
young person could be made dangerous to Lord Walderhurst, it would be made so during this visit.
The man was in peril from this beauty from Cincinnati and her rather indiscreet mother, though
upon the whole, the indiscreet maternal parent might unconsciously form his protection.

But Emily only laughed amiably, as at a humorous remark. She was ready to accept almost anything
as humour.

"Well, he would be a great match for any girl," she said. "He is so rich, you know. He is very
rich."

When they reached Mallowe, and were led out upon the lawn, where the tea was being served under
embowering trees, they found a group of guests eating little hot cakes and holding teacups
in their hands. There were several young women, and one of them--a very tall, very fair girl,
with large eyes as blue as forget-me-nots, and with a lovely, limp, and long blue frock of
the same shade--had been one of the beauties of the past season. She was a Lady Agatha Slade,
and Emily began to admire her at once. She felt her to be a sort of added boon bestowed by
kind Fate upon herself. It was so delightful that she should be of this particular house-party--this
lovely creature, whom she had only known previously through pictures in ladies' illustrated
papers. If it should occur to her to wish to become the Marchioness of Walderhurst, what could
possibly prevent the consummation of her desire? Surely not Lord Walderhurst himself, if he
was human. She was standing, leaning lightly against the trunk of an ilex-tree, and a snow-white
Borzoi was standing close to her, resting his long, delicate head against her gown, encouraging
the caresses of her fair, stroking hand. She was in this attractive pose when Lady Maria turned
in her seat and said:

"There's Walderhurst."

The man who had driven himself over from the station in the cart was coming towards them across
the grass. He was past middle life and plain, but was of good height and had an air. It was
perhaps, on the whole, rather an air of knowing what he wanted.

Emily Fox-Seton, who by that time was comfortably seated in a cushioned basket-chair, sipping
her own cup of tea, gave him the benefit of the doubt when she wondered if he was not really
distinguished and aristocratic-looking. He was really neither, but was well-built and well-dressed,
and had good grayish-brown eyes, about the colour of his grayish-brown hair. Among these amiably
worldly people, who were not in the least moved by an altruistic prompting, Emily's greatest
capital consisted in the fact that she did not expect to be taken the least notice of. She
was not aware that it was her capital, because the fact was so wholly a part of the simple
contentedness of her nature that she had not thought about it at all. The truth was that she
found all her entertainment and occupation in being an audience or a spectator. It did not
occur to her to notice that, when the guests were presented to him, Lord Walderhurst barely
glanced at her surface as he bowed, and could scarcely be said to forget her existence the
next second, because he had hardly gone to the length of recognising it. As she enjoyed her
extremely nice cup of tea and little buttered scone, she also enjoyed looking at his Lordship
discreetly, and trying to make an innocent summing up of his mental attitudes.

Lady Maria seemed to like him and to be pleased to see him. He himself seemed, in an undemonstrative
way, to like Lady Maria. He also was evidently glad to get his tea, and enjoyed it as he sat
at his cousin's side. He did not pay very much attention to any one else. Emily was slightly
disappointed to see that he did not glance at the beauty and the Borzoi more than twice, and
then that his examination seemed as much for the Borzoi as for the beauty. She could not help
also observing that since he had joined the circle it had become more animated, so far at least
as the female members were concerned. She could not help remembering Lady Maria's remark about
the effect he produced on women when he entered a room. Several interesting or sparkling speeches
had already been made. There was a little more laughter and chattiness, which somehow it seemed
to be quite open to Lord Walderhurst to enjoy, though it was not exactly addressed to him.
Miss Cora Brooke, however, devoted herself to a young man in white flannels with an air of
tennis about him. She sat a little apart and talked to him in a voice soft enough to even exclude
Lord Walderhurst. Presently she and her companion got up and sauntered away. They went down
the broad flight of ancient stone steps which led to the tennis-court, lying in full view below
the lawn. There they began to play tennis. Miss Brooke skimmed and darted about like a swallow.
The swirl of her lace petticoats was most attractive.

"That girl ought not to play tennis in shoes with ridiculous heels," remarked Lord Walderhurst.
"She will spoil the court."

Lady Maria broke into a little chuckle.

"She wanted to play at this particular moment," she said. "And as she has only just arrived,
it did not occur to her to come out to tea in tennis-shoes."

"She'll spoil the court all the same," said the marquis. "What clothes! It's amazing how girls
dress now."

"I wish I had such clothes," answered Lady Maria, and she chuckled again. "She's got beautiful
feet."

"She's got Louis Quinze heels," returned his Lordship.

At all events, Emily Fox-Seton thought Miss Brooke seemed to intend to rather keep out of his
way and to practise no delicate allurements. When her tennis-playing was at an end, she sauntered
about the lawn and terraces with her companion, tilting her parasol prettily over her shoulder,
so that it formed an entrancing background to her face and head. She seemed to be entertaining
the young man. His big laugh and the silver music of her own lighter merriment rang out a little
tantalisingly.

"I wonder what Cora is saying," said Mrs. Brooke to the group at large. "She always makes men
laugh so."

Emily Fox-Seton felt an interest herself, the merriment sounded so attractive. She wondered
if perhaps to a man who had been so much run after a girl who took no notice of his presence
and amused other men so much might not assume an agreeable aspect.

But he took more notice of Lady Agatha Slade than of any one else that evening. She was placed
next to him at dinner, and she really was radiant to look upon in palest green chiffon. She
had an exquisite little head, with soft hair piled with wondrous lightness upon it, and her
long little neck swayed like the stem of a flower. She was lovely enough to arouse in the beholder's
mind the anticipation of her being silly, but she was not silly at all.

Lady Maria commented upon that fact to Miss Fox-Seton when they met in her bedroom late that
night. Lady Maria liked to talk and be talked to for half an hour after the day was over, and
Emily Fox-Seton's admiring interest in all she said she found at once stimulating and soothing.
Her Ladyship was an old woman who indulged and inspired herself with an Epicurean wisdom. Though
she would not have stupid people about her, she did not always want very clever ones.

"They give me too much exercise," she said. "The epigrammatic ones keep me always jumping over
fences. Besides, I like to make all the epigrams myself."

Emily Fox-Seton struck a happy mean, and she was a genuine admirer. She was intelligent enough
not to spoil the point of an epigram when she repeated it, and she might be relied upon to
repeat it and give all the glory to its originator. Lady Maria knew there were people who,
hearing your good things, appropriated them without a scruple. To-night she said a number of
good things to Emily in summing up her guests and their characteristics.

"Walderhurst has been to me three times when I made sure that he would not escape without a
new marchioness attached to him. I should think he would take one to put an end to the annoyance
of dangling unplucked upon the bough. A man in his position, if he has character enough to
choose, can prevent even his wife's being a nuisance. He can give her a good house, hang the
family diamonds on her, supply a decent elderly woman as a sort of lady-in-waiting and turn
her into the paddock to kick up her heels within the limits of decorum. His own rooms can be
sacred to him. He has his clubs and his personal interests. Husbands and wives annoy each other
very little in these days. Married life has become comparatively decent."

"I should think his wife might be very happy," commented Emily. "He looks very kind."

"I don't know whether he is kind or not. It has never been necessary for me to borrow money
from him."

Lady Maria was capable of saying odd things in her refined little drawling voice.

"He's more respectable than most men of his age. The diamonds are magnificent, and he not only
has three superb places, but has money enough to keep them up. Now, there are three aspirants
at Mallowe in the present party. Of course you can guess who they are, Emily?"

Emily Fox-Seton almost blushed. She felt a little indelicate.

"Lady Agatha would be very suitable," she said. "And Mrs. Ralph is very clever, of course.
And Miss Brooke is really pretty."

Lady Maria gave vent to her small chuckle.

"Mrs. Ralph is the kind of woman who means business. She'll corner Walderhurst and talk literature
and roll her eyes at him until he hates her. These writing women, who are intensely pleased
with themselves, if they have some good looks into the bargain, believe themselves capable
of marrying any one. Mrs. Ralph has fine eyes and rolls them. Walderhurst won't be ogled. The
Brooke girl is sharper than Ralph. She was very sharp this afternoon. She began at once."

"I--I didn't see her"--wondering.

"Yes, you did; but you didn't understand. The tennis, and the laughing with young Heriot on
the terrace! She is going to be the piquant young woman who aggravates by indifference, and
disdains rank and splendour; the kind of girl who has her innings in novelettes--but not out
of them. The successful women are those who know how to toady in the right way and not obviously.
Walderhurst has far too good an opinion of himself to be attracted by a girl who is making
up to another man: he's not five-and-twenty."

Emily Fox-Seton was reminded, in spite of herself, of Mrs. Brooke's plaint: "Don't be too indifferent,
Cora." She did not want to recall it exactly, because she thought the Brookes agreeable and
would have preferred to think them disinterested. But, after all, she reflected, how natural
that a girl who was so pretty should feel that the Marquis of Walderhurst represented prospects.
Chiefly, however, she was filled with admiration at Lady Maria's cleverness.

"How wonderfully you observe everything, Lady Maria!" she exclaimed. "How wonderfully!"

"I have had forty-seven seasons in London. That's a good many, you know. Forty-seven seasons
of débutantes and mothers tend toward enlightenment. Now there is Agatha Slade, poor girl!
She's of a kind I know by heart. With birth and beauty, she is perfectly helpless. Her people
are poor enough to be entitled to aid from the Charity Organisation, and they have had the
indecency to present themselves with six daughters--six! All with delicate skins and delicate
little noses and heavenly eyes. Most men can't afford them, and they can't afford most men.
As soon as Agatha begins to go off a little, she will have to step aside, if she has not married.
The others must be allowed their chance. Agatha has had the advertising of the illustrated
papers this season, and she has gone well. In these days a new beauty is advertised like a
new soap. They haven't given them sandwich-men in the streets, but that is about all that has
been denied them. But Agatha has not had any special offer, and I know both she and her mother
are a little frightened. Alix must come out next season, and they can't afford frocks for two.
Agatha will have to be sent to their place in Ireland, and to be sent to Castle Clare is almost
like being sent to the Bastille. She'll never get out alive. She'll have to stay there and
see herself grow thin instead of slim, and colourless instead of fair. Her little nose will
grow sharp, and she will lose her hair by degrees."

"Oh!" Emily Fox-Seton gave forth sympathetically. "What a pity that would be! I thought--I
really thought--Lord Walderhurst seemed to admire her."

"Oh, every one admires her, for that matter; but if they go no further that will not save her
from the Bastille, poor thing. There, Emily; we must go to bed. We have talked enough."

Chapter Three

To awaken in a still, delicious room, with the summer morning sunshine breaking softly into
it through leafy greenness, was a delightful thing to Miss Fox-Seton, who was accustomed to
opening her eyes upon four walls covered with cheap paper, to the sound of outside hammerings,
and the rattle and heavy roll of wheels. In a building at the back of her bed-sitting-room
there lived a man whose occupation, beginning early in the morning, involved banging of a persistent
nature.

She awakened to her first day at Mallowe, stretching herself luxuriously, with the smile of
a child. She was so thankful for the softness of her lavender-fragrant bed, and so delighted
with the lovely freshness of her chintz-hung room. As she lay upon her pillow, she could see
the boughs of the trees, and hear the chatter of darting starlings. When her morning tea was
brought, it seemed like nectar to her. She was a perfectly healthy woman, with a palate as
unspoiled as that of a six-year-old child in the nursery. Her enjoyment of all things was so
normal as to be in her day and time an absolute abnormality.

She rose and dressed at once, eager for the open air and sunshine. She was out upon the lawn
before any one else but the Borzoi, which rose from beneath a tree and came with stately walk
toward her. The air was exquisite, the broad, beautiful stretch of view lay warm in the sun,
the masses of flowers on the herbaceous borders showed leaves and flower-cups adorned with
glittering drops of dew. She walked across the spacious sweep of short-cropped sod, and gazed
enraptured at the country spread out below. She could have kissed the soft white sheep dotting
the fields and lying in gentle, huddled groups under the trees.

"The darlings!" she said, in a little, effusive outburst.

She talked to the dog and fondled him. He seemed to understand her mood, and pressed close
against her gown when she stopped. They walked together about the gardens, and presently picked
up an exuberant retriever, which bounded and wriggled and at once settled into a steady trot
beside them. Emily adored the flowers as she walked by their beds, and at intervals stopped
to bury her face in bunches of spicy things. She was so happy that the joy in her hazel eyes
was pathetic.

She was startled, as she turned into a rather narrow rose-walk, to see Lord Walderhurst coming
toward her. He looked exceedingly clean in his fresh light knickerbocker suit, which was rather
becoming to him. A gardener was walking behind, evidently gathering roses for him, which he
put into a shallow basket. Emily Fox-Seton cast about for a suitable remark to make, if he
should chance to stop to speak to her. She consoled herself with the thought that there were
things she really wanted to say about the beauty of the gardens, and certain clumps of heavenly-blue
campanulas, which seemed made a feature of in the herbaceous borders. It was so much nicer
not to be obliged to invent observations. But his lordship did not stop to speak to her. He
was interested in his roses (which, she heard afterward, were to be sent to town to an invalid
friend), and as she drew near, he turned aside to speak to the gardener. As Emily was just
passing him when he turned again, and as the passage was narrow, he found himself unexpectedly
gazing into her face.

Being nearly the same height, they were so near each other that it was a little awkward.

"I beg pardon," he said, stepping back a pace and lifting his straw hat.

But he did not say, "I beg pardon, Miss Fox-Seton," and Emily knew that he had not recognised
her again, and had not the remotest idea who she was or where she came from.

She passed him with her agreeable, friendly smile, and there returned to her mind Lady Maria's
remarks of the night before.

"To think that if he married poor pretty Lady Agatha she will be mistress of three places quite
as beautiful as Mallowe, three lovely old houses, three sets of gardens, with thousands of
flowers to bloom every year! How nice it would be for her! She is so lovely that it seems as
if he must fall in love with her. Then, if she was Marchioness of Walderhurst, she could do
so much for her sisters."

After breakfast she spent her morning in doing a hundred things for Lady Maria. She wrote notes
for her, and helped her to arrange plans for the entertainment of her visitors. She was very
busy and happy. In the afternoon she drove across the moor to Maundell, a village on the other
side of it. She really went on an errand for her hostess, but as she was fond of driving and
the brown cob was a beauty, she felt that she was being given a treat on a level with the rest
of her ladyship's generous hospitalities. She drove well, and her straight, strong figure showed
to much advantage on the high seat of the cart. Lord Walderhurst himself commented on her as
he saw her drive away.

"She has a nice, flat, straight back, that woman," he remarked to Lady Maria. "What is her
name? One never hears people's names when one is introduced."

"Her name is Emily Fox-Seton," her ladyship answered, "and she's a nice creature."

"That would be an inhuman thing to say to most men, but if one is a thoroughly selfish being,
and has some knowledge of one's own character, one sees that a nice creature might be a nice
companion."

"You are quite right," was Lady Maria's reply, as she held up her lorgnette and watched the
cart spin down the avenue. "I am selfish myself, and I realise that is the reason why Emily
Fox-Seton is becoming the lodestar of my existence. There is such comfort in being pandered
to by a person who is not even aware that she is pandering. She doesn't suspect that she is
entitled to thanks for it."

That evening Mrs. Ralph came shining to dinner in amber satin, which seemed to possess some
quality of stimulating her to brilliance. She was witty enough to collect an audience, and
Lord Walderhurst was drawn within it. This was Mrs. Ralph's evening. When the men returned
to the drawing-room, she secured his lordship at once and managed to keep him. She was a woman
who could talk pretty well, and perhaps Lord Walderhurst was amused. Emily Fox-Seton was not
quite sure that he was, but at least he listened. Lady Agatha Slade looked a little listless
and pale. Lovely as she was, she did not always collect an audience, and this evening she said
she had a headache. She actually crossed the room, and taking a seat by Miss Emily Fox-Seton,
began to talk to her about Lady Maria's charity-knitting which she had taken up. Emily was
so gratified that she found conversation easy. She did not realise that at that particular
moment she was a most agreeable and comforting companion for Agatha Slade. She had heard so
much of her beauty during the season, and remembered so many little things that a girl who
was a thought depressed might like to hear referred to again. Sometimes to Agatha the balls
where people had collected in groups to watch her dancing, the flattering speeches she had
heard, the dazzling hopes which had been raised, seemed a little unreal, as if, after all,
they could have been only dreams. This was particularly so, of course, when life had dulled
for a while and the atmosphere of unpaid bills became heavy at home. It was so to-day, because
the girl had received a long, anxious letter from her mother, in which much was said of the
importance of an early preparation for the presentation of Alix, who had really been kept back
a year, and was in fact nearer twenty than nineteen.

"If we were not in Debrett and Burke, one might be reserved about such matters," poor Lady
Claraway wrote; "but what is one to do when all the world can buy one's daughters' ages at
the book-sellers'?"

Miss Fox-Seton had seen Lady Agatha's portrait at the Academy and the way in which people had
crowded about it. She had chanced to hear comments also, and she agreed with a number of persons
who had not thought the picture did the original justice.

"Sir Bruce Norman was standing by me with an elderly lady the first time I saw it," she said,
as she turned a new row of the big white-wool scarf her hostess was knitting for a Deep-Sea
Fisherman's Charity. "He really looked quite annoyed. I heard him say: 'It is not good at all.
She is far, far lovelier. Her eyes are like blue flowers.' The moment I saw you, I found myself
looking at your eyes. I hope I didn't seem rude."

Lady Agatha smiled. She had flushed delicately, and took up in her slim hand a skein of the
white wool.

"There are some people who are never rude," she sweetly said, "and you are one of them, I am
sure. That knitting looks nice. I wonder if I could make a comforter for a deep-sea fisherman."

"If it would amuse you to try," Emily answered, "I will begin one for you. Lady Maria has several
pairs of wooden needles. Shall I?"

"Do, please. How kind of you!"

In a pause of her conversation, Mrs. Ralph, a little later, looked across the room at Emily
Fox-Seton bending over Lady Agatha and the knitting, as she gave her instructions.

"What a good-natured creature that is!" she said.

Lord Walderhurst lifted his monocle and inserted it in his unillumined eye. He also looked
across the room. Emily wore the black evening dress which gave such opportunities to her square
white shoulders and firm column of throat; the country air and sun had deepened the colour
on her cheek, and the light of the nearest lamp fell kindly on the big twist of her nut-brown
hair, and burnished it. She looked soft and warm, and so generously interested in her pupil's
progress that she was rather sweet.

Lord Walderhurst simply looked at her. He was a man of but few words. Women who were sprightly
found him somewhat unresponsive. In fact, he was aware that a man in his position need not
exert himself. The women themselves would talk. They wanted to talk because they wanted him
to hear them.

Mrs. Ralph talked.

"She is the most primeval person I know. She accepts her fate without a trace of resentment;
she simply accepts it."

"What is her fate?" asked Lord Walderhurst, still gazing in his unbiassed manner through his
monocle, and not turning his head as he spoke.

"It is her fate to be a woman who is perfectly well born, and who is as penniless as a charwoman,
and works like one. She is at the beck and call of any one who will give her an odd job to
earn a meal with. That is one of the new ways women have found of making a living."

"Good skin," remarked Lord Walderhurst, irrelevantly. "Good hair--quite a lot."

"She has some of the nicest blood in England in her veins, and she engaged my last cook for
me," said Mrs. Ralph.

"Hope she was a good cook."

"Very. Emily Fox-Seton has a faculty of finding decent people. I believe it is because she
is so decent herself"--with a little laugh.

"Looks quite decent," commented Walderhurst. The knitting was getting on famously.

"It was odd you should see Sir Bruce Norman that day," Agatha Slade was saying. "It must have
been just before he was called away to India."

"It was. He sailed the next day. I happen to know, because some friends of mine met me only
a few yards from your picture and began to talk about him. I had not known before that he was
so rich. I had not heard about his collieries in Lancashire. Oh!"--opening her big eyes in
heart-felt yearning,--"how I wish I owned a colliery! It must be so nice to be rich!"

"I never was rich," answered Lady Agatha, with a bitter little sigh. "I know it is hideous
to be poor."

"I never was rich," said Emily, "and I never shall be. You"--a little shyly--"are so different."

Lady Agatha flushed delicately again.

Emily Fox-Seton made a gentle joke. "You have eyes like blue flowers," she said. Lady Agatha
lifted the eyes like blue flowers, and they were pathetic.

"Oh!" she gave forth almost impetuously, "sometimes it seems as if it does not matter whether
one has eyes or not."

It was a pleasure to Emily Fox-Seton to realise that after this the beauty seemed to be rather
drawn toward her. Their acquaintance became almost a sort of intimacy over the wool scarf for
the deep-sea fisherman, which was taken up and laid down, and even carried out on the lawn
and left under the trees for the footmen to restore when they brought in the rugs and cushions.
Lady Maria was amusing herself with the making of knitted scarfs and helmets just now, and
bits of white or gray knitting were the fashion at Mallowe. Once Agatha brought hers to Emily's
room in the afternoon to ask that a dropped stitch might be taken up, and this established
a sort of precedent. Afterward they began to exchange visits.

The strenuousness of things was becoming, in fact, almost too much for Lady Agatha. Most unpleasant
things were happening at home, and occasionally Castle Clare loomed up grayly in the distance
like a spectre. Certain tradespeople who ought, in Lady Claraway's opinion, to have kept quiet
and waited in patience until things became better, were becoming hideously persistent. In view
of the fact that Alix's next season must be provided for, it was most awkward. A girl could
not be presented and properly launched in the world, in a way which would give her a proper
chance, without expenditure. To the Claraways expenditure meant credit, and there were blots
as of tears on the letters in which Lady Claraway reiterated that the tradespeople were behaving
horribly. Sometimes, she said once in desperation, things looked as if they would all be obliged
to shut themselves up in Castle Clare to retrench; and then what was to become of Alix and
her season? And there were Millicent and Hilda and Eve.

More than once there was the mist of tears in the flower-blue eyes when Lady Agatha came to
talk. Confidence between two women establishes itself through processes at once subtle and
simple. Emily Fox-Seton could not have told when she first began to know that the beauty was
troubled and distressed; Lady Agatha did not know when she first slipped into making little
frank speeches about herself; but these things came about. Agatha found something like comfort
in her acquaintance with the big, normal, artless creature--something which actually raised
her spirits when she was depressed. Emily Fox-Seton paid constant kindly tribute to her charms,
and helped her to believe in them. When she was with her, Agatha always felt that she really
was lovely, after all, and that loveliness was a great capital. Emily admired and revered it
so, and evidently never dreamed of doubting its omnipotence. She used to talk as if any girl
who was a beauty was a potential duchess. In fact, this was a thing she quite ingenuously believed.
She had not lived in a world where marriage was a thing of romance, and, for that matter, neither
had Agatha. It was nice if a girl liked the man who married her, but if he was a well-behaved,
agreeable person, of good means, it was natural that she would end by liking him sufficiently;
and to be provided for comfortably or luxuriously for life, and not left upon one's own hands
or one's parents', was a thing to be thankful for in any case. It was such a relief to everybody
to know that a girl was "settled," and especially it was such a relief to the girl herself.
Even novels and plays were no longer fairy-stories of entrancing young men and captivating
young women who fell in love with each other in the first chapter, and after increasingly picturesque
incidents were married in the last one in the absolute surety of being blissfully happy forevermore.
Neither Lady Agatha nor Emily had been brought up on this order of literature, nor in an atmosphere
in which it was accepted without reservation.

They had both had hard lives, and knew what lay before them. Agatha knew she must make a marriage
or fade out of existence in prosaic and narrowed dulness. Emily knew that there was no prospect
for her of desirable marriage at all. She was too poor, too entirely unsupported by social
surroundings, and not sufficiently radiant to catch the roving eye. To be able to maintain
herself decently, to be given an occasional treat by her more fortunate friends, and to be
allowed by fortune to present to the face of the world the appearance of a woman who was not
a pauper, was all she could expect. But she felt that Lady Agatha had the right to more. She
did not reason the matter out and ask herself why she had the right to more, but she accepted
the proposition as a fact. She was ingenuously interested in her fate, and affectionately sympathetic.
She used to look at Lord Walderhurst quite anxiously at times when he was talking to the girl.
An anxious mother could scarcely have regarded him with a greater desire to analyse his sentiments.
The match would be such a fitting one. He would make such an excellent husband--and there were
three places, and the diamonds were magnificent. Lady Maria had described to her a certain
tiara which she frequently pictured to herself as glittering above Agatha's exquisite low brow.
It would be infinitely more becoming to her than to Miss Brooke or Mrs. Ralph, though either
of them would have worn it with spirit. She could not help feeling that both Mrs. Ralph's brilliancy
and Miss Brooke's insouciant prettiness were not unworthy of being counted in the running,
but Lady Agatha seemed somehow so much more completely the thing wanted. She was anxious that
she should always look her best, and when she knew that disturbing letters were fretting her,
and saw that they made her look pale and less luminous, she tried to raise her spirits.

"Suppose we take a brisk walk," she would say, "and then you might try a little nap. You look
a little tired."

"Oh," said Agatha one day, "how kind you are to me! I believe you actually care about my complexion--about
my looking well."

"Lord Walderhurst said to me the other day," was Emily's angelically tactful answer, "that
you were the only woman he had ever seen who always looked lovely."

"Did he?" exclaimed Lady Agatha, and flushed sweetly. "Once Sir Bruce Norman actually said
that to me. I told him it was the nicest thing that could be said to a woman. It is all the
nicer"--with a sigh--"because it isn't really true."

"I am sure Lord Walderhurst believed it true," Emily said. "He is not a man who talks, you
know. He is very serious and dignified." She had herself a reverence and admiration for Lord
Walderhurst bordering on tender awe. He was indeed a well-mannered person, of whom painful
things were not said. He also conducted himself well toward his tenantry, and was patron of
several notable charities. To the unexacting and innocently respectful mind of Emily Fox-Seton
this was at once impressive and attractive. She knew, though not intimately, many noble personages
quite unlike him. She was rather early Victorian and touchingly respectable.

"I have been crying," confessed Lady Agatha.

"I was afraid so, Lady Agatha," said Emily.

"Things are getting hopeless in Curzon Street. I had a letter from Millicent this morning.
She is next in age to Alix, and she says--oh, a number of things. When girls see everything
passing by them, it makes them irritable. Millicent is seventeen, and she is too lovely. Her
hair is like a red-gold cloak, and her eyelashes are twice as long as mine." She sighed again,
and her lips, which were like curved rose-petals, unconcealedly quivered. "They were all so
cross about Sir Bruce Norman going to India," she added.

"He will come back," said Emily, benignly; "but he may be too late. Has he"--ingenuously--"seen
Alix?"

Agatha flushed oddly this time. Her delicate skin registered every emotion exquisitely. "He
has seen her, but she was in the school-room, and--I don't think--"

She did not finish, but stopped uneasily, and sat and gazed out of the open window into the
park. She did not look happy.

The episode of Sir Bruce Norman was brief and even vague. It had begun well. Sir Bruce had
met the beauty at a ball, and they had danced together more than once. Sir Bruce had attractions
other than his old baronetcy and his coal-mines. He was a good-looking person, with a laughing
brown eye and a nice wit. He had danced charmingly and paid gay compliments. He would have
done immensely well. Agatha had liked him. Emily sometimes thought she had liked him very much.
Her mother had liked him and had thought he was attracted. But after a number of occasions
of agreeable meetings, they had encountered each other on the lawn at Goodwood, and he had
announced that he was going to India. Forthwith he had gone, and Emily had gathered that somehow
Lady Agatha had been considered somewhat to blame. Her people were not vulgar enough to express
this frankly, but she had felt it. Her younger sisters had, upon the whole, made her feel it
most. It had been borne in upon her that if Alix, or Millicent with the red-gold cloak, or
even Eve, who was a gipsy, had been given such a season and such Doucet frocks, they would
have combined them with their wonderful complexions and lovely little chins and noses in such
a manner as would at least have prevented desirable acquaintances from feeling free to take
P. and O. steamers to Bombay.

In her letter of this morning, Millicent's temper had indeed got somewhat the better of her
taste and breeding, and lovely Agatha had cried large tears. So it was comforting to be told
that Lord Walderhurst had said such an extremely amiable thing. If he was not young, he was
really very nice, and there were exalted persons who absolutely had rather a fad for him. It
would be exceptionally brilliant.

The brisk walk was taken, and Lady Agatha returned from it blooming. She was adorable at dinner,
and in the evening gathered an actual court about her. She was all in pink, and a wreath of
little pink wild roses lay close about her head, making her, with her tall young slimness,
look like a Botticelli nymph. Emily saw that Lord Walderhurst looked at her a great deal. He
sat on an extraordinarily comfortable corner seat, and stared through his monocle.

Lady Maria always gave her Emily plenty to do. She had a nice taste in floral arrangement,
and early in her visit it had fallen into her hands as a duty to "do" the flowers.

The next morning she was in the gardens early, gathering roses with the dew on them, and was
in the act of cutting some adorable "Mrs. Sharman Crawfords," when she found it behoved her
to let down her carefully tucked up petticoats, as the Marquis of Walderhurst was walking straight
toward her. An instinct told her that he wanted to talk to her about Lady Agatha Slade.

"You get up earlier than Lady Agatha," he remarked, after he had wished her "Good-morning."

"She is oftener invited to the country than I am," she answered. "When I have a country holiday,
I want to spend every moment of it out of doors. And the mornings are so lovely. They are not
like this in Mortimer Street."

"Do you live in Mortimer Street?"

"Yes."

"Do you like it?"

"I am very comfortable. I am fortunate in having a nice landlady. She and her daughter are
very kind to me."

The morning was indeed heavenly. The masses of flowers were drenched with dew, and the already
hot sun was drawing fragrance from them and filling the warm air with it. The marquis, with
hia monocle fixed, looked up into the cobalt-blue sky and among the trees, where a wood-dove
or two cooed with musical softness.

"Yes," he observed, with a glance which swept the scene, "it is different from Mortimer Street,
I suppose. Are you fond of the country?"

"Oh, yes," sighed Emily; "oh, yes!"

She was not a specially articulate person. She could not have conveyed in words all that her
"Oh, yes!" really meant of simple love for and joy in rural sights and sounds and scents. But
when she lifted her big kind hazel eyes to him, the earnestness of her emotion made them pathetic,
as the unspeakableness of her pleasures often did.

Lord Walderhurst gazed at her through the monocle with an air he sometimes had of taking her
measure without either unkindliness or particular interest.

"Is Lady Agatha fond of the country?" he inquired.

"She is fond of everything that is beautiful," she replied. "Her nature is as lovely as her
face, I think."

"Is it?"

Emily walked a step or two away to a rose climbing up the gray-red wall, and began to clip
off blossoms, which tumbled sweetly into her basket.

"She seems lovely in everything," she said, "in disposition and manner and--everything. She
never seems to disappoint one or make mistakes."

"You are fond of her?"

"She has been so kind to me."

"You often say people are kind to you."

Emily paused and felt a trifle confused. Realising that she was not a clever person, and being
a modest one, she began to wonder if she was given to a parrot-phrase which made her tiresome.
She blushed up to her ears.

"People are kind," she said hesitatingly. "I--you see, I have nothing to give, and I always
seem to be receiving."

"What luck!" remarked his lordship, calmly gazing at her.

He made her feel rather awkward, and she was at once relieved and sorry when he walked away
to join another early riser who had come out upon the lawn. For some mysterious reason Emily
Fox-Seton liked him. Perhaps his magnificence and the constant talk she had heard of him had
warmed her imagination. He had never said anything particularly intelligent to her, but she
felt as if he had. He was a rather silent man, but never looked stupid. He had made some good
speeches in the House of Lords, not brilliant, but sound and of a dignified respectability.
He had also written two pamphlets. Emily had an enormous respect for intellect, and frequently,
it must be admitted, for the thing which passed for it. She was not exacting.

During her stay at Mallowe in the summer, Lady Maria always gave a village treat. She had given
it for forty years, and it was a lively function. Several hundred wildly joyous village children
were fed to repletion with exhilarating buns and cake, and tea in mugs, after which they ran
races for prizes, and were entertained in various ways, with the aid of such of the house-party
as were benevolently inclined to make themselves useful.

Everybody was not so inclined, though people always thought the thing amusing. Nobody objected
to looking on, and some were agreeably stimulated by the general sense of festivity. But Emily
Fox-Seton was found by Lady Maria to be invaluable on this occasion. It was so easy, without
the least sense of ill-feeling, to give her all the drudgery to do. There was plenty of drudgery,
though it did not present itself to Emily Fox-Seton in that light. She no more realised that
she was giving Lady Maria a good deal for her money, so to speak, than she realised that her
ladyship, though an amusing and delightful, was an absolutely selfish and inconsiderate old
woman. So long as Emily Fox-Seton did not seem obviously tired, it would not have occurred
to Lady Maria that she could be so; that, after all, her legs and arms were mere human flesh
and blood, that her substantial feet were subject to the fatigue unending trudging to and fro
induces. Her ladyship was simply delighted that the preparations went so well, that she could
turn to Emily for service and always find her ready. Emily made lists and calculations, she
worked out plans and made purchases. She interviewed the village matrons who made the cake
and buns, and boiled the tea in bags in a copper; she found the women who could be engaged
to assist in cutting cake and bread-and-butter and helping to serve it; she ordered the putting
up of tents and forms and tables; the innumerable things to be remembered she called to mind.

"Really, Emily," said Lady Maria, "I don't know how I have done this thing for forty years
without you. I must always have you at Mallowe for the treat."

Emily was of the genial nature which rejoices upon even small occasions, and is invariably
stimulated to pleasure by the festivities of others. The festal atmosphere was a delight to
her. In her numberless errands to the village, the sight of the excitement in the faces of
the children she passed on her way to this cottage and that filled her eyes with friendly glee
and wreathed her face with smiles. When she went into the cottage where the cake was being
baked, children hovered about in groups and nudged each other, giggling. They hung about, partly
through thrilled interest, and partly because their joy made them eager to courtesy to her
as she came out, the obeisance seeming to identify them even more closely with the coming treat.
They grinned and beamed rosily, and Emily smiled at them and nodded, uplifted by a pleasure
almost as infantile as their own. She was really enjoying herself so honestly that she did
not realise how hard she worked during the days before the festivity. She was really ingenious,
and invented a number of new methods of entertainment. It was she who, with the aid of a couple
of gardeners, transformed the tents into bowers of green boughs and arranged the decorations
of the tables and the park gates.

"What a lot of walking you do!" Lord Walderhurst said to her once, as she passed the group
on the lawn. "Do you know how many hours you have been on your feet to-day?"

"I like it," she answered, and, as she hurried by, she saw that he was sitting a shade nearer
to Lady Agatha than she had ever seen him sit before, and that Agatha, under a large hat of
white gauze frills, was looking like a seraph, so sweet and shining were her eyes, so flower-fair
her face. She looked actually happy.

"Perhaps he has been saying things," Emily thought. "How happy she will be! He has such a nice
pair of eyes. He would make a woman very happy." A faint sigh fluttered from her lips. She
was beginning to be physically tired, and was not yet quite aware of it. If she had not been
physically tired, she would not even vaguely have had, at this moment, recalled to her mind
the fact that she was not of the women to whom "things" are said and to whom things happen.

"Emily Fox-Seton," remarked Lady Maria, fanning herself, as it was frightfully hot, "has the
most admirable effect on me. She makes me feel generous. I should like to present her with
the smartest things from the wardrobes of all my relations."

"Do you give her clothes?" asked Walderhurst.

"I haven't any to spare. But I know they would be useful to her. The things she wears are touching;
they are so well contrived, and produce such a decent effect with so little."

Lord Walderhurst inserted his monocle and gazed after the straight, well-set-up back of the
disappearing Miss Fox-Seton.

"I think," said Lady Agatha, gently, "that she is really handsome."

"So she is," admitted Walderhurst--"quite a good-looking woman."

That night Lady Agatha repeated the amiability to Emily, whose grateful amazement really made
her blush.

"Lord Walderhurst knows Sir Bruce Norman," said Agatha. "Isn't it strange? He spoke of him
to me to-day. He says he is clever."

"You had a nice talk this afternoon, hadn't you?" said Emily. "You both looked so--so--as if
you were enjoying yourselves when I passed."

"Did he look as if he were enjoying himself? He was very agreeable. I did not know he could
be so agreeable."

"I have never seen him look as much pleased," answered Emily Fox-Seton. "Though he always looks
as if he liked talking to you, Lady Agatha. That large white gauze garden-hat"--reflectively--"is
so very becoming."

"It was very expensive," sighed lovely Agatha. "And they last such a short time. Mamma said
it really seemed almost criminal to buy it."

"How delightful it will be," remarked cheering Emily, "when--when you need not think of things
like that!"

"Oh!"--with another sigh, this time a catch of the breath,--"it would be like Heaven! People
don't know; they think girls are frivolous when they care, and that it isn't serious. But when
one knows one must have things,--that they are like bread,--it is awful!"

"The things you wear really matter." Emily was bringing all her powers to bear upon the subject,
and with an anxious kindness which was quite angelic. "Each dress makes you look like another
sort of picture. Have you,"--contemplatively--"anything quite different to wear to-night and
to-morrow?"

"I have two evening dresses I have not worn here yet"--a little hesitatingly. "I--well I saved
them. One is a very thin black one with silver on it. It has a trembling silver butterfly for
the shoulder, and one for the hair."

"Oh, put that on to-night!" said Emily, eagerly. "When you come down to dinner you will look
so--so new! I always think that to see a fair person suddenly for the first time all in black
gives one a kind of delighted start--though start isn't the word, quite. Do put it on."

Lady Agatha put it on. Emily Fox-Seton came into her room to help to add the last touches to
her beauty before she went down to dinner. She suggested that the fair hair should be dressed
even higher and more lightly than usual, so that the silver butterfly should poise the more
airily over the knot, with its quivering, outstretched wings. She herself poised the butterfly
high upon the shoulder.

"Oh, it is lovely!" she exclaimed, drawing back to gaze at the girl. "Do let me go down a moment
or so before you do, so that I can see you come into the room."

She was sitting in a chair quite near Lord Walderhurst when her charge entered. She saw him
really give something quite like a start when Agatha appeared. His monocle, which had been
in his eye, fell out of it, and he picked it up by its thin cord and replaced it.

"Psyche!" she heard him say in his odd voice, which seemed merely to make a statement without
committing him to an opinion--"Psyche!"

He did not say it to her or to any one else. It was simply a kind of exclamation,--appreciative
and perceptive without being enthusiastic,--and it was curious. He talked to Agatha nearly
all the evening.

Emily came to Lady Agatha before she retired, looking even a little flushed.

"What are you going to wear at the treat to-morrow?" she asked.

"A white muslin, with entre-deux of lace, and the gauze garden-hat, and a white parasol and shoes."

Lady Agatha looked a little nervous; her pink fluttered in her cheek.

"And to-morrow night?" said Emily.

"I have a very pale blue. Won't you sit down, dear Miss Fox-Seton?"

"We must both go to bed and sleep. You must not get tired."

But she sat down for a few minutes, because she saw the girl's eyes asking her to do it.

The afternoon post had brought a more than usually depressing letter from Curzon Street. Lady
Claraway was at her motherly wits' ends, and was really quite touching in her distraction.
A dressmaker was entering a suit. The thing would get into the papers, of course.

"Unless something happens, something to save us by staving off things, we shall have to go
to Castle Clare at once. It will be all over. No girl could be presented with such a thing
in the air. They don't like it."

"They," of course, meant persons whose opinions made London's society's law.

"To go to Castle Clare," faltered Agatha, "will be like being sentenced to starve to death.
Alix and Hilda and Millicent and Eve and I will be starved, quite slowly, for the want of the
things that make girls' lives bearable when they have been born in a certain class. And even
if the most splendid thing happened in three or four years, it would be too late for us four--almost
too late for Eve. If you are out of London, of course you are forgotten. People can't help
forgetting. Why shouldn't they, when there are such crowds of new girls every year?"

Emily Fox-Seton was sweet. She was quite sure that they would not be obliged to go to Castle
Clare. Without being indelicate, she was really able to bring hope to the fore. She said a
good deal of the black gauze dress and the lovely effect of the silver butterflies.

"I suppose it was the butterflies which made Lord Walderhurst say 'Psyche! Psyche!' when he
first saw you," she added, en passant.

"Did he say that?" And immediately Lady Agatha looked as if she had not intended to say the words.

"Yes," answered Emily, hurrying on with a casual air which had a good deal of tact in it. "And
black makes you so wonderfully fair and aërial. You scarcely look quite real in it; you might
float away. But you must go to sleep now."

Lady Agatha went with her to the door of the room to bid her good-night. Her eyes looked like
those of a child who might presently cry a little. "Oh, Miss Fox-Seton," she said, in a very
young voice, "you are so kind!"

Chapter Four

The parts of the park nearest to the house already presented a busy aspect when Miss Fox-Seton
passed through the gardens the following morning. Tables were being put up, and baskets of
bread and cake and groceries were being carried into the tent where the tea was to be prepared.
The workers looked interested and good-humoured; the men touched their hats as Emily appeared,
and the women courtesied smilingly. They had all discovered that she was amiable and to be
relied on in her capacity of her ladyship's representative.

"She's a worker, that Miss Fox-Seton," one said to the other. "I never seen one that was a
lady fall to as she does. Ladies, even when they means well, has a way of standing about and
telling you to do things without seeming to know quite how they ought to be done. She's coming
to help with the bread-and-butter-cutting herself this morning, and she put up all them packages
of sweets yesterday with her own hands. She did 'em up in different-coloured papers, and tied
'em with bits of ribbon, because she said she knowed children was prouder of coloured things
than plain--they was like that. And so they are: a bit of red or blue goes a long way with
a child."

Emily cut bread-and-butter and cake, and placed seats and arranged toys on tables all the morning.
The day was hot, though beautiful, and she was so busy that she had scarcely time for her breakfast.
The household party was in the gayest spirits. Lady Maria was in her most amusing mood. She
had planned a drive to some interesting ruins for the afternoon of the next day, and a dinner-party
for the evening. Her favourite neighbours had just returned to their country-seat five miles
away, and they were coming to the dinner, to her great satisfaction. Most of her neighbours
bored her, and she took them in doses at her dinners, as she would have taken medicine. But
the Lockyers were young and good-looking and clever, and she was always glad when they came
to Loche during her stay at Mallowe.

"There is not a frump or a bore among them," she said. "In the country people are usually frumps
when they are not bores, and bores when they are not frumps, and I am in danger of becoming
both myself. Six weeks of unalloyed dinner-parties, composed of certain people I know, would
make me begin to wear moreen petticoats and talk about the deplorable condition of London society."

She led all her flock out on to the lawn under the ilex-trees after breakfast.

"Let us go and encourage industry," she said. "We will watch Emily Fox-Seton working. She is
an example."

Curiously enough, this was Miss Cora Brooke's day. She found herself actually walking across
the lawn with Lord Walderhurst by her side. She did not know how it happened, but it seemed
to occur accidentally.

"We never talk to each other," he said.

"Well," answered Cora, "we have talked to other people a great deal--at least I have."

"Yes, you have talked a good deal," said the marquis.

"Does that mean I have talked too much?"

He surveyed her prettiness through his glass. Perhaps the holiday stir in the air gave him
a festive moment.

"It means that you haven't talked enough to me. You have devoted yourself too much to the laying
low of young Heriot."

She laughed a trifle saucily.

"You are a very independent young lady," remarked Walderhurst, with a lighter manner than usual.
"You ought to say something deprecatory or--a little coy, perhaps."

"I shan't," said Cora, composedly.

"Shan't or won't?" he inquired. "They are both bad words for little girls--or young ladies--to
use to their elders."

"Both," said Miss Cora Brooke, with a slightly pleased flush. "Let us go over to the tents
and see what poor Emily Fox-Seton is doing."

"Poor Emily Fox-Seton," said the marquis, non-committally.

They went, but they did not stay long. The treat was taking form. Emily Fox-Seton was hot and
deeply engaged. People were coming to her for orders. She had a thousand things to do and to
superintend the doing of. The prizes for the races and the presents for the children must be
arranged in order: things for boys and things for girls, presents for little children and presents
for big ones. Nobody must be missed, and no one must be given the wrong thing.

"It would be dreadful, you know," Emily said to the two when they came into her tent and began
to ask questions, "if a big boy should get a small wooden horse, or a little baby should be
given a cricket bat and ball. Then it would be so disappointing if a tiny girl got a work-box
and a big one got a doll. One has to get things in order. They look forward to this so, and
it's heart-breaking to a child to be disappointed, isn't it?"

Walderhurst gazed uninspiringly.

"Who did this for Lady Maria when you were not here?" he inquired.

"Oh, other people. But she says it was tiresome." Then with an illumined smile; "She has asked
me to Mallowe for the next twenty years for the treats. She is so kind."

"Maria is a kind woman"--with what seemed to Emily delightful amiability. "She is kind to her
treats and she is kind to Maria Bayne."

"She is kind to me," said Emily. "You don't know how I am enjoying this."

"That woman enjoys everything," Lord Walderhurst said when he walked away with Cora. "What
a temperament to have! I would give ten thousand a year for it."

"She has so little," said Cora, "that everything seems beautiful to her. One doesn't wonder,
either. She's very nice. Mother and I quite admire her. We are thinking of inviting her to
New York and giving her a real good time."

"She would enjoy New York."

"Have you ever been there, Lord Walderhurst?"

"No."

"You ought to come, really. So many Englishmen come now, and they all seem to like it."

"Perhaps I will come," said Walderhurst. "I have been thinking of it. One is tired of the Continent
and one knows India. One doesn't know Fifth Avenue, and Central Park, and the Rocky Mountains."

"One might try them," suggested pretty Miss Cora.

This certainly was her day. Lord Walderhurst took her and her mother out in his own particular
high phaeton before lunch. He was fond of driving, and his own phaeton and horses had come
to Mallowe with him. He took only his favourites out, and though he bore himself on this occasion
with a calm air, the event caused a little smiling flurry on the lawn. At least, when the phaeton
spun down the avenue with Miss Brooke and her mother looking slightly flushed and thrilled
in their high seats of honour, several people exchanged glances and raised eye-brows.

Lady Agatha went to her room and wrote a long letter to Curzon Street. Mrs. Ralph talked about
the problem-play to young Heriot and a group of others.

The afternoon, brilliant and blazing, brought new visitors to assist by their presence at the
treat. Lady Maria always had a large house-party, and added guests from the neighbourhood to
make for gaiety. At two o'clock a procession of village children and their friends and parents,
headed by the village band, marched up the avenue and passed before the house on their way
to their special part of the park. Lady Maria and her guests stood upon the broad steps and
welcomed the jocund crowd, as it moved by, with hospitable bows and nods and becks and wreathed
smiles. Everybody was in a delighted good-humour.

As the villagers gathered in the park, the house-party joined them by way of the gardens. A
conjurer from London gave an entertainment under a huge tree, and children found white rabbits
taken from their pockets and oranges from their caps, with squeals of joy and shouts of laughter.
Lady Maria's guests walked about and looked on, laughing with the children.

The great affair of tea followed the performance. No treat is fairly under way until the children
are filled to the brim with tea and buns and cake, principally cake in plummy wedges.

Lady Agatha and Mrs. Ralph handed cake along rows of children seated on the grass. Miss Brooke
was talking to Lord Walderhurst when the work began. She had poppies in her hat and carried
a poppy-coloured parasol, and sat under a tree, looking very alluring.

"I ought to go and help to hand cake," she said.

"My cousin Maria ought to do it," remarked Lord Walderhurst, "but she will not--neither shall
I. Tell me something about the elevated railroad and Five-Hundred-and-Fifty-Thousandth Street."
He had a slightly rude, gracefully languid air, which Cora Brooke found somewhat impressive,
after all.

Emily Fox-Seton handed cake and regulated supplies with cheerful tact and good spirits. When
the older people were given their tea, she moved about their tables, attending to every one.
She was too heart-whole in her interest in her hospitalities to find time to join Lady Maria
and her party at the table under the ilex-trees. She ate some bread-and-butter and drank a
cup of tea while she talked to some old women she had made friends with. She was really enjoying
herself immensely, though occasionally she was obliged to sit down for a few moments just to
rest her tired feet. The children came to her as to an omnipotent and benign being. She knew
where the toys were kept and what prizes were to be given for the races. She represented law
and order and bestowal. The other ladies walked about in wonderful dresses, smiling and exalted,
the gentlemen aided the sports in an amateurish way and made patrician jokes among themselves,
but this one lady seemed to be part of the treat itself. She was not so grandly dressed as
the others,--her dress was only blue linen with white bands on it,--and she had only a sailor
hat with a buckle and bow, but she was of her ladyship's world of London people, nevertheless,
and they liked her more than they had ever liked a lady before. It was a fine treat, and she
seemed to have made it so. There had never been quite such a varied and jovial treat at Mallowe
before.

The afternoon waxed and waned. The children played games and raced and rejoiced until their
young limbs began to fail them. The older people sauntered about or sat in groups to talk and
listen to the village band. Lady Maria's visitors, having had enough of rural festivities,
went back to the gardens in excellent spirits, to talk and to watch a game of tennis which
had taken form on the court.

Emily Fox-Seton's pleasure had not abated, but her colour had done so. Her limbs ached and
her still-smiling face was pale, as she stood under the beech-tree regarding the final ceremonies
of the festal day, to preside over which Lady Maria and her party returned from their seats
under the ilex-trees. The National Anthem was sung loudly, and there were three tremendous
cheers given for her ladyship. They were such joyous and hearty cheers that Emily was stirred
almost to emotional tears. At all events, her hazel eyes looked nice and moistly bright. She
was an easily moved creature.

Lord Walderhurst stood near Lady Maria and looked pleased also. Emily saw him speak to her
ladyship and saw Lady Maria smile. Then he stepped forward, with his non-committal air and
his monocle glaring calmly in his eye.

"Boys and girls," he said in a clear, far-reaching voice, "I want you to give three of the
biggest cheers you are capable of for the lady who has worked to make your treat the success
it has been. Her ladyship tells me she has never had such a treat before. Three cheers for
Miss Fox-Seton."

Emily gave a gasp and felt a lump rise in her throat. She felt as if she had been without warning
suddenly changed into a royal personage, and she scarcely knew what to do.

The whole treat, juvenile and adult, male and female, burst into three cheers which were roars
and bellows. Hats and caps were waved and tossed into the air, and every creature turned toward
her as she blushed and bowed in tremulous gratitude and delight.

"Oh, Lady Maria! oh, Lord Walderhurst!" she said, when she managed to get to them, "how kind
you are to me!"

Chapter Five

After she had taken her early tea in the morning, Emily Fox-Seton lay upon her pillows and
gazed out upon the tree-branches near her window, in a state of bliss. She was tired, but happy.
How well everything had "gone off"! How pleased Lady Maria had been, and how kind of Lord Walderhurst
to ask the villagers to give three cheers for herself! She had never dreamed of such a thing.
It was the kind of attention not usually offered to her. She smiled her childlike smile and
blushed at the memory of it. Her impression of the world was that people were really very amiable,
as a rule. They were always good to her, at least, she thought, and it did not occur to her
that if she had not paid her way so remarkably well by being useful they might have been less
agreeable. Never once had she doubted that Lady Maria was the most admirable and generous of
human beings. She was not aware in the least that her ladyship got a good deal out of her.
In justice to her ladyship, it may be said that she was not wholly aware of it herself, and
that Emily absolutely enjoyed being made use of.

This morning, however, when she got up, she found herself more tired than she ever remembered
being before, and it may be easily argued that a woman who runs about London on other people's
errands often knows what it is to be aware of aching limbs. She laughed a little when she discovered
that her feet were actually rather swollen, and that she must wear a pair of her easiest slippers.
"I must sit down as much as I can to-day," she thought. "And yet, with the dinner-party and
the excursion this morning, there may be a number of little things Lady Maria would like me to do."

There were, indeed, numbers of things Lady Maria was extremely glad to ask her to do. The drive
to the ruins was to be made before lunch, because some of the guests felt that an afternoon
jaunt would leave them rather fagged for the dinner-party in the evening. Lady Maria was not
going, and, as presently became apparent, the carriages would be rather crowded if Miss Fox-Seton
joined the party. On the whole, Emily was not sorry to have an excuse for remaining at home,
and so the carriages drove away comfortably filled, and Lady Maria and Miss Fox-Seton watched
their departure.

"I have no intention of having my venerable bones rattled over hill and dale the day I give
a dinner-party," said her ladyship. "Please ring the bell, Emily. I want to make sure of the
fish. Fish is one of the problems of country life. Fishmongers are demons, and when they live
five miles from one they can arouse the most powerful human emotions."

Mallowe Court was at a distance from the country town delightful in its effects upon the rusticity
of the neighbourhood, but appalling when considered in connection with fish. One could not
dine Without fish; the town was small and barren of resources, and the one fishmonger of weak
mind and unreliable nature.

The footman who obeyed the summons of the bell informed her ladyship that the cook was rather
anxious about the fish, as usual. The fishmonger had been a little doubtful as to whether he
could supply her needs, and his cart never arrived until half-past twelve.

"Great goodness!" exclaimed her ladyship when the man retired. "What a situation if we found
ourselves without fish! Old General Barnes is the most ferocious old gourmand in England, and
he loathes people who give him bad dinners. We are all rather afraid of him, the fact is, and
I will own that I am vain about my dinners. That is the last charm nature leaves a woman, the
power to give decent dinners. I shall be fearfully annoyed if any ridiculous thing happens."

They sat in the morning-room together writing notes and talking, and as half-past twelve drew
near, watching for the fishmonger's cart. Once or twice Lady Maria spoke of Lord Walderhurst.

"He is an interesting creature, to my mind," she said. "I have always rather liked him. He
has original ideas, though he is not in the least brilliant. I believe he talks more freely
to me, on the whole, than to most people, though I can't say he has a particularly good opinion
of me. He stuck his glass in his eye and stared at me last night, in that weird way of his,
and said to me, 'Maria, in an ingenuous fashion of your own, you are the most abominably selfish
woman I ever beheld.' Still, I know he rather likes me. I said to him: 'That isn't quite true,
James. I am selfish, but I'm not abominably selfish. Abominably selfish people always have
nasty tempers, and no one can accuse me of having a nasty temper. I have the disposition of
a bowl of bread and milk."

"Emily,"--as wheels rattled up the avenue,--"is that the fishmonger's cart?"

"No," answered Emily at the window; "it is the butcher."

"His attitude toward the women here has made my joy," Lady Maria proceeded, smiling over the
deep-sea fishermen's knitted helmet she had taken up. "He behaves beautifully to them all,
but not one of them has really a leg to stand on as far as he is responsible for it. But I
will tell you something, Emily." She paused.

Miss Fox-Seton waited with interested eyes.

"He is thinking of bringing the thing to an end and marrying some woman. I feel it in my bones."

"Do you think so?" exclaimed Emily. "Oh, I can't help hoping--" But she paused also.

"You hope it will be Agatha Slade," Lady Maria ended for her. "Well, perhaps it will be. I
sometimes think it is Agatha, if it's any one. And yet I'm not sure. One never could be sure
with Walderhurst. He has always had a trick of keeping more than his mouth shut. I wonder if
he could have any other woman up his sleeve?" The Order
of these groups against each other trying to work on the score, the Michelangelo where the
law was on their contents have by using it to measure the image of the man he to realize in
the target.

If this is successful, then the poems form a series which, starting
from a relatively external more and more to penetrate what Michelangelo
judged as his most valuable and own.

That in this experiment, the danger of subjectivity is near, I never
would conceal; but this seemed the best way to lie, from a mere juxtaposition
of an internally connected to make a whole.

The letters are arranged chronologically. From the large number of very few had chosen be. It is particularly
those in which the peculiar relationship of the master of the family,
his constant worry and willing help, then his status to friends and
clients expressed.

As an annex, the few surviving letters are attached to it Vittoria.

The translations of the poems are sometimes already present earlier, the re-printing of the Men
allowed publishers in amiable manner, was part of retransmissions Bettina Jacobson. [1] The
letters were translated by the editor are all new.

The choice to go some Chapters from Ascanio Condivis life Michelangelo's
"ahead about ten years before his death under his eyes was: a simple
version, which is "the cut stones of Insert seals might be clearer
shimmer.

The reproduced earlier transfers come from:

Michelangelo's poems, translated by Sophie Hasenclever, Leipzig, Dürr
1875th

Translations of Hermann Grimm: Grimm, Michelangelo's life,
Berlin, Spemann.

                                                         

Translations of Bodenstedt in: North and South. 34th Bd

Translations of Karl Witte: Romance Studies 1871st

Translations by Hans Berger in grass: Le Rime di Michelangelo 1872nd

RA Guardini.

"Michelangelo was limited in his youth, not on sculpture and painting, but he was dedicated to all related
and similar arts, and he did it with such zeal, that he was for some time almost completely
deprived the community of men and only with very few kept company. This brought him the reputation
of a proud and strange and fantastic People, and yet both were equally foreign to his error.
It was the love of the drive and the loyal devotion to the fine arts, it - as happened many
distinguished men - Lonely power and let him find only in their services satisfy and delight.
So was his social life no joy, even hated, because she disturbed him in his ideas work; but he was, like the
great Scipio used to say, never less alone than when he was alone.

But he looked like the friendship of those who have him in any talks and efficient useful fruit offered,
or in their mind flashed a ray of unusual ... A special and big love
him with the Marchesana of Pescara, whose high spirit held him captive,
and he retaliated with extraordinary love.

From her he still retains many letters, full of pure, sweet love, as they had come from such
a noble heart, and he has addressed many of them even artistic sonnets, which are home to a deep longing.
They often left Viterbo and other places where they are to spiritual collection or summer residence
had retired, and came to Rome to see only to Michelangelo, and he contributed to her such
love that I once heard him say that he had only the pain that he did not, as it departed from
this life, kissed on the forehead or the mouth, as he had kissed her hand. And the thought of
her death caused him to freeze, as it is often in pain.

As he talks with learned people very loved, he also took delight in
reading the writer, whether they wrote now in prose or verse, and
especially it with reverence Dante, whose wonderful genius attracts
him, and whose works he almost entirely in faithful memory preserved.

Petrarca he values ​​perhaps almost as high. But he was not content in reading them, but also
found his pleasure in it, even to write poetry, and some of his Sonnets set for the great power of
his invention and his pure taste good report from ... But all this he only drove to his delight, and
lays claim no knowledge in fact, put themselves down, and rather
always stressed his inexperience in These kinds of Arts.

With equal zeal and equal attention, he read the Scriptures of the Old and penetrate the New Testament
and was looking with a steady effort in their minds. Likewise, studies He works by Savonarola,
to which he always had great affection, and yet he keeps in mind the vibrant sound of his voice.

He
also loves the beauty of the body, he is most deeply familiar with its nature. Yes, he loves them
so much that sensual people who only unfair and dishonest way to love the beauty of assets, thought
ill of him and said. And it was Alcibiades, the very nice young man, from Socrates to the chaste
love covers and he used say, whenever he had rested on its side, he had never otherwise than as
a son of the Side of the father stood up. I often talk about Michelangelo's love and talk ,
Have heard but always, also heard from the others, who were there, that he otherwise talking
about love, as written, is in Plato. I do not know now what Plato on the subject says, but that
certainly I know that I am his long familiarity enjoyed out of his mouth always heard only words
of strict integrity, which in any were all disordered youth and unbridled desires forced down and
exterminated. And that his mind does not tolerate ugly thoughts, it can be seen from the fact that
he always not just the people loved beauty, but all that is beautiful, a beautiful horse and
a beautiful Dog, the beauty of a landscape, a mountain, a forest, every beautiful area and any looked
beautiful and rare thing in its kind and wonderful with deep reverence. Sun took he beauty of nature
everywhere, as the bees collect the honey from the flowers, and laid It reflected in his works.
This has been done but all the ones in the art of a larger Reputation enjoyed. Those masters
of antiquity was content to form Venus is not so, to see just a virgin, but he wanted to look
at many. And as he so each of the Most beautiful and most perfect,
took it, he created the goddess.

And this much is certain: whoever imagines that he would otherwise, as in this way that leads only
to the left view, Big performance in the arts, is mistaken fatally.

In his whole life watching Michelangelo a great moderation and use of, especially since if
he worked more from necessity than for the enjoyment of food. Mostly he was content then with
a piece of bread he ate, without interrupting the work ... Often I heard him say: "Ascanio, though
I was still so rich, I have always lived poor." And as he never had much ass, so he slept little,
but even he used to say, he never had the sleep done well, but he did almost every time he
slept longer, causing headaches. When he was still of more vigorous health, he often slept in
his clothes and boots - this availed himself because he suffered
cramp and always on, or for other reasons - and sometimes they were
so hard to take off that went along with the boots and the skin, as
it the snake happens when shedding its skin.

He never stingy of money, yet he sought to amass wealth, but rather he was satisfied, if he
had enough to live in peace can ... Many of his works he has given away and would still be able
to solve by selling vast amounts ... He was not only generous with his works, but also often
has a poor but clever young man, which is devoted to the arts or science, helped with his purse,
I can witness, for myself is so done by him. He was never jealous of the successes of other
in his art, and more from the natural goodness of heart, than because he is of itself a had a
high opinion. He praised the good in everyone, even in Raphael of Urbino, with whom he yet;
as I wrote above, has been fought in the field of painting some fight. Only I heard him say,
Raphael did not get his art from nature, but by long Study purchased
...

He has an extraordinarily faithful memory, so that he, however,
as you can see, painted thousands of forms, has never even two, formed
the view is similar, or had adopted the same attitude.

I heard him say that he preferred no line, no to know whether he had already moved once, and
when this is done, he lets them never stand if the work is intended for the public. He also
has a tremendous Force-shaping imagination, and therefore it is crucial that it always so dissatisfied
with his works, and it always reduces, because it never seemed to him that it was his Hand
managed to form the image as it rose within him. And for the same reasons so here he is, as are
those who give themselves in a contemplative life of leisure. Only if he or other injustice
is inflicted, or violates one's rights, it flares up in righteous Anger on. But then the weight
of his defense is greater than those found for the brave holds ... "

Ascanio Condivi, Life of Michelangelo, Section 62-68.

* * * * *

SEALS.

                                    
                                                               

       TO FLORENCE.

Only you enjoyed my grief!

  Look, what a pity The lovely wives moved that torture
  and death Too sweet you still consider me poor.

Where
  is compassion?

  Whom to recruit guards Before Grimm woman when
  men kill themselves, In hate and struggle to plunge
  into ruin?

  
  Thou shalt Amor, as always, also addressed
  today! Rich and only the bow of your hand; I am guilty, then they
may destroy me.

  
  
  He who languishes between prison walls, The one death is looped in
a wild rush, To what a Tribunal is to the business?

  
  
  What do him and me right and laws?

  But tell me, why you teach hate my loved ones? Whoever
  holds that put you in anger entreaties?
  

  The shadow is like your charm, pale in the
  The draw near to you: the heart, love the warm,
  Must include trembling his undoing here.

  
  
  Her proud, always ready to murder arms Your eyes, mocking the entangled
web, Your hands, arms scornfully pointing to us,

Your gifts of all,
given the happy To high fame, not God created you will, To bring death
and disgrace us delighted!

  
  
  You shall in the mirror of your beauty wealth Let us imagine the splendor
of these spheres, The still us carries the dust veil covering.

  
  
  The earthly beauty is to teach us believe An eternal beauty, divine
perfection; And you live to kill only to ravage!

  
  
  A heavenly messenger, mocking his mission, Worth the decline even
more than that The followed him in human blindness.

  
  
  The love shown to me your end, you pretty That destroyed my warning
your pride And you in the eye attracts remorse tear.

  
  
  O but feel the world up also required to For the so beautiful you
created, like Do not let the songs that you composed for the glory.

  
  
  The virtue not only benefit themselves, no, all The same sky, the
light gives the most Where is the darkest shadows bales,

But you've
turned stingy; We die, you stay on earth with impunity; Now you see
that does not end here, the existence

And that justice must be practiced
In other worlds.

  Alas, that faithful service It's worth
  suffering through, and deadly dangerous to ----

1.
  Sophie Hasenclever.

  
  ON THE "NIGHT" BY GIOVANNI OF BUONARROTI STROZZI.

"The
  night that we see in deep slumber, An angel
  she created here in this stone, And because she sleeps, she must
be alive, Go, she awakens, she is you are speaking.

"

  RESPONSE Michelangelo.
  
  "Sleep is my happiness, so long shame and sorrow
  take on earth, better to stay stone Not see, not hear from so vile
a bustle.

  Speak softly drum and do not disturb 'my slumber.

  "
  
  2. Sophie Hasenclever.
  

FLORENCE AND THE BANNED.

  "For a thousand loves, you are born In
  angel beauty! Sleeps the sky today That you are
  the one prey You all paid
  once and now lost? Are we born oh far away,
  Not quite disdained days so
  let us also For us exiles your eyes suns! " "Well,
  do not drop your courage, their gates For
  not the big predators can be great trepidation
  Enjoy the one who won me in appearance; And see,
  is not surrounded by all of bliss Unfit for
  the enjoyment, much worse, As tolerated in
  the hope farthest glimmer? "
  

3. Sophie Hasenclever.

  TO JULIUS II
  
  Lord, had each an old saying that value,
  It is this: Who can, who does not yet.

  On hollow speeches you laid weight And have awarded
  favor of truth enemy.
  
  Always have I proved myself in your service, Your like the sun rays
of light; But when I lost time's not touched up, And unlock everything,
the more I mühbeschwert.

  
  
  I hope you had I to fend for yourself, Only was a good sword and right
balance More appropriate as a hollow echo word.

  
  
  But true virtue worth preserving this world The sky is not, he wants
to bear fruit A hollow tree for us, who had already withered.

  4. Betty Jacobson.
  
  TO GIOVANNI DI Pistoia.
  

  Already grown a goiter at the Quälerei'n me, How
  cats happening in Lombardy From water, (or,
  as it's seen elsewhere), For in the belly pushes
  already a chin himself.

  
  The beard staring upward, the Memorial Shrine
  Located in the neck, like harpies flees The chest and face over dribbling
moves The brush rich mosaics and fine.

  
  
  The loins are excited me in the belly, Other hand, my bottom was the
croup; Uncertain step, a blind man, I moved.

  
  
  Takes forward the skin folds of hand, And behind them stretched over
a hard tip, For as a Syrerbogen I bowed down me.

  
  
  How it very strangely And wrong the verdict from the brain out, For
just a bad shot moves from an inclined tube.

  Seek now, my friend, shows Is there any justification
  for my dead pictures! Bad is my place to paint, I
  am not fit!
  
  5. Betty Jacobson.
  
  Satire.
  

Mus is as sweet as your face, O Beautiful, So smooth, as were a snail
walking on it, How delicate turnips; it same your teeth The parsnips,
and your eyes staring Just as the Theriakpflanze green, I feel, Through
such a pope will shine even seduced.

  As onions are white and blonde your hair! Have
  mercy on 'up quick, or I lie on the stretcher!

6.
  Sophie Hasenclever.
  
  So rapidly, so boldly, in
  alliance with lies and deceit Is my friend that she
  promised bounty At the moment
  when they pierced my heart; And
  already, the iron stuck in the wound. Alas,
  the same hour Warms me through life, because through me death!

The anxious soul mourns For if this takes wavering Defeat of death,
life.

  More destruction The evil
  than good heals and settles.
  
  7. Sophie Hasenclever.
  
  Comrade I mindre grace Then well enough to live
  my strength, Now, however,
  is relaxed Through tears,
  which flow in twin brooks My heart and sick
  of tears bathing. Must atone for
  the weakness of the good fortune!
  No wise man will enjoy, What ails him the
  power, For worldly joy overwhelmed without measure. A
  quiet happiness will sprout, beseelet from the
  Peace breath The heart that allotted in humility.

Does not bring what is fitting another, to me the peace; Givest to
him who only asked for little reward; The highest you, the luck is
going to kill him.

  
  
  8. Sophie Hasenclever.
  
  If the pain, the dull my face,
  You, dear lady, show They seem to rise To
  the same degree as in the thy love, It remained
  free of grief, The stimuli are erhöh'n;
  through my suffering Cupid wants
  you embellish or mistress; Since fame brings such love, Sun patience
'with me for joy.

  Makes my whole Gram up nicely,
  as only my death!
  
  And yet, when my tears, The splendor and charm
  to your erhöh'n trains Once dry
  up by death, So my death brings glory to you
  instead of destruction. Now I do not want to die,
  No endure, I will gladly near
  you, For sweet is grief that nourishes such beauty; Whom they bestowed
schau'n to The so easily with both a large contraction.

  
  9. Sophie Hasenclever.
  
  The golden wreath, see how he delightedly The blonde hair with flowers
surrounds rings, It may the flower, which hangs at the lowest, The
first kiss press on your forehead.

  
  
  How joyful the robe's long day closes around
  the shoulders and then expands On the neck, down to the hair slides,
That you might like to touch the cheeks.

  
  
  But see here, as with entangled cords Flexible and yet closely the
silk ribbon Happy is to touch your breasts.

  
  
  The belt says: Let me enjoy the pleasure The fact that my detention
forever you so encompassing - As there were only arms surround you!

  
  10. Hermann Grimm.
  
  Because you like soul force,
  They appear as Labe The
  favor feels bound to believe, Thus complains
  my desire for freedom Whether
  your gift worth Moreover, as I would a thief
  robbed. And can the main beam The sun undimmed
  not penetrate the eye,
  The need to grow strong but 'in such a car, NOW
  LIKE kraftberaubt Do not be my fortune to
  bring to you thanks. Often does in front
  of abundance, the lack dismayed, And those
  complaining about this again: For love will call only those friends,
(How rare ah)! at the same luck and skill.

  11. Betty Jacobson.
  
  AN Giorgio Vasari.
  

  With your style, your color tones Have you done the
  same, the art of nature Yes, they sometimes
  exceeded in power, Since you are able, to beautify
  her beauty.

  
  But today is the first victory vollständ'ger
  crown thee, You who, intent on höh're works now Because your writing
is clear of his tomb And immortality are the sons of earth.

  
  
  Whether the art is often subdued nature, Of annual data do not violate
their works, It's does not prevent all spray once.

  But you, singing acts who died, You, dead,
  despite arousing natural laws, Will
  you be and remain alive.
  

  12. Sophie Hasenclever.
  
  AN Giorgio Vasari.
  

  A mule, candles, real sugar masses!
  So my money you act, Given the large bottle of
  Malvasia, St. Michael that I must leave the balance.

  
  
  To good weather can blow no wind: The sailing is, of course I vanishes,
My weak little boat seems almost a splinter, The wild sea waves left.

Consider I your gifts, your kindness And food and drink and friendly concerns That you carefully
watch over me on the road, -

Then, my thanks would not be limited to, Even if I offer myself to
you as such, After paying a debt to pay does not mean.

  
  
  13. Betty Jacobson.
  
  FROM PUNCH TO PRAISE THE COUNTRY LIFE.
  
  (Michelangelo in the first part of the poem
  describes the charms of rural life and provides that the number of
trucks compared to, exacerbate the wealthy in the city life: skepticism,
Falsehood, flattery, strife, deceit, lies, finally, in the following
cutting, the arrogance, the resentment and the seven deadly sins,
their children.)

The giant inflated pride so high that never He respected
us in the dust, some beautiful city Crushed with soles plump it in
ruins; To the Sun he wants to create the path He builds tower to tower,
but its luster Did he ever, as only one eye he has, And so he sits
on the heel.

  In the delusion By locking the sky, he
  is equal to the hurricanes.
  
  The mountains are the feet of that giant,
  What us a grain of sand. The dragon hatching
  Concealed in his coat, and beside them Appears
  the whale in the ocean tide As a fly small. It
  scares the Bold Just one thing: When does the storms rage And whirling
up dust and straws, sends His only 'eyes through the smoke, it disappears.

Even

  a lazy old man is expensive, The great
  nurse of his deformity, It nourishes
  in him the wild audacity fire It appeals to
  to insolence and violence. The woman does
  not live with this monster, It hides itself
  in the deepest crevices. Does it idle, it
  sits in a dark chamber And sends the people
  hunger and misery.

  
  In the bosom of origin of all evil With the
  character of their Lord, the torment Of the neighbor
  it fattens, it shrinks For happiness of others,
  greed breastfeeding her no meal; She tortures
  all with flames of hatred And love, o wonder,
  not even himself. Her arm was iron, stone
  love the empty The icy heart, she schlinget mountain and sea.

  
  
  And their children - to fly through - seven's
  are The world from pole to pole, a hellish
  chorus; Only the righteous war against them
  do They close up and to the abyss gate
  For prey, they bring great victories; Unzähl'ge
  arms sticking out it, To bind to and to the souls of all How Eupheuranken
encircle a tower.

  14. Sophie Hasenclever.
  
  Epitaphs.
  

       Oh, you feel with me, here in the dust Closed at rest, the world caught
up, mercy, So your tears save for the poor, Living, changing fate
a prey.

  
  
  * * * * *
  

       Why do not you grab Death tired old men, Why should I die in my flower?

  "Because what the world is aging in ruin,
  Not aufschwebt and not staying in the spheres of
  heaven. "
  

       * * * * *

  
  Not murdered with high annual weapons The death
  of the beauty that covers the dust here He quickly
  took on that unsullied Return to heaven, as beautiful as they are
created.

       

  
  * * * * *
  
  I was born only a short period, When I was here buried; abducted as
soon The death of me, that free spirit hardly spüret, How much his
condition is now changed.

       

  
  * * * * *
  
  Stimuli were not the heaven of my wealth, The many he snatched the
jewelry for me, back through my death, I certainly On my last day
dress' in the same envelope.

       

  
  * * * * *
  
  I was believed dead, I lived on the Pious The world, in the breast-supporting
thousand souls, Who loved me, how can my life missing As a soul made
only death?

       

  
  * * * * *
  
  O would flesh and blood for my bones - The fact that I lived again
- your tears, Would be 'hard out of compassion, who cries, his tendons
Compulsions' me back to the yoke that I broke.

       

  
  * * * * *
  
  That I lived only know my tombstone, And a person thinks of me, then
it seems to him at all Like a dream, so does the death, that what
was Appears to have been, as you can 'never.

* * * * *

I saw Braccio
of sex, since in pain For the world I was only a short time the day;
Now I'm here, where I might like to wait, Leb I just continue in my
friend's heart. I have watched you and thought of you ever since I came here. You are necessary
to every one, and you are so modest that you know nothing about it. You are a handsome woman,
and you are always thinking of other women's good looks."

Emily gave a soft little gasp.

"But Lady Agatha," she said. "I was sure it was Lady Agatha."

"I don't want a girl," returned his lordship. "A girl would bore me to death. I am not going
to dry-nurse a girl at the age of fifty-four. I want a companion."

"But I am so far from clever," faltered Emily.

The marquis turned in his driving-seat to look at her. It was really a very nice look he gave
her. It made Emily's cheeks grow pink and her simple heart beat.

"You are the woman I want," he said. "You make me feel quite sentimental."

When they reached Mallowe, Emily had upon her finger the ruby which Lady Maria had graphically
described as being "as big as a trouser button." It was, indeed, so big that she could scarcely
wear her glove over it. She was still incredible, but she was blooming like a large rose. Lord
Walderhurst had said so many "things" to her that she seemed to behold a new heaven and a new
earth. She had been so swept off her feet that she had not really been allowed time to think,
after that first gasp, of Lady Agatha.

When she reached her bedroom she almost returned to earth as she remembered it. Neither of
them had dreamed of this--neither of them. What could she say to Lady Agatha? What would Lady
Agatha say to her, though it had not been her fault? She had not dreamed that such a thing
could be possible. How could she, oh, how could she?

She was standing in the middle of her room with clasped hands. There was a knock upon the door,
and Lady Agatha herself came to her.

What had occurred? Something. It was to be seen in the girl's eyes, and in a certain delicate
shyness in her manner.

"Something very nice has happened," she said.

"Something nice?" repeated Emily.

Lady Agatha sat down. The letter from Curzon Street was in her hand half unfolded.

"I have had a letter from mamma. It seems almost bad taste to speak of it so soon, but we have
talked to each other so much, and you are so kind, that I want to tell you myself. Sir Bruce
Norman has been to talk to papa about--about me."

Emily felt that her cup filled to the brim at the moment.

"He is in England again?"

Agatha nodded gently.

"He only went away to--well, to test his own feelings before he spoke. Mamma is delighted with
him. I am going home to-morrow."

Emily made a little swoop forward.

"You always liked him?" she said.

Lady Agatha's delicate mounting colour was adorable.

"I was quite unhappy," she owned, and hid her lovely face in her hands.

In the morning-room Lord Walderhurst was talking to Lady Maria.

"You need not give Emily Fox-Seton any more clothes, Maria," he said. "I am going to supply
her in future. I have asked her to marry me."

Lady Maria lightly gasped, and then began to laugh.

"Well, James," she said, "you have certainly much more sense than most men of your rank and age."

PART TWO

Chapter Seven

When Miss Emily Fox-Seton was preparing for the extraordinary change in her life which transformed
her from a very poor, hardworking woman into one of the richest marchionesses in England, Lord
Walderhurst's cousin, Lady Maria Bayne, was extremely good to her. She gave her advice, and
though advice is a cheap present as far as the giver is concerned, there are occasions when
it may be a very valuable one to the recipient. Lady Maria's was valuable to Emily Fox-Seton,
who had but one difficulty, which was to adjust herself to the marvellous fortune which had
befallen her.

There was a certain thing Emily found herself continually saying. It used to break from her
lips when she was alone in her room, when she was on her way to her dressmaker's, and in spite
of herself, sometimes when she was with her whilom patroness.

"I can't believe it is true! I can't believe it!"

"I don't wonder, my dear girl," Lady Maria answered the second time she heard it. "But what
circumstances demand of you is that you should learn to."

"Yes," said Emily, "I know I must. But it seems like a dream. Sometimes," passing her hand
over her forehead with a little laugh, "I feel as if I should suddenly find myself wakened
in the room in Mortimer Street by Jane Cupp bringing in my morning tea. And I can see the wallpaper
and the Turkey-red cotton curtains. One of them was an inch or so too short. I never could
afford to buy the new bit, though I always intended to."

"How much was the stuff a yard?" Lady Maria inquired.

"Sevenpence."

"How many yards did you need?"

"Two. It would have cost one and twopence, you see. And I really could get on without it."

Lady Maria put up her lorgnette and looked at her protégée with an interest which bordered
on affection, it was so enjoyable to her epicurean old mind.

"I didn't suspect it was as bad as that, Emily," she said. "I should never have dreamed it.
You managed to do yourself with such astonishing decency. You were actually nice--always."

"I was very much poorer than anyone knew," said Emily. "People don't like one's troubles. And
when one is earning one's living as I was, one must be agreeable, you know. It would never
do to seem tiresome."

"There's cleverness in realising that fact," said Lady Maria. "You were always the most cheerful
creature. That was one of the reasons Walderhurst admired you."

The future marchioness blushed all over. Lady Maria saw even her neck itself blush, and it
amused her ladyship greatly. She was intensely edified by the fact that Emily could be made
to blush by the mere mention of her mature fiancé's name.

"She's in such a state of mind about the man that she's delightful," was the old woman's internal
reflection; "I believe she's in love with him, as if she was a nurse-maid and he was a butcher's
boy."

"You see," Emily went on in her nice, confiding way (one of the most surprising privileges
of her new position was that it made it possible for her to confide in old Lady Maria), "it
was not only the living from day to day that made one anxious, it was the Future!" (Lady Maria
knew that the word began in this case with a capital letter.) "No one knows what the Future
is to poor women. One knows that one must get older, and one may not keep well, and if one
could not be active and in good spirits, if one could not run about on errands, and things
fell off, what could one do? It takes hard work, Lady Maria, to keep up even the tiniest nice
little room and the plainest presentable wardrobe, if one isn't clever. If I had been clever
it would have been quite different, I dare say. I have been so frightened sometimes in the
middle of the night, when I wakened and thought about living to be sixty-five, that I have
lain and shaken all over. You see," her blush had so far disappeared that she looked for the
moment pale at the memory, "I had nobody--nobody."

"And now you are going to be the Marchioness of Walderhurst," remarked Lady Maria.

Emily's hands, which rested on her knee, wrung themselves together.

"That is what it seems impossible to believe," she said, "or to be grateful enough for to--to--"
and she blushed all over again.

"Say 'James'," put in Lady Maria, with a sinful if amiable sense of comedy; "you will have
to get accustomed to thinking of him as 'James' sometimes, at all events."

But Emily did not say "James." There was something interesting in the innocent fineness of
her feeling for Lord Walderhurst. In the midst of her bewildered awe and pleasure at the material
splendours looming up in her horizon, her soul was filled with a tenderness as exquisite as
the religion of a child. It was a combination of intense gratitude and the guileless passion
of a hitherto wholly unawakened woman--a woman who had not hoped for love or allowed her thoughts
to dwell upon it, and who therefore had no clear understanding of its full meaning. She could
not have explained her feeling if she had tried, and she did not dream of trying. If a person
less inarticulate than herself had translated it to her she would have been amazed and abashed.
So would Lord Walderhurst have been amazed, so would Lady Maria; but her ladyship's amazement
would have expressed itself after its first opening of the eyes, with a faint elderly chuckle.

When Miss Fox-Seton had returned to town she had returned with Lady Maria to South Audley Street.
The Mortimer Street episode was closed, as was the Cupps' house. Mrs. Cupp and Jane had gone
to Chichester, Jane leaving behind her a letter the really meritorious neatness of which was
blotted by two or three distinct tears. Jane respectfully expressed her affectionate rapture
at the wondrous news which "Modern Society" had revealed to her before Miss Fox-Seton herself
had time to do so.

"I am afraid, miss," she ended her epistle, "that I am not experienced enough to serve a lady
in a grand position, but hoping it is not a liberty to ask it, if at any time your own maid
should be wanting a young woman to work under her, I should be grateful to be remembered. Perhaps
having learned your ways, and being a good needlewoman and fond of it, might be a little recommendation
for me."

"I should like to take Jane for my maid," Emily had said to Lady Maria. "Do you think I might
make her do?"

"She would probably be worth half a dozen French minxes who would amuse themselves by getting
up intrigues with your footmen," was Lady Maria's astute observation. "I would pay an extra
ten pounds a year myself for slavish affection, if it was to be obtained at agency offices.
Send her to a French hairdresser to take a course of lessons, and she will be worth anything.
To turn you out perfectly will be her life's ambition."

To Jane Cupp's rapture the next post brought her the following letter:--

DEAR JANE,--It is just like you to write such a nice letter to me, and I can assure you I appreciated
all your good wishes very much. I feel that I have been most fortunate, and am, of course,
very happy. I have spoken to Lady Maria Bayne about you, and she thinks that you might make
me a useful maid if I gave you the advantage of a course of lessons in hairdressing. I myself
know that you would be faithful and interested and that I could not have a more trustworthy
young woman. If your mother is willing to spare you, I will engage you. The wages would be
thirty-five pounds a year (and beer, of course) to begin with, and an increase later as you
became more accustomed to your duties. I am glad to hear that your mother is so well and comfortable.
Remember me to her kindly.

Yours truly,

EMILY FOX-SETON

Jane Cupp trembled and turned pale with joy as she read her letter.

"Oh, mother!" she said, breathless with happiness. "And to think she is almost a marchioness
this very minute. I wonder if I shall go with her to Oswyth Castle first, or to Mowbray, or
to Hurst?"

"My word!" said Mrs. Cupp, "you are in luck, Jane, being as you'd rather be a lady's maid than
live private in Chichester. You needn't go out to service, you know. Your uncle's always ready
to provide for you."

"I know he is," answered Jane, a little nervous lest obstacles might be put in the way of her
achieving her long-cherished ambition. "And it's kind of him, and I'm sure I'm grateful. But--though
I wouldn't hurt his feelings by mentioning it--it is more independent to be earning your own
living, and there's more life, you see, in waiting on a titled lady and dressing her for drawing-rooms
and parties and races and things, and travelling about with her to the grand places she lives
in and visits. Why, mother, I've heard tell that the society in the servants' halls is almost
like high life. Butlers and footmen and maids to high people has seen so much of the world
and get such manners. Do you remember how quiet and elegant Susan Hill was that was maid to
Lady Cosbourne? And she'd been to Greece and to India. If Miss Fox-Seton likes travel and his
lordship likes it, I may be taken to all sorts of wonderful places. Just think!"

She gave Mrs. Cupp a little clutch in her excitement. She had always lived in the basement
kitchen of a house in Mortimer Street and had never had reason to hope she might leave it. And now!

"You're right, Jane!" her mother said, shaking her head. "There's a great deal in it, particular
when you're young. There's a great deal in it."

When the engagement of the Marquis of Walderhurst had been announced, to the consternation
of many, Lady Maria had been in her element. She was really fine at times in her attitude towards
the indiscreetly or tactlessly inquiring. Her management of Lady Malfry in particular had been
a delightful thing. On hearing of her niece's engagement, Lady Malfry had naturally awakened
to a proper and well-behaved if belated interest in her. She did not fling herself upon her
breast after the manner of worldly aunts in ancient comedies in which Cinderella attains fortune.
She wrote a letter of congratulation, after which she called at South Audley Street, and with
not too great obviousness placed herself and her house at the disposal of such female relatives
as required protection during the period of their preparation for becoming marchionesses. She
herself could not have explained exactly how it was that, without being put through any particular
process, she understood, before her call was half over, that Emily's intention was to remain
with Lady Maria Bayne and that Lady Maria's intention was to keep her. The scene between the
three was far too subtle to be of the least use upon the stage, but it was a good scene, nevertheless.
Its expression was chiefly, perhaps, a matter of inclusion and exclusion, and may also have
been largely telepathic; but after it was over, Lady Maria chuckled several times softly to
herself, like an elderly bird of much humour, and Lady Malfry went home feeling exceedingly cross.

She was in so perturbed a humour that she dropped her eyelids and looked rather coldly down
the bridge of her nose when her stupidly cheery little elderly husband said to her,--

"Well, Geraldine?"

"I beg pardon," she replied. "I don't quite understand."

"Of course you do. How about Emily Fox-Seton?"

"She seems very well, and of course she is well satisfied. It would not be possible for her
to be otherwise. Lady Maria Bayne has taken her up."

"She is Walderhurst's cousin. Well, well! It will be an immense position for the girl."

"Immense," granted Lady Malfry, with a little flush. A certain tone in her voice conveyed that
discussion was terminated. Sir George knew that her niece was not coming to them and that the
immense position would include themselves but slightly.

Emily was established temporarily at South Audley Street with Jane Cupp as her maid. She was
to be married from Lady Maria's lean old arms, so to speak. Her ladyship derived her usual
epicurean enjoyment from the whole thing,--from too obviously thwarted mothers and daughters;
from Walderhurst, who received congratulations with a civilly inexpressive countenance which
usually baffled the observer; from Emily, who was overwhelmed by her emotions, and who was
of a candour in action such as might have appealed to any heart not adapted by the flintiness
of its nature to the macadamising of roads.

If she had not been of the most unpretentious nice breeding and unaffected taste, Emily might
have been ingenuously funny in her process of transformation.

"I keep forgetting that I can afford things," she said to Lady Maria. "Yesterday I walked such
a long way to match a piece of silk, and when I was tired I got into a penny bus. I did not
remember until it was too late that I ought to have called a hansom. Do you think," a shade
anxiously, "that Lord Walderhurst would mind?"

"Just for the present, perhaps, it would be as well that I should see that you shop in the
carriage," her ladyship answered with a small grin. "When you are a marchioness you may make
penny buses a feature of the distinguished insouciance of your character if you like. I shouldn't
myself, because they jolt and stop to pick up people, but you can, with originality and distinction,
if it amuses you."

"It doesn't," said Emily. "I hate them. I have longed to be able to take hansoms. Oh! how I
have longed--when I was tired."

The legacy left her by old Mrs. Maytham had been realised and deposited as a solid sum in a
bank. Since she need no longer hoard the income of twenty pounds a year, it was safe to draw
upon her capital for her present needs. The fact made her feel comfortable. She could make
her preparations for the change in her life with a decent independence. She would have been
definitely unhappy if she had been obliged to accept favours at this juncture. She felt as
if she could scarcely have borne it. It seemed as if everything conspired to make her comfortable
as well as blissfully happy in these days.

Lord Walderhurst found an interest in watching her and her methods. He was a man who, in certain
respects, knew himself very well and had few illusions respecting his own character. He had
always been rather given to matter-of-fact analysis of his own emotions; and at Mallowe he
had once or twice asked himself if it was not disagreeably possible that the first moderate
glow of his St. Martin's summer might die away and leave him feeling slightly fatigued and
embarrassed by the new aspect of his previously regular and entirely self-absorbed existence.
You might think that you would like to marry a woman and then you might realise that there
were objections--that even the woman herself, with all her desirable qualities, might be an
objection in the end, that any woman might be an objection; in fact, that it required an effort
to reconcile oneself to the fact of a woman's being continually about. Of course the arriving
at such a conclusion, after one had committed oneself, would be annoying. Walderhurst had,
in fact, only reflected upon this possible aspect of affairs before he had driven over the
heath to pick Emily up. Afterwards he had, in some remote portion of his mentality, vaguely
awaited developments.

When he saw Emily day by day at South Audley Street, he found he continued to like her. He
was not clever enough to analyse her; he could only watch her, and he always looked on at her
with curiosity and a novel sensation rather like pleasure. She wakened up at sight of him,
when he called, in a way that was attractive even to an unimaginative man. Her eyes seemed
to warm, and she often looked flushed and softly appealing. He began to note vaguely that her
dresses were better, and oftener changed, than they had been at Mallowe. A more observant man
might have been touched by the suggestion that she was unfolding petal by petal like a flower,
and that each carefully chosen costume was a new petal. He did not in the least suspect the
reverent eagerness of her care of herself as an object hoping to render itself worthy of his
qualities and tastes.

His qualities and tastes were of no exalted importance in themselves, but they seemed so to
Emily. It is that which by one chance or another so commends itself to a creature as to incite
it to the emotion called love, which is really of importance, and which, not speaking in figures,
holds the power of life and death. Personality sometimes achieves this, circumstances always
aid it; but in all cases the result is the same and sways the world it exists in--during its
existence. Emily Fox-Seton had fallen deeply and touchingly in love with this particular prosaic,
well-behaved nobleman, and her whole feminine being was absorbed in her adoration of him. Her
tender fancy described him by adjectives such as no other human being would have assented to.
She felt that he had condescended to her with a generosity which justified worship. This was
not true, but it was true for her. As a consequence of this she thought out and purchased her
wardrobe with a solemnity of purpose such as might well have been part of a religious ceremonial.
When she consulted fashion plates and Lady Maria, or when she ordered a gown at her ladyship's
dressmaker's, she had always before her mind, not herself, but the Marchioness of Walderhurst--a
Marchioness of Walderhurst whom the Marquis would approve of and be pleased with. She did not
expect from him what Sir Bruce Norman gave to Lady Agatha.

Agatha and her lover were of a different world. She saw them occasionally, not often, because
the simple selfishness of young love so absorbed them that they could scarcely realise the
existence of other persons than themselves. They were to be married, and to depart for fairyland
as soon as possible. Both were fond of travel, and when they took ship together their intention
was to girdle the world at leisure, if they felt so inclined. They could do anything they chose,
and were so blissfully sufficient for each other that there was no reason why they should not
follow their every errant fancy.

The lines which had been increasing in Lady Claraway's face had disappeared, and left her blooming
with the beauty her daughters had reproduced. This delightful marriage had smoothed away every
difficulty. Sir Bruce was the "most charming fellow in England." That fact acted as a charm
in itself, it seemed. It was not necessary to go into details as to the mollifying of tradespeople
and rearranging of the entire aspect of life at Curzon Street. When Agatha and Emily Fox-Seton
met in town for the first time--it was in the drawing room at South Audley Street--they clasped
each other's hands with an exchange of entirely new looks.

"You look so--so well, Miss Fox-Seton," said Agatha, with actual tenderness.

If she had not been afraid of seeming a little rudely effusive she would have said "handsome"
instead of "well," for Emily was sweetly blooming.

"Happiness is becoming to you," she added. "May I say how glad I am?"

"Thank you, thank you!" Emily answered. "Everything in the world seems changed, doesn't it?"

"Yes, everything."

They stood and gazed into each other's eyes a few seconds, and then loosed hands with a little
laugh and sat down to talk.

It was, in fact, Lady Agatha who talked most, because Emily Fox-Seton led her on and aided
her to delicate expansion by her delight in all that in these days made up her existence of
pure bliss. It was as if an old-time fairy story were being enacted before Emily's eyes. Agatha
without doubt had grown lovelier, she thought; she seemed even fairer, more willowy, the forget-me-not
eyes were of a happier blue, as forget-me-nots growing by clear water-sides are bluer than
those grown in a mere garden. She appeared, perhaps, even a little taller, and her small head
had, if such a thing were possible, a prettier flower-like poise. This, at least, Emily thought,
and found her own happiness added to by her belief in her fancy. She felt that nothing was
to be wondered at when she heard Agatha speak of Sir Bruce. She could not utter his name or
refer to any act of his without a sound in her voice which had its parallel in the light floating
haze of blush on her cheeks. In her intercourse with the world in general she would have been
able to preserve her customary sweet composure, but Emily Fox-Seton was not the world. She
represented a something which was so primitively of the emotions that one's heart spoke and
listened to her. Agatha was conscious that Miss Fox-Seton had seen at Mallowe--she could never
quite understand how it had seemed so naturally to happen--a phase of her feelings which no
one else had seen before. Bruce had seen it since, but only Bruce. There had actually been
a sort of confidence between them--a confidence which had been like intimacy, though neither
of them had been effusive.

"Mamma is so happy," the girl said. "It is quite wonderful. And Alix and Hilda and Millicent
and Eve--oh! it makes such a difference to them. I shall be able," with a blush which expressed
a world of relieved affection, "to give them so much pleasure. Any girl who marries happily
and--and well--can alter everything for her sisters, if she remembers. You see, I shall have
reason to remember. I know things from experience. And Bruce is so kind, and gay, and proud
of their prettiness. Just imagine their excitement at all being bridesmaids! Bruce says we
shall be like a garden of spring flowers. I am so glad," her eyes suddenly quite heavenly in
their joyful relief, "that he is young!"

The next second the heavenly relieved look died away. The exclamation had been involuntary.
It had sprung from her memory of the days when she had dutifully accepted, as her portion,
the possibility of being smiled upon by Walderhurst, who was two years older than her father,
and her swift realisation of this fact troubled her. It was indelicate to have referred to
the mental image even ever so vaguely.

But Emily Fox-Seton was glad too that Sir Bruce was young, that they were all young, and that
happiness had come before they had had time to tire of waiting for it. She was so happy herself
that she questioned nothing.

"Yes. It is nice," she answered, and glowed with honest sympathy. "You will want to do the
same things. It is so agreeable when people who are married like to do the same things. Perhaps
you will want to go out a great deal and to travel, and you could not enjoy it if Sir Bruce
did not."

She was not reflecting in the least upon domestic circles whose male heads are capable of making
themselves extremely nasty under stress of invitations it bores them to accept, and the inclination
of wives and daughters to desire acceptance. She was not contemplating with any premonitory
regrets a future in which, when Walderhurst did not wish to go out to dinner or disdained a
ball, she should stay at home. Far from it. She simply rejoiced with Lady Agatha, who was twenty-two
marrying twenty-eight.

"You are not like me," she explained further. "I have had to work so hard and contrive so closely
that everything will be a pleasure to me. Just to know that I never need starve to death or
go into the workhouse is such a relief that--"

"Oh!" exclaimed Lady Agatha, quickly and involuntarily laying a hand on hers, startled by the
fact that she spoke as if referring to a wholly matter-of-fact possibility.

Emily smiled, realising her feeling.

"Perhaps I ought not to have said that. I forgot. But such things are possible when one is
too old to work and has nothing to depend on. You could scarcely understand. When one is very
poor one is frightened, because occasionally one cannot help thinking of it."

"But now--now! Oh! how different!" exclaimed Agatha, with heartfelt earnestness.

"Yes. Now I need never be afraid. It makes me so grateful to--Lord Walderhurst."

Her neck grew pink as she said it, just as Lady Maria had seen it grow pink on previous occasions.
Moderate as the words were, they expressed ardour.

Lord Walderhurst came in half an hour later and found her standing smiling by the window.

"You look particularly well, Emily. It's that white frock, I suppose. You ought to wear a good
deal of white," he said.

"I will," Emily answered. He observed that she wore the nice flush and the soft appealing look,
as well as the white frock. "I wish--"

Here she stopped, feeling a little foolish.

"What do you wish?"

"I wish I could do more to please you than wear white--or black--when you like."

He gazed at her, always through the single eyeglass. Even the vaguest approach to emotion or
sentiment invariably made him feel stiff and shy. Realising this, he did not quite understand
why he rather liked it in the case of Emily Fox-Seton, though he only liked it remotely and
felt his own inaptness a shade absurd.

"Wear yellow or pink occasionally," he said with a brief, awkward laugh.

What large, honest eyes the creature had, like a fine retriever's or those of some nice animal
one saw in the Zoo!

"I will wear anything you like," she said, the nice eyes meeting his, not the least stupidly,
he reflected, though women who were affectionate often looked stupid. "I will do anything you
like; you don't know what you have done for me, Lord Walderhurst."

They moved a trifle nearer to each other, this inarticulate pair. He dropped his eyeglass and
patted her shoulder.

"Say 'Walderhurst' or 'James'--or--or 'my dear,'" he said. "We are going to be married, you
know." And he found himself going to the length of kissing her cheek with some warmth.

"I sometimes wish," she said feelingly, "that it was the fashion to say 'my lord' as Lady Castlewood
used to do in 'Esmond.' I always thought it nice."

"Women are not so respectful to their husbands in these days," he answered, with his short
laugh. "And men are not so dignified."

"Lord Castlewood was not very dignified, was he?"

He chuckled a little.

"No. But his rank was, in the reign of Queen Anne. These are democratic days. I'll call you
'my lady' if you like."

"Oh! No--no!" with fervour, "I wasn't thinking of anything like that."

"I know you were not," he reassured her. "You are not that kind of woman."

"Oh! how could I be?"

"You couldn't," good-naturedly. "That's why I like you."

Then he began to tell her his reason for calling at this particular hour. He came to prepare
her for a visit from the Osborns, who had actually just returned from India. Captain Osborn
had chosen, or chance had chosen for him, this particular time for a long leave. As soon as
she heard the name of Osborn, Emily's heart beat a little quickly. She had naturally learned
a good deal of detail from Lady Maria since her engagement. Alec Osborn was the man who, since
Lord Walderhurst's becoming a widower, had lived in the gradually strengthening belief that
the chances were that it would be his enormous luck to inherit the title and estates of the
present Marquis of Walderhurst. He was not a very near relation, but he was the next of kin.
He was a young man and a strong one, and Walderhurst was fifty-four and could not be called
robust. His medical man did not consider him a particularly good life, though he was not often ill.

"He's not the kind of chap who lives to be a hundred and fifty. I'll say that for him," Alec
Osborn had said at mess after dinner had made him careless of speech, and he had grinned not
too pleasantly when he uttered the words. "The only thing that would completely wipe my eye
isn't as likely to happen to him as to most men. He's unsentimental and level headed, and doesn't
like marriage. You can imagine how he's chivied by women. A fellow in his position couldn't
be let alone. But he doesn't like marriage, and he's a man who knows jolly well what he likes
and what he doesn't. The only child died, and if he doesn't marry again, I'm in a safe place.
Good Lord! the difference it would make!" and his grin extended itself.

It was three months after this that the Marquis of Walderhurst followed Emily Fox-Seton out
upon the heath, and finding her sitting footsore and depressed in spirit beside the basket
of Lady Maria's fish, asked her to marry him.

When the news reached him, Alec Osborn went and shut himself up in his quarters and blasphemed
until his face was purple and big drops of sweat ran down it. It was black bad luck--it was
black bad luck, and it called for black curses. What the articles of furniture in the room
in the bungalow heard was rather awful, but Captain Osborn did not feel that it did justice
to the occasion.

When her husband strode by her to his apartment, Mrs. Osborn did not attempt to follow him.
She had only been married two years, but she knew his face too well; and she also knew too
well all the meaning of the fury contained in the words he flung at her as he hurled himself
past her.

"Walderhurst is going to be married!" Mrs. Osborn ran into her own room and sat down clutching
at her hair as she dropped her face in her little dark hands. She was an Anglo-Indian girl
who had never been home, and had not had much luck in life at any time, and her worst luck
had been in being handed over by her people to this particular man, chiefly because he was
the next of kin to Lord Walderhurst. She was a curious, passionate creature, and had been in
love with him in her way. Her family had been poor and barely decently disreputable. She had
lived on the outskirts of things, full of intense girlish vanity and yearnings for social recognition,
poorly dressed, passed over and snubbed by people she aspired to know socially, seeing other
girls with less beauty and temperament enjoying flirtations with smart young officers, biting
her tongue out with envy and bitterness of thwarted spirit. So when Captain Osborn cast an
eye on her and actually began a sentimental episode, her relief and excitement at finding herself
counting as other girls did wrought itself up into a passion. Her people were prompt and sharp
enough to manage the rest, and Osborn was married before he knew exactly whither he was tending.
He was not pleased with himself when he wakened to face facts. He could only console himself
for having been cleverly led and driven into doing the thing he did not want to do, by the
facts that the girl was interesting and clever and had a good deal of odd un-English beauty.

It was a beauty so un-English that it would perhaps appear to its greatest advantage in the
contrasts afforded by life in England. She was so dark, of heavy hair and drooping-lidded eyes
and fine grained skin, and so sinuous of lithe, slim body, that among native beauties she seemed
not to be sufficiently separated by marks of race. She had tumbled up from childhood among
native servants, who were almost her sole companions, and who had taught her curious things.
She knew their stories and songs, and believed in more of their occult beliefs than any but
herself knew.

She knew things which made her interesting to Alec Osborn, who had a bullet head and a cruel
lower jaw, despite a degree of the ordinary good looks. The fact that his chances were good
for becoming Marquis of Walderhurst and taking her home to a life of English luxury and splendour
was a thing she never forgot. It haunted her in her sleep. She had often dreamed of Oswyth
Castle and of standing amidst great people on the broad lawns her husband had described feelingly
during tropical days when they had sat together panting for breath. When there had been mention
made of the remote, awful possibility that Walderhurst might surrender to the siege laid to
him, she had turned sick at the thought. It made her clench her hands until the nails almost
pressed into the skin of her palms. She could not bear it. She had made Osborn burst into a
big, harsh laugh one day when she had hinted to him that there were occult things to be done
which might prevent ill luck. He had laughed first and scowled afterwards, cynically saying
that she might as well be working them up.

He had not come out to India followed by regrets and affection. He had been a black sheep at
home, and had rather been hustled away than otherwise. If he had been a more admirable kind
of fellow, Walderhurst would certainly have made him an allowance; but his manner of life had
been such as the Marquis had no patience with in men of any class, and especially abhorred
in men whom the accident of birth connected with good names. He had not been lavish in his
demonstrations of interest in the bullet-headed young man. Osborn's personableness was not
of a kind attractive to the unbiassed male observer. Men saw his cruel young jowl and low forehead,
and noticed that his eyes were small. He had a good, swaggering military figure to which uniform
was becoming, and a kind of animal good looks which would deteriorate early. His colour would
fix and deepen with the aid of steady daily drinking, and his features would coarsen and blur,
until by the time he was forty the young jowl would have grown heavy and would end by being
his most prominent feature.

While he had remained in England, Walderhurst had seen him occasionally, and had only remarked
and heard unpleasant things of him,--a tendency to selfish bad manners, reckless living, and
low flirtation. He once saw him on the top of a bus with his arm round the waist of an awful,
giggling shop-girl kind of person, who was adorned with tremendous feathers and a thick fringe
coming unfrizzled with the heat and sticking out here and there in straight locks on her moist
forehead. Osborn thought that the arm business had been cleverly managed with such furtiveness
that no one could see it, but Walderhurst was driving solemnly by in his respectable barouche,
and he found himself gazing through his monocle directly at his relative, and seeing, from
the street below, the point at which the young man's arm lost itself under the profusely beaded
short cape. A dull flush rose to his countenance, and he turned away without showing any sign
of recognition; but he was annoyed and disgusted, because this particular kind of blatantly
vulgar bad taste was the sort of thing he loathed. It was the sort of thing which made duchesses
of women who did alluring "turns" at music halls or sang suggestive songs in comic opera, and
transformed into the chatelaines of ancient castles young persons who had presided at the ribbon
counter. He saw as little as possible of his heir presumptive after this, and if the truth
were told, Captain Alec Osborn was something of a factor in the affair of Miss Emily Fox-Seton.
If Walderhurst's infant son had lived, or if Osborn had been a refined, even if dull, fellow,
there are ten chances to one his lordship would have chosen no second marchioness.

Captain Osborn's life in India had not ended in his making no further debts. He was not a man
to put the brake on in the matter of self-indulgence. He got into debt so long as a shred of
credit remained to him, and afterwards he tried to add to his resources by cards and betting
at races. He made and lost by turn, and was in a desperate state when he got his leave. He
applied for it because he had conceived the idea that his going home as a married man might
be a good thing for him. Hester, it seemed not at all improbable, might accomplish something
with Walderhurst. If she talked to him in her interesting semi-Oriental way, and was fervid
and picturesque in her storytelling, he might be attracted by her. She had her charm, and when
she lifted the heavy lids of her long black eyes and fixed her gaze upon her hearer as she
talked about the inner side of native life, of which she knew such curious, intimate things,
people always listened, even in India, where the thing was not so much of a novelty, and in
England she might be a sort of sensation.

Osborn managed to convey to her gradually, by a process of his own, a great deal of what he
wanted her to do. During the months before the matter of the leave was quite decided, he dropped
a word here and there which carried a good deal of suggestion to a mind used to seizing on
passing intimations. The woman who had been Hester's Ayah when she was a child had become her
maid. She was a woman with a wide, silent acquaintance with her own people. She was seldom
seen talking to anyone and seldom seemed to leave the house, but she always knew everything.
Her mistress was aware that if at any time she chose to ask her a question about the secret
side of things concerning black or white peoples, she would receive information to be relied
upon. She felt that she could have heard from her many things concerning her husband's past,
present, and future, and that the matter of the probable succession was fully comprehended by her.

When she called her into the room after recovering outwardly from her hour of desperation,
she saw that the woman was already aware of the blow that had fallen upon the household. What
they said to each other need not be recorded here, but there was more in the conversation than
the mere words uttered, and it was one of several talks held before Mrs. Osborn sailed for
England with her husband.

"He may be led into taking into consideration the fact that he has cut the ground from under
a fellow's feet and left him dangling in the air," said Osborn to his wife. "Best thing will
be to make friends with the woman, hang her!"

"Yes, Alec, yes," Hester Osborn answered, just a little feverishly. "We must make friends with
her. They say she is a good sort and was frightfully poor herself."

"She won't be poor now, hang her!" remarked Captain Osborn with added fervour. "I should like
to break her neck! I wonder if she rides?"

"I'm sure she has not been well enough off to do anything like that."

"Good idea to begin to teach her." And he laughed as he turned on his heel and began to walk
the deck with a fellow passenger.

It was these people Lord Walderhurst had come to prepare her for.

"Maria has told you about them, I know," he said. "I dare say she has been definite enough
to explain that I consider Osborn altogether undesirable. Under the veneer of his knowledge
of decent customs he is a cad. I am obliged to behave civilly to the man, but I dislike him.
If he had been born in a low class of life, he would have been a criminal."

"Oh!" Emily exclaimed.

"Any number of people would be criminals if circumstances did not interfere. It depends a good
deal on the shape of one's skull."

"Oh!" exclaimed Emily again, "do you think so?"

She believed that people who were bad were bad from preference, though she did not at all understand
the preference. She had accepted from her childhood everything she had ever heard said in a
pulpit. That Walderhurst should propound ideas such as ministers of the Church of England might
regard as heretical startled her, but he could have said nothing startling enough to shake
her affectionate allegiance.

"Yes, I do," he answered. "Osborn's skull is quite the wrong shape."

But when, a short time after, Captain Osborn brought the skull in question into the room, covered
in the usual manner with neatly brushed, close-cropped hair, Emily thought it a very nice shape
indeed. Perhaps a trifle hard and round-looking and low of forehead, but not shelving or bulging
as the heads of murderers in illustrated papers generally did. She owned to herself that she
did not see what Lord Walderhurst evidently saw, but then she did not expect of herself an
intelligence profound enough to follow his superior mental flights.

Captain Osborn was well groomed and well mannered, and his demeanour towards herself was all
that the most conventional could have demanded. When she reflected that she herself represented
in a way the possible destruction of his hopes of magnificent fortune, she felt almost tenderly
towards him, and thought his easy politeness wonderful. Mrs. Osborn, too! How interesting and
how beautiful in an odd way Mrs. Osborn was! Every movement of her exceeding slimness was curiously
graceful. Emily remembered having read novels whose heroines were described as "undulating."
Mrs. Osborn was undulating. Her long, drooping, and dense black eyes were quite unlike other
girls' eyes. Emily had never seen anything like them. And she had such a lonely, slow, shy
way of lifting them to look at people. She was obliged to look up at tall Emily. She seemed
a schoolgirl as she stood near her. Emily was the kind of mistaken creature whose conscience,
awakening to unnecessary remorses, causes its owner at once to assume all the burdens which
Fate has laid upon the shoulders of others. She began to feel like a criminal herself, irrespective
of the shape of her skull. Her own inordinate happiness and fortune had robbed this unoffending
young couple. She wished that it had not been so, and vaguely reproached herself without reasoning
the matter out to a conclusion. At all events, she was remorsefully sympathetic in her mental
attitude towards Mrs. Osborn, and being sure that she was frightened of her husband's august
relative, felt nervous herself because Lord Walderhurst bore himself with undated courtesy
and kept his monocle fixed in his eye throughout the interview. If he had let it drop and allowed
it to dangle in an unbiassed manner from its cord, Emily would have felt more comfortable,
because she was sure his demeanour would have appeared a degree more encouraging to the Osborns.

"Are you glad to be in England again?" she asked Mrs. Osborn.

"I never was here before," answered the young woman. "I have never been anywhere but in India."

In the course of the conversation she explained that she had not been a delicate child, and
also conveyed that even if she had been one, her people could not have afforded to send her
home. Instinct revealed to Emily that she had not had many of the good things of life, and
that she was not a creature of buoyant spirits. The fact that she had spent a good many hours
of most of her young days in reflecting on her ill-luck had left its traces on her face, particularly
in the depths of her slow-moving, black eyes.

They had come, it appeared, in the course of duty, to pay their respects to the woman who was
to be their destruction. To have neglected to do so would have made them seem to assume an
indiscreet attitude towards the marriage.

"They can't like it, of course," Lady Maria summed them up afterwards, "but they have made
up their minds to lump it as respectably as possible."

"I am so sorry for them," said Emily.

"Of course you are. And you will probably show them all sorts of indiscreet kindnesses, but
don't be too altruistic, my good Emily. The man is odious, and the girl looks like a native
beauty. She rather frightens me."

"I don't think Captain Osborn is odious," Emily answered. "And she is pretty, you know. She
is frightened of us, really."

Remembering days when she herself had been at a disadvantage with people who were fortunate
enough to be of importance, and recalling what her secret tremor before them had been, Emily
was very nice indeed to little Mrs. Osborn. She knew from experience things which would be
of use to her--things about lodgings and things about shops. Osborn had taken lodgings in Duke
Street, and Emily knew the quarter thoroughly. Walderhurst watched her being nice, through
his fixed eyeglass, and he decided that she had really a very good manner. Its goodness consisted
largely in its directness. While she never brought forth unnecessarily recollections of the
days when she had done other people's shopping and had purchased for herself articles at sales
marked 11-3/4d, she was interestingly free from any embarrassment in connection with the facts.
Walderhurst, who had been much bored by himself and other people in time past, actually found
that it gave a fillip to existence to look on at a woman who, having been one of the hardest
worked of the genteel labouring classes, was adapting herself to the role of marchioness by
the simplest of processes, and making a very nice figure at it too, in her entirely unbrilliant
way. If she had been an immensely clever woman, there would have been nothing special in it.
She was not clever at all, yet Walderhurst had seen her produce effects such as a clever woman
might have laboured for and only attained by a stroke of genius. As, for instance, when she
had met for the first time after her engagement, a certain particularly detestable woman of
rank, to whom her relation to Walderhurst was peculiarly bitter. The Duchess of Merwold had
counted the Marquis as her own, considering him fitted by nature to be the spouse of her eldest
girl, a fine young woman with projecting teeth, who had hung fire. She felt Emily Fox-Seton's
incomprehensible success to be a piece of impudent presumption, and she had no reason to restrain
the expression of her sentiments so long as she conveyed them by methods of inference and inclusion.

"You must let me congratulate you very warmly, Miss Fox-Seton," she said, pressing her hand
with maternal patronage. "Your life has changed greatly since we last saw each other."

"Very greatly indeed," Emily flushed frankly in innocent gratitude as she answered. "You are
very kind. Thank you, thank you."

"Yes, a great change." Walderhurst saw that her smile was feline and asked himself what the
woman was going to say next. "The last time we met you called to ask me about the shopping
you were to do for me. Do you remember? Stockings and gloves, I think."

Walderhurst observed that she expected Emily to turn red and show herself at a loss before
the difficulties of the situation. He was on the point of cutting into the conversation and
disposing of the matter himself when he realised that Emily was neither gaining colour nor
losing it, but was looking honestly into her Grace's eyes with just a touch of ingenuous regret.

"It was stockings," she said. "There were some marked down to one and elevenpence halfpenny
at Barratt's. They were really quite good for the price. And you wanted four pairs. And when
I got there they were all gone, and those at two and three were not the least bit better. I
was so disappointed. It was too bad!"

Walderhurst fixed his monocle firmly to conceal the fact that he was verging upon a cynical
grin. The woman was known to be the stingiest of small great persons in London, her economies
were noted, and this incident was even better than many others society had already rejoiced
over. The picture raised in the minds of the hearers of her Grace foiled in the purchase of
stockings marked down to 1s. 11-1/2d. would be a source of rapture for some time to come. And
Emily's face! The regretful kindness of it, the retrospective sympathy and candid feeling!
It was incredibly good!

"And she did it quite by accident!" he repeated to himself in his inward glee. "She did it
quite by accident! She's not clever enough to have done it on purpose. What a brilliantly witty
creature she would be if she had invented it!"

As she had been able unreluctantly to recall her past upon this occasion, so she was able to
draw for Mrs. Osborn's benefit from the experience it had afforded her. She wanted to make
up to her, in such ways as she could, for the ill turn she had inadvertently done her. As she
had at once ranged herself as an aid on the side of Lady Agatha, so she ranged herself entirely
without obtrusiveness on the side of the Osborns.

"It's true that she's a good sort," Hester said when they went away. "Her days of being hard
up are not far enough away to be forgotten. She hasn't any affectation, at any rate. It makes
it easier to stand her."

"She looks like a strong woman," said Osborn. "Walderhurst got a good deal for his money. She'll
make a strapping British matron."

Hester winced and a dusky red shot up in her cheek. "So she will," she sighed.

It was quite true, and the truer it was the worse for people who despairingly hung on and were
foolish enough to hope against hope.

Chapter Eight

The marriage of Lady Agatha came first, and was a sort of pageant. The female writers for fashion
papers lived upon it for weeks before it occurred and for some time after. There were numberless
things to be written about it. Each flower of the garden of girls was to be described, with
her bridesmaid's dress, and the exquisite skin and eyes and hair which would stamp her as the
beauty of her season when she came out. There yet remained five beauties in Lady Claraway's
possession, and the fifth was a baby thing of six, who ravished all beholders as she toddled
into church carrying her sister's train, aided by a little boy page in white velvet and point lace.

The wedding was the most radiant of the year. It was indeed a fairy pageant, of youth and beauty,
and happiness and hope.

One of the most interesting features of the occasion was the presence of the future Marchioness
of Walderhurst, "the beautiful Miss Fox-Seton." The fashion papers were very strenuous on the
subject of Emily's beauty. One of them mentioned that the height and pose of her majestic figure
and the cut of her profile suggested the Venus of Milo. Jane Cupp cut out every paragraph she
could find and, after reading them aloud to her young man, sent them in a large envelope to
Chichester. Emily, faithfully endeavouring to adjust herself to the demands of her approaching
magnificence, was several times alarmed by descriptions of her charms and accomplishments which
she came upon accidentally in the course of her reading of various periodicals.

The Walderhurst wedding was dignified and distinguished, but not radiant. The emotions Emily
passed through during the day--from her awakening almost at dawn to the silence of her bedroom
at South Audley Street, until evening closed in upon her sitting in the private parlour of
an hotel in the company of the Marquis of Walderhurst--it would require too many pages to describe.

Her first realisation of the day brought with it the physical consciousness that her heart
was thumping--steadily thumping, which is quite a different matter from the ordinary beating--at
the realisation of what had come at last. An event which a year ago the wildest dream could
not have depicted for her was to-day an actual fact; a fortune such as she would have thought
of with awe if it had befallen another woman, had befallen her unpretending self. She passed
her hand over her forehead and gasped as she thought of it.

"I hope I shall be able to get accustomed to it and not be a--a disappointment," she said.
"Oh!" with a great rising wave of a blush, "how good of him! How can I ever--"

She lived through the events of the day in a sort of dream within a dream. When Jane Cupp brought
her tea, she found herself involuntarily making a mental effort to try to look as if she was
really awake. Jane, who was an emotional creature, was inwardly so shaken by her feelings that
she herself had stood outside the door a few moments biting her lips to keep them from trembling,
before she dared entirely trust herself to come in. Her hand was far from steady as she set
down the tray.

"Good morning, Jane," Emily said, by way of trying the sound of her voice.

"Good morning, miss," Jane answered. "It's a beautiful morning, miss. I hope--you are very well?"

And then the day had begun.

Afterwards it marched on with solemn thrill and stately movement through hours of wondrous
preparation for an imposing function, through the splendid gravity of the function itself,
accompanied by brilliant crowds collected and looking on in a fashionable church, and motley
crowds collected to look on outside the edifice, the latter pushing and jostling each other
and commenting in more or less respectful if excited undertones, but throughout devouring with
awe-struck or envious eyes. Great people whom Emily had only known through the frequent mention
of their names in newspapers or through their relationship or intimacy with her patrons, came
to congratulate her in her rôle of bride. She seemed to be for hours the centre of a surging,
changing crowd, and her one thought was to bear herself with an outward semblance of composure.
No one but herself could know that she was saying internally over and over again, to steady
herself, making it all seem real, "I am being married. This is my wedding. I am Emily Fox-Seton
being married to the Marquis of Walderhurst. For his sake I must not look stupid or excited.
I am not in a dream."

How often she said this after the ceremony was over and they returned to South Audley Street,
for the wedding breakfast could scarcely be computed. When Lord Walderhurst helped her from
the carriage and she stepped on to the strip of red carpet and saw the crowd on each side of
it and the coachman and footmen with their big white wedding favours and the line of other
equipages coming up, her head whirled.

"That's the Marchioness," a young woman with a bandbox exclaimed, nudging her companion. "That's
'er! Looks a bit pale, doesn't she?"

"But, oh Gawd! look at them di-monds an' pearls--jess look at 'em!" cried the other. "Wish
it was me."

The breakfast seemed splendid and glittering and long; people seemed splendid and glittering
and far off; and by the time Emily went to change her bridal magnificence for her travelling
costume she had borne as much strain as she was equal to. She was devoutly grateful for the
relief of finding herself alone in her bedroom with Jane Cupp.

"Jane," she said, "you know exactly how many minutes I can dress in and just when I must get
into the carriage. Can you give me five minutes to lie down quite flat and dab my forehead
with eau de cologne? Five minutes, Jane. But be quite sure."

"Yes, miss--I do beg pardon--my lady. You can have five--safe."

She took no more,--Jane went into the dressing-room and stood near its door, holding the watch
in her hand,--but even five minutes did her good.

She felt less delirious when she descended the stairs and passed through the crowds again on
Lord Walderhurst's arm. She seemed to walk through a garden in resplendent bloom. Then there
were the red carpet once more, and the street people, and the crowd of carriages and liveries,
and big, white favours. Sometimes
I'm just feeling and everything I do is subject to him. Sometimes is it again quite different.
Not only the mind then speak, but I lean against almost mischievous all that opposes me. Yes, wicked,
wild radish! I feel satisfaction in someone to hurt. So it was with Carin.

It burned in me to tell her unpleasant, I always wanted from their vigilierenden Eyes free. And when
she was away, I longed not for her, proof that: - I loved it but probably not what I thought
- but I was ashamed of my callousness. What then again from me! I scare her sometimes. - I believe - I
believe - "

"Well?" Wild radish, was soft spoken to.

The girl sat up higher and higher, wild radish looked firmly in the eye and said, his voice dampening
effect, "Yes, I think, really, that I had a husband, as must the pastor Yes, yes a lot, has
a lot of heart, does not see me so much like Brecken. If I alone am, I plan, as I want it to
parents to turn everything - not just as they mean it, but still
plentiful - and if I hear him then, and shall ever come to action,
shall levy again very different voices in me.

Not true, you tell anyone that I ever as you said, wild radish! But they should but see that
I am not so heartless - they call me bad and calculating even in
the neighborhood, yes, yes, I know how they judge me, - so that I
do not 'm so heartless to be to dismiss even the reflection of me.

"

"They just said," tied to wild radish, and a hope, as soon as a spark glowed, suddenly up in
him, "that you feel you should have a softer kind people at your side. Does this mean that
the bells and whistles that you regret your choice? O, then act, so long as there is Time. I
beg, I implore you!

The moment when the senses are talking, in short, - Then comes a long, long time forever, and
when one does not match each other, like you give everything to be
rid of what they had to conquer as much haste.

"

It flew through the body of the girl, as if a horror seized them,
she breathed deeply, deeply up and stared, his eyes lowering to the
floor.

"Oh, wild radish - I do not know,"'s rapidly penetrated and moaning from her mouth, and a helpless
Expression came into her face. But it was only for seconds. Then everything was blurred, She
shook her head, her countenance was the old cough, and she said,
almost business-like:

"That's the fight about his.

But it's not the right thing. A man must Know what he wants! "

Unfortunately for occurred when wild radish wanted to go back despite
their statements again - so many; penetrating and eloquent words to
him were on the tongue, - wife of lace into the room, and their Conversation
was interrupted.

"There you are, Grete. Tancred you looking everywhere, "she cried.

And teasing she continued:

"He will certainly be jealous when he learns that you so long with
wild radish in secret Corner've talked!

"

Grete said, but the highest surprise both very serious, almost sinister:

"He
really has a cause to be jealous!

       I know of no better man on the World as wild radish, and I would
have said yes immediately, if he had stopped for me.

"

After that, she hurried away quickly.

After Madame de tresses had recovered from their surprise, uttered wild radish, the blood-red's
run across the face was out, bypassing of Meg's last words:

"Bells and whistles, my wife, she has a good heart.

But, of course, he - he's not is ! Train, "They both walked thoughtfully, but then quickly re-smoothing
Expression on the circle to score. -

* * * * *

Nearly ten months had passed. The summer was long drawn to the country, and since Vorerzählten
had changed a lot.

Tancred of Brecken Grete had brought home from the trees and found himself, during Tresses is
still staying on wood, since his marriage with her on trips. The Pastor enjoyed its former health,
as before, preached from the pulpit, heard the energetic speeches by his wife, listening to Lenchens
sweet chatter, and finally was Theonie after she had her return Tancred half always postponed
again, now recovered on Falsterhof.

But something else that had been in the winter in the air, won design.

Carin Theoni had become a partner and from the Pastor home, where her kind offered courteous hospitality,
had moved to Falsterhof. Carin appeared since she was accompanied Theoni next to tapers years.

Not
quite as enjoyable things were on wood. Lord of Tresses health was not the best, it made itself
felt in his suffering, which it often in the longer term to the room or even tied to the bed.
The free movement it was inhibited.

Receiving guests in-house and visiting friends in the neighborhood had to be restricted.

Meg's mother felt the first time a strong isolation; uncanny urged
her at that age is near, that all sorts of waiver appears necessary,
and instead of the previous rapid a more contemplative and necessary
to the care of the body and directed life as is.

But something else they put it: It was so very different now, since her husband and they had
the power to need to file wood, they were no longer the sole focus in the economy, they were
asked not, as before, and they met No decisions.

Even by restricting them to the top of the castle room, they were
granted a day reminiscent of changes that have occurred.

The habit of command, to rule, had after, and with the loss of the stimulus increased. When
talking about Gutsgeschäfte wild radish, it was the new Lord's will, which he submitted. Tancred
had to report weekly and wild radish received instructions from him.

The young couple had only still not returned because Grete recently at a fever-like Disease
that had been adopted no serious character, but the postponement
the onward journey necessitated daniederlag.

The letters, which said the young couple were breathing, not just excessive heat. Tancred did
indeed smooth words, but they only appeared just as such, and Grete
had to as it was cool and intellectually sober.

On the relationship with her husband, she wrote nothing; if she was happy, she mentioned not
a word. Their reports were limited to descriptions the countries they visited on Experiences
and on her being.

Occasionally looked through a bit of nostalgia for wood. Your home is still on most beautiful,
she had said, but that was the only thing you rise to a Sensation had given utterance.

His long absence, the young couple established by the fact that apart
from Greta's ailment, the two had never seen the world, they now wanted
the Opportunity to benefit.

Germany, England, Paris, Switzerland and Italy they had last affected in the shorter or longer
periods.

Recently, wild radish much wrong with the old, almost every evening he came and played whist or
chatted and told what happened to him the sparrows.

He kept his cool verdict on Tancred back even now, but conceded that his new master for many
things and have a proper view to plan well understand.

"It's too soon will make alone, the bells and whistles! Why retain a manager and ? Pay "and added
he had already thrown to the objections of the two braids: "Yes, I said pay, madam. He's like the
girl he sees on the shilling. "

Tresses felt that wild radish was right, had in the last weeks before the wedding, all sorts of
little things become noticeable, the only reason for lack of no earlier
had come to express.

Narrowness of their children had disturbed Tresses, but just they did not understand it to guard, appreciated,
but again the economy sense, though her temperament enraptured even to rebel against.

If the ancients were alone, she gave her thoughts unreservedly expressed; fears that seemed
to be removed by the agreements made before the wedding, quietly prescient reasserted.

Grete and Tancred them had a third of Jahreserträgnisse transferred
the goods and their Agreement explains that the ancients would dwell
in the castle.

If it turned out, but that such close together is not conducive, so they have agreed to them
set up an apartment in Elster Hausen for their needs, without however held for be, they pay even
more special.

Grete had her parents that, after repeated consultations with Tancred
mounted points submitted one day as their unalterable will, indeed,
the case left them equal signed on the table.

The lawyer had braids in a private letter advised to take what was offered to them. It was but
possibly also in their interest, that a separation takes place, and the material point is probably
not actionable because the transfer call to one third of the income was koulant. -

It was the middle of June, according to one's mind exhilarating, very
nice summer days, as table A letter arrived from Crete, who announced
now that Brecken would return.

Incidentally, had the Theoni and Carin, the latter still good by the sentiments Tresses of the
two constant evidence received on wood logged in the afternoon.

Between Theonie and Tress had developed for obvious reasons, a friendly intercourse, and the
tendency to encounter more frequently, had been reinforced by the
fact that wild radish, the by Theoni lot and received an approach
for achieving a reliable means diligently on the application brought.

He told both groups, the cost, what they themselves had expressed.

  

  
  Theonie it had made to the law, a Tancred Tresses judge to non-
  leave and they wanted them to take their good faith, not even it
  was in their way, critics avoid over-men. She seemed to have influenced
  Carin in this sense. It came from the mouth Carins never a word about
  the now blaming the family Weft moved so close man
  
  "We now want to rest the old things, Frege," had Theoni after their
  return and expressed to the latter. She felt that if they then also by
  the stimuli was excused, had not acted fairly, their servants as guards
  and rapporteur to make over Tancred. The resident in her clemency heischende
  sense of justice was always again expressed.
  
  Wife of lace for the expected guests had served in the garden under an
  arbor coffee and go thither, as the Gutsbote Grete's letter can
  be brought.
  

  "Read it quickly before even before Mrs. Cromwell is coming," asked Mr.
  tresses of his wife and refused back into the garden chairs.
  

  She nodded and said - she had already skimmed through the letter in
half - "How strange Please have a letter expressing, and how strange
it shapes the phrases!

"

Then she began:

Love mom!

Tancred said differently. But I thought that was too much less. He
then.

That was before, and I say it, because we only just written, the trip was still delayed. When
we come from? We want to travel directly, but it keeps us a nice point, a forest, a prospect that
an acquaintance on the road longer, then later. First, you when we close, I report determines the
day. They rejoiced then leave. Different now. Often I can not wait to get in to sit in my
little room. Please, the flowers!

Do not forget it. As nice that Dad is better. That gives a quiet atmosphere, one wishes cause,
always outside and inside hell Who does not love it? So much to tell, but too much can not
talk. We do not know where start and where to end!

It should however be different. I tell you about orally everything. That the grain is so beautiful,
wild radish writes. Also good news. I am quite prepared, as I am concerned more with you. I
want it too, and you want it.

It is the Sparks blow. Who is always right, of course! Tancred is clearer. If he had not as rapid
blood, quite deliberately. -

Lives of the great tap yet? Strange!

Last night I heard him again crow, wild radish and stood in his shirt sleeves and said, "and
Drum turn, he calls you, Miss Gretchen! "greet him special!

Your Grete. "

A woman of lace just read the letter over, Peter appeared and announced
that the ladies Hoeppner and followed him on foot.

"What a pleasant surprise," came out of braids and women hurried,
followed by her husband, contrary to the guests.

Hoeppner had also brought Lene, who gave her little hands and then
like a small house dachshund, who had crawled under the table and
now emerged, turned.

While the gentlemen sat comfortably chatting over coffee, also appeared Wild radish, all vividly welcomed,
especially by the pastor.

"You know no more where we live, rather wild radish!" Began it. "How long is it since you were
not in Breckendorf!

But I know what you're attracting a lot more. Our Theoni wife and some other people have gouged
us!

Of course, this is understandable, I have to admit it, "she concluded with friendly teasing,
half-wild radish, half-Carin grazing with their eyes.

About Carins face flew a smile. Wild radish but indulged because he was taken in very serious
counter-speech, which then led the good-natured pastor to attempt to the effect of the words
of his wife to weaken.

"Yes, yes, certainly the distance," he confirmed. "Breckendorf is so far, and you are just now
so busy. My wife always says everything that comes her straight on the tongue. That you are
familiar with her! "

"Mr wild radish is an avid chess player has become" now also took Theoni the word. "The he goes
to Falsterhof. Miss Carin is a good teacher - "

"Yes, the bells and whistles, this is true, but strict it is," laughed wild radish. "Only in previous
Week's was a lot of blame, and a transfer to Prima was not the speech. "

"They may soon play better than I, Mr. Hederich!" Interrupted Carin. And the other turned over,
she continued: "It is also quite different from what he says. He has me already matt made
a couple of times! That is how the thing! "

The conversation went on to other things now.

The minister praised Mr. Tresses of excellent had called cigars, and the pastor and wife of
lace, Lena from playing to their zuzustecken a cake, were busy talking to the child.

"Have you seen the roses in the garden, Miss Carin?"

Wild radish then asked the busily working on a companion bent Theoni.

"No, wild radish! If they are especially beautiful this year? "

"Well if!"

There was a pause.

Earlier, when Carin had been on wood, wild radish were against it the words never missed. Since
then, however, his sympathy was awakened, and later the deprivation,
Carin not see every day, stirred in him, and also comparisons to his
forced were between the mature, serious girl and others, he had all
his impartiality lost.

And they did not help him at all. They always sat there with a peculiar silence smiling face,
with facial expressions, by which they are said as he turned on him.

Of course if they then opened his friendly eyes and looked at him,
was the disturbing Train on.

Then he had to stop in to her not just to fall around his neck.

Once was in wild radish has gone up the idea of ​​getting married
Carin Helge.

But as he was of a snake bite, he was frightened at himself, jumped up. He was over forty, and
at most seven. This already existing in his eyes Mismatch prevented to give the train of thought.
And then she was very learned, "said several languages ​​and had knowledge of things that he scarcely
knew by name. She had read recently, for example, Macaulay's History of England. Even the name
of the author! The Devil could pronounce it.

And then she was so fine, white fingers and wrists and was so very clean - their clothes always made
the impression that she had just made the clothes come - and at last they came from a very
respectable family. Her grandfather had a Sent Items clothed, and only by very serious conditions
it was been induced to leave their homeland to train for a profession and therefore their
Bread to earn.

No, no, that could never be anything. The neighborhood already had several young landowner their
interest for them to shine through, but leave them they had not even a glance indulgence. And now
she was just in the last few years, ever since she went away from wood, so much nicer now, and
all it took. Her dark eyes shone bright as she had previously always withdrawn into itself.
Her slim figure had almost are rounded.

The face was fuller, more even now.

And what he was against it? When he teased the pastor, so it was just because she completely for
held harmless. Her delicacy would otherwise have prohibited such remarks. -

But his desire to show Carin roses, wild radish was later, after another
general conversation had cultivated, but closer than the women expressed
the intention of to get a little movement in the garden.

As soon as the other charged also laid Carin their work aside.

"Look here, Miss Carin," begged wild radish, which made creating the first with Lene and had been
able to separate it from those two gentlemen seated permanent, at a Bend in the road. "Will you
take even the flowers in action?

Bells and whistles! How it was in no years. "

Carin ease nodded and went while the others turned into the book rise to the to win there at
the output level, a situated view, with with wild radish to the low, strongly fragrant boxwood
bordered Rondell.

After Carin had admired the roses, she said: "I find that the garden
not as beautifully kept, as before.

Too bad! Why is that? "
The trimmings, from what you know yourself. Lord of lace and not
much is ailing out. And then, then, Miss Carin, it is not the former
train there. The elderly may to interfere in anything. The young gentlemen
who entered the property, and now Of course the interest in not much
in the old way there. "

"I hear, Breck have written today that they
have begun the journey home. They are expected in a few days. This
leads also probably for some change with you, Mr. Wild radish? "

"Bells
and whistles! Yes, indeed! Do you know what I think, Miss Carin? "Said
the wild radish Name very wide, it's not understood differently.

"Well,
sir wild radish?"

"I think my days are numbered here at all. Lord
of Brecken wants to rule itself, the expenses to be reduced. You want
them both. Well, you already know's best. I've got me already accustomed
to the idea. At the end of life, I can, as I have! Maybe lease I buy
something somewhere or give me a small estate. - But the bells and
whistles - slightly it gets me are not yet - even slightly, because
- because - "

"Because it is difficult to separate from the land
on which you worked hard for so long and successfully was active,
"interrupted Carin. "Yes, I understand. The love of the local landscape
and the People did stay next to the pastor's wife eager persuasion
for me the reason. Otherwise I would have probably not exposed to
the embarrassment again in Crete Contact-connect. How lightly she
let me go! "

"They have very busy, it has also done her hurt, I told
you already, Miss Carin. It was only because of Lord of Brecken Sun
derogatory judged. They had yet; drum tuned and remember, that she
had an eye on him, it seemed - no offense, careless and a little hard
of you to bring him so in contempt. What did you love, one may can
not spoil other. But watch out for me, it all will go well if she
comes back. It will be very old. "

"No, no, that's over. I also will
not play and I have only to Mrs. Cromwell Permission sought, the later
companies to be allowed in the house stay away. They think still far
too good about the people, Mr wild radish. It honors you, it proves
that a have heart of gold. But you will be disappointed yet. I am
glad only that you things have been with Mr. Brecken already clear.
Not a year's take, then it is over. I advise you to quit so that he
does not. "

"You mean -?" Pushed a wild radish and Carin saw only
a little startled and then with a sad eyes on, so, although he defended
himself, however, entered a silver dot in his eye.

"Well, sir wild
radish, what is it? I have you by my frankness unpleasant sensations
provided? Ah - ah - this hurts me "and gently soothingly she concluded:"
I may be wrong, yes! dear wild radish! "

"No, not that is it," said
the man with dignity easier. "I became a soft bushes, because - because
- because, no, no, I can not say it, you could interpret it wrong
- "

"I certainly put nothing wrong, Mr wild radish. On the contrary!
And it bothers me that I agree with your own condition by the earlier
parting sorrow in you have awakened, as it was necessary. By the way
a man like you, it is everywhere with open Poor record. You will soon
see again elsewhere friends, and then feel happy, I am sure, and I
is a relief. "

"As you have so beautifully expressed, Miss Carin!
And how much sympathy for me create your day! There were
many things she did not tell him. He used to laugh at her native stories of occult powers,
though she knew that he had seen some strange things done, as most foreigners had. He always
explained such things contemptuously on grounds which presupposed in the performers of the
mysteries powers of agility, dexterity, and universal knowledge quite as marvellous as anything
occult could have been. He did not like her to show belief in the "tricks of the natives,"
as he called them. It made a woman look a fool, he said, to be so credulous.

During the last few months a new fever had tormented her. Feelings had awakened in her which
were new. She thought things she had never thought before. She had never cared for children
or suspected herself of being the maternal woman. But Nature worked in her after her weird
fashion. She began to care less for some things and more for others. She cared less for Osborn's
moods and was better able to defy them. He began to be afraid of her temper, and she began
to like at times to defy his. There had been some fierce scenes between them in which he had
found her meet with a flare of fury words she would once have been cowed by. He had spoken
one day with the coarse slightingness of a selfish, irritable brute, of the domestic event
which was before them. He did not speak twice.

She sprang up before him and shook her clenched fist in his face, so near that he started back.

"Don't say a word!" she cried. "Don't dare--don't dare. I tell you--look out, if you don't
want to be killed."

During the outpouring of her frenzy he saw her in an entirely new light and made discoveries.
She would fight for her young, as a tigress fights for hers. She was nursing a passion of secret
feeling of which he had known nothing. He had not for a moment suspected her of it. She had
not seemed that kind of girl. She had been of the kind that cares for finery and social importance
and the world's favour, not for sentiments.

On this morning of the letter's arrival he watched her sobbing and clutching the tablecloth,
and reflected. He walked up and down and pondered. There were a lot of things to be thought over.

"We may as well accept the invitation at once," he said. "Grovel as much as you choose. The
more the better. They'll like it."

Chapter Eleven

The Osborns arrived at The Kennel Farm on a lovely rainy morning. The green of the fields and
trees and hedges was sweetly drenched, and the flowers held drops which sparkled when the fitful
sun broke forth and searched for the hidden light in them. A Palstrey carriage comfortably
met them and took them to their destination.

As they turned into the lane, Osborn looked out at the red gables and chimneys showing themselves
among the trees.

"It's the old place I looked at," he said, "and a jolly old place it is."

Hester was drinking in the pure sweetness of the fresh air and filling her soul with the beauty
of such things as she had never seen before. In London she had grown hopeless and sick of spirit.
The lodgings in Duke Street, the perpetual morning haddock and questionable eggs and unpaid
bills, had been evil things for her. She had reached a point at which she had felt she could
bear them no longer. Here, at all events, there would be green trees and clear air, and no
landlady. With no rent to pay, there would be freedom from one torment at least.

She had not expected much more than this freedom, however. It had seemed highly probable that
there might be discomforts in an ancient farmhouse of the kind likely to be lent to impecunious
relatives.

But before they crossed the threshold it was plain to her that, for some reason, they had been
given more. The old garden had been put in order--a picturesque and sweet disorderly order,
which had allowed creepers to luxuriate and toss, and flowers to spring out of crannies, and
clumps of things to mass themselves without restraint.

The girl's wretched heart lifted itself as they drove up to the venerable brick porch which
had somewhat the air of a little church vestibule. Through the opened door she saw a quaint
comfort she had not dreamed of. She had not the knowledge of things which would have told her
what wonders Emily had done with the place, but she could see that its quaint furnishings were
oddly beautiful in their harmony. The heavy chairs and benches and settles seemed to have been
part of centuries of farm-house life, and to belong to the place as much as the massive beams
and doors.

Hester stood in the middle of the hall and looked about her. Part of it was oak panelled and
part was whitewashed. There were deep, low windows cut in the thick walls.

"I never saw anything the least like it," she said.

"You wouldn't expect to see anything like it in India," her husband answered. "And you won't
find many places like it in England. I should like a look at the stables."

He went out almost immediately and took the look in question, finding the result unexpectedly
satisfactory. Walderhurst had lent him a decent horse to ride, and there was a respectable
little cart for Hester. Palstrey Manor had "done them" very well. This was a good deal more
than he had expected. He knew such hospitality would not have been shown him if he had come
to England unmarried. Consequently his good luck was partly a result of Hester's existence
in his life. At the same time there awakened in him a consciousness that Hester would not have
been likely to produce such results unless in combination with another element in the situation,--the
element of another woman who was sympathetic and had some power,--the new Lady Walderhurst,
in fact.

"And yet, confound her--confound her!" he thought, as he walked into the loose box to look
the mare over and pat her sleekness.

The relations which established themselves between Palstrey and The Kennel Farm were marked
by two characteristic features. One of these was that Lord Walderhurst did not develop any
warmer interest in the Osborns, and that Lady Walderhurst did. Having acceded to Emily's wishes,
and really behaved generously in the matter of providing for his heir presumptive and his wife,
Lord Walderhurst felt impelled to no further demonstration of feeling.

"I don't like him any better than I did," he remarked to Emily. "And I cannot say that Mrs.
Osborn attracts me. Of course there is a reason why a kind-hearted woman like yourself should
be specially good to her just now. Do anything you wish for them while they are in the neighbourhood.
But as for me, the fact that a man is one's heir presumptive is not enough in itself alone
to endear him to one, rather the contrary."

Between these two it is to be confessed there existed that rancour which is not weakened by
the fact that it remains unexpressed and lurks in the deeps of the inward being. Walderhurst
would not have been capable of explaining to himself that the thing he chiefly disliked in
this robust, warm-blooded young man was that when he met him striding about with his gun over
his shoulder and a keeper behind him, the almost unconscious realisation of the unpleasant
truth that he was striding over what might prove to be his own acres, and shooting birds which
in the future he would himself possess the right to preserve, to invite other people to shoot,
to keep less favoured persons from shooting, as lord of the Manor. This was a truth sufficiently
irritating to accentuate all his faults of character and breeding.

Emily, whose understanding of his nature developed with every day of her life, grew into a
comprehension of this by degrees. Perhaps her greatest leap forward was taken on the day when,
as he was driving her in the cart which had picked her up on the moor, they saw Osborn tramping
through a cover with his gun. He did not see them, and a shade of irritation swept Walderhurst's
face.

"He seems to feel very much at home," he commented.

Then he was silent for a space during which he did not look pleased.

"If he were my son," he said, "it would be a different matter. If Audrey's child had lived--"

He stopped and gave the tall mare a light cut with his whip. He was evidently annoyed with
himself for having spoken.

A hot wave of colour submerged Emily. She felt it rush over her whole body. She turned her
face away, hoping Walderhurst would not observe her. This was the first time she had heard
him utter his dead wife's name. She had never heard anyone speak it. Audrey had evidently not
been a much-beloved or regretted person. But she had had a son.

Her primitive soul had scarcely dared to approach, even with awe, the thought of such a possibility
for herself. As in the past she had not had the temerity to dream of herself as a woman who
possessed attractions likely to lead to marriage, so she was mentally restrained in these days.
There was something spinster-like in the tenor of her thoughts. But she would have laid down
her life for this dull man's happiness. And of late she had more than once blamed herself for
accepting so much, unthinkingly.

"I did not realise things properly," she had said to herself in humble pain. "I ought to have
been a girl, young and strong and beautiful. His sacrifice was too great, it was immense."

It had been nothing of the sort. He had pleased himself and done what was likely to tend, and
had tended, altogether to his own ease and comfort. In any case Emily Fox-Seton was a fine
creature, and only thirty-four, and with Alec Osborn at the other side of the globe the question
of leaving an heir had been less present and consequently had dwindled in importance.

The nearness of the Osborns fretted him just now. If their child was a son, he would be more
fretted still. He was rather glad of a possibility, just looming, of his being called away
from England through affairs of importance.

He had spoken to Emily of this possibility, and she had understood that, as his movements and
the length of his stay would be uncertain, she would not accompany him.

"There is one drawback to our marriage," he said.

"Is it--is it anything I can remove?" Emily asked.

"No, though you are responsible for it. People seldom can remove the drawbacks they are responsible
for. You have taught me to miss you.",

"Have I--have I?" cried Emily. "Oh! I am happy!"

She was so happy that she felt that she must pass on some of her good fortune to those who
had less. She was beautifully kind to Hester Osborn. Few days passed without the stopping of
a Walderhurst carriage before the door of The Kennel Farm. Sometimes Emily came herself to
take Mrs. Osborn to drive, sometimes she sent for her to come to lunch and spend the day or
night at Palstrey. She felt an interest in the young woman which became an affection. She would
have felt interested in her if there had not existed a special reason to call forth sympathy.
Hester had many curious and new subjects for conversation. Emily liked her descriptions of
Indian life and her weird little stories of the natives. She was charmed with Ameerah, whose
nose rings and native dress, combining themselves with her dark mystic face, rare speech, and
gliding, silent movements, awakened awe in the rustics and mingled distrust and respect in
the servants' hall at Palstrey.

"She's most respectably behaved, my lady, though foreign and strange in her manners," was Jane
Cupp's comment. "But she has a way of looking at a person--almost stealthy--that's upset me
many a time when I've noticed it suddenly. They say that she knows things, like fortune-telling
and spells and love potions. But she will only speak of them quite secret."

Emily gathered that Jane Cupp was afraid of the woman, and kept a cautious eye upon her.

"She is a very faithful servant, Jane," she answered. "She is devoted to Mrs. Osborn."

"I am sure she is, my lady. I've read in books about the faithfulness of black people. They
say they're more faithful than white ones."

"Not more faithful than some white ones," said Lady Walderhurst with her good smile. "Ameerah
is not more faithful than you, I'm very sure."

"Oh, my lady!" ejaculated Jane, turning red with pleasure. "I do hope not. I shouldn't like
to think she could be."

In fact the tropic suggestion of the Ayah's personality had warmed the imagination of the servants'
hall, and there had been much talk of many things, of the Osborns as well as of their servants,
and thrilling stories of East Indian life had been related by Walderhurst's man, who was a
travelled person. Captain Osborn had good sport on these days, and sport was the thing he best
loved. He was of the breed of man who can fish, hunt, or shoot all day, eat robust meals and
sleep heavily all night; who can do this every day of a year, and in so doing reach his highest
point of desire in existence. He knew no other aspirations in life than such as the fortunes
of a man like Walderhurst could put him in possession of. Nature herself had built him after
the model of the primeval type of English country land-owner. India with her blasting and stifling
hot seasons and her steaming rains gave him nothing that he desired, and filled him with revolt
against Fate every hour of his life. His sanguine body loathed and grew restive under heat.
At The Kennel Farm, when he sprang out of his bed in the fresh sweetness of the morning and
plunged into his tub, he drew every breath with a physical rapture. The air which swept in
through the diamond-paned, ivy-hung casements was a joy.

"Good Lord!" he would cry out to Hester through her half-opened door, "what mornings! how a
man lives and feels the blood rushing through his veins! Rain or shine, it's all the same to
me. I can't stay indoors. Just to tramp through wet or dry heather, or under dripping or shining
trees, is enough. How can one believe one has ever lain sweating with one's tongue lolling
out, and listened to the whining creak of the punkah through nights too deadly hot to sleep
in! It's like remembering hell while one lives in Paradise."

"We shan't live in Paradise long," Hester said once with some bitterness. "Hell is waiting for us."

"Damn it! don't remind a man. There are times when I don't believe it." He almost snarled the
answer. It was true that his habit was to enhance the pleasure of his days by thrusting into
the background all recollections of the reality of any other existence than that of the hour.
As he tramped through fern and heather he would remember nothing but that there was a chance--there
was chance, good Lord! After a man not over strong reached fifty-four or five, there were more
chances than there had been earlier.

After hours spent in such moods, it was not pleasant to come by accident upon Walderhurst riding
his fine chestnut, erect and staid, and be saluted by the grave raising of his whip to his
hat. Or to return to the Farm just as the Palstrey barouche turned in at the gate with Lady
Walderhurst sitting in it glowing with health and that enjoyable interest in all things which
gave her a kind of radiance of eye and colour.

She came at length in a time when she did not look quite so radiant. This, it appeared, was
from a reason which might be regarded as natural under the circumstances. A more ardent man
than Lord Walderhurst might have felt that he could not undertake a journey to foreign lands
which would separate him from a wife comparatively new. But Lord Walderhurst was not ardent,
and he had married a woman who felt that he did all things well--that, in fact, a thing must
be well because it was his choice to do it. His journey to India might, it was true, be a matter
of a few months, and involved diplomatic business for which a certain unimpeachable respectability
was required. A more brilliant man, who had been less respectable in the most decorous British
sense, would not have served the purpose of the government.

Emily's skin had lost a shade of its healthful freshness, it struck Hester, when she saw her.
There was a suggestion of fulness under her eyes. Yet with the bright patience of her smile
she defied the remote suspicion that she had shed a tear or so before leaving home. She explained
the situation with an affectionally reverent dwelling upon the dignity of the mission which
would temporarily bereave her of her mate. Her belief in Walderhurst's intellectual importance
to the welfare of the government was a complete and touching thing.

"It will not be for very long," she said, "and you and I must see a great deal of each other.
I am so glad you are here. You know how one misses--" breaking off with an admirable air of
determined cheer--"I must not think of that."

Walderhurst congratulated himself seriously during the days before his departure. She was so
exactly what he liked a woman to be. She might have made difficulties, or have been sentimental.
If she had been a girl, it would have been necessary to set up a sort of nursery for her, but
this fine amenable, sensible creature could take perfect care of herself. It was only necessary
to express a wish, and she not only knew how to carry it out, but was ready to do so without
question. As far as he was concerned, he was willing to leave all to her own taste. It was
such decent taste. She had no modern ideas which might lead during his absence to any action
likely to disturb or annoy him. What she would like best to do would be to stay at Palstrey
and enjoy the beauty of it. She would spend her days in strolling through the gardens, talking
to the gardeners, who had all grown fond of her, or paying little visits to old people or young
ones in the village. She would help the vicar's wife in her charities, she would appear in
the Manor pew at church regularly, make the necessary dull calls, and go to the unavoidable
dull dinners with a faultless amiability and decorum.

"As I remarked when you told me you had asked her to marry you," said Lady Maria on the occasion
of his lunching with her on running up to town for a day's business, "you showed a great deal
more sense than most men of your age and rank. If people will marry, they should choose the
persons least likely to interfere with them. Emily will never interfere with you. She cares
a great deal more about your pleasure than her own. And as to that, she's so much like a big,
healthy, good child that she would find pleasure wheresoever you dropped her."

This was true, yet the healthy, childish creature had, in deep privacy, cried a little, and
was pathetically glad to feel that the Osborns were to be near her, and that she would have
Hester to think of and take care of during the summer.

It was pathetic that she should cherish an affection so ingenuous for the Osborns, for one
of them at least had no patience with her. To Captain Osborn her existence and presence in
the near neighbourhood were offences. He told himself that she was of the particular type of
woman he most disliked. She was a big, blundering fool, he said, and her size and very good
nature itself got on his nerves and irritated him.

"She looks so deucedly prosperous with her first-rate clothes and her bouncing health," he said.

"The tread of her big feet makes me mad when I hear it."

Hester answered with a shrill little laugh.

"Her big feet are a better shape than mine," she said. "I ought to hate her, and I would if
I could, but I can't."

"I can," muttered Osborn between his teeth as he turned to the mantel and scratched a match
to light his pipe.

Chapter Twelve

When Lord Walderhurst took his departure for India, his wife began to order her daily existence
as he had imagined she would. Before he had left her she had appeared at the first Drawing-room,
and had spent a few weeks at the town house, where they had given several imposing and serious
dinner parties, more remarkable for dignity and good taste than liveliness. The duties of social
existence in town would have been unbearable for Emily without her husband. Dressed by Jane
Cupp with a passion of fervour, fine folds sweeping from her small, long waist, diamonds strung
round her neck, and a tiara or a big star in her full brown hair, Emily was rather superb when
supported by the consciousness that Walderhurst's well-carried maturity and long accustomedness
were near her. With him she could enjoy even the unlively splendour of a function, but without
him she would have been very unhappy. At Palstrey she was ceasing to feel new, and had begun
to realise that she belonged to the world she lived in. She was becoming accustomed to her
surroundings, and enjoyed them to the utmost. Her easily roused affections were warmed by the
patriarchal atmosphere of village life. Most of the Palstrey villagers had touched their forelocks
or curtsied to Walderhursts for generations. Emily liked to remember this, and had at once
conceived a fondness for the simple folk, who seemed somehow related so closely to the man
she worshipped.

Walderhurst had not the faintest conception of what this worship represented. He did not even
reach the length of realising its existence. He saw her ingenuous reverence for and belief
in him, and was naturally rather pleased by them. He was also vaguely aware that if she had
been a more brilliant woman she would have been a more exacting one, and less easily impressed.
If she had been a stupid woman or a clumsy one, he would have detested her and bitterly regretted
his marriage. But she was only innocent and gratefully admiring, which qualities, combining
themselves with good looks, good health, and good manners, made of a woman something he liked
immensely. Really she had looked very nice and attractive when she had bidden him good-by,
with her emotional flush and softness of expression and the dewy brightness of her eyes. There
was something actually moving in the way her strong hand had wrung his at the last moment.

"I only wish," she had said, "I only do so wish that there was something I could do for you
while you are away--something you could leave me to do."

"Keep well and enjoy yourself," he had answered. "That will really please me."

Nature had not so built him that he could suspect that she went home and spent the rest of
the morning in his rooms, putting away his belongings with her own hands, just for the mere
passion of comfort she felt in touching the things he had worn, the books he had handled, the
cushions his head had rested against. She had indeed mentioned to the housekeeper at Berkeley
Square that she wished his lordship's apartments to remain untouched until she herself had
looked over them. The obsession which is called Love is an emotion past all explanation. The
persons susceptible to its power are as things beneath a spell. They see, hear, and feel that
of which the rest of their world is unaware, and will remain unaware for ever. To the endearing
and passion-inspiring qualities Emily Walderhurst saw in this more than middle-aged gentleman
an unstirred world would remain blind, deaf, and imperceptive until its end transpired. This,
however, made not the slightest difference in the reality of these things as she saw and felt
and was moved to her soul's centre by them. Bright youth in Agatha Norman, at present joyously
girdling the globe with her bridegroom, was moved much less deeply, despite its laughter and love.

A large lump swelled in Emily's throat as she walked about the comfortable, deserted apartments
of her James. Large tears dropped on the breast of her dress as they had dropped upon her linen
blouse when she walked across the moor to Maundell. But she bravely smiled as she tenderly
brushed away with her hand two drops which fell upon a tweed waistcoat she had picked up. Having
done this, she suddenly stooped and kissed the rough cloth fervently, burying her face in it
with a sob.

"I do love him so!" she whispered, hysterically. "I do so love him, and I shall so miss him!"
with the italicised feelingness of old.

The outburst was in fact so strongly italicised that she felt the next moment almost as if
she had been a little indecent. She had never been called upon by the strenuousness of any
occasion to mention baldly to Lord Walderhurst that she "loved" him. It had not been necessary,
and she was too little used to it not to be abashed by finding herself proclaiming the fact
to his very waistcoat itself. She sat down holding the garment in her hands and let her tears fall.

She looked about her at the room and across the corridor through the open door at his study
which adjoined it. They were fine rooms, and every book and bust and chair looked singularly
suggestive of his personality. The whole house was beautiful and imposing in Emily's eyes.
"He has made all my life beautiful and full of comfort and happiness," she said, trembling.
"He has saved me from everything I was afraid of, and there is nothing I can do. Oh!" suddenly
dropping a hot face on her hands, "if I were only Hester Osborn. I should be glad to suffer
anything, or die in any way. I should have paid him back--just a little--if I might."

For there was one thing she had learned through her yearning fervour, not through any speech
of his. All the desire and pride in him would be fed full and satisfied if he could pass his
name on to a creature of his own flesh and blood. All the heat his cold nature held had concentrated
itself in a secret passion centred on this thing. She had begun to awaken to a suspicion of
this early in their marriage, and afterwards by processes of inclusion and exclusion she had
realised the proud intensity of his feeling despite his reserve and silence. As for her, she
would have gone to the stake, or have allowed her flesh to be cut into pieces to form that
which would have given him reason for exultation and pride. Such was the helpless, tragic,
kindly love and yearning of her.

       *       *       *       *       *

The thing filled her with a passion of tenderness for Hester Osborn. She yearned over her,
too. Her spinster life had never brought her near to the mystery of birth. She was very ignorant
and deeply awed by the mere thought of it. At the outset Hester had been coldly shy and reticent,
but as they saw each other more she began to melt before the unselfish warmth of the other
woman's overtures of friendship. She was very lonely and totally inexperienced. As Agatha Slade
had gradually fallen into intimacy of speech, so did she. She longed so desperately for companionship
that the very intensity of her feelings impelled her to greater openness than she had at first
intended.

"I suppose men don't know," she said to herself sullenly, in thinking of Osborn, who spent
his days out of doors. "At any rate, they don't care."

Emily cared greatly, and was so full of interest and sympathy that there was something like
physical relief in talking to her.

"You two have become great pals," Alec said, on an afternoon when he stood at a window watching
Lady Walderhurst's carriage drive away. "You spend hours together talking. What is it all about?"

"She talks a good deal about her husband. It is a comfort to her to find someone to listen.
She thinks he is a god. But we principally talk about--me."

"Don't discourage her," laughed Osborn. "Perhaps she will get so fond of you that she will
not be willing to part with us, as she will be obliged to take both to keep one."

"I wish she would, I wish she would!" sighed Hester, tossing up her hands in a languid, yet
fretted gesture.

The contrast between herself and this woman was very often too great to be equably borne. Even
her kindness could not palliate it. The simple perfection of her country clothes, the shining
skins of her horses, the smooth roll of her carriage, the automatic servants who attended her,
were suggestive of that ease and completeness in all things, only to be compassed by long-possessed
wealth. To see every day the evidences of it while one lived on charitable sufferance on the
crumbs which fell from the master's table was a galling enough thing, after all. It would always
have been galling. But it mattered so much more now--so much more to Hester than she had known
it could matter even in those days when as a girl she had thirstily longed for it. In those
days she had not lived near enough to it all to know the full meaning and value of it--the
beauty and luxury, the stateliness and good taste. To have known it in this way, to have been
almost part of it and then to leave it, to go back to a hugger-mugger existence in a wretched
bungalow hounded by debt, pinched and bound hard and fast by poverty, which offered no future
prospect of bettering itself into decent good luck! Who could bear it?

Both were thinking the same thing as their eyes met.

"How are we to stand it, after this?" she cried out sharply.

"We can't stand it," he answered. "Confound it all, something must happen."

"Nothing will," she said; "nothing but that we shall go back worse off than before."

       *       *       *       *       *

At this period Lady Walderhurst went to London again to shop, and spent two entire happy days
in buying beautiful things of various kinds, which were all to be sent to Mrs. Osborn at The
Kennel Farm, Palstrey. She had never enjoyed herself so much in her life as she did during
those two days when she sat for hours at one counter after another looking at exquisite linen
and flannel and lace. The days she had spent with Lady Maria in purchasing her trousseau had
not compared with these two. She looked actually lovely as she almost fondled the fine fabrics,
smiling with warm softness at the pretty things shown her. She spent, in fact, good deal of
money, and luxuriated in so doing as she tfould never have luxuriated in spending it in finery
for herself. Nothing indeed seemed too fairy-like in its fineness, no quantity of lace seemed
in excess. Her heart positively trembled in her breast sometimes, and she found strange tears
rising in her eyes.

"They are so sweet," she said plaintively to the silence of her own bedroom as she looked some
of her purchases over. "I don't know why they give me such a feeling. They look so little and--helpless,
and as if they were made to hold in one's arms. It's absurd of me, I daresay."

The morning the boxes arrived at The Kennel Farm, Emily came too. She was in the big carriage,
and carried with her some special final purchases she wanted to bring herself. She came because
she could not have kept away. She wanted to see the things again, to be with Hester when she
unpacked them, to help her, to look them all over, to touch them and hold them in her hands.

She found Hester in the large, low-ceilinged room in which she slept. The big four-post bed
was already snowed over with a heaped-up drift of whiteness, and open boxes were scattered
about. There was an odd expression in the girl's eyes, and she had a red spot on either cheek.

"I did not expect anything like this," she said. "I thought I should have to make some plain,
little things myself, suited to its station," with a wry smile. "They would have been very
ugly. I don't know how to sew in the least. You forget that you were not buying things for
a prince or a princess, but for a little beggar."

"Oh, don't!" cried Emily, taking both her hands. "Let us be happy! It was so nice to buy them.
I never liked anything so much in my life."

She went and stood by the bedside, taking up the things one by one, touching up frills of lace
and smoothing out tucks.

"Doesn't it make you happy to look at them?" she said.

"You look at them," said Hester, staring at her, "as if the sight of them made you hungry,
or as if you had bought them for yourself."

Emily turned slightly away. She said nothing. For a few moments there was a dead silence.

Hester spoke again. What in the world was it in the mere look of the tall, straight body of
the woman to make her feel hot and angered.

"If you had bought them for yourself," she persisted, "they would be worn by a Marquis of Walderhurst."

Emily laid down the robe she had been holding. She put it on the bed, and turned round to look
at Hester Osborn with serious eyes.

"They may be worn by a Marquis of Walderhurst, you know," she answered. "They may."

She was remotely hurt and startled, because she felt in the young woman something she had felt
once or twice before, something resentful in her thoughts of herself, as if for the moment
she represented to her an enemy.

The next moment, however, Hester Osborn fell upon her with embraces.

"You are an angel to me," she cried. "You are an angel, and I can't thank you. I don't know how."

Emily Walderhurst patted her shoulder as she kindly enfolded her in warm arms.

"Don't thank me," she half whispered emotionally. "Don't. Just let us enjoy ourselves."

Chapter Thirteen

Alec Osborn rode a good deal in these days. He also walked a good deal, sometimes with a gun
over his shoulder and followed by a keeper, sometimes alone. There was scarcely a square yard
of the Palstrey Manor lands he had not tramped over. He had learned the whole estate by heart,
its woods, its farms, its moorlands. A morbid secret interest in its beauties and resources
possessed him. He could not resist the temptation to ask apparently casual questions of keepers
and farmers when he found himself with them. He managed to give his inquiries as much the air
of accident as possible, but he himself knew that they were made as a result of a certain fevered
curiosity. He found that he had fallen into the habit of continually making plans connected
with the place. He said to himself, "If it were mine I would do this, or that. If I owned it,
I would make this change or that one. I would discharge this keeper or put another man on such
a farm." He tramped among the heather thinking these things over, and realising to the full
what the pleasure of such powers would mean to a man such as himself, a man whose vanity had
never been fed, who had a desire to control and a longing for active out-of-door life.

"If it were mine, if it were mine!" he would say to himself. "Oh! damn it all, if it were only
mine!"

And there were other places as fine, and finer places he had never seen,--Oswyth, Hurst, and
Towers,--all Walderhurst's all belonging to this one respectable, elderly muff. Thus he summed
up the character of his relative. As for himself he was young, strong, and with veins swelling
with the insistent longing for joyful, exultant life. The sweating, panting drudgery of existence
in India was a thought of hell to him. But there it was, looming up nearer and nearer with
every heavenly English day that passed. There was nothing for it but to go back--go back, thrust
one's neck into the collar again, and sweat and be galled to the end. He had no ambitions connected
with his profession. He realised loathingly in these days that he had always been waiting, waiting.

The big, bright-faced woman who was always hanging about Hester, doing her favours, he actually
began to watch feverishly. She was such a fool; she always looked so healthy, and she was specially
such a fool over Walderhurst. When she had news of him, it was to be seen shining in her face.

She had a sentimental school-girl fancy that during his absence she would apply herself to
the task of learning to ride. She had been intending to do so before he went away; they had
indeed spoken of it together, and Walderhurst had given her a handsome, gentle young mare.
The creature was as kind as she was beautiful. Osborn, who was celebrated for his horsemanship,
had promised to undertake to give the lessons.

A few days after her return from London with her purchases, she asked the husband and wife
to lunch with her at Palstrey, and during the meal broached the subject.

"I should like to begin soon, if you can spare the time for me," she said. "I want to be able
to go out with him when he comes back. Do you think I shall be slow in learning? Perhaps I
ought to be lighter to ride well."

"I think you will be pretty sure to have a first-class seat," Osborn answered. "You will be
likely to look particularly well."

"Do you think I shall? How good you are to encourage me. How soon could I begin?"

She was quite agreeably excited. In fact, she was delighted by innocent visions of herself
as Walderhurst's equestrian companion. Perhaps if she sat well, and learned fine control of
her horse, he might be pleased, and turn to look at her, as they rode side by side, with that
look of approval and dawning warmth which brought such secret joy to her soul.

"When may I take my first lesson?" she said quite eagerly to Captain Osborn, for whom a footman
was pouring out a glass of wine.

"As soon," he answered, "as I have taken out the mare two or three times myself. I want to
know her thoroughly. I would not let you mount her until I had learned her by heart."

They went out to the stables after lunch and visited the mare in her loose box. She was a fine
beast, and seemed as gentle as a child.

Captain Osborn asked questions of the head groom concerning her. She had a perfect reputation,
but nevertheless she was to be taken over to the Kennel stables a few days before Lady Walderhurst
mounted her.

"It is necessary to be more than careful," Osborn said to Hester that night. "There would be
the devil and all to pay if anything went wrong."

The mare was brought over the next morning. She was a shining bay, and her name was Faustine.

In the afternoon Captain Osborn took her out. He rode her far and learned her thoroughly before
he brought her back. She was as lively as a kitten, but as kind as a dove. Nothing could have
been better tempered and safer. She would pass anything, even the unexpected appearance of
a road-mending engine turning a corner did not perceptibly disturb her.

"Is she well behaved?" Hester asked at dinner time.

"Yes, apparently," was his answer; "but I shall take her out once or twice again."

He did take her out again, and had only praise for her on each occasion. But the riding lessons
did not begin at once. In fact he was, for a number of reasons, in a sullen and unsociable
humour which did not incline him towards the task he had undertaken. He made various excuses
for not beginning the lessons, and took Faustine out almost every day.

But Hester had an idea that he did not enjoy his rides. He used to return from them with a
resentful, sombre look, as if his reflections had not been pleasant company for him. In truth
they were not pleasant company. He was beset by thoughts he did not exactly care to be beset
by--thoughts which led him farther than he really cared to go, which did not incline him to
the close companionship of Lady Walderhurst. It was these thoughts which led him on his long
rides; it was one of them which impelled him, one morning, as he was passing a heap of broken
stone, piled for the mending of the ways by the roadside, to touch Faustine with heel and whip.
The astonished young animal sprang aside curvetting. She did not understand, and to horse-nature
the uncomprehended is alarming. She was more bewildered and also more fretted when, in passing
the next stone heap, she felt the same stinging touches. What did it mean? Was she to avoid
this thing, to leap at sight of it, to do what? She tossed her delicate head and snorted in
her trouble. The country road was at some distance from Palstrey, and was little frequented.
No one was in sight. Osborn glanced about him to make sure of this fact. A long stretch of
road lay before him, with stone heaps piled at regular intervals. He had taken a big whiskey
and soda at the last wayside inn he had passed, and drink did not make him drunk so much as
mad. He pushed the mare ahead, feeling in just the humour to try experiments with her.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Alec is very determined that you shall be safe on Faustine," Hester said to Emily. "He takes
her out every day."

"It is very good of him," answered Emily.

Hester thought she looked a trifle nervous, and wondered why. She did not say anything about
the riding lessons, and in fact had seemed of late less eager and interested. In the first
place, it had been Alec who had postponed, now it was she. First one trifling thing and then
another seemed to interpose.

"The mare is as safe as a feather-bed," Osborn said to her one afternoon when they were taking
tea on the lawn at Palstrey. "You had better begin now if you wish to accomplish anything before
Lord Walderhurst comes back. What do you hear from him as to his return?"

Emily had heard that he was likely to be detained longer than he had expected. It seemed always
to be the case that people were detained by such business. He was annoyed, but it could not
be helped. There was a rather tired look in her eyes and she was paler than usual.

"I am going up to town to-morrow," she said. "The riding lessons might begin after I come back."

"Are you anxious about anything?" Hester asked her as she was preparing for the drive back
to The Kennel Farm.

"No, no," Emily answered. "Only--"

"Only what?"

"I should be so glad if--if he were not away."

Hester gazed reflectively at her suddenly quivering face.

"I don't think I ever saw a woman so fond of a man," she said.

Emily stood still. She was quite silent. Her eyes slowly filled. She had never been able to
say much about what she felt for Walderhurst. Hers was a large, dumb, primitive affection.

She sat at her open bedroom window a long time that evening. She rested her chin upon her hand
and looked up at the deeps of blue powdered with the diamond dust of stars. It seemed to her
that she had never looked up and seen such myriads of stars before. She felt far away from
earthly things and tremulously uplifted. During the last two weeks she had lived in a tumult
of mind, of amazement, of awe, of hope and fear. No wonder that she looked pale and that her
face was full of anxious yearning. There were such wonders in the world, and she, Emily Fox-Seton,
no, Emily Walderhurst, seemed to have become part of them.

She clasped her hands tight together and leaned forward into the night with her face turned
upwards. Very large drops began to roll fast down her cheeks, one after the other. The argument
of scientific observation might have said she was hysterical, and whether with or without reason
is immaterial. She did not try to check her tears or wipe them away, because she did not know
that she was crying. She began to pray, and heard herself saying the Lord's Prayer like a child.

"Our Father who art in Heaven--Our Father who art in Heaven, hallowed be Thy name," she murmured
imploringly.

She said the prayer to the end, and then began it over again. She said it three or four times,
and her appeal for daily bread and the forgiveness of trespasses expressed what her inarticulate
nature could not have put into words. Beneath the entire vault of heaven's dark blue that night
there was nowhere lifted to the Unknown a prayer more humbly passion-full and gratefully imploring
than her final whisper.

"For Thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen, amen."

When she left her seat at the window and turned towards the room again, Jane Cupp, who was
preparing for the morrow's journey and was just entering with a dress over her arm, found herself
restraining a start at sight of her.

"I hope you are quite well, my lady," she faltered.

"Yes," Lady Walderhurst answered. "I think I am very well--very well, Jane. You will be quite
ready for the early train to-morrow morning."

"Yes, my lady, quite."

"I have been thinking," said Emily gently, almost in a tone of reverie, "that if your uncle
had not wanted your mother so much it would have been nice to have her here with us. She is
such an experienced person, and so kind. I never forget how kind she was to me when I had the
little room in Mortimer Street."

"Oh! my lady, you was kind to us," cried Jane.

She recalled afterwards, with tears, how her ladyship moved nearer to her and took her hand
with what Jane called "her wonderful good look," which always brought a lump to her throat.

"But I always count on you, Jane," she said. "I count on you so much."

"Oh! my lady," Jane cried again, "it's my comfort to believe it. I'd lay down my life for your
ladyship, I would indeed."

Emily sat down, and on her face there was a soft, uplifted smile.

"Yes," she said, and Jane Cupp saw that she was reflective again, and the words were not addressed
exactly, to herself, "one would be quite ready to lay down one's life for the person one loved.
It seems even a little thing, doesn't it?"

Chapter Fourteen

Lady Walderhurst remained in town a week, and Jane Cupp remained with her, in the house in
Berkeley Square, which threw open its doors to receive them on their arrival quite as if they
had never left it. The servants' hall brightened temporarily in its hope that livelier doings
might begin to stir the establishment, but Jane Cupp was able to inform inquirers that the
visit was only to be a brief one.

"We are going back to Palstrey next Monday," she explained. "My lady prefers the country, and
she is very fond of Palstrey; and no wonder. It doesn't seem at all likely she'll come to stay
in London until his lordship gets back."

"We hear," said the head housemaid, "that her ladyship is very kind to Captain Osborn and his
wife, and that Mrs. Osborn's in a delicate state of health."

"It would be a fine thing for us if it was in our family," remarked an under housemaid who
was pert.

Jane Cupp looked extremely reserved.

"Is it true," the pert housemaid persisted, "that the Osborns can't abide her?"

"It's true," said Jane, severely, "that she's goodness itself to them, and they ought to adore
her."

"We hear they don't," put in the tallest footman. "And who wonders. If she was an angel, there's
just a chance that she may give Captain Osborn a wipe in the eye, though she is in her thirties."

"It's not for us," said Jane, stiffly, "to discuss thirties or forties or fifties either, which
are no business of ours. There's one gentleman, and him a marquis, as chose her over the heads
of two beauties in their teens, at least."

"Well, for the matter of that," admitted the tall footman, "I'd have chose her myself, for
she's a fine woman."

Lady Maria was just on the point of leaving South Audley Street to make some visits in the
North, but she came and lunched with Emily, and was in great form.

She had her own opinion of a number of matters, some of which she discussed, some of which
she kept to herself. She lifted her gold lorgnette and looked Emily well over.

"Upon my word, Emily," she said, "I am proud of you. You are one of my successes. Your looks
are actually improving. There's something rather etherealised about your face to-day. I quite
agree with Walderhurst in all the sentimental things he says about you."

She said this last partly because she liked Emily and knew it would please her to hear that
her husband went to the length of dwelling on her charms in his conversation with other people,
partly because it entertained her to see the large creature's eyelids flutter and a big blush
sweep her cheek.

"He really was in great luck when he discovered you," her ladyship went on briskly. "As for
that, I was in luck myself. Suppose you had been a girl who could not have been left. As Walderhurst
is short of female relatives, it would have fallen to me to decently dry-nurse you. And there
would have been the complications arising from a girl being baby enough to want to dance about
to places, and married enough to feel herself entitled to defy her chaperone; she couldn't
have been trusted to chaperone herself. As it is, Walderhurst, can go where duty calls, etc.,
and I can make my visits and run about, and you, dear thing, are quite happy at Palstrey playing
Lady Bountiful and helping the little half-breed woman to expect her baby. I daresay you sit
and make dolly shirts and christening robes hand in hand."

"We enjoy it all very much," Emily answered, adding imploringly, "please don't call her a little
half-breed woman. She's such a dear little thing, Lady Maria."

Lady Maria indulged in the familiar chuckle and put up her lorgnette to examine her again.

"There's a certain kind of early Victorian saintliness about you, Emily Walderhurst, which
makes my joy," she said. "You remind me of Lady Castlewood, Helen Pendennis, and Amelia Sedley,
with the spitefulness and priggishness and catty ways left out. You are as nice as Thackeray
thought they were, poor mistaken man. I am not going to suffuse you with blushes by explaining
to you that there is what my nephew would call a jolly good reason why, if you were not an
early Victorian and improved Thackerayian saint, you would not be best pleased at finding yourself
called upon to assist at this interesting occasion. Another kind of woman would probably feel
like a cat towards the little Osborn. But even the mere reason itself, as a reason, has not
once risen in your benign and pellucid mind. You have a pellucid mind, Emily; I should be rather
proud of the word if I had invented it myself to describe you. But I didn't. It was Walderhurst.
You have actually wakened up the man's intellects, such as they are."

She evidently had a number of opinions of the Osborns. She liked neither of them, but it was
Captain Osborn she especially disliked.

"He is really an underbred person," she explained, "and he hasn't the sharpness to know that
is the reason Walderhurst detests him. He had vulgar, cheap sort of affairs, and nearly got
into the kind of trouble people don't forgive. What a fool a creature in his position is to
offend the taste of the man he may inherit from, and who, if he were not antagonistic to him,
would regard him as a sort of duty. It wasn't his immorality particularly. Nobody is either
moral or immoral in these days, but penniless persons must be decent. It's all a matter of
taste and manners. I haven't any morals myself, my dear, but I have beautiful manners. A woman
can have the kind of manners which keep her from breaking the Commandments. As to the Commandments,
they are awfully easy things not to break. Who wants to break them, good Lord! Thou shall do
no murder. Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt not commit, etc. Thou shalt not bear false witness.
That's simply gossip and lying, and they are bad manners. If you have good manners, you don't."

She chatted on in her pungent little worldly, good-humoured way through the making of a very
excellent lunch. After which she settled her smart bonnet with clever touches, kissed Emily
on both cheeks, and getting into her brougham rolled off smiling and nodding.

Emily stood at the drawing-room window and watched her equipage roll round the square and into
Charles Street, and then turned away into the big, stately empty room, sighing without intending
to do so while she smiled herself.

"She's so witty and so amusing," she said; "but one would no more think of telling her anything
than one would think of catching a butterfly and holding it while one made it listen. She would
be so bored if she was confided in."

Which was most true. Never in her life had her ladyship allowed herself the indiscretion of
appearing a person in whom confidences might be reposed. She had always had confidences enough
of her own to take care of, without sharing those of other people.

"Good heavens!" she had exclaimed once, "I should as soon think of assuming another woman's
wrinkles."

On the first visit Lady Walderhurst made to The Kennel Farm the morning after her return to
Palstrey, when Alec Osborn helped her from her carriage, he was not elated by the fact that
he had never seen her look so beautifully alive and blooming during his knowledge of her. There
was a fine rose on her cheek, and her eyes were large and happily illumined.

"How well you look!" broke from him with an involuntariness he was alarmed to realise as almost
spiteful. The words were an actual exclamation which he had not meant to utter, and Emily Walderhurst
even started a trifle and looked at him with a moment's question.

"But you look well, too," she answered. "Palstrey agrees with both of us. You have such a colour."

"I have been riding," he replied. "I told you I meant to know Faustine thoroughly before I
let you mount her. She is ready for you now. Can you take your first lesson to-morrow?"

"I--I don't quite know," she hesitated. "I will tell you a little later. Where is Hester?"

Hester was in the drawing-room. She was lying on a sofa before an open window and looking rather
haggard and miserable. She had, in fact, just had a curious talk with Alec which had ended
in something like a scene. As Hester's health grew more frail, her temper became more fierce,
and of late there had been times when a certain savagery, concealed with difficulty in her
husband's moods, affected her horribly.

This morning she felt a new character in Emily's manner. She was timid and shy, and a little
awkward. Her child-like openness of speech and humour seemed obscured. She had less to say
than usual, and at the same time there was a suggestion of restless unease about her. Hester
Osborn, after a few minutes, began to have an odd feeling that the woman's eyes held a question
or a desire in them.

She had brought some superb roses from the Manor gardens, and she moved about arranging them
for Hester in vases.

"It is beautiful to come back to the country," she said. "When I get into the carriage at the
station and drive through the sweet air, I always feel as if I were beginning to live again,
and as if in London I had not been quite alive. It seemed so heavenly in the rose garden at
Palstrey to-day, to walk about among those thousands of blooming lovely things breathing scent
and nodding their heavy, darling heads."

"The roads are in a beautiful condition for riding," Hester said, "and Alec says that Faustine
is perfect. You ought to begin to-morrow morning. Shall you?"

She spoke the words somewhat slowly, and her face did not look happy. But, then, it never was
a really happy face. The days of her youth had been too full of the ironies of disappointment.

There was a second's silence, and then she said again:

"Shall you, if it continues fine?"

Emily's hands were full of roses, both hands, and Hester saw both hands and roses tremble.
She turned round slowly and came towards her. She looked nervous, awkward, abashed, and as
if for that moment she was a big girl of sixteen appealing to her and overwhelmed with queer
feelings, and yet the depths of her eyes held a kind of trembling, ecstatic light. She came
and stood before her, holding the trembling roses as if she had been called up for confession.

"I--I mustn't," she half whispered. The corners of her lips drooped and quivered, and her voice
was so low that Hester could scarcely hear it. But she started and half sat up.

"You mustn't?" she gasped; yes, really it was gasped.

Emily's hand trembled so that the roses began to fall one by one, scattering a rain of petals
as they dropped.

"I mustn't," she repeated, low and shakily. "I had--reason.--I went to town to see--somebody. Now
she had moved a little aside, the hands had to be tired, which is curved and looked ready to work.
The old man sighed and said to himself: "Yes, if I still could as they used to, "She said working
well, because had they done so bravely all their lives. Now she was old, and the once vigorous
and untiring wash woman could do do nothing more than a little spin, and was wearing a very
little. However, they had have been brought by a couple of years in this way and still get to
her grandchild, who lived with her and not much could earn. It was even his little income, for
it was a nimble and clever child.

Today, the Grandmother fulfilled, however, a special grief that her ever since the early Morning,
the heart had been heavy. Her grandchild, the cheerful Trini, which from an early had brought
up was twelve years old. It was released in spring of the school and will then go into a service.
This morning the now distant cousin was down from the Reuss had come up and the old cousin
made the suggestion, the child to trust him. He had not much and could even be nothing, but it was down
there a good earnings to find. Because the new factory, which was built at the water-rich Reuss needed
many workers. There was the Trini a week to earn about a nice piece of money, and next to it
could do the necessary work at his home, but he wanted to accommodate it. As his wife was sickly
and they could do no maid, so they were welcome here the child, because they knew it was big and strong
and very skilled.

The Grandmother zugehoert keep silent, but in her heart were the words of a great Battle kindled.
The cousin also wished that the child has come down in the autumn, the half a school year may
already be abbreviated, as it knew enough and could be something like . Earn Also would have
a woman in winter particularly necessary. The Grandmother had still said nothing. Now, as the
cousin wanted to succeed and have the same consent, she said, he would have to give her a little
time. Before the fall, they would not even . Decide You see the advantage of the child well,
but they must all first nor superior to, and then talk with the child. The cousin was not quite
satisfied, he would have liked all the same be made and determined the day should come down
when the Trini. He said, was with the child but nothing to talk about that still do not have a reason
and know his own advantage. But the Grandmother remained steadfast. In the fall, he may still
come once, then determined he should have an answer. If she was in agreement then, he could then
immediately take the child himself, for the moment she could no more . Say They stayed. The
cousin saw that there was to do nothing. He warned again old cousin of the child benefit to be quite
appreciable. It was indeed but also their own Advantageous for the child to take something and
they can also support later. Then he left.

The whole day during the work thought the Grandmother about the words of his cousin, but they could
come to no decision. Now in the twilight she considered carefully and they had a few deep sigh
here. The cousin was right, it was a big advantage for the child that he could live in his house,
from there to the factory in a safe to find merit. She herself did not advantageous way for the
child, she knew actually no. All around were only small goods, which the people themselves all
built and they had to help their own children enough. Who hired a maid, as below had in the rectory
or in the home or office in the new inn, the women were doing, because older his girl. There were
strong, adult persons who work in kitchen and garden . Knew

The Goldaepfelbaeuerin on the big, rich fruit farm has always had
a maid, but also a large and strong that it could help in everything.

Nevertheless, it was never long on the the farmer's wife to stay. If you do not even an adult
to work right could, then what would be a child as the Trini for them. That the child but in
the spring, when It has now been dismissed from school, had to look for work, which saw the well-Grandmother
one. Since they are no longer as they used to as a washer could go to work, but only laboriously
with their crooked fingers at the spinning wheel worked, she was hardly in a position to and maintain
the child. And every day it could be difficult for them. And yet, being forced to part with the
child who came before the Grandmother as the most serious of which they could do.

Would make the task for the young child should not be too hard? The old woman knew well how It
was with his cousin.

He had a rude and unfriendly way and was generally surly. His wife was still ill and therefore
not in a good mood. She sat mostly joyless and as blunt in their corner by the stove and did not say
a word. It was now become so bad with her, that the man had to remember to bring a help to the
house. Since then the child would have the Business of the house to get all alone and could only
then go to work in the factory. Was now for all the work the child is not too young? And he was
not too heavy fall away from the Grandmother, it was so nice to go into a very strange house. They
would bear to hear not a word of love and comfort? It was her dear Trineli not used.

The Grandmother was that day in mind when it was brought her into the house, a small, helpless thing,
no one could do and maintain that no one wanted.

At that time she had still vigorous hands and good forces, and if they had to be from early to
late doing business, she did it gladly. The Waschkaethe had had three children, two sons and
a daughter. Her husband had died of a burning fever, when all three children were very little. Since
the Kaethe had to work a lot, so the kids some clothes and had no Deficiency suffered. Day
and night she was at work, and everyone around them called for help in the large laundry. For we
knew not worked as good as the Kaethe, because of This activity was called everywhere only
Waschkaethe. When her sons were high, were they desire to wander off into the distance, and went
together to America. The daughter married and went down into the valley. But not much more
than a year later she died suddenly still quite young. The afflicted her husband so much that
he could not endure it at home. He brought up the very small Trineli to Grandmother and said, "There,
mother, you take the Child, I know nothing to do with it. I have to go, it does not keep me
here anymore. "Then he went to the in-law to America.

From the day had the Waschkaethe a new concern, but also a new, great pleasure to much grief and
suffering.

The small Trineli developed quickly and was worth the good Grandmother their effort and work
with an uncommon love and devotion. They had many happy hours together, because the child was always
so mobile and living as a gay Fish in the water. With every year it was the Grandmother dear
and indispensable.

All of these past days gone now in the twilight in front of the old Waschkaethe, and the thought
of the child so far and perhaps to send for all of the time, made for the heart and more difficult.
But they knew a Troester, who you have in many dark hours and also had helped alleviate some dreaded
suffering. They wanted to but not forgotten. Rather, as so heavy, thought-out and herzuwaelzen within
her, she wanted now the whole thing to God about giving. Had to be there and she had this pain
of Endure separation, yet the Lord's protective hand was there. It could indeed everything
done for the good of the child and his well went over the her own. When the Grandmother had
put in all this is over, she folded her hands and quietly said reverently himself:

"Drum, my soul, be thou silent to God, as the gebuehret's when he
you so, as he wants, and not as you want led.

Then comes the goal of the dark run, you put your mouth with joy, praise and thanksgiving.
"

2.

Chapter

In the strawberries

While the old Kaethe thought lost so only at her spinning wheel and then in the twilight sat, it went
up on the sun Rain to quite loud. Here grew each year an abundance of the most beautiful,
most succulent strawberries. If they were mature, it often seemed as if a large, dark red carpet
Rain from the Sun sat down, glowing in the sun. The place was the children of high pines, as the
small, scattered houses was called from existing Bergdoerfchen well known. You knew quite
well that if you let the berries ripen, so a nice profit achieve was. Because this unusually
large, juicy berries were purchased everywhere you. Thus, the children reported self-respecting
each other, that not too early to the berries obsolete before they had acquired the right maturity.
Rang but in a beautiful June day among the school children of the call: "Are you ready for
the sun Rain you are ready!", then crashed On that same day the whole
band out of the sun Rain.

Each child had a basket in hand, and ran as fast as she could, because each was first on the pitch
be and find the most beautiful and mature berries.

Brought along, basket, Kratten called, had all the same shape but different sizes. They had
the shape of top hats, with the difference that the bottom in these opening is where the head
is put into it, but for those above, where thrown into the strawberries be. Then, when the
dawn came and we could not see the berries, The work was completed. Then we covered the Kratten
with large leaves and fortified two wooden chopsticks crosswise about
it, so that the wind leaves no kidnapping.

Well, there was widespread at the strawberry song, full of gaiety and moved heimwaerts the
whole band. All of their voices sang:

Strawberries rollers, Kratten all, the full, strawberries with stems, now they are carried
home to many branches of strawberries, the mean is the best!

The fastest and most diligent of all was the granddaughter of all the old Waschkaethe, the Trini
funny. Always knew it, where the berries were the most beautiful and at least find out more
had been picked. Then it shot away and plucked with a skill that no other Child was faster and
the slow in its vicinity do not get caught. At a small Kick it came to the Trini while also not possible
if a nice place especially in the eye remembered where already collected another child berries.
Never ate it from the fruits, to be Kratten was so full that it just yet fix the wooden rod
over the leaves could not suppress the delicate fruits together.

Only then were some of the sweet-scented Berries in the mouth and tasted wonderful after hard
work. Previously, they had but the Trini tasted not, because it seemed to him that they were
all part of the Grandmother, to not a single berry everything went in the Kratten.

The Trini is very strained, for his dear Grandmother to do something. It felt well as self-sacrificing
and good she was to him and how hard they still worked, so they Both had suffered no shortage.
It also had all his life never other than lovingly Words heard from her. And how many times it had
felt that they much prefer themselves as something he denied. For this, we go with the whole
heart of the Grandmother, and tremendous joy when she saw the berry time to come back. Then
there was his full daily Kratten bring home or take him to where he was appointed to be a nice
Geldstueck to earn. That was for the Grandmother a large dose, which of course only a short Lasted.
Brought a lot but only the very largest Kratten, and this had the Trini and the small, pale
Maneli. This was never just for its Kratten Half fill. The Maneli, the name was actually Maria
was Trini with the same age.

Both were sitting on the same school, but she looked very different. Trini was great and strong
and had strong, round arms and red cheeks. It was afraid of the biggest Boys in school, because
it knew how to defend himself.

The Maneli but was thin, pale and very Shy. It was poorly dressed and looked out, as it never
get enough to eat, that's right probably because it had five smaller Siblings and his mother
was often sick. The father, who was a Tageloehner did not always so much at home that it arrived
at all. Even now, as the dawn heranrueckte had Trini Maneli the powerless with a violent kick
pushed onto the page. For it was was still fast at one point, which was covered with very large
berries, and Trini his Kratten vollfuellen it.

He also succeeded, and, above all others it called now confident
of victory: "! full finished home home!"

Now called the other "home home!" and Trini had already placed himself by his full, nicely packaged
Kratten to the Train to lead. In a clear voice began to sing:

Strawberries rollers, Kratten all, the full ...

On reaching the crowd singing and shouting the first houses, the children
suddenly flew all apart, on the upswing, the downward others.

The Trini ran with all their might up the hill, it had to go for a pretty long way. The little
house of Grandmother was high and was the highest of all high fir trees. Now the Trini arrived
at the court of Goldaepfelbaeuerin over.

She looked just over the hedge that enclosed the yard, and when they run past the child as
saw, she called to him: "Come here once and show me your berries!"

The Trini was in his zeal has a good piece about the place beyond,
where the farmer's wife stood, but it came back quickly, as can the
prospect of selling the berries immediately, it came in handy.

"Have you anything right?" Show me! " "continued the woman, as the Trini to the hedge stood
and lifted his Kratten to her.

"I buy no other such goods, it grows better on my farm. But they say, cooked the stuff was good
against all kinds of evil. How give her! What they give you down at the inn for the berries? "

"A Swiss francs," replied the Trini.

"So, that's enough for such soft stuff.

But you must have's for your Grandmother sake, this is a brave woman who works hard. You bring
her home but the money and do not fuss with it? "

"No, I do not," replied the Trini. It looked at the farmer's wife with eyes that are a small
wild cat is not dissimilar goods, for it is annoyed about this suspicion. The woman laughed
and said:

"Just not the same so upset, something also happens. But come, we do well again his friend! There,
the Swiss franc is for the Grandmother, and if I have a coin for giving up so's you will not
be sorry. So, now running again!

"

The Trini thanked excited and ran away heard, not even to run until the top Little house had
arrived. Now it stormed into the small room where it was almost dark had become. Only a last
strip of light shone in the evening sky still in the window inside,
where the Grandmother sat.

The Trini crashed over to her and told so eager about his experiences, that always wanted
the second word before the first out. It took a long time before the Grandmother had understood
that the strawberries were already sold and a whole franc and another Geldstueck had been disbursed
for that.

Also had Grandmother to take the Trini wanted to keep any money, because it should all of Grandmother
. Belong That they still a Geldstueck above the ordinary was made, the Trini a particular
pleasure.

"Yes, Grandmother, and you see," went on the Trini still half out of breath, "I was before
any other ready first and he had the Kratten as full as any other child. The Maneli had its not
half full. It was also terribly slow, and when it was a good spot to which I came, I had already
weggerupft everything before could catch only a handful. "

The Grandmother had to have received the good news and about the abundant
Profit for the child happy.

But now she said earnestly: "But Trineli, but pushes you not the Maneli away when it has found
a good spot, so you then the berries get?

That would not be right. "

"But, of course, I do already, do you always, Grandmother," assured the Trini. "It has all see
that it caught the most and the most beautiful. So it goes s always so rough to. "
"No, no, you need to press the small, weak Maneli not do more," warned
the Grandmother. "You see, it can not pay not only you, it is powerless
and can not defend themselves, and his mother, who needed the berries.
Sometimes they certainly do not know where they for all which is to
small children hernehmen bread. Do not do more, Trineli, let the poor
little Another time come to their berries. But now sit down here to
me, "went to Grandmother in a different tone continues, "I have something
to talk with you, you are sensible enough to to understand it. "

Curiously,
the child sat down, for it was never happened before that the Grandmother
it looked so serious to talk to him.

"Trineli" caught it now, slowly,
"we have to remember what you do for work could now when you come
home from school in the spring. The cousin of the Reuss valley is
this morning was here. In the fall you could come down to him and
you in there, the Factory to earn some. Perhaps it would be your happiness.
You could one-year Next come the other and thus make your way. What
do you think? "

Being reminded of the book again, she carried it down herself into the drawing-room. It was
a volume she was fond of because it recorded romantic stories of certain noble dames of Walderhurst
lineage.

Her special predilection was a Dame Ellena, who, being left with but few servitors in attendance
during her lord's absence from his castle on a foraging journey into an enemy's country, had
defended the stronghold boldly against the attack of a second enemy who had adroitly seized
the opportunity to forage for himself. In the cellars had been hidden treasure recently acquired
by the usual means, and knowing this, Dame Ellena had done splendid deeds, marshalling her
small forces in such way as deceived the attacking party and showing herself in scorn upon
the battlements, a fierce, beauteous woman about to give her lord an heir, yet fearing naught,
and only made more fierce and full of courage by this fact. The son, born but three weeks later,
had been the most splendid and savage fighter of his name, and a giant in build and strength.

"I suppose," Emily said when they discussed the legend after dinner, "I suppose she felt that
she could do anything," with her italics. "I daresay nothing could make her afraid, but the
thought that something might go wrong while her husband was away. And strength was given her."

She was so thrilled that she got up and walked across the room with quite a fine sweep of heroic
movement in her momentary excitement. She held her head up and smiled with widening eyes.

But she saw Captain Osborn drag at his black moustache to hide an unattractive grin, and she
was at once abashed into feeling silly and shy. She sat down again with awkward self-consciousness.

"I'm afraid I'm making you laugh at me," she apologised, "but that story always gives me such
a romantic feeling. I like her so."

"Oh! not at all, not all," said Osborn. "I was not laughing really; oh no!"

But he had been, and had been secretly calling her a sentimental, ramping idiot.

It was a great day for Jane Cupp when her mother arrived at Palstrey Manor. It was a great
day for Mrs. Cupp also. When she descended from the train at the little country station, warm
and somewhat flushed by her emotions and the bugled splendours of her best bonnet and black
silk mantle, the sight of Jane standing neatly upon the platform almost overcame her. Being
led to his lordship's own private bus, and seeing her trunk surrounded by the attentions of
an obsequious station-master and a liveried young man, she was conscious of concealing a flutter
with dignified reserve.

"My word, Jane!" she exclaimed after they had taken their seats in the vehicle. "My word, you
look as accustomed to it as if you had been born in the family."

But it was when, after she had been introduced to the society in the servants' hall, she was
settled in her comfortable room next to Jane's own that she realised to the full that there
were features of her position which marked it with importance almost startling. As Jane talked
to her, the heat of the genteel bonnet and beaded mantle had nothing whatever to do with the
warmth which moistened her brow.

"I thought I'd keep it till I saw you, mother," said the girl decorously. "I know what her
ladyship feels about being talked over. If I was a lady myself, I shouldn't like it. And I
know how deep you'll feel it, that when the doctor advised her to get an experienced married
person to be at hand, she said in that dear way of hers, 'Jane, if your uncle could spare your
mother, how I should like to have her. I've never forgot her kindness in Mortimer Street.'"

Mrs. Cupp fanned her face with a handkerchief of notable freshness.

"If she was Her Majesty," she said, "she couldn't be more sacred to me, nor me more happy to
be allowed the privilege."

Jane had begun to put her mother's belongings away. She was folding and patting a skirt on
the bed. She fussed about a little nervously and then lifted a rather embarrassed face.

"I'm glad you are here, mother," she said. "I'm thankful to have you!"

Mrs. Cupp ceased fanning and stared at her with a change of expression. She found herself involuntarily
asking her next question in a half whisper.

"Why, Jane, what is it?"

Jane came nearer.

"I don't know," she answered, and her voice also was low. "Perhaps I'm silly and overanxious,
because I am so fond of her. But that Ameerah, I actually dream about her."

"What! The black woman?",

"If I was to say a word, or if you did, and we was wrong, how should we feel? I've kept my
nerves to myself till I've nearly screamed sometimes. And my lady would be so hurt if she knew.
But--well," in a hurried outburst, "I do wish his lordship was here, and I do wish the Osborns
wasn't. I do wish it, I tell you that."

"Good Lord!" cried Mrs. Cupp, and after staring with alarmed eyes a second or so, she wiped
a slight dampness from her upper lip.

She was of the order of female likely to take a somewhat melodramatic view of any case offering
her an opening in that direction.

"Jane!" she gasped faintly, "do you think they'd try to take her life?"

"Goodness, no!" ejaculated Jane, with even a trifle of impatience. "People like them daren't.
But suppose they was to try to, well, to upset her in some way, what a thing for them it would be."

After which the two women talked together for some time in whispers, Jane bringing a chair
to place opposite her mother's. They sat knee to knee, and now and then Jane shed a tear from
pure nervousness. She was so appalled by the fear of making a mistake which, being revealed
by some chance, would bring confusion upon and pain of mind to her lady.

"At all events," was Mrs. Cupp's weighty observation when their conference was at an end, "here
we both are, and two pairs of eyes and ears and hands and legs is a fat lot better than one,
where there's things to be looked out for."

Her training in the matter of subtlety had not been such as Ameerah's, and it may not be regarded
as altogether improbable that her observation of the Ayah was at times not too adroitly concealed,
but if the native woman knew that she was being remarked, she gave no sign of her knowledge.
She performed her duties faithfully and silently, she gave no trouble, and showed a gentle
subservience and humbleness towards the white servants which won immense approbation. Her manner
towards Mrs. Cupp's self was marked indeed by something like a tinge of awed deference, which,
it must be confessed, mollified the good woman, and awakened in her a desire to be just and
lenient even to the dark of skin and alien of birth.

"She knows her betters when she sees them, and has pretty enough manners for a black," the
object of her respectful obeisances remarked. "I wonder if she's ever heard of her Maker, and
if a little brown Testament with good print wouldn't be a good thing to give her?"

This boon was, in fact, bestowed upon her as a gift. Mrs. Cupp bought it for a shilling at
a small shop in the village. Ameerah, in whose dusky being was incorporated the occult faith
of lost centuries, and whose gods had been gods through mystic ages, received the fat, little
brown book with down-dropped lids and grateful obeisance. These were her words to her mistress:

"The fat old woman with protruding eyes bestowed it upon me. She says it is the book of her
god. She has but one. She wishes me to worship him. Am I a babe to worship such a god as would
please her. She is old, and has lost her mind."

Lady Walderhurst's health continued all that could be desired. She arose smiling in the morning,
and bore her smile about with her all day. She walked much in the gardens, and spent long,
happy hours sewing in her favourite sitting-room. Work which she might have paid other women
to do, she did with her own hands for the mere sentimental bliss of it. Sometimes she sat with
Hester and sewed, and Hester lay on a sofa and stared at her moving hands.

"You know how to do it, don't you?" she once said.

"I was obliged to sew for myself when I was so poor, and this is delightful," was Emily's answer.

"But you could buy it all and save yourself the trouble."

Emily stroked her bit of cambric and looked awkward.

"I'd rather not," she said.

Well as she was, she began to think she did not sleep quite so soundly as had been habitual
with her. She started up in bed now and again as if she had been disturbed by some noise, but
when she waited and listened she heard nothing. At least this happened on two or three occasions.
And then one night, having been lying folded in profound, sweet sleep, she sprang up in the
black darkness, wakened by an actual, physical reality of sensation, the soft laying of a hand
upon her naked side,--that, and nothing else.

"What is that? Who is there?" she cried. "Someone is in the room!"

Yes, someone was there. A few feet from her bed she heard a sobbing sigh, then a rustle, then
followed silence. She struck a match and, getting up, lighted candles. Her hand shook, but
she remembered that she must be firm with herself.

"I must not be nervous," she said, and looked the room over from end to end.

But it contained no living creature, nor any sign that living creature had entered it since
she had lain down to rest. Gradually the fast beating of her heart had slackened, and she passed
her hand over her face in bewilderment.

"It wasn't like a dream at all," she murmured; "it really wasn't. I felt it."

Still as absolutely nothing was to be found, the sense of reality diminished somewhat, and
being so healthy a creature, she regained her composure, and on going back to bed slept well
until Jane brought her early tea.

Under the influence of fresh morning air and sunlight, of ordinary breakfast and breakfast
talk with the Osborns, her first convictions receded so far that she laughed a little as she
related the incident.

"I never had such a real dream in my life," she said; "but it must have been a dream."

"One's dreams are very real sometimes," said Hester.

"Perhaps it was the Palstrey ghost," Osborn laughed. "It came to you because you ignore it."
He broke off with a slight sudden start and stared at her a second questioningly. "Did you
say it put its hand on your side?" he asked.

"Don't tell her silly things that will frighten her. How ridiculous of you," exclaimed Hester
sharply. "It's not proper."

Emily looked at both of them wonderingly.

"What do you mean?" she said. "I don't believe in ghosts. It won't frighten me, Hester. I never
even heard of a Palstrey ghost."

"Then I am not going to tell you of one," said Captain Osborn a little brusquely, and he left
his chair and went to the sideboard to cut cold beef.

He kept his back towards them, and his shoulders looked uncommunicative and slightly obstinate.
Hester's face was sullen. Emily thought it sweet of her to care so much, and turned upon her
with grateful eyes.

"I was only frightened for a few minutes, Hester," she said. "My dreams are not vivid at all,
usually."

But howsoever bravely she ignored the shock she had received, it was not without its effect,
which was that occasionally there drifted into her mind a recollection of the suggestion that
Palstrey had a ghost. She had never heard of it, and was in fact of an orthodoxy so ingenuously
entire as to make her feel that belief in the existence of such things was a sort of defiance
of ecclesiastical laws. Still, such stories were often told in connection with old places,
and it was natural to wonder what features marked this particular legend. Did it lay hands
on people's sides when they were asleep? Captain Osborn had asked his question as if with a
sudden sense of recognition. But she would not let herself think of the matter, and she would
not make inquiries.

The result was that she did not sleep well for several nights. She was annoyed at herself,
because she found that she kept lying awake as if listening or waiting. And it was not a good
thing to lose one's sleep when one wanted particularly to keep strong.

Jane Cupp during this week was, to use her own words, "given quite a turn" by an incident which,
though a small matter, might have proved untoward in its results.

The house at Palstrey, despite its age, was in a wonderful state of preservation, the carved
oak balustrades of the stairways being considered particularly fine.

"What but Providence," said Jane piously, in speaking to her mother the next morning, "made
me look down the staircase as I passed through the upper landing just before my lady was going
down to dinner. What but Providence I couldn't say. It certainly wasn't because I've done it
before that I remember. But just that one evening I was obliged to cross the landing for something,
and my eye just lowered itself by accident, and there it was!"

"Just where it would have tripped her up. Good Lord! it makes my heart turn over to hear you
tell it. How big a bit of carving was it?" Mrs. Cupp's opulent chest trimmings heaved.

"Only a small piece that had broken off from old age and worm-eatenness, I suppose, but it
had dropped just where she wouldn't have caught sight of it, and ten to one would have stepped
on it and turned her ankle and been thrown from the top to the bottom of the whole flight.
Suppose I hadn't seen it in time to pick it up before she went down. Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Mother!"

"I should say so!" Mrs. Cupp's manner approached the devout. This incident it was which probably
added to Jane's nervous sense of responsibility. She began to watch her mistress's movements
with hyper-sensitive anxiety. She fell into the habit of going over her bedroom two or three
times a day, giving a sort of examination to its contents.

"Perhaps I'm so fond of her that it's making me downright silly," she said to her mother; "but
it seems as if I can't help it. I feel as if I'd like to know everything she does, and go over
the ground to make sure of it before she goes anywhere. I'm so proud of her, mother; I'm just
as proud as if I was some connection of the family, instead of just her maid. It'll be such
a splendid thing if she keeps well and everything goes as it should. Even people like us can
see what it means to a gentleman that can go back nine hundred years. If I was Lady Maria Bayne,
I'd be here and never leave her. I tell you nothing could drive me from her."

"You are well taken care of," Hester had said. "That girl is devoted to you. In her lady's
maid's way she'd fight for your life."

"I think she is as faithful to me as Ameerah is to you," Emily answered. "I feel sure Ameerah
would fight for you."

Ameerah's devotion in these days took the form of a deep-seated hatred of the woman whom she
regarded as her mistress's enemy.

"It is an evil thing that she should take this place," she said. "She is an old woman. What
right hath she to think she may bear a son. Ill luck will come of it. She deserves any ill
fortune which may befall her."

"Sometimes," Lady Walderhurst once said to Osborn, "I feel as if Ameerah disliked me. She looks
at me in such a curious, stealthy way."

"She is admiring you," was his answer. "She thinks you are something a little supernatural,
because you are so tall and have such a fresh colour."

There was in the park at Palstrey Manor a large ornamental pool of water, deep and dark and
beautiful because of the age and hugeness of the trees which closed around it, and the water
plants which encircled and floated upon it. White and yellow flags and brown velvet rushes
grew thick about its edge, and water-lilies opened and shut upon its surface. An avenue of
wonderful limes led down to a flight of mossy steps, by which in times gone by people had descended
to the boat which rocked idly in the soft green gloom. There was an island on it, on which
roses had been planted and left to run wild; early in the year daffodils and other spring flowers
burst up through the grass and waved scented heads. Lady Walderhurst had discovered the place
during her honeymoon, and had loved it fondly ever since. The avenue leading to it was her
favourite walk; a certain seat under a tree on the island her favourite resting-place.

"It is so still there," she had said to the Osborns. "No one ever goes there but myself. When
I have crossed the little old bridge and sit down among the greenness with my book or work,
I feel as if there was no world at all. There is no sound but the rustle of the leaves and
the splash of the moor-hens who come to swim about. They don't seem to be afraid of me, neither
do the thrushes and robins. They know I shall only sit still and watch them. Sometimes they
come quite near."

She used, in fact, to take her letter-writing and sewing to the sweet, secluded place and spend
hours of pure, restful bliss. It seemed to her that her life became more lovely day by day.

Hester did not like the pool. She thought it too lonely and silent. She preferred her beflowered
boudoir or the sunny garden. Sometimes in these days she feared to follow her own thoughts.
She was being pushed--pushed towards the edge of her precipice, and it was only the working
of Nature that she should lose her breath and snatch at strange things to stay herself. Between
herself and her husband a sort of silence had grown. There were subjects of which they never
spoke, and yet each knew that the other's mind was given up to thought of them day and night.
There were black midnight hours when Hester, lying awake in her bed, knew that Alec lay awake
in his also. She had heard him many a time turn over with a caught breath and a smothered curse.
She did not ask herself what he was thinking of. She knew. She knew because she was thinking
of the same things herself. Of big, fresh, kind Emily Walderhurst lost in her dreams of exultant
happiness which never ceased to be amazed and grateful to prayerfulness; of the broad lands
and great, comfortable houses; of all it implied to be the Marquis of Walderhurst or his son;
of the long, sickening voyage back to India; of the hopeless muddle of life in an ill-kept
bungalow; of wretched native servants, at once servile and stubborn and given to lies and thefts.
More than once she was forced to turn on her face that she might smother her frenzied sobs
in her pillow.

It was on such a night--she had awakened from her sleep to notice such stillness in Osborn's
adjoining room, that she thought him profoundly asleep--that she arose from her bed to go and
sit at her open window.

She had not been seated there many minutes before she became singularly conscious, she did
not know how, of some presence near her among the bushes in the garden below. It had indeed
scarcely seemed to be sound or movement which had attracted her attention, and yet it must
have been one or both, for she involuntarily turned to a particular spot.

Yes, something, someone, was standing in a corner, hidden by shrubbery. It was the middle of
the night, and people were meeting. She sat still and almost breathless. She could hear nothing
and saw nothing but, between the leafage, a dim gleam of white. Only Ameerah wore white. After
a few seconds' waiting she began to think a strange thing, though she presently realised that,
taking all things into consideration, it was not strange at all. She got up very noiselessly
and stole into her husband's room. He was not there; the bed was empty, though he had slept
there earlier in the night.

She went back to her own bed and got into it again. In ten minutes' time Captain Osborn crept
upstairs and returned to bed also. Hester made no sign and did not ask any questions. She knew
he would have told her nothing, and also she did not wish to hear. She had seen him speaking
to Ameerah in the lane a few days before, and now that he was meeting her in the night she
knew that she need not ask herself what the subject of their consultation might be. But she
looked haggard in the morning.

Lady Walderhurst herself did not look well, For the last two or three nights she had been starting
from her sleep again with that eerie feeling of being wakened by someone at her bedside, though
she had found no one when she had examined the room on getting up.

"I am sorry to say I am afraid I am getting a little nervous," she had said to Jane Cupp. "I
will begin to take valerian, though it is really very nasty."

Jane herself had a somewhat harried expression of countenance. She did not mention to her mistress
that for some days she had been faithfully following a line of conduct she had begun to mark
out for herself. She had obtained a pair of list slippers and had been learning to go about
softly. She had sat up late and risen from her bed early, though she had not been rewarded
by any particularly marked discoveries. She had thought, however, that she observed that Ameerah
did not look at her as much as had been her habit, and she imagined she rather avoided her.
All she said to Lady Walderhurst was:

"Yes, my lady, mother thinks a great deal of valerian to quiet the nerves. Will you have a
light left in your room to-night, my lady?"

"I am afraid I could not sleep with a light," her mistress answered. "I am not used to one."

She continued to sleep, disturbedly some nights, in the dark. She was not aware that on some
of the nights Jane Cupp either slept or laid awake in the room nearest to her. Jane's own bedroom
was in another part of the house, but in her quiet goings about in the list shoes she now and
then saw things which made her nervously determined to be within immediate call.

"I don't say it isn't nerves, mother," she said, "and that I ain't silly to feel so suspicious
of all sorts of little things, but there's nights when I couldn't stand it not to be quite
near her."

Chapter Sixteen

The Lime Avenue was a dim, if lovely, place at twilight. When the sun was setting, broad lances
of gold slanted through the branches and glorified the green spaces with mellow depths of light.
But later, when the night was drawing in, the lines of grey tree-trunks, shadowed and canopied
by boughs, suggested to the mind the pillars of some ruined cathedral, desolate and ghostly.

Jane Cupp, facing the gloom of it during her lady's dinner-hour, and glancing furtively from
side to side as she went, would have been awed by the grey stillness, even if she had not been
in a timorous mood to begin with. In the first place, the Lime Avenue, which was her ladyship's
own special and favourite walk, was not the usual promenade of serving-maids. Even the gardeners
seldom set foot in it unless to sweep away dead leaves and fallen wood. Jane herself had never
been here before. This evening she had gone absolutely because she was following Ameerah.

She was following Ameerah because, during the afternoon tea-hour in the servants' hall, she
had caught a sentence or so in the midst of a gossiping story, which had made her feel that
she should be unhappy if she did not go down the walk and to the water-side,--see the water,
the boat, the steps, everything.

"My word, mother!" she had said, "it's a queer business for a respectable girl that's maid
in a great place to be feeling as if she had to watch black people, same as if she was in the
police, and not daring to say a word; for if I did say a word, Captain Osborn's clever enough
to have me sent away from here in a jiffy. And the worst of it is," twisting her hands together,
"there mayn't be anything going on really. If they were as innocent as lambs they couldn't
act any different; and just the same, things might have happened by accident."

"That's the worst of it," was Mrs. Cupp's fretted rejoinder. "Any old piece of carving might
have dropped out of a balustrade, and any lady that wasn't well might have nightmare and be
disturbed in her sleep."

"Yes," admitted Jane, anxiously, "that is the worst of it. Sometimes I feel so foolish I'm
all upset with myself."

The gossip in servants' halls embraces many topics. In country houses there is naturally much
to be said of village incidents, of the scandals of cottages and the tragedies of farms. This
afternoon, at one end of the table the talk had been of a cottage scandal which had verged
on tragedy. A handsome, bouncing, flaunting village girl had got into that "trouble" which
had been anticipated for her by both friends and enemies for some time. Being the girl she
was, much venomous village social stir had resulted. It had been predicted that she would "go
up to London," or that she would drown herself, having an impudent high spirit which brought
upon her much scornful and derisive flouting on her evil day. The manor servants knew a good
deal of her, because she had been for a while a servant at The Kennel Farm, and had had a great
fancy for Ameerah, whom it had pleased her to make friends with. When she fell suddenly ill,
and for days lay at the point of death, there was a stealthy general opinion that Ameerah,
with her love spells and potions, could have said much which might have been enlightening,
if she had chosen. The girl had been in appalling danger. The village doctor, who had been
hastily called in, had at one moment declared that life had left her body. It was, in fact,
only Ameerah who had insisted that she was not dead. After a period of prostration, during
which she seemed a corpse, she had slowly come back to earthly existence. The graphic descriptions
of the scenes by her bedside, of her apparent death, her cold and bloodless body, her lagging
and ghastly revival to consciousness, aroused in the servants' hall a fevered interest. Ameerah
was asked questions, and gave such answers as satisfied herself if not her interlocutors. She
was perfectly aware of the opinions of her fellow servitors. She knew all about them while
they knew nothing whatsoever about her. Her limited English could be used as a means of baffling
them. She smiled, and fell into Hindustani when she was pressed.

Jane Cupp heard both questions and answers. Ameerah professed to know nothing but such things
as the whole village knew. Towards the end of the discussion, however, in a mixture of broken
English and Hindustani, she conveyed that she had believed that the girl would drown herself.
Asked why, she shook her head, then said that she had seen her by the Mem Sahib's lake at the
end of the trees. She had asked if the water was deep enough, near the bridge, to drown. Ameerah
had answered that she did not know.

There was a general exclamation. They all knew it was deep there. The women shuddered as they
remembered how deep they had been told it was at that particular spot. It was said that there
was no bottom to it. Everybody rather revelled in the gruesomeness of the idea of a bottomless
piece of water. Someone remembered that there was a story about it. As much as ninety years
ago two young labourers on the place had quarrelled about a young woman. One day, in the heat
of jealous rage one had seized the other and literally thrown him into the pond. He had never
been found. No drags could reach his body. He had sunk into the blackness for ever.

Ameerah sat at the table with downcast eyes. She had a habit of sitting silent with dropped
eyes, which Jane could not bear. As she drank her tea she watched her in spite of herself.

After a few minutes had passed, her appetite for bread and butter deserted her. She got up
and left the hall, looking pale.

The mental phases through which she went during the afternoon ended in her determination to
go down the avenue and to the water's side this evening. It could be done while her ladyship
and her guests were at dinner. This evening the Vicar and his wife and daughter were dining
at the Manor.

Jane took in emotionally all the mysterious silence and dimness of the long tree-pillared aisle,
and felt a tremor as she walked down it, trying to hold herself in hand by practical reflections
half whispered.

"I'm just going to have a look, to make sure," she said, "silly or not. I've got upset through
not being able to help watching that woman, and the way to steady my nerves is to make sure
I'm just giving in to foolishness."

She walked as fast as she could towards the water. She could see its gleam in the dim light,
but she must pass a certain tree before she could see the little bridge itself.

"My goodness! What's that?" she said suddenly. It was something white, which rose up as if
from the ground, as if from the rushes growing at the water's edge.

Just a second Jane stood, and choked, and then suddenly darted forward, running as fast as
she could. The white figure merely moved slowly away among the trees. It did not run or seem
startled, and as Jane ran she caught it by its white drapery, and found herself, as she had
known she would, dragging at the garments of Ameerah. But Ameerah only turned round and greeted
her with a welcoming smile, mild enough to damp any excitement.

"What are you doing here?" Jane demanded. "Why do you come to this place?"

Ameerah answered her with simple fluency in Hindustani, with her manner of not realising that
she was speaking to a foreigner who could not understand her. What she explained was that,
having heard that Jane's Mem Sahib came here to meditate on account of the stillness, she herself
had formed the habit of coming to indulge in prayer and meditation when the place was deserted
for the day. She commended the place to Jane, and to Jane's mother, whom she believed to be
holy persons given to devotional exercises. Jane shook her.

"I don't understand a word you say," she cried. "You know I don't. Speak in English."

Ameerah shook her head slowly, and smiled again with patience. She endeavoured to explain in
English which Jane was sure was worse than she had ever heard her use before. Was it forbidden
that a servant should come to the water?

She was far too much for Jane, who was so unnerved that she burst into tears.

"You are up to some wickedness," she sobbed; "I know you are. You're past bearing. I'm going
to write to people that's got the right to do what I daren't. I'm going back to that bridge."

Ameerah looked at her with a puzzled amiability for a few seconds. She entered into further
apologies and explanations in Hindustani. In the midst of them her narrow eyes faintly gleamed,
and she raised a hand.

"They come to us. It is your Mem Sahib and her people. Hear them."

She spoke truly. Jane had miscalculated as to her hour, or the time spent at the dinner-table
had been shorter than usual. In fact, Lady Walderhurst had brought her guests to see the young
moon peer through the lime-trees, as she sometimes did when the evening was warm.

Jane Cupp fled precipitately. Ameerah disappeared also, but without precipitation or any sign
of embarrassment.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You look as if you had not slept well, Jane," Lady Walderhurst remarked in the morning as
her hair was being brushed. She had glanced into the glass and saw that it reflected a pale
face above her own, and that the pale face had red rims to its eyes.

"I have been a bit troubled by a headache, my lady," Jane answered.

"I have something like a headache myself." Lady Walderhurst's voice had not its usual cheerful
ring. Her own eyes looked heavy. "I did not rest well. I have not rested well for a week. That
habit of starting from my sleep feeling that some sound has disturbed me is growing on me.
Last night I dreamed again that someone touched my side. I think I shall be obliged to send
for Sir Samuel Brent."

"My lady," exclaimed Jane feverishly, "if you would--if you would."

Lady Walderhurst's look at her was nervous and disturbed.

"Do you--does your mother think I am not as well as I should be, Jane?" she said.

Jane's hands were actually trembling.

"Oh no, my lady. Oh no! But if Sir Samuel could be sent for, or Lady Maria Bayne, or--or his
lordship--"

The disturbed expression of Lady Walderhurst's face changed to something verging on alarm.
It was true that she began to be horribly frightened. She turned upon Jane, pallor creeping
over her skin.

"Oh!" she cried, a sound of almost child-like fear and entreaty in her voice. "I am sure you
think I am ill, I am sure you do. What--what is it?"

She leaned forward suddenly and rested her forehead on her hands, her elbows supported by the
dressing-table. She was overcome by a shock of dread.

"Oh! if anything should go wrong!" in a faint half wail; "if anything could happen!" She could
not bear the mere thought. It would break her heart. She had been so happy. God had been so good.

Jane was inwardly convulsed with contrition commingled with anger at her own blundering folly.
Now it was she herself who had "upset" her ladyship, given her a fright that made her pale
and trembling. What did she not deserve for being such a thoughtless fool. She might have known.
She poured forth respectfully affectionate protestations.

"Indeed, I beg your pardon, my lady. Indeed, it's only my silliness! Mother was saying yesterday
that she had never seen a lady so well and in as good spirits. I have no right to be here if
I make such mistakes. Please, my lady--oh! might mother be allowed to step in a minute to speak
to you?"

Emily's colour came, back gradually. When Jane went to her mother, Mrs. Cupp almost boxed her ears.

"That's just the way with girls," she said. "No more sense than a pack of cats. If you can't
keep quiet you'd better just give up. Of course she'd think you meant they was to be sent for
because we was certain she was a dying woman. Oh my! Jane Cupp, get away!"

She enjoyed her little interview with Lady Walderhurst greatly. A woman whose opinion was of
value at such a time had the soundest reasons for enjoying herself. When she returned to her
room, she sat and fanned herself with a pocket handkerchief and dealt judicially with Jane.

"What we've got to do," she said, "is to think, and think we will. Tell her things outright
we must not, until we've got something sure and proved. Then we can call on them that's got
the power in their hands. We can't call on them till we can show them a thing no one can't
deny. As to that bridge, it's old enough to be easy managed, and look accidental if it broke.
You say she ain't going there to-day. Well, this very night, as soon as it's dark enough, you
and me will go down and have a look at it. And what's more, we'll take a man with us. Judd
could be trusted. Worst comes to worst, we're only taking the liberty of making sure it's safe,
because we know it is old and we're over careful."

As Jane had gathered from her, by careful and apparently incidental inquiry, Emily had had
no intention of visiting her retreat. In the morning she had, in fact, not felt quite well
enough. Her nightmare had shaken her far more on its second occurring. The stealthy hand had
seemed not merely to touch, but to grip at her side, and she had been physically unable to
rise for some minutes after her awakening. This experience had its physical and mental effects
on her.

She did not see Hester until luncheon, and after luncheon she found her to be in one of her
strange humours. She was often in these strange humours at this time. She wore a nervous and
strained look, and frequently seemed to have been crying. She had new lines on her forehead
between the eyebrows. Emily had tried in vain to rouse and cheer her with sympathetic feminine
talk. There were days when she felt that for some reason Hester did not care to see her.

She felt it this afternoon, and not being herself at the high-water mark of cheerfulness, she
was conscious of a certain degree of discouragement. She had liked her so much, she had wanted
to be friends with her and to make her life an easier thing, and yet she appeared somehow to
have failed. It was because she was so far from being a clever woman. Perhaps she might fail
in other things because she was not clever. Perhaps she was never able to give to people what
they wanted, what they needed. A brilliant woman had such power to gain and hold love.

After an hour or so spent in trying to raise the mental temperature of Mrs. Osborn's beflowered
boudoir, she rose and picked up her little work-basket.

"Perhaps you would take a nap if I left you," she said. "I think I will stroll down to the lake."

She quietly stole away, leaving Hester on her cushions.

Chapter Seventeen

A few minutes later a knock at the door being replied to by Hester's curt "Come in!" produced
the modest entry of Jane Cupp, who had come to make a necessary inquiry of her mistress. "Her
ladyship is not here; she has gone out." Jane made an altogether involuntary step forward.
Her face became the colour of her clean white apron.

"Out!" she gasped.

Hester turned sharply round.

"To the lake," she said. "What do you mean by staring in that way?"

Jane did not tell her what she meant. She incontinently ran from the room without any shadow
of a pretence at a lady's maid's decorum.

She fled through the rooms, to make a short cut to the door opening on to the gardens. Through
that she darted, and flew across paths and flowerbeds towards the avenue of limes.

"She shan't get to the bridge before me," she panted. "She shan't, she shan't. I won't let
her. Oh, if my breath will only hold out!"

She did not reflect that gardeners would naturally think she had gone mad. She thought of nothing
whatever but the look in Ameerah's downcast eyes when the servants had talked of the bottomless
water,--the eerie, satisfied, sly look. Of that, and of the rising of the white figure from
the ground last night she thought, and she clutched her neat side as she ran.

The Lime Avenue seemed a mile long, and yet when she was running down it she saw Lady Walderhurst
walking slowly under the trees carrying her touching little basket of sewing in her hand. She
was close to the bridge.

"My lady! my lady!" she gasped out as soon as she dared. She could not run screaming all the
way. "Oh, my lady! if you please!"

Emily heard her and turned round. Never had she been much more amazed in her life. Her maid,
her well-bred Jane Cupp, who had not drawn an indecorous breath since assuming her duties,
was running after her calling out to her, waving her hands, her face distorted, her voice hysteric.

Emily had been just on the point of stepping on to the bridge, her hand had been outstretched
towards the rail. She drew back a step in alarm and stood staring. How strange everything seemed
to-day. She began to feel choked and trembling.

A few seconds and Jane was upon her, clutching at her dress. She had so lost her breath that
she was almost speechless.

"My lady," she panted. "Don't set foot on it; don't--don't, till we're sure."

"On--on what?"

Then Jane realised how mad she looked, how insane the whole scene was, and she gave way to
her emotions. Partly through physical exhaustion and breathlessness, and partly through helpless
terror, she fell on her knees.

"The bridge!" she said. "I don't care what happens to me so that no harm comes to you. There's
things being plotted and planned that looks like accidents. The bridge would look like an accident
if part of it broke. There's no bottom to the water. They were saying so yesterday, and she
sat listening. I found her here last night."

"She! Her!" Emily felt as if she was passing through another nightmare.

"Ameerah," wailed poor Jane. "White ones have no chance against black. Oh, my lady!" her sense
of the possibility that she might be making a fool of herself after all was nearly killing
her. "I believe she would drive you to your death if she could do it, think what you will of me."

The little basket of needlework shook in Lady Walderhurst's hand. She swallowed hard, and without
warning sat down on the roots of a fallen tree, her cheeks blanching slowly.

"Oh Jane!" she said in simple woe and bewilderment. "I don't understand any of it. How could--how
could they want to hurt me!" Her innocence was so fatuous that she thought that because she
had been kind to them they could not hate or wish to injure her.

But something for the first time made her begin to quail. She sat, and tried to recover herself.
She put out a shaking hand to the basket of sewing. She could scarcely see it, because suddenly
tears had filled her eyes.

"Bring one of the men here," she said, after a few moments. "Tell him that I am a little uncertain
about the safety of the bridge."

She sat quite still while Jane was absent in search of the man. She held her basket on her
knee, her hand resting on it. Her kindly, slow-working mind was wakening to strange thoughts.
To her they seemed inhuman and uncanny. Was it because good, faithful, ignorant Jane had been
rather nervous about Ameerah that she herself had of late got into a habit of feeling as if
the Ayah was watching and following her. She had been startled more than once by finding her
near when she had not been aware of her presence. She had, of course, heard Hester say that
native servants often startled one by their silent, stealthy-seeming ways. But the woman's
eyes had frightened her. And she had heard the story about the village girl.

She sat, and thought, and thought. Her eyes were fixed upon the moss-covered ground, and her
breath came quickly and irregularly several times.

"I don't know what to do," she said. "I am sure--if it is true--I don't know what to do."

The under-gardener's heavy step and Jane's lighter one roused her. She lifted her eyes to watch
the pair as they came. He was a big, young man with a simple rustic face and big shoulders
and hands.

"The bridge is so slight and old," she said to him, "that it has just occurred to me that it
might not be quite safe. Examine it carefully to make sure."

The young man touched his forehead and began to look the supports over. Jane watched him with
bated breath when he rose to his feet.

"They're all right on this side, my lady," he said. "I shall have to get in the boat to make
sure of them that rest on the island."

He stamped upon the end nearest and it remained firm.

"Look at the railing well," said Lady Walderhurst. "I often stand and lean on it and--and watch
the sunset."

She faltered at this point, because she had suddenly remembered that this was a habit of hers,
and that she had often spoken of it to the Osborns. There was a point on the bridge at which,
through a gap in the trees, a beautiful sunset was always particularly beautiful. It was the
right-hand rail facing these special trees she rested on when she watched the evening sky.

The big, young gardener looked at the left-hand rail and shook it with his strong hands.

"That's safe enough," he said to Jane.

"Try the other," said Jane.

He tried the other. Something had happened to it. It broke in his big grasp. His sunburnt skin
changed colour by at least three shades.

"Lord A'mighty!" Jane heard him gasp under his breath. He touched his cap and looked blankly
at Lady Walderhurst. Jane's heart seemed to herself to roll over. She scarcely dared look at
her mistress, but when she took courage to do so, she found her so white that she hurried to
her side.

"Thank you, Jane," she said rather faintly. "The sky is so lovely this afternoon that I meant
to stop and look at it. I should have fallen into the water, which they say has no bottom.
No one would have seen or heard me if you had not come."

She caught Jane's hand and held it hard. Her eyes wandered over the avenue of big trees, which
no one but herself came near at this hour. It would have been so lonely, so lonely!

The gardener went away, still looking less ruddy than he had looked when he arrived on the
spot. Lady Walderhurst rose from her seat on the mossy tree-trunk. She rose quite slowly.

"Don't speak to me yet, Jane," she said. And with Jane following her at a respectful distance,
she returned to the house and went to her room to lie down.

There was nothing to prove that the whole thing was not mere chance, mere chance. It was this
which turned her cold. It was all impossible. The little bridge had been entirely unused for
so long a time, it had been so slight a structure from the first; it was old, and she remembered
now that Walderhurst had once said that it must be examined and strengthened if it was to be
used. She had leaned upon the rail often lately; one evening she had wondered if it seemed
quite as steady as usual. What could she say, whom could she accuse, because a piece of rotten
wood had given away.

She started on her pillow. It was a piece of rotten wood which had fallen from the balustrade
upon the stairs, to be seen and picked up by Jane just before she would have passed down on
her way to dinner. And yet, what would she appear to her husband, to Lady Maria, to anyone
in the decorous world, if she told them that she believed that in a dignified English household,
an English gentleman, even a deposed heir presumptive, was working out a subtle plot against
her such as might adorn a melodrama? She held her head in her hands as her mind depicted to
her Lord Walderhurst's countenance, Lady Maria's dubious, amused smile.

"She would think I was hysterical," she cried, under her breath. "He would think I was vulgar
and stupid, that I was a fussy woman with foolish ideas, which made him ridiculous. Captain
Os-born is of his family. I should be accusing him of being a criminal. And yet I might have
been in the bottomless pond, in the bottomless pond, and no one would have known."

If it all had not seemed so incredible to her, if she could have felt certain herself, she
would not have been overwhelmed with this sense of being baffled, bewildered, lost.

The Ayah who so loved Hester might hate her rival. A jealous native woman might be capable
of playing stealthy tricks, which, to her strange mind, might seem to serve a proper end. Captain
Osborn might not know. She breathed again as this thought came to her. He could not know; it
would be too insane, too dangerous, too wicked.

And yet, if she had been flung headlong down the staircase, if the fall had killed her, where
would have been the danger for the man who would only have deplored a fatal accident. If she
had leaned upon the rail and fallen into the black depths of water below, what could have been
blamed but a piece of rotten wood. She touched her forehead with her handkerchief because it
felt cold and damp. There was no way out. Her teeth chattered.

"They may be as innocent as I am. And they may be murderers in their hearts. I can prove nothing,
I can prevent nothing. Oh! do come home."

There was but one thought which remained clear in her mind. She must keep herself safe--she
must keep herself safe. In the anguish of her trouble she confessed, by putting it into words,
a thing which she had not confessed before, and even as she spoke she did not realise that
her words contained confession.

"If I were to die now," she said with a touching gravity, "he would care very much."

A few moments later she said, "It does not matter what happens to me, how ridiculous or vulgar
or foolish I seem, if I can keep myself safe--until after. I will write to him now and ask
him to try to come back."

It was the letter she wrote after this decision which Osborn saw among others awaiting postal,
and which he stopped to examine.

Chapter Eighteen

Hester sat at the open window of her boudoir in the dark. She had herself put out the wax candles,
because she wanted to feel herself surrounded by the soft blackness. She had sat through the
dinner and heard her husband's anxious inquiries about the rotten handrail, and had watched
his disturbed face and Emily's pale one. She herself had said but little, and had been glad
when the time came that she could decently excuse herself and come away.

As she sat in the darkness and felt the night breath of the flowers in the garden, she was
thinking of all the murderers she had ever heard of. She was reflecting that some of them had
been quite respectable people, and that all of them must have lived through a period in which
they gradually changed from respectable people to persons in whose brains a thought had worked
which once they would have believed impossible to them, which they might have scouted the idea
of their giving room to. She was sure the change must come about slowly. At first it would
seem too mad and ridiculous, a sort of angry joke. Then the angry joke would return again and
again, until at last they let it stay and did not laugh at it, but thought it over. Such things
always happened because some one wanted, or did not want, something very much, something it
drove them mad to think of being forced to live without, or with. Men who hated a woman and
could not rid themselves of her, who hated the sight of her face, her eyes, her hair, the sound
of her voice and step, and were rendered insane by her nearness and the thought that they never
could be free from any of these things, had before now, commonplace or comparatively agreeable
men, by degrees reached the point where a knife or a shot or a heavy blow seemed not only possible
but inevitable. People who had been ill-treated, people who had faced horrors through want
and desire, had reached the moment in which they took by force what Fate would not grant them.
Her brain so whirled that she wondered if she was not a little delirious as she sat in the
stillness thinking such strange things.

For weeks she had been living under a strain so intense that her feelings had seemed to cease
to have any connection with what was normal.

She had known too much; and yet she had been certain of nothing at all.

But she and Alec were like the people who began with a bad joke, and then were driven and driven.
It was impossible not to think of what might come, and of what might be lost for ever. If the
rail had not been tried this afternoon, if big, foolish Emily Walderhurst had been lying peacefully
among the weeds to-night!

"The end comes to everyone," she said. "It would have been all over in a few minutes. They
say it isn't really painful."

Her lips quivered, and she pressed her hands tightly between her knees.

"That's a murderer's thought," she muttered querulously. "And yet I wasn't a bad girl to begin
with."

She began to see things. The chief thing was a sort of vision of how Emily would have looked
lying in the depths of the water among the weeds. Her brown hair would have broken loose, and
perhaps tangled itself over her white face. Would her eyes be open and glazed, or half shut?
And her childish smile, the smile that looked so odd on the face of a full-grown woman, would
it have been fixed and seemed to confront the world of life with a meek question as to what
she had done to people--why she had been drowned? Hester felt sure that was what her helpless
stillness would have expressed.

How happy the woman had been! To see her go about with her unconsciously joyous eyes had sometimes
been maddening. And yet, poor thing! why had she not the right to be happy? She was always
trying to please people and help them. She was so good that she was almost silly. The day she
had brought the little things from London to The Kennel Farm, Hester remembered that, despite
her own morbid resentment, she had ended by kissing her with repentant tears. She heard again,
in the midst of her delirious thoughts, the nice, prosaic emotion of her voice as she said:

"Don't thank me--don't. Just let us enjoy ourselves."

And she might have been lying among the long, thick weeds of the pond. And it would not have
been the accident it would have appeared to be. Of that she felt sure. Brought face to face
with this definiteness of situation, she began to shudder.

She went out into the night feeling that she wanted air. She was not strong enough to stand
the realisation that she had become part of a web into which she had not meant to be knitted.
No; she had had her passionate and desperate moments, but she had not meant things like this.
She had almost hoped that disaster might befall, she had almost thought it possible that she
would do nothing to prevent it--almost. But some things were too bad.

She felt small and young and hopelessly evil as she walked in the dark along a grass path to
a seat under a tree. The very stillness of the night was a horror to her, especially when once
an owl called, and again a dreaming bird cried in its nest.

She sat under the tree in the dark for at least an hour. The thick shadow of the drooping branches
hid her in actual blackness and seclusion.

She said to herself later that some one of the occult powers she believed in had made her go
out and sit in this particular spot, because there was a thing which was not to be, and she
herself must come between.

When she at last rose it was with panting breath. She stole back to her room, and lighted with
an unsteady hand a bedroom candle, whose flame flickered upon a distorted, little dark face.
For as she had sat under the tree she had, after a while, heard whispering begin quite near
her; had caught, even in the darkness, a gleam of white, and had therefore deliberately sat
and listened.

       *       *       *       *       *

There could be, to the purely normal geniality of Emily Walderhurst's nature, no greater relief
than the recognition that a cloud had passed from the mood of another.

When Hester appeared the next morning at the breakfast-table, she had emerged from her humour
of the day before and was almost affectionate in her amiability. The meal at an end, she walked
with Emily in the garden.

She had never shown such interest in what pertained to her as she revealed this morning. Something
she had always before lacked Emily recognised in her for the first time,--a desire to ask friendly
questions, to verge on the confidential. They talked long and without reserve. And how pretty
it was of the girl, Emily thought, to care so much about her health and her spirits, to be
so interested in the details of her every-day life, even in the simple matter of the preparation
and serving of her food, as if the merest trifle was of consequence. It had been unfair, too,
to fancy that she felt no interest in Walderhurst's absence and return. She had noticed everything
closely, and actually thought he ought to come back at once.

"Send for him," she said quite suddenly; "send for him now."

There was an eagerness expressed in the dark thinness of her face which moved Emily.

"It is dear of you to care so much, Hester," she said. "I didn't know you thought it mattered."

"He must come," said Hester. "That's all. Send for him."

"I wrote a letter yesterday," was Lady Walderhurst's meek rejoinder. "I got nervous."

"So did I get nervous," said Hester; "so did I."

That she was disturbed Emily could see. The little laugh she ended her words with had an excited
ring in it.

During the Osborns' stay at Palstrey the two women had naturally seen a good deal of each other,
but for the next two days they were scarcely separated at all. Emily, feeling merely cheered
and supported by the fact that Hester made herself so excellent a companion, was not aware
of two or three things. One was that Mrs. Osborn did not lose sight of her unless at such times
as she was in the hands of Jane Cupp.

"I may as well make a clean breast of it," the young woman said. "I have a sense of responsibility
about you that I haven't liked to speak of before. It's half hysterical, I suppose, but it
has got the better of me."

"You feel responsible for me!" exclaimed Emily, with wondering eyes.

"Yes, I do," she almost snapped. "You represent so much. Walderhurst ought to be here. I'm
not fit to take care of you."

"I ought to be taking care of you," said Emily, with gentle gravity. "I am the older and stronger.
You are not nearly so well as I am."

Hester startled her by bursting into tears.

"Then do as I tell you," she said. "Don't go anywhere alone. Take Jane Cupp with you. You have
nearly had two accidents. Make Jane sleep in your dressing-room."

Emily felt a dreary chill creep over her. That which she had felt in the air when she had slowly
turned an amazed face upon Jane in the Lime Avenue, that sense of the strangeness of things
again closed her in.

"I will do as you wish," she answered.

But before the next day closed all was made plain to her, all the awfulness, all the cruel,
inhuman truth of things which seemed to lose their possibility in the exaggeration of proportion
which made their incongruous ness almost grotesque.

The very prettiness of the flowered boudoir, the very softness of the peace in the velvet spread
of garden before the windows, made it even more unreal.

That day, the second one, Emily had begun to note the new thing. Hester was watching her, Hester
was keeping guard. And as she realised this, the sense of the abnormalness of things grew,
and fear grew with it. She began to feel as if a wall were rising around her, built by unseen
hands.

The afternoon, an afternoon of deeply golden sun, they had spent together. They had read and
talked. Hester had said most. She had told stories of India,--curious, vivid, interesting stories,
which seemed to excite her.

At the time when the sunlight took its deepest gold the tea-tray was brought in. Hester had
left the room a short time before the footman appeared with it, carrying it with the air of
disproportionate solemnity with which certain male domestics are able to surround the smallest
service. The tea had been frequently served in Hester's boudoir of late. During the last week,
however, Lady Walderhurst's share of the meal had been a glass of milk. She had chosen to take
it because Mrs. Cupp had suggested that tea was "nervous." Emily sat down at the table and
filled a cup for Hester. She knew she would return in a few moments, so set the cup before
Mrs. Osborn's place and waited. She heard the young woman's footsteps outside, and as the door
opened she lifted the glass of milk to her lips.

She was afterwards absolutely unable to describe to herself clearly what happened the next
moment. In fact, it was the next moment that she saw Hester spring towards her, and the glass
of milk had been knocked from her hand and rolled, emptying itself, upon the floor. Mrs. Osborn
stood before her, clenching and unclenching her hands.

"Have you drunk any of it?" she demanded.

"No," Emily answered. "I have not."

Hester Osborn dropped into a chair and leaned forward, covering her face with her hands. She
looked like a woman on the verge of an outbreak of hysteria, only to be held in check by a
frenzied effort.

Lady Walderhurst, quite slowly, turned the colour of the milk itself. But she did nothing but
sit still and gaze at Hester.

"Wait a minute." The girl was trying to recover her breath. "Wait till I can hold myself still.
I am going to tell you now. I am going to tell you."

"Yes," Emily answered faintly.

It seemed to her that she waited twenty minutes before another word was spoken, that she sat
quite that long looking at the thin hands which seemed to clutch the hidden face. This was
a mistake arising from the intensity of the strain upon her nerves. It was scarcely five minutes
before Mrs. Osborn lowered her hands and laid them, pressed tightly palm to palm, between her
knees.

She spoke in a low voice, such a voice as a listener outside could not have heard.

"Do you know," she demanded, "what you represent to us--to me and to my husband--as you sit there?"

Emily shook her head. The movement of disclaimer was easier than speech. She felt a sort of
exhaustion.

"I don't believe you do," said Hester. "You don't seem to realise anything. Perhaps it's because
you are so innocent, perhaps it's because you are so foolish. You represent the thing that
we have the right to hate most on earth."

"Do you hate me?" asked Emily, trying to adjust herself mentally to the mad extraordinariness
of the situation, and at the same time scarcely understanding why she asked her question.

"Sometimes I do. When I do not I wonder at myself." The girl paused a second, looked down,
as if questioningly, at the carpet, and then, lifting her eyes again, went on in a dragging,
half bewildered voice: "When I do not, I actually believe it is because we are both--women
together. Before, it was different."

The look which Walderhurst had compared to "that of some nice animal in the Zoo" came into
Emily's eyes as two honest drops fell from them.

"Would you hurt me?" she faltered. "Could you let other people hurt me?"

Hester leaned further forward in her chair, widening upon her such hysterically insistent,
terrible young eyes as made her shudder.

"Don't you see?" she cried. "Can't you see? But for you my son would be what Walderhurst is--my
son, not yours."

"I understand," said Emily. "I understand."

"Listen!" Mrs. Osborn went on through her teeth. "Even for that, there are things I haven't
the nerve to stand. I have thought I could stand them. But I can't. It does not matter why.
I am going to tell you the truth. You represent too much. You have been too great a temptation.
Nobody meant anything or planned anything at first. It all came by degrees. To see you smiling
and enjoying everything and adoring that stilted prig of a Walderhurst put ideas into people's
heads, and they grew because every chance fed them. If Walderhurst would come home--"

Lady Walderhurst put out her hand to a letter which lay on the table.

"I heard from him this morning," she said. "And he has been sent to the Hills because he has
a little fever. He must be quiet. So you see he cannot come yet."

She was shivering, though she was determined to keep still.

"What was in the milk?" she asked.

"In the milk there was the Indian root Ameerah gave the village girl. Last night as I sat under
a tree in the dark I heard it talked over. Only a few native women know it."

There was a singular gravity in the words poor Lady Walderhurst spoke in reply.

"That," she said, "would have been the cruelest thing of all."

Mrs. Osborn got up and came close to her.

"If you had gone out on Faustine," she said, "you would have met with an accident. It might
or might not have killed you. But it would have been an accident. If you had gone downstairs
before Jane Cupp saw the bit of broken balustrade you might have been killed--by accident again.
If you had leaned upon the rail of the bridge you would have been drowned, and no human being
could have been accused or blamed."

Emily gasped for breath, and lifted her head as if to raise it above the wall which was being
slowly built round her.

"Nothing will be done which can be proved," said Hester Osborn. "I have lived among native
people, and know. If Ameerah hated me and I could not get rid of her I should die, and it would
all seem quite natural."

She bent down and picked up the empty glass from the carpet.

"It is a good thing it did not break," she said, as she put it on the tray. "Ameerah will think
you drank the milk and that nothing will hurt you. You escape them always. She will be frightened."

As she said it she began to cry a little, like a child.

"Nothing will save me," she said. "I shall have to go back, I shall have to go back!"

"No, no!" cried Emily.

The girl swept away her tears with the back of a clenched hand.

"At first, when I hated you," she was even petulant and plaintively resentful, "I thought I
could let it go on. I watched, and watched, and bore it. But the strain was too great. I broke
down. I think I broke down one night, when something began to beat like a pulse against my side."

Emily got up and stood before her. She looked perhaps rather as she had looked when she rose
and stood before the Marquis of Walderhurst on a memorable occasion, the afternoon on the moor.
She felt almost quiet, and safe.

"What must I do?" she asked, as if she was speaking to a friend. "I am afraid. Tell me."

Little Mrs. Osborn stood still and stared at her. The most incongruous thought came to her
mind. She found herself, at this weird moment, observing how well the woman held her stupid
head, how finely it was set on her shoulders, and that in a modern Royal Academy way she was
rather like the Venus of Milo. It is quite out of place to think such things at such a time.
But she found herself confronted with them.

"Go away," she answered. "It is all like a thing in a play, but I know what I am talking about.
Say you are ordered abroad. Be cool and matter-of-fact. Simply go and hide yourself somewhere,
and call your husband home as soon as he can travel."

Emily Walderhurst passed her hand over her forehead.

"It is like something in a play," she said, with a baffled, wondering face. "It isn't even
respectable."

Hester began to laugh.

"No, it isn't even respectable," she cried. And her laughter was just in time. The door opened
and Alec Osborn came in.

"What isn't respectable?" he asked.

"Something I have been telling Emily," she answered, laughing even a trifle wildly. "You are
too young to hear such things. You must be kept respectable at any cost."

He grinned, but faintly scowled at the same time.

"You've upset something," he remarked, looking at the carpet.

"I have, indeed," said Hester. "A cup of tea which was half milk. It will leave a grease spot
on the carpet. That won't be respectable."

When she had tumbled about among native servants as a child, she had learned to lie quickly,
and she was very ready of resource.

Chapter Nineteen

As she heard the brougham draw up in the wet street before the door, Mrs. Warren allowed her
book to fall closed upon her lap, and her attractive face awakened to an expression of agreeable
expectation, in itself denoting the existence of interesting and desirable qualities in the
husband at the moment inserting his latch-key in the front door preparatory to mounting the
stairs and joining her. The man who, after twenty-five years of marriage, can call, by his
return to her side, this expression to the countenance of an intelligent woman is, without
question or argument, an individual whose life and occupations are as interesting as his character
and points of view.

Dr. Warren was of the mental build of the man whose life would be interesting and full of outlook
if it were spent on a desert island or in the Bastille. He possessed the temperament which
annexes incident and adventure, and the perceptiveness of imagination which turns a light upon
the merest fragment of event. As a man whose days were filled with the work attendant upon
the exercise of a profession from which can be withheld few secrets, and to which most mysteries
explain themselves, his brain was the recording machine of impressions which might have stimulated
to vividness of imagination a man duller than himself, and roused to feeling one of far less
warm emotions.

He came into the room smiling. He was a man of fifty, of strong build, and masculine. He had
good shoulders and good colour, and the eyes, nose, and chin of a man it would be a stupid
thing to attempt to deal with in a blackguardly manner. He sat down in his chair by the fire
and began to chat, as was his habit before he and his wife parted to dress for dinner. When
he was out during the day he often looked forward to these chats, and made notes of things
he would like to tell his Mary. During her day, which was given to feminine duties and pleasures,
she frequently did the same thing. Between seven and eight in the evening they had delightful
conversational opportunities. He picked up her book and glanced it over, he asked her a few
questions and answered a few; but she saw it was with a somewhat preoccupied manner. She knew
a certain remote look in his eye, and she waited to see him get up from his chair and begin
to walk to and fro, with his hands in his pockets and his head thrown back. When, after having
done this, he began in addition to whistle softly and draw his eyebrows together, she broke
in upon him in the manner of merely following an established custom.

"I am perfectly sure," was her remark, "that you have come upon one of the Extraordinary Cases."

The last two words were spoken as with inverted commas. Of many deep interests he added to
her existence, the Extraordinary Cases were among the most absorbing. He had begun to discuss
them with her during the first year of their married life. Accident had thrown one of them
into her immediate personal experience, and her clear-headed comprehension and sympathy in
summing up singular evidence had been of such value to him that he had turned to her in the
occurrence of others for the aid straightforward, mutual logic could give. She had learned
to await the Extraordinary Case with something like eagerness. Sometimes, it was true, its
incidents were painful; but invariably they were absorbing in their interest, and occasionally
illuminating beyond description. Of names and persons it was not necessary she should hear
anything--the drama, the ethics, were enough. With an absolute respect for his professional
reserves, she asked no questions he could not reply to freely, and avoided even the innocent
following of clues. The Extraordinary Case was always quite enough as it stood. When she saw
the remotely speculative look in his eye, she suspected one, when he left his chair and paced
the floor with that little air of restlessness, and ended with unconscious whistling which
was scarcely louder than a breath, she felt that evidence enough had accumulated for her.

He stopped and turned round.

"My good Mary," he owned at once, "its extraordinariness consists in its baffling me by being
so perfectly ordinary."

"Well, at least that is not frequent. What is its nature? Is it awful? Is it sad? Is it eccentric?
Is it mad or sane, criminal or domestic?"

"It is nothing but suggestive, and that it suggests mystery to me makes me feel as if I myself,
instead of a serious practitioner, am a professional detective."

"Is it a case in which you might need help?"

"It is a case in which I am impelled to give help, if it proves that it is necessary. She is
such an exceedingly nice woman."

"Good, bad, or indifferent?"

"Of a goodness, I should say--of a goodness which might prevent the brain acting in the manner
in which a brutal world requires at present that the human brain should act in self-defence.
Of a goodness which may possibly have betrayed her into the most pathetic trouble."

"Of the kind--?" was Mrs. Warren's suggestion.

"Of that kind," with a troubled look; "but she is a married woman."

"She says she is a married woman."

"No. She does not say so, but she looks it. That's the chief feature of the case. Any woman
bearing more obviously the stamp of respectable British matrimony than this one does, it has
not fallen to me to look upon."

Mrs. Warren's expression was intriguée in the extreme. There was a freshness in this, at least.

"But if she bears the stamp as well as the name--! Do tell me all it is possible to tell. Come
and sit down, Harold."

He sat down and entered into details.

"I was called to a lady who, though not ill, seemed fatigued from a hurried journey and, as
it seemed to me, the effects of anxiety and repressed excitement. I found her in a third-class
lodging-house in a third-class street. It was a house which had the air of a place hastily
made inhabitable for some special reason. There were evidences that money had been spent, but
that there had been no time to arrange things. I have seen something of the kind before, and
when I was handed into my patient's sitting-room, thought I knew the type I should find. It
is always more or less the same,--a girl or a very young woman, pretty and refined and frightened,
or pretty and vulgar and 'carrying it off' with transparent pretences and airs and graces.
Anything more remote from what I expected you absolutely cannot conceive."

"Not young and pretty?"

"About thirty-five or six. A fresh, finely built woman with eyes as candid as a six-year-old
girl's. Quite unexplanatory and with the best possible manner, only sweetly anxious about her
health. Her confidence in my advice and the earnestness of her desire to obey my least instructions
were moving. Ten minutes' conversation with her revealed to me depths of long-secreted romance
in my nature. I mentally began to swear fealty to her."

"Did she tell you that her husband was away?"

"What specially struck me was that it did not occur to her that her husband required stating,
which was ingenuously impressive. She did not explain her mother or her uncles, why her husband?
Her mental attitude had a translucent clearness. She wanted a medical man to take charge of
her, and if she had been an amiable, un-brilliant lady who was a member of the royal house,
she would have conversed with me exactly as she did."

"She was so respectable?"

"She was even a little Mid-Victorian, dear Mary; a sort of clean, healthy, Mid-Victorian angel."

"There's an incongruousness in the figure in connection with being obviously in hiding in a
lodging-house street." And Mrs. Warren gave herself to reflection.

"I cannot make it as incongruous as she was. I have not told you all. I have saved to the last
the feature which marked her most definitely as an Extraordinary Case. I suppose one does that
sort of thing from a sense of drama."

"What else?" inquired Mrs. Warren, roused from her speculation.

"What respectable conclusion could one deduce from the fact that a letter lay on the table
near her, sealed with an imposing coat of arms. One's eye having accidentally fallen on it,
one could, of course, only avoid glancing at it again, so I recognised nothing definite. Also,
when I was announced unexpectedly, I saw her quickly withdraw her hand from her lips. She had
been kissing a ring she wore. I could not help seeing that afterwards. My good Mary, it was
a ruby, of a size and colour which recalled the Arabian Nights."

Mrs. Warren began to resign herself.

"No," she said, "there is no respectable conclusion to be drawn. It is tragic, but prosaic.
She has been governess or companion in some great house. She may be a well-born woman. It is
ten times more hideous for her than if she were a girl. She has to writhe under knowing that
both her friends and her enemies are saying that she had not the excuse of not having been
old enough to know better."

"That might all be true," he admitted promptly. "It would be true if--but she is not writhing.
She is no more unhappy than you or I. She is only anxious, and I could swear that she is only
anxious about one thing. The moment in which I swore fealty to her was when she said to me,
'I want to be quite safe--until after. I do not care for myself. I will bear anything or do
anything. Only one thing matters. I shall be such a good patient.' Then her eyes grew moist,
and she closed her lips decorously to keep them from trembling.

"They're not usually like that," Mrs. Warren remarked.

"I have not found them so," he replied.

"Perhaps she believes the man will marry her."

There was odd unexpectedness in the manner in which Dr. Warren suddenly began to laugh.

"My dear wife, if you could see her! It is the incongruity of what we are saying which makes
me laugh. With her ruby and her coronets and her lodging-house street, she is of an impeccableness!
She does not even know she could be doubted. Fifteen years of matrimony spent in South Kensington,
three girls in the schoolroom and four boys at Eton, could not have crystallised a more unquestionable
serenity. And you are saying gravely, 'Perhaps she believes the man will marry her.' Whatsoever
the situation is, I am absolutely sure that she has never asked herself whether he would or not."

"Then," Mrs. Warren answered, "it is the most Extraordinary Case we have had yet."

"But I have sworn fealty to her," was Warren's conclusion. "And she will tell me more later."
He shook his head with an air of certainty. "Yes, she will feel it necessary to tell me later." 

Tancred the wake of a Brecken the air, but when he had just entered the yard, turned but he
once again steps into the house, entered the room where slept his child, lifted the curtain from
the cradle, and assured himself that the boy was breathing - that he was alive. - - He stood
before his child and looked into his features. It looked like Greta, it was the same clear-cut,
cold lips, and it will continue to have their character and the money love, he thought. But he
too will the same. - - It was a good thing for the child to live? No! Tancred despise the imperfect
existence. And because he lives on a random whim Nature pushed because he spent the night life
of a man is not higher than that of a fly, - and whether she was there in creation or not,
what value was it? - He also wanted this young creature's death.

Fortunately for the boy when the earth again withdrew him in her lap! Yes, the earth - - But
no violent cutting of the thread of life! -

How well do such a child to weigh the easiest would be snuffed out? Brecken thought. - At least
conspicuous it happened anyway due to suffocation, - traces of a
violent hand then were not visible.

It had in the morning find that on the night moved on the ceiling. A choking, transported by
coughing! Yes, yes, felt like! - Or a strong dose of opium - but that was already dangerous.
- The man recoiled in horror together.

Now he was back at such terrible thoughts as he was hurried back to ensure that the Child
lived. - -

A hot feeling came over him! It was as if the only vein in the sense of this young life was there,
jumped in it. And rapidly under the strong impulse of his pulsating heart of Tancred Brecken
leaned down and kissed for the first time his boy on the forehead.

But the moldy smell of the infants came from him, and through this discomfort caused irritation
of the olfactory nerves, or because the feeling at all, only the
short power had a quick flash, had extinguished the tender feelings
of the man in no time.

With the old, indifferent eye Brecken looked at the boy and left at the thought that he had to give
it to the fate of prey, whether it would support his plans to the
room.

After he kept brief look around the yard, he entered the stable, where
in a separate Room a diseased for some time carriage horse was treated
by a veterinarian, and the welfare of a gray mare Liese Tancred employed
in the next hour, more than any any other living creature to be or
not. - -

Shortly after the nap, the housekeeper told him, - had the
male servants Brecken dismissed and keep out of this woman, only the
Kindeswärterin and a girl, - That Mr. Pastor Hoeppner on the floor
and wait to speak to the Lord wanted.

"Pastor Hoeppner," repeated Brecken, angeheimelt little step beyond, however, and forced the
unexpected visit to his study.

"What special circumstances give me the pleasure of once again on
wood see, dear pastor, "he began with flattering ease, moved a chair
up and grabbed a box of cigars, of which he the servant often be and
offered his thanks expressing pastor.

As Hoeppner was happy if he could only smoke at all, by the quality of a cigar but did not understand,
he had offered Brecken from the so-called 'box people', is himself
but he had a different and better lit, after the guest before with
fire served.

Hoeppner began by explaining that he had to do nearby and seized the opportunity have to tell Mr
Brecken of one good day. He added that his wife left him had encouraged vorzugucken in wood,
and Brecken was after this casually interspersed Comment convinced that the woman had sent the man
to him because of the Tresses Conscience talking.

Hoeppner was yet not I move onto goal, but led the conversation the question of whether Mr. Brecken've
already heard of the most innovative solutions.

No, he was by his retired life with what is happening out there, little known, Brecken said, but gave
his unconcealed astonishment expressed when his now Hoeppner Engagement Heder ego told with Carin.

Then
of course, he indulged in sarcastic remarks and said, without tenderness
on Hoeppner anything to take that into consideration, he says of this
engagement, when a camel associations a wagtail.

"O, o - o -"

Hoeppner was defensive line and with the middle finger by him under the Chin beard, was seated,
but then the transition to the matter that had brought him. He said:

"Now that we sit together and chat again, lord of Brecken, I would
ask myself to listen even for a moment because of your revered parents.

I like my great regret've heard are broken out serious differences between them. The font reminds
us men - "

But neither of what was in Scripture, nor of other coveted Tancred of Brecken to hear, he Pastor
Hoeppner stopped suddenly and said, boned his hand on his rights Legend:

"It helps not intervene because, my dear sir. Justice was already Brix for me to a comparison
to forge, but since my parents conceived such a meaning that they are still all over the pension,
so make just anything.

Of course, breaks out again as the most outrageous rumors, but that is correct only that I
simply can not pay as much as the other loads that are on the estate
to large.

"

"So, so?

In fact? - That would be something quite different from what we reported. Wife Weft is my
wife - "

"Yes, that's the bad luck, dear pastor, that my mother so extensive Imagination has. How it suits
her, so she puts it; they do know very well what it was is, but - "

"No, I assure you, they do not know," Hoeppner pushed, the words of the innocent man pursue
a. "She has received a letter from you yet, according to the pension payments and set your in-laws
refer to the courts - "

"Oh, those are mere technicalities! But, as I said, you are of an intervention trial from, he
can avail nothing, because the one thing I could offer, they would anyway "- Brecken said casually
thrown his words - ". Not be satisfied"

"You could hear it!" Hoeppner was an eagerly. "Frankly, Mr. Brecker, I came really just to get you right
to urge you to make peace with your in-laws. - So, how much would
you pay?

Brecken now but hesitated to speak, although he no longer doubted
that the pastor posted by Tresses is.

Brix he had at first by half, then one-third spoken, and now he wanted to offer a quarter. That
seemed even though monstrous, but He quickly overcame his hesitation
and said:

"With five or six hundred marks, they will not be satisfied,
and that would be the worst."

"This is only the fourth part of the agreed sum of Mr. Brecken," Hoeppner
came frightened out in great disappointment and shook his head.

He then lay down on begging and persuasion, and was looking as if legal reasoning and or even
those in which, say the heart, would be caught at Brecken, otherwise all that would have such
favorable to him can work out, and ended with the words:

"The eternal God will reward you, by Brecken, when the hand of peace and offer an acceptable
agreement, "

"The eternal God has something else to do than to deal with such things," said Brecken, brutal
accordingly. "No, he may keep his rewards, and I keep my money.

I am so much rather! - "

"Lord of Brecken! Mr. Brecken of "Hoeppner came, for the first time in sound and Devotion Expression,
have based out and shook his head. "You will not regret it deeply, have gone so out of the
way of any reconciliation. Yes regret deeply, that tells me an inner Voice. But since you persist
in your intention, you have to agree with himself and with the one
who towers above all of us as a judge of our actions.

I know you believe not a higher being, the concept of God is only a human conception. They take
the view that chance governs the fate of all the people and every individual. But life with
all its manifestations teaches the opposite.

It gives a vengeance! Not for nothing that nature has placed a conscience in our chests. Nothing
offense, but I want to serve both you as our friends in Klementinenhof, I would save you from
regret and soul unrest. "

"Yes, yes, very good, good Mr. Pastor, I accept your good will, but
remember, - I see from your religious admonitions - that in money
matters is not speaking the will but the skill.

And then, what is the position my in-laws against me! Disparage, you suspect me at every opportunity?
They scatter the most infamous Rumors about me from talking, forgeries, and what I know, and
I should like a lamb let me go through? Last swells but each of the comb! "

The stored records Brecken had spoken on the one hand, to explore whether his in-laws had already
decided to take legal action against him, on the other hand, a pretext
consulted for his action.

       

For answer, and Hoeppner's defense Tresses he saw that his suspicion unjustified been, also did
not escape him how surprised the pastor about the motivation of his procedure was. But that
changed his mind, of course not, and he was also, boring spout '
not return when he left and finally, very depressed about the failure
of his Test recommended.

After he left, Brecken remembered that even now Carin leave soon Falsterhof
would be that there are less then two eyes, and that now but maybe
- yes! what?

Brecken reached into the cigar box and ignited a new Havana to the him as a to banish disease
pursued thoughts. Again he had the terrible idea caught as he come to fate with a shortening
of life to help Theoni could - -

* * * * *

A considerable time had elapsed, and with it, in turn pulled the winter into the country.

Founded by the workhouse Hoeppner had opened its doors, were in his rooms the sick and needy, and
at least once a week went to Mrs. Hoeppner, usually Lene with the hand, in the asylum in order
to look after things.

The child knew all the occupants and took her mother to position them, and his heart beat in sympathy
when they saw people suffering, and without knowing it, took the principles in itself, which
launched her foster mother's side towards people.

Wild radish had married his Carin and lived on the land leased by
him for now, only Elmenried small little estate.

The two men enjoyed the pleasure of life, the young woman, finally free of a constraint, the
nature of their resistance so much, but they already had since a young age must submit, breathed
a sigh of bliss, and the daily evidence of love and kindness she received from her husband, she
returned from an inner impulse, for she loved him with that warm love that springs from the mind
and is based on respect.

The twenty-four hours of the day were filled with activity and joyful
Life urge an increased value received, flew there for Carin, house,
yard, kitchen and cellar were devoted to their attention, but they
were also, in all their models wife Hoeppner Theoni and following,
their lives have a fuller content by focusing their fellow human beings
Caring and took their minds through reading and tried to make music
on.

Between two families Hoeppner and wild radish, there was a very lively and intimate movement,
and the Pastor and Carins man came together as a human mind, and the two women met by the commonality
of their outlook on life. They were the good and honest friends the bad energetic opponents.

But
while for them by favorable physical conditions, as by limiting in the enjoyment of life and happiness
through retrenchment was preparing a fixed site, it looked at Tresses gradually from sad.

The
assistance Heder ego, which they had been offered by Brix and later
by Carin, They had also rejected, as the pastor selfless Dienstwilligkeit.

So much goodness and Friendship they never touch, but they would also know be so had, she says.
Wife of lace had sold their jewelry already.

She wanted defeated by life, prefer to dispense with the superfluous, as the pressure of obligations
on the load. And in their Mingled pride and the hope! The process
was immediately brought, he had decide in six months.

But with this condition Tresses had ignored, with whom they had to do. Brecken once asked by his
attorney, stay the proceedings because of his side still had to procure material, then again,
he knew the dates to delay by He vorschützte disease. A formal error in the first action the
request of the Judicial Council used Brix He was a protest, and the consequence of all that the
matter after six years especially since the court holidays got in the way, was almost the same
spot.

Just now, just before Christmas, he had begun a journey to the south, and it was said that he would
not return before the first of March. -

Narrow and close to Tresses had been connected to Theoni. With warmest participation the latter
had approached her relatives and expressed at the first contact:

"If I give you some good will as you have about me. There are no limits to my Willingness and
no friendship, which I would not pay you. "

Currently employed by women braids but something more than just material concern. Since the departure
of wood she had seen her grandchild be recovered, and there it now
learned her son was away for months, there was only one thought for
you: Grete Child to press once to her heart. The terrible grief for
the deceased sought a Detachment, for a balance. But the woman was
also met by concern that the boy, who was entrusted to other hands,
could anything happen. The father did not seem such a thought came
to be, or complete indifference had determined his actions. 

Not
even on the occasion of his journey, he had suppressed his personal
feelings and the grandmother remembers a nurse of the child during
his absence. The small Nature was still far from the strife and discord,
it was more than cruel to the child whose sake suspend harmful contingencies.
But he did not, he even had the left strict orders to deny women of
lace entry into the palace, under her any circumstances to allow a
contact with their grandchildren.

The nurse was a good, compassionate
creature, but the housekeeper, who now alone Werder prevailed in wood,
and a servant, being replaced by their previous female support was,
and for the protection of women and children had to sleep in the manor
house, were , since Brecken had promised them rewards, if, during
his absence, all perform according to its requirements will be to
him in utter dependence.

"She wanted to tell or ask me something this afternoon," he said, "but she was afraid. She
looked like a good child in great trouble. I think she will speak before long."

She looked more and more like a good child in trouble as time passed. Mail after mail came
in, and she received no letter. She did not understand, and her fresh colour died away. She
spent her time now in inventing reasons for the non-arrival of her letter. None of them comprised
explanations which could be disparaging in any sense to Walderhurst. Chiefly she clung to the
fact that he had not been well. Anything could be considered a reason for neglecting letter
writing if a man was not well. If his illness had become serious she would, of course, have
heard from his doctor. She would not allow herself to contemplate that. But if he was languid
and feverish, he might so easily put off writing from day to day. This was all the more plausible
as a reason, since he had not been a profuse correspondent. He had only written when he had
found he had leisure, with decent irregularity, so to speak.

At last, however, on a day when she had felt the strain of waiting greater than she had courage
for, and had counted every moment of the hour which must elapse before Jane could return from
her mission of inquiry, as she rested on the sofa she heard the girl mount the stairs with
a step whose hastened lightness wakened in her an excited hopefulness.

She sat up with brightened face and eager eyes. How foolish she had been to fret. Now--now
everything would be different. Ah! how thankful she was to God for being so good to her!

"I think you must have a letter, Jane," she said the moment the door opened. "I felt it when
I heard your footstep."

Jane was touching in her glow of relief and affection.

"Yes, my lady, I have, indeed. And they said at the bank that it had come by a steamer that
was delayed by bad weather."

Emily took the letter. Her hand shook, but it was with pleasure. She forgot Jane, and actually
kissed the envelope before she opened it. It looked like a beautiful, long letter. It was quite
thick.

But when she had opened it, she saw that the letter itself was not very long. Several extra
sheets of notes or instructions, it did not matter what, seemed to be enclosed. Her hand shook
so that she let them fall on the floor. She looked so agitated that Jane was afraid to do more
than retire discreetly and stand outside the door.

In a few minutes she congratulated herself on the wisdom of not having gone downstairs. She
heard a troubled exclamation of wonder, and then a call for herself.

"Jane, please, Jane!"

Lady Walderhurst was still sitting upon the sofa, but she looked pale and unsteady. The letter
was in her hand, which rested weakly in her lap. It seemed as if she was so bewildered that
she felt helpless.

She spoke in a tired voice.

"Jane," she said, "I think you will have to get me a glass of wine. I don't think I am going
to faint, but I do feel so--so upset."

Jane was at her side kneeling by her.

"Please, my lady, lie down," she begged. "Please do."

But she did not lie down. She sat trembling and looking at the girl in a pathetic, puzzled fashion.

"I don't think," she quavered, "that his lordship can have received my letter. He can't have
received it. He doesn't say anything. He doesn't say one word--"

She had been too healthy a woman to be subject to attacks of nerves. She had never fainted
before in her life, and as she spoke she did not at all understand why Jane seemed to move
up and down, and darkness came on suddenly in the middle of the morning.

Jane managed by main strength to keep her from falling from the sofa, and thanked Providence
for the power vouchsafed to her. She reached the bell and rang it violently, and hearing it,
Mrs. Cupp came upstairs with heavy swiftness.

Chapter Twenty one

Naturally a perceptive and closely reasoning woman, Mrs. Warren's close intellectual intimacy
with her husband had, in giving her the benefit of intercourse with a wide experience, added
greatly to her power of reasoning by deduction. Warren frequently felt that his talk with her
was something like consultation with a specially clever and sympathetic professional confrère.
Her suggestions or conclusions were invariably worth consideration. More than once his reflection
upon them had led him to excellent results. She made one night a suggestion with regard to
the Extraordinary Case which struck him as being more than usually astute.

"Is she an intellectual woman?" she inquired.

"Not in the least. An unsparingly brilliant person might feel himself entitled to the right
to call her stupid."

"Is she talkative?"

"Far from it. One of her charms is the nice respect she seems to feel for the remarks of others."

"And she is not excitable?"

"Rather the reverse. If excitability is liveliness, she is dull."

"I see," slowly, "you have not yet thought it possible that she might--well--be under some
delusion."

Warren turned quickly and looked at her.

"It is wonderfully brilliant of you to have thought of it. A delusion?" He stood and thought
it over.

"Do you remember," his wife assisted him with, "the complications which arose from young Mrs.
Jerrold's running away, under similar circumstances, to Scotland and hiding herself in a shepherd's
cottage under the impression that her husband was shadowing her with detectives? You recollect
what a lovable woman she was, and what horror she felt of the poor fellow."

"Yes, yes. That was an Extraordinary Case too."

Mrs. Warren warmed with her subject.

"Here is a woman obviously concealing herself from the world in a lodging-house, plainly possessing
money, owning a huge ruby ring, receiving documents stamped with imposing seals, taking exercise
only by night, heart-wrung over the non-arrival of letters which are due. Every detail points
to one painful, dubious situation. On the other hand, she presents to you the manner and aspect
of a woman who is absolutely not dubious, and who is merely anxious on the one point a dubious
person would be indifferent to. Isn't it, then, possible that over-wrought physical condition
may have driven her to the belief that she is hiding from danger."

Dr. Warren was evidently following the thought seriously.

"She said," reflecting, "that all that mattered was that she should be safe. 'I want to keep
safe.' That was it. You are very enlightening, Mary, always. I will go and see her again to-morrow.
But," as the result of another memory, "how sane she seems!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He was thinking of this possible aspect of the matter as he mounted the staircase of the house
in Mortimer Street the next day. The stairway was of the ordinary lodging-house type, its dinginess
somewhat alleviated by the fact that the Cupps had covered the worn carpet with clean warm-coloured
felting. The yellowish marbled paper on the walls depressed the mind as one passed it; the
indeterminate dun paint had defied fog for years. The whole house presented only such features
as would encourage its proprietors to trust to the sufficing of infrequent re-decoration.

Jane had, however, made efforts in behalf of the drawing-room, in which her mistress spent
her days. She had introduced palliations by degrees and with an unobtrusiveness which was not
likely to attract the attention of neighbours unaccustomed to lavish delivery by means of furniture
vans. She had brought in a rug or so, and had gradually replaced objects with such as were
more pleasant to live with and more comfortable to use. Dr. Warren had seen the change wrought,
and had noted evidences that money was not unobtainable. The maid also was a young woman whose
manner towards her mistress was not merely respectful and well-bred, but suggestive of watchful
affection bordering on reverence. Jane Cupp herself was a certificate of decorum and good standing.
It was not such young women who secluded themselves with questionable situations. As she laid
her hand on the drawing-room door to open it and announce him, it occurred to Dr. Warren that
he would tell Mary that evening that if Mrs. Jameson had been the heroine of any unconventional
domestic drama it was an unmistakable fact that Jane Cupp would have "felt it her duty as a
young woman to leave this day month, if you please, ma'am," quite six months ago. And there
she was, in a neat gown and apron,--evidently a fixture because she liked her place,--her decent
young face full of sympathetic interest.

The day was dull and cold, but the front room was warm and made cheerful by fire. Mrs. Jameson
was sitting at a writing-table. There were letters before her, and she seemed to have been
re-reading them. She did not any longer bloom with normal health. Her face was a little dragged,
and the first thing he noted in the eyes she lifted to him was that they were bewildered.

"She has had a shock," he thought. "Poor woman!"

He began to talk to her about herself with the kindly perception which was inseparable from
him. He wondered if the time had not come when she would confide in him. Her shock, whatsoever
it had been, had left her in the position of a woman wholly at a loss to comprehend what had
occurred. He saw this in her ingenuous troubled face. He felt as if she was asking herself
what she should do. It was not unlikely that presently she would ask him what she should do.
He had been asked such things before by women, but they usually added trying detail accompanied
by sobs, and appealed to his chivalry for impossible aid. Sometimes they implored him to go
to people and use his influence.

Emily answered all his questions with her usual sweet, good sense. She was not well. Yesterday
she had fainted.

"Was there any disturbing reason for the faint?" he inquired.

"It was because I was--very much disappointed," she answered, hesitating. "I had a letter which--It
was not what I expected."

She was thinking desperately. She could understand nothing. It was not explainable that what
she had written did not matter at all, that James should have made no reply.

"I was awake all night," she added.

"That must not go on," he said.

"I was thinking--and thinking," nervously.

"I can see that," was his answer.

Perhaps she ought to have courage to say nothing. It might be safer. But it was so lonely not
to dare to ask anyone's advice, that she was getting frightened. India was thousands and thousands
of miles away, and letters took so long to come and go. Anxiety might make her ill before she
could receive a reply to a second letter. And perhaps now in her terror she had put herself
into a ridiculous position. How could she send for Lady Maria to Mortimer Street and explain
to her? She realised also that her ladyship's sense of humour might not be a thing to confide
in safely.

Warren's strong, amiable personality was good for her. It served to aid her to normal reasoning.
Though she was not aware of the fact, her fears, her simplicity, and her timorous adoration
of her husband had not allowed her to reason normally in the past. She had been too anxious
and too much afraid.

Her visitor watched her with great interest and no little curiosity. He himself saw that her
mood was not normal. She did not look as poor Mrs. Jerrold had looked, but she was not in a
normal state.

He made his visit a long one purposely. Tea was brought up, and he drank it with her. He wanted
to give her time to make up her mind about him. When at last he rose to go away, she rose also.
She looked nervously undecided, but let him go towards the door.

Her move forward was curiously sudden.

"No, no," she said. "Please come back. I--oh!--I really think I ought to tell you."

He turned towards her, wishing that Mary were with him. She stood trying to smile, and looking
so entirely nice and well-behaved even in her agitation.

"If I were not so puzzled, or if there was anybody--" she said. "If you could only advise me;
I must--I must keep safe."

"There is something you want to tell me?" he said quietly.

"Yes," she answered. "I am so anxious, and I am sure it must be bad for one to be anxious always.
I have not dared to tell anyone. My name is not Mrs. Jameson, Dr. Warren. I am--I am Lady Walderhurst."

He barely managed to restrain a start. He was obliged to admit to himself that he had not thought
of anything like this. But Mary had been right.

Emily blushed to her ears with embarrassment. He did not believe her.

"But I am really," she protested. "I really am. I was married last year. I was Emily Fox-Seton.
Perhaps you remember."

She was not flighty or indignant. Her frank face was only a little more troubled than it had
been before. She looked straight into his eyes without a doubt of his presently believing her.
Good heavens! if--

She walked to the writing-table and picked up a number of letters. They were all stamped with
the same seal. She brought them to him almost composedly.

"I ought to have remembered how strange it would sound," she said in her amenable voice. "I
hope I am not doing wrong in speaking. I hope you won't mind my troubling you. It seemed as
if I couldn't bear it alone any longer."

After which she told him her story.

       *       *       *       *       *

The unadorned straightforwardness of the relation made it an amazing thing to hear, even more
amazing than it would have been made by a more imaginative handling. Her obvious inability
to cope with the unusual and villainous, combined with her entire willingness to obliterate
herself in any manner in her whole-souled tenderness for the one present object of her existence,
were things a man could not be unmoved by, even though experience led him to smile at the lack
of knowledge of the world which had left her without practical defence. Her very humbleness
and candour made her a drama in herself.

"Perhaps I was wrong to run away. Perhaps only a silly woman would have done such a queer,
unconventional thing. But I could think of nothing else so likely to be quite safe, until Lord
Walderhurst could advise me. And when his letter came yesterday, and he did not speak of what
I had said--" Her voice quite failed her.

"Captain Osborn has detained your letter. Lord Walderhurst has not seen it."

Life began to come back to her. She had been so horribly bewildered as to think at moments
that perhaps it might be that a man who was very much absorbed in affairs--

"The information you sent him is the most important, and moving, a man in his position could
receive."

"Do you think so, really?" She lifted her head with new courage and her colour returned.

"It is impossible that it should be otherwise. It is, I assure you, impossible, Lady Walderhurst."

"I am so thankful," she said devoutly. "I am so thankful that I have told you."

Anything more touching and attractive than her full eyes and her grown-up child's smile he
felt he had never seen.

Chapter Twenty two

The attack of fever which had seemed to begin lightly for Lord Walderhurst assumed proportions
such as his medical man had not anticipated. His annoyance at finding his duties interfered
with fretted him greatly. He was not, under the circumstances, a good patient, and, partly
as a result of his state of mind, he began, in the course of a few weeks, to give his doctors
rather serious cause for anxiety. On the morning following Emily's confession to Dr. Warren
she had received a letter from her husband's physician, notifying her of his new anxieties
in connection with his patient. His lordship required extreme care and absolute freedom from
all excitement. Everything which medical science and perfect nursing could do would be done.
The writer asked Lady Walderhurst's collaboration with him in his efforts at keeping the invalid
as far as possible in unperturbed spirits. For some time it seemed probable that letter writing
and reading would be out of the question, but if, when correspondence might be resumed, Lady
Walderhurst would keep in mind the importance of serenity to the convalescent, the case would
have all in its favour. This, combined with expressions of sympathetic encouragement and assurances
that the best might be hoped for, was the gist of the letter. When Dr. Warren arrived, Emily
handed the epistle to him and watched him as he read it.

"You see," she said when he looked up, "that I did not speak too soon. Now I shall have to
trust to you for everything. I could never have borne it all by myself. Could I?"

"Perhaps not," thinking it over; "but you are very brave."

"I don't think I'm brave," thinking it over on her own part, "but it seemed as if there were
things I must do. But now you will advise me."

She was as biddable as a child, he told his wife afterwards, and that a woman of her height
and carriage should be as biddable as she might have been at six years old, was an effective thing.

"She will do anything I tell her, she will go anywhere I advise. I advise that she shall go
to her husband's house in Berkeley Square, and that together you and I will keep unobtrusive
guard over her. All is quite simple, really. All would have been comparatively simple at the
outset, if she had felt sure enough of her evidence to dare to confide in some practical person.
But she was too uncertain and too much afraid of scandal, which might annoy her husband. She
is deeply in awe of Lord Walderhurst and deeply in love with him."

"When one realises how unnecessary qualities and charms seem to be to the awakening of the
tender emotion, it is rather dull, perhaps, to ask why. Yet one weakly asks it," was Mrs. Warren's
summation.

"And one cannot supply the answer. But the mere devotion itself in this nice creature is a
thing to be respected. She will control even her anxieties and reveal nothing while she writes
her cheerful letters, as soon as she is allowed to write them."

"Lord Walderhurst will be told nothing?"

"Nothing until his recovery is complete. Now that she has made a clean breast of everything
to me and given herself into my hands, I believe that she finds a sentimental pleasure in the
thought of keeping her secret until he returns. I will confess to you, Mary, that I think that
she has read of and tenderly sympathised with heroines who have done the like before. She does
not pose to herself as a heroine, but she dwells affectionately on ingenuous mental pictures
of what Lord Walderhurst will say. It is just as well that it should be so. It is better for
her than fretting would be. Experience helped me to gather from the medical man's letter that
his patient is in no condition to be told news of any kind, good or bad."

The house in Berkeley Square was reopened. Lady Walderhurst returned to it, as it was understood
below stairs, from a visit to some German health resort. Mrs. Cupp and Jane returned with her.
The wife of her physician in attendance was with her a great deal. It was most unfortunate
for her ladyship that my lord was detained in India by illness.

The great household, having presented opened shutters to the world, went on in the even tenor
of its way. There brooded over it, however, a sort of hushed dignity of atmosphere. The very
housemaids wore an air of grave discretion. Their labours assumed the proportions of confidential
interested service, in which they felt a private pride. Not one among them had escaped becoming
attached to Lady Walderhurst.

Away from Palstrey, away from Mortimer Street, Emily began to find reality in the fact that
everything had already become quite simple, after all. The fine rooms looked so well ordered
and decent in a stately way. Melodramatic plotting ceased to exist as she looked at certain
dignified sofas and impressive candelabra. Such things became even more impossible than they
had become before the convincingness of the first floor front bedroom in Mortimer Street, She
began to give a good deal of thought to the summer at Mallowe. There was an extraordinary luxury
in living again each day of it, the morning when she had taken the third-class carriage which
provided her with hot, labouring men in corduroys as companions, that fleeting moment when
the tall man with the square face had passed the carriage and looked straight through her without
seeming to see her at all. She sat and smiled tenderly at the mere reminiscent thought. And
then the glimpse of him as he got into the high phaeton at the station; and the moment when
Lady Maria had exclaimed "There's Walderhurst," and he had come swinging with his leisurely
step across the lawn. And he had scarcely seemed to see her then, or notice her really when
they met, until the morning he had joined her as she gathered the roses and had talked to her
about Lady Agatha. But he had actually been noticing her a little even from the first--he had
been thinking about her a little all the time. And how far she had been from guessing it when
she had talked to Lady Agatha, how pleased she had been the morning of the rose gathering when
he had seemed interested only in Agatha's self! She always liked to recall, however, the way
in which he had asked the few questions about her own affairs. Her simplicity never wearied
of the fascination of the way in which he had looked at her, standing on the pathway, with
that delightful non-committal fixing of her with the monocle when she had said:

"People are kind. You see, I have nothing to give, and I always seem to be receiving."

And he had gazed at her quite unmovedly and answered only:

"What luck!"

But since then he had mentioned this moment as one of those in which he had felt that he might
want to marry her, because she was so unconscious of the fact that she gave much more to everybody
than she received, that she had so much to give and was totally unaware of the value of her gifts.

"His thoughts of me are so beautiful very often," was her favourite reflection, "though he
always has that composed way of saying things. What he says seems more valuable, because he
is like that."

In truth, his composed way of saying things it was which seemed to her incomparable. Even when,
without understanding its own longing for a thing it lacked, her heart had felt itself a little
unsustained she had never ceased to feel the fascination of his entire freedom from any shadow
of interest in the mental attitude of others towards himself. When he stood and gazed at people
through the glass neatly screwed into his eye, one felt that it was he whose opinion was of
importance, not the other person's. Through sheer chill imperviousness he seemed entirely detached
from the powers of criticism. What people said or thought of his fixed opinion on a subject
was not of the least consequence, in fact did not exist; the entities of the persons who cavilled
at such opinions themselves ceased to exist, so far as he was concerned. His was the immovable
temperament. He did not snub people: he cut the cord of mental communication with them and
dropped them into space. Emily thought this firmness and reserved dignity, and quailed before
the thought of erring in such a manner as would cause him to so send her soul adrift. Her greatest
terror during the past months had been the fear of making him ridiculous, of putting him in
some position which might annoy him by objectionable publicity.

But now she had no further fears, and could wait in safety and dwell in peace upon her memories
and her hopes. She even began to gain a kind of courage in her thoughts of him.

The atmosphere of the Berkeley Square mansion was good for her. She had never felt so much
its mistress before the staff of servants of whose existence she was the centre, who so plainly
served her with careful pleasure, who considered her least wish or inclination as a royal command,
increased her realisation of her security and power. The Warrens, who understood the dignity
and meaning of mere worldly facts her nature did not grasp, added subtly to her support. Gradually
she learned to reveal herself in simple talk to Mrs. Warren, who found her, when so revealed,
a case more extraordinary than she had been when enshrouded in dubious mystery.

"She is absolutely delicious," Mrs. Warren said to her husband. "That an adoration such as
hers could exist in the nineteenth century is--"

"Almost degenerate," he laughed.

"Perhaps it is regenerate," reflecting. "Who knows! Nothing earthly, or heavenly, would induce
me to cast a doubt upon it. Seated opposite to a portrait of her James, I hear her opinions
of him, when she is not in the least aware of what her simplest observation conveys. She does
not know that she is including him when she is talking of other things, that one sees that
while she is too shy to openly use his name much, the very breath of her life is a reference
to him. Her greatest bliss at present is to go unobtrusively into his special rooms and sit
there dwelling upon his goodness to her."

In fact Emily spent many a quiet hour in the apartments she had visited on the day of her farewell
to her husband. She was very happy there. Her soul was uplifted by her gratitude for the peace
she had reached. The reports of Lord Walderhurst's physician were never alarming and generally
of a reassuring nature. But she knew that he must exercise great caution, and that time must
elapse before he could confront his return voyage. He would come back as soon as was quite
safe. And in the meantime her world held all that she could desire, lacking himself.

Her emotion expressed itself in her earnest performance of her reverent daily devotions. She
read many chapters of the Bible, and often sat happily absorbed in the study of her Book of
Common Prayer. She found solace and happiness in such things, and spent her Sunday mornings,
after the ringing of the church bells, quite alone in Walderhurst's study, following the Service
and reading the Collects and Lessons. The room used to seem so beautifully still, even Berkeley
Square wearing its church-hour aspect suggested devout aloofness from worldly things.

"I sit at the window and think," she explained to Mrs. Warren. "It is so nice there."

She wrote her letters to India in this room. She did not know how far the new courage in her
thoughts of her husband expressed itself in these letters. When Walderhurst read them, however,
he felt a sense of change in her. Women were sometimes spoken of as "coming out amazingly."
He began to feel that Emily was, in a measure at least, "coming out." Perhaps her gradually
increasing feeling of accustomedness to the change in her life was doing it for her. She said
more in her letters, and said it in a more interesting way. It was perhaps rather suggestive
of the development of a girl who was on the verge of becoming a delightful sort of woman.

Lying upon his back in bed, rendered, it may be, a trifle susceptible by the weakness of slow
convalescence, he found a certain habit growing upon him--a habit of reading her letters several
times, and of thinking of her as it had not been his nature to think of women; also he slowly
awakened to an interest in the arrival of the English mails. The letters actually raised his
spirits and had an excellent physical effect. His doctor always found him in good condition
after he had heard from his wife.

"Your letters, my dear Emily," Walderhurst once wrote, "are a great pleasure to me. You are
to-day exactly as you were at Mallowe,--the creature of amiable good cheer. Your comfort stimulates
me."

"How dear, how dear?" Emily cried to the silence of the study, and kissed the letter with impassioned
happiness.

The next epistle went even farther. It absolutely contained "things" and referred to the past
which it was her joy to pour libations before in secret thought. When her eye caught the phrase
"the days at Mallowe" in the middle of a sheet, she was almost frightened at the rush of pleasure
which swept over her. Men who were less aloof from sentimental moods used such phrases in letters,
she had read and heard. It was almost as if he had said "the dear old days at Mallowe" or "the
happy days at Mallowe," and the rapture of it was as much as she could bear.

"I cannot help remembering as I lie here," she read in actual letters as she went on, "of the
many thoughts which passed through my mind as I drove over the heath to pick you up. I had
been watching you for days. I always liked particularly your clear, large eyes. I recall trying
to describe them to myself and finding it difficult. They seemed to me then to resemble something
between the eyes of a very nice boy and the eyes of a delightful sheep-dog. This may not appear
so romantic a comparison as it really is."

Emily began most softly and sweetly to cry. Nothing more romantic could she possibly have imagined.

"I thought of them in spite of myself as I drove across the moor, and I could scarcely express
to you how angry I was at Maria. It seemed to me that she had brutally imposed on you only
because she had known she might impose on a woman with such a pair of eyes. I was angry and
sentimental at one and the same time. And to find you sitting by the wayside, absolutely worn
out with fatigue and in tears, moved me really more than I had anticipated being moved. And
when you mistook my meaning and stood up, your nice eyes looking into mine in such ingenuous
appeal and fear and trouble, I have never forgotten it, my dear, and I never shall."

His mood of sentiment did not sit easily upon him, but it meant a real and interesting quite
human thing.

Emily sat alone in the room and brooded over it as a mother might brood over a new-born child.
She was full of tremulous bliss, and, dwelling with reverent awe upon the wonder of great things
drawing nearer to her every hour, wept for happiness as she sat.

       *       *       *       *       *

The same afternoon Lady Maria Bayne arrived. She had been abroad taking, in no dull fashion,
various "cures," which involved drinking mineral waters while promenading to the sounds of
strains of outdoor music, and comparing symptoms wittily with friends equal to amazing repartee
in connection with all subjects.

Dr. Warren was an old acquaintance, and as he was on the point of leaving the house as she
entered it she stopped to shake hands with him.

"It's rather unfortunate for a man when one can only be glad to see him in the house of an enemy."

She greeted him with, "I must know what you are doing here. It's not possible that Lady Walderhurst
is fretting herself into fiddle-strings because her husband chooses to have a fever in India."

"No, she is behaving beautifully in all respects. May I have a few minutes' talk with you,
Lady Maria, before you see her?"

"A few minutes' talk with me means something either amusing or portentous. Let us walk into
the morning-room."

She led the way with a rustle or silk petticoats and a suggestion of lifted eyebrows. She was
inclined to think that the thing sounded more portentous than amusing. Thank Heaven! it was
not possible for Emily to have involved herself in annoying muddles. She was not that kind
of woman.

When she came out of the room some twenty minutes later she did not look quite like herself.
Her smart bonnet set less well upon her delicate little old face, and she was agitated and
cross and pleased.

"It was ridiculous of Walderhurst to leave her," she was saying. "It was ridiculous of her
not to order him home at once. It was exactly like her,--dear and ridiculous."

In spite of her agitation she felt a little grotesque as she went upstairs to see Emily,--grotesque,
because she was obliged to admit to herself that she had never felt so curiously excited in
her life. She felt as she supposed women did when they allowed themselves to shed tears through
excitement; not that she was shedding tears, but she was "upset," that was what she called it.

As the door opened Emily rose from a chair near the fire and came slowly towards her, with
an awkward but lovely smile.

Lady Maria made a quick movement forward and caught hold of both her hands.

"My good Emily," she broke forth and kissed her. "My excellent Emily," and kissed her again.
"I am completely turned upside down. I never heard such an insane story in my life. I have
seen Dr. Warren. The creatures were mad."

"It is all over," said Emily. "I scarcely believe it was true now."

Lady Maria being led to a sofa settled herself upon it, still wearing her complex expression
of crossness, agitation, and pleasure.

"I am going to stay here," she said, obstinately. "There shall be no more folly. But I will
tell you that they have gone back to India. The child was a girl."

"It was a girl?"

"Yes, absurdly enough."

"Oh," sighed Emily, sorrowfully. "I'm sure Hester was afraid to write to me."

"Rubbish!" said Lady Maria. "At any rate, as I remarked before, I am going to stay here until
Walderhurst comes back. The man will be quite mad with gratified vanity."

Chapter Twenty three

It was a damp and depressing day on which Lord Walderhurst arrived in London. As his carriage
turned into Berkeley Square he sat in the corner of it rather huddled in his travelling-wraps
and looking pale and thin. He was wishing that London had chosen to show a more exhilarating
countenance to him, but he himself was conscious of being possessed by something more nearly
approaching a mood of eagerness than he remembered experiencing at any period of his previous
existence. He had found the voyage home long, and had been restless. He wanted to see his wife.
How agreeable it would be to meet, when he looked across the dinner-table, the smile in her
happy eyes. She would grow pink with pleasure, like a girl, when he confessed that he had missed
her. He was curious to see in her the changes he had felt in her letters. Having time and opportunities
for development, she might become an absolutely delightful companion. She had looked very handsome
on the day of her presentation at Court. Her height and carriage had made her even impressive.
She was a woman, after all, to be counted on in one's plans.

But he was most conscious that his affection for her had warmed. A slight embarrassment was
commingled with the knowledge, but that was the natural result of his dislike to the sentimental.
He had never felt a shadow of sentiment for Audrey, who had been an extremely light, dry, empty-headed
person, and he had always felt she had been adroitly thrust upon him by their united families.
He had not liked her, and she had not liked him. It had been very stupidly trying. And the
child had not lived an hour. He had liked Emily from the first, and now--It was an absolute
truth that he felt a slight movement in the cardiac region when the carriage turned into Berkeley
Square. The house would look very pleasant when he entered it. Emily would in some subtle way
have arranged that it should wear a festal, greeting air. She had a number of nice, little
feminine emotions about bright fires and many flowers. He could picture her childlike grown-up
face as it would look when he stepped into the room where they met.

Some one was ill in Berkeley Square, evidently very ill. Straw was laid thick all along one
side of it, depressing damp, fresh straw, over which the carriage rolled with a dull drag of
the wheels.

It lay before the door of his own house, he observed, as he stepped out. It was very thickly
scattered. The door swung open as the carriage stopped. Crossing the threshold, he glanced
at the face of the footman nearest to him. The man looked like a mute at a funeral, and the
expression was so little in accord with his mood that he stopped with a feeling of irritation.
He had not time to speak, however, before a new sensation arrested his attention,--a faint
odour which filled the place.

"The house smells like a hospital," he exclaimed, in great annoyance. "What does it mean?"

The man he addressed did not answer. He turned a perturbed awkward face to his superior in
rank, an older man, who was house steward.

In the house of mortal pain or death there is but one thing more full of suggestion than the
faint smell of antiseptics,--the gruesome, cleanly, unpleasant odour,--that is, the unnatural
sound of the whispering of hushed voices. Lord Walderhurst turned cold, and felt it necessary
to stiffen his spine when he heard his servant's answer and the tone in which it was made.

"Her ladyship, my lord--her ladyship is very low. The doctors do not leave her."

"Her ladyship?"

The man stepped back deferentially. The door of the morning-room had been opened, and old Lady
Maria Bayne stood on the threshold. Her worldly air of elderly gaiety had disappeared. She
looked a hundred. She was almost dilapidated. She had allowed to relax themselves the springs
which held her together and ordinarily supplied her with sprightly movement.

"Come here!" she said.

When he entered the room, aghast, she shut the door.

"I suppose I ought to break it to you gently," she said shakily, "but I shall do no such thing.
It's too much to expect of any woman who has gone through what I have during these last three
days. The creature is dying; she may be dead now."

She sank on the sofa and began to wipe away pouring tears. Her old cheeks were pale and her
handkerchief showed touches of rose-pink on its dampness. She was aware of their presence,
but was utterly indifferent. Walderhurst stared at her haggard disorder and cleared his throat,
finding himself unable to speak without doing so.

"Will you have the goodness to tell me," he said with weird stiffness, "what you are talking
about?"

"About Emily Walderhurst," she answered. "The boy was born yesterday, and she has been sinking
ever since. She cannot possibly last much longer."

"She!" he gasped, turning lead colour. "Cannot possibly last,--Emily?"

The wrench and shock were so unnatural that they reached that part of his being where human
feeling was buried under selfishness and inhuman conventionality. He spoke, and actually thought,
of Emily first.

Lady Maria continued to weep shamelessly.

"I am over seventy," she said, "and the last three days have punished me quite enough for anything
I may have done since I was born. I have been in hell, too, James. And, when she could think
at all, she has only thought of you and your miserable child. I can't imagine what is the matter
with a woman when she can care for a man to such an extent. Now she has what she wants,--she's
dying for you."

"Why wasn't I told?" he asked, still with the weird and slow stiffness.

"Because she was a sentimental fool, and was afraid of disturbing you. She ought to have ordered
you home and kept you dancing attendance, and treated you to hysterics."

No one would have resented such a course of action more derisively than Lady Maria herself,
but the last three days had reduced her to something like hysteria, and she had entirely lost
her head.

"She has been writing cheerfully to me--"

"She would have written cheerfully to you if she had been seated in a cauldron of boiling oil,
it is my impression," broke in her ladyship. "She has been monstrously treated, people trying
to murder her, and she afraid to accuse them for fear that you would disapprove. You know you
have a nasty manner, James, when you think your dignity is interfered with."

Lord Walderhurst stood clenching and unclenching his hands as they hung by his sides. He did
not like to believe that his fever had touched his brain, but he doubted his senses hideously.

"My good Maria," he said, "I do not understand a word you say, but I must go and see her."

"And kill her, if she has a breath left! You will not stir from here. Thank Heaven! here is
Dr. Warren."

The door had opened and Dr. Warren came in. He had just laid down upon the coverlet of a bed
upstairs what seemed to be the hand of a dying woman, and no man like himself can do such a
thing and enter a room without a singular look on his face.

People in a house of death inevitably whisper, whatsoever their remoteness from the sick-room.
Lady Maria cried out in a whisper:

"Is she still alive?"

"Yes," was the response.

Walderhurst went to him.

"May I see her?"

"No, Lord Walderhurst. Not yet."

"Does that mean that it is not yet the last moment?"

"If that moment had obviously arrived, you would be called."

"What must I do?"

"There is absolutely nothing to be done but to wait. Brent, Forsythe, and Blount are with her."

"I am in the position of knowing nothing. I must be told. Have you time to tell me?"

They went to Walderhurst's study, the room which had been Emily's holy of holies.

"Lady Walderhurst was very fond of sitting here alone," Dr. Warren remarked.

Walderhurst saw that she must have written letters at his desk. Her own pen and writing-tablet
lay on it. She had probably had a fancy for writing her letters to himself in his own chair.
It would be like her to have done it. It gave him a shock to see on a small table a thimble
and a pair of scissors.

"I ought to have been told," he said to Dr. Warren.

Dr. Warren sat down and explained why he had not been told.

As he spoke, interest was awakened in his mind by the fact that Lord Walderhurst drew towards
him the feminine writing-tablet and opened and shut it mechanically.

"What I want to know," he said, "is, if I shall be able to speak to her. I should like to speak
to her."

"That is what one most wants," was Dr. Warren's non-committal answer, "at such a time."

"You think I may not be able to make her understand?"

"I am very sorry. It is impossible to know."

"This," slowly, "is very hard on me."

"There is something I feel I must tell you, Lord Walderhurst." Dr. Warren kept a keen eye on
him, having, in fact, felt far from attracted by the man in the past, and wondering how much
he would be moved by certain truths, or if he would be moved at all. "Before Lady Walderhurst's
illness, she was very explicit with me in her expression of her one desire. She begged me to
give her my word, which I could not have done without your permission, that whatsoever the
circumstances, if life must be sacrificed, it should be hers."

A dusky red shot through Walderhurst's leaden pallor.

"She asked you that?" he said.

"Yes. And at the worst she did not forget. When she became delirious, and we heard that she
was praying, I gathered that she seemed to be praying to me, as to a deity whom she implored
to remember her fervent pleading. When her brain was clear she was wonderful. She saved your
son by supernatural endurance."

"You mean to say that if she had cared more for herself and less for the safety of the child
she need not have been as she is now?"

Warren bent his head.

Lord Walderhurst's eyeglass had been dangling weakly from its cord. He picked it up and stuck
it in his eye to stare the doctor in the face. The action was a singular, spasmodic, hard one.
But his hands were shaking.

"By God!" he cried out, "if I had been here it should not have been so!"

He got up and supported himself against the table with the shaking hands.

"It is very plain," he said, "that she has been willing to be torn to pieces upon the rack
to give me the thing I wanted. And now, good God in heaven, I feel that I would have strangled
the boy with my own hands rather than lose her."

In this manner, it seemed, did a rigid, self-encased, and conventional elderly nobleman reach
emotion. He looked uncanny. His stiff dignity hung about him in rags and tatters. Cold sweat
stood on his forehead and his chin twitched.

"Just now," he poured forth, "I don't care whether there is a child or not. I want her--I care
for nothing else. I want to look at her, I want to speak to her, whether she is alive or dead.
But if there is a spark of life in her, I believe she will hear me."

Dr. Warren sat and watched him, wondering. He knew curious things of the human creature, things
which most of his confrères did not know. He knew that Life was a mysterious thing, and that
even a dying flame of it might sometimes be fanned to flickering anew by powers more subtle
than science usually regards as applicable influences. He knew the nature of the half-dead
woman lying on her bed upstairs, and he comprehended what the soul of her life had been,--her
divinely innocent passion for a self-centred man. He had seen it in the tortured courage of
her eyes in hours of mortal agony.

"Don't forget," she had said. "Our Father which art in Heaven. Don't let anyone forget. Hallowed
be thy name."

The man, leaning upon his shaking hands before him, stood there, for these moments at least,
a harrowed thing. Not a single individual of his acquaintance would have known him.

"I want to see her before the breath leaves her," he gave forth in a harsh, broken whisper.
"I want to speak. Let me see her."

Dr. Warren left his chair slowly. Out of a thousand chances against her, might this one chance
be for her,--the chance of her hearing, and being called back to the shores she was drifting
from, by this stiff, conventional fellow's voice. There was no knowing the wondrousness of
a loving human thing, even when its shackles were loosening themselves to set it free.

"I will speak to those in charge with me," he said. "Will you control every outward expression
of feeling?"

"Yes."

Adjoining Lady Walderhurst's sleeping apartment was a small boudoir where the medical men consulted
together. Two of them were standing near the window conversing in whispers.

Walderhurst merely nodded and went to wait apart by the fire. Ceremony had ceased to exist.
Dr. Warren joined the pair at the window. Lord Walderhurst only heard one or two sentences.

"I am afraid that nothing, now, can matter--at any moment."

       *       *       *       *       *

Those who do not know from experience what he saw when he entered the next room have reason
to give thanks to such powers as they put trust in.

There ruled in the large, dim chamber an awful order and silence. The faint flickering of the
fire was a marked sound. There was no other but a fainter and even more irregular one heard
as one neared the bed. Sometimes it seemed to stop, then, with a weak gasp, begin again. A
nurse in uniform stood in waiting; an elderly man sat on a chair at the bedside, listening
and looking at his watch, something white and lifeless lying in his grasp,--Emily Walderhurst's
waxen, unmoving hand. The odour of antiseptics filled the nostrils. Lord Walderhurst drew near.
The speaking sign of the moment was that neither nurse nor doctor stirred.

Emily lay low upon a pillow. Her face was as bloodless as wax and was a little turned aside.
The Shadow was hovering over it and touched her closed lids and the droop of her cheek and
corners of her mouth. She was far, far away.

This was what Walderhurst felt first,--the strange remoteness, the lonely stillness of her.
She had gone alone far from the place he stood in, and which they two familiarly knew. She
was going, alone, farther still. As he stood and watched her closed eyes,--the nice, easily
pleased eyes,--it was they themselves, closed on him and all prosaic things and pleasures,
which filled him most strangely with that sense of her loneliness, weirdly enough, hers, not
his. He was not thinking of himself but of her. He wanted to withdraw her from her loneliness,
to bring her back.

He knelt down carefully, making no sound, stealthily, not removing his eyes from her strange,
aloof face. He slowly dared to close his hand on hers which lay outside the coverlet. And it
was a little chill and damp,--a little chill.

A power, a force which hides itself in human things and which most of them know not of, was
gathering within him. He was warm and alive, a living man; his hand as it closed on the chill
of hers was warm; his newly awakened being sent heat to it.

He whispered her name close to her ear.

"Emily!" slowly, "Emily!"

She was very far away and lay unmoving. Her breast scarcely stirred with the faintness of her
breath.

"Emily! Emily!"

The doctor slightly raised his eyes to glance at him. He was used to death-bed scenes, but
this was curious, because he knew the usual outward aspect of Lord Walderhurst, and its alteration
at this moment suggested abnormal things. He had not the flexibility of mind which revealed
to Dr. Warren that there were perhaps abnormal moments for the most normal and inelastic personages.

"Emily!" said his lordship, "Emily!"

He did not cease from saying it, in a low yet reaching whisper, at regular intervals, for at
least half an hour. He did not move from his knees, and so intense was his absorption that
the presence of those who came near was as nothing.

What he hoped or intended to do he did not explain to himself. He was of the order of man who
coldly waves aside all wanderings on the subjects of occult claims. He believed in proven facts,
in professional aid, in the abolition of absurdities. But his whole narrow being concentrated
itself on one thing,--he wanted this woman back. He wanted to speak to her.

What power he unknowingly drew from the depths of him, what exquisite answering thing he reached
at, could not be said. Perhaps it was only some remote and subtle turn of the tide of life
and death which chanced to come to his aid.

"Emily!" he said again, after many times.

Dr. Warren at this moment met the lifted eyes of the doctor who was counting her pulse, and
in response to his look went to him.

"It seems slightly stronger," Dr. Forsythe whispered.

The slow, faint breathing changed a shade; there was heard a breath slightly, very slightly
deeper, less flickering, then another.

Lady Walderhurst slightly stirred.

"Remain where you are," whispered Dr. Warren to her husband, "and continue to speak to her.
Do not alter your tone. Go on."

       *       *       *       *       *

Emily Walderhurst, drifting out on a still, borderless, white sea, sinking gently as she floated,
sinking in peaceful painlessness deeper and deeper in her drifting until the soft, cool water
lapped her lips and, as she knew without fear, would soon cover them and her quiet face, hiding
them for ever,--heard from far, very far away, across the whiteness floating about her, a faint
sound which at first only fell upon the stillness without meaning. Everything but the silence
had been left behind aeons ago. Nothing remained but the soundless white sea and the slow drifting
and sinking as one swayed. It was more than sleep, this still peace, because there was no thought
of waking to any shore.

But the far-off sound repeated itself again, again, again and again, monotonously. Something
was calling to Something. She was so given up to the soft drifting that she had no thoughts
to give, and gave none. In drifting so, one did not think--thought was left in the far-off
place the white sea carried one from. She sank quietly a little deeper and the water touched
her lip. But Something was calling to Something, something was calling something to come back.
The call was low, low and strange, so regular and so unbroken and insistent, that it arrested,
she knew not what. Did it arrest the floating and the swaying in the enfolding sea? Was the
drifting slower? She could not rouse herself to think, she wanted to go on. Did she no longer
feel the water lapping against her lip? Something was calling to Something still. Once, aeons
ago, before the white sea had borne her away, she would have understood.

"Emily, Emily, Emily!"

Yes, once she would have known what the sound meant. Once it had meant something, a long time
ago. It had even now disturbed the water, and made it cease to lap so near her lip.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was at this moment that one doctor had raised his eyes to the other, and Lady Walderhurst
had stirred.

When Walderhurst left his place beside his wife's bed, Dr. Warren went with him to his room.
He made him drink brandy and called his man to him. "You must remember," he said, "that you
are an invalid yourself."

"I believe," was the sole answer, given with an abstracted knitting of the brows,--"I believe
that in some mysterious way I have made her hear me."

Dr. Warren looked grave. He was a deeply interested man. He felt that he had been looking on
at an almost incomprehensible thing.

"Yes," was his reply. "I believe that you have."

About an hour later Lord Walderhurst made his way downstairs to the room in which Lady Maria
Bayne sat. She still looked a hundred years old, but her maid had redressed her toupee, and
given her a handkerchief neither damp nor tinted with rubbed-off rouge. She looked at her relative
a shade more leniently, but still addressed him with something of the manner of a person undeservedly
chained to a malefactor. Her irritation was not modified by the circumstance that it was extremely
difficult to be definite in the expression of her condemnation of things which had made her
hideously uncomfortable. Having quite approved of his going to India in the first place, it
was not easy to go thoroughly into the subject of the numerous reasons why a man of his years
and responsibilities ought to have realised that it was his duty to remain at home and take
care of his wife.

"Incredible as it seems," she snapped, "the doctors think there is a slight change, for the
better."

"Yes," Walderhurst answered.

He leaned against the mantel and gazed into the fire.

"She will come back," he added in a monotone.

Lady Maria stared at him. She felt that the man was eerie, Walderhurst, of all men on earth!

"Where do you think she has been?" She professed to make the inquiry with an air of reproof.

"How should one know?" rather with the old stiffness. "It is impossible to tell."

Lady Maria Bayne was not the person possessing the temperament to incline him to explain that,
wheresoever the outer sphere might be to which the dying woman had been drifting, he had been
following her, as far as living man could go.

The elderly house steward opened the door and spoke in the hollow whisper.

"The head nurse wished to know if your ladyship would be so good as to see Lord Oswyth before
he goes to sleep."

Walderhurst turned his head towards the man. Lord Oswyth was the name of his son. He felt a shock.

"I will come to the nursery," answered Lady Maria. "You have not seen him yet?" turning to
Walderhurst.

"How could I?"

"Then you had better come now. If she becomes conscious and has life enough to expect anything,
she will expect you to burst forth into praises of him. You had better at least commit to memory
the colour of his eyes and hair. I believe he has two hairs. He is a huge, fat, overgrown thing
with enormous cheeks. When I saw his bloated self-indulgent look yesterday, I confess I wanted
to slap him."

Her description was not wholly accurate, but he was a large and robust child, as Walderhurst
saw when he beheld him.

From kneeling at the pillow on which the bloodless statue lay, and calling into space to the
soul which would not hear, it was a far cry to the warmed and lighted orris-perfumed room in
which Life had begun.

There was the bright fire before which the high brass nursery fender shone. There was soft
linen hanging to be warmed, there was a lace-hung cradle swinging in its place, and in a lace-draped
basket silver and gold boxes and velvet brushes and sponges such as he knew nothing about.
He had not been in such a place before, and felt awkward, and yet in secret abnormally moved,
or it seemed abnormally to him.

Two women were in attendance. One of them held in her arms what he had come to see. It was
moving slightly in its coverings of white. Its bearer stood waiting in respectful awe as Lady
Maria uncovered its face.

"Look at it," she said, concealing her relieved elation under a slightly caustic manner. "How
you will relish the situation when Emily tells you that he is like you, I can't be as sure
as I should be of myself under the same circumstances."

Walderhurst applied his monocle and gazed for some moments at the object before him. Please God that he help me and advise. If it becomes worse with me I incurred
as a dangerous fever, then I shall send for you. Let you but come not to come, before you call
a letter from me.

Lord Walderhurst made a slight movement backward.

"I--I should not know how," he said, and then felt angry at himself. He desired to take the
thing in his arms. He desired to feel its warmth. He absolutely realised that if he had been
alone with it, he should have laid aside his eyeglass and touched its cheek with his lips.

Two days afterwards he was sitting by his wife's pillow, watching her shut lids, when he saw
them quiver and slowly move until they were wide open. Her eyes looked very large in her colourless,
more sharply chiselled face. They saw him and him only, as light came gradually into them.
They did not move, but rested on him. He bent forward, almost afraid to stir.

He spoke to her as he had spoken before.

"Emily!" very low, "Emily!"

Her voice was only a fluttering breath, but she answered.

"It--was--you!" she said.

Chapter Twenty four

Such individuals as had not already thought it expedient to gradually loosen and drop the links
of their acquaintance with Captain Alec Osborn did not find, on his return to his duties in
India, that the leave of absence spent in England among his relatives had improved him. If
a woman once took this inner power, it makes the man she loves, first alone by the Lord, their
attention will acquire all the knowledge, and their activity She knows to use them all. It is dependent
on no one and gives her husband the true independence, the domestic, internal, what he has seen,
he secured what he buys, well used, and he may turn his mind to large objects and if the luck
is good, that are the state, which his wife at home so well is present. "

He drew a description of how he would like to see a woman. I was red, as he described me as I breathe
and live. I enjoyed my triumph in the quiet, the more so since I made all events saw that he
had not meant me personally that he actually me did not know. I remember no more pleasant sensation
in my whole life, as that a man I respected so much, not mine, but in my innermost nature
the preference was. What a reward I felt! What encouragement I had become!

When they were gone, my worthy friend, smiling, said to me: "Too bad that the men often think
and talk about what they do not let it come to execution, otherwise would be an excellent Lot for my
dear Therese almost found. " When asked questions, she merely smiled and
made no answer, which was extremely awkward for the well-meaning inquirer.

The questioner was the wife of the colonel of the regiment, and when the lady related the incident
to her husband in the evening, he drew in his breath sharply and summed the situation up in
a few words.

"That little woman," he said, "lives every day through twenty-four hours of hell. One can see
it in her eyes, even when she professes to smile at the brute for decency's sake. The awfulness
of a woman's forced smile at the devil she is tied to, loathing him and bearing in her soul
the thing, blood itself could not wipe out. Ugh! I've seen it once before, and I recognised
it in her again. There will be a bad end to this."

There probably would have been, with the aid of unlimited brandy and unrestrained devil, some
outbreak so gross that the social laws which rule men who are "officers and gentlemen" could
not have ignored or overlooked it. But the end came in an unexpected way, and Osborn was saved
from open ignominy by an accident.

On a certain day when he had drunk heavily and had shut Hester up with him for an hour's torture,
after leaving her writhing and suffocating with sobs, he went to examine some newly bought
firearms. In twenty minutes it was he who lay upon the floor writhing and suffocating, and
but a few minutes later he was a dead man. A charge from a gun he had believed unloaded had
finished him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lady Walderhurst was the kindest of women, as the world knew. She sent for little Mrs. Osborn
and her child, and was tender goodness itself to them.

Hester had been in England four years, and Lord Oswyth had a brother as robust as himself,
when one heavenly summer afternoon, as the two women sat on the lawn drinking little cups of
tea, Hester made a singular revelation, and made it without moving a muscle of her small countenance.

"I always intended to tell you, Emily," she began quietly, "and I will tell you now."

"What, dear?" said Emily, holding out to her a plate of tiny buttered scones. "Have some of
these nice, little hot ones."

"Thank you." Hester took one of the nice, little hot ones, but did not begin to eat it. Instead,
she held it untouched and let her eyes rest on the brilliant flower terraces spread out below.
"What I meant to tell you was this. The gun was not loaded, the gun Alec shot himself with,
when he laid it aside."

Emily put down her tea-cup hastily.

"I saw him take out the charge myself two hours before. When he came in, mad with drink, and
made me go into the room with him, Ameerah saw him. She always listened outside. Before we
left The Kennel Farm, the day he tortured and taunted me until I lost my head and shrieked
out to him that I had told you what I knew, and had helped you to go away, he struck me again
and again. Ameerah heard that. He did it several times afterwards, and she always knew. She
always intended to end it in some way. She knew how drunk he was that last day, and--It was
she who went in and loaded the gun while he was having his scene with me. She knew he would
go and begin to pull the things about without having the sense to know what he was doing. She
had seen him do it before. I know it was she who put the load in. We have never uttered a word
to each other about it, but I know she did it, and that she knows I know. Before I married
Alec, I did not understand how one human being could kill another. He taught me to understand,
quite. But I had not the courage to do it myself. Ameerah had."

And while Lady Walderhurst sat gazing at her with a paling face, she began quietly to eat the
little buttered scone.

Original page 312 (Part Two, Chapter 17): "My lady! my lady!" she gasped out as soon as she
dare[missing "d" inserted].

Original page 320 (Part Two, Chapter 17): "They may be as innocent as I am. And they may be
murderers in their hearts. I can prove nothing, I can prevent nothing. "[extraneous " omitted]Oh!
do come home."

Original page 432: Human nature at its best and worst is well protrayed[changed to "portrayed"].
By William Allen White.

A vivid, startling portrayal of one man's financial greed, its wide spreading power, its action
in Wall Street, and its effect on the three women most intimately in his life. A splendid,
entertaining American novel.

IN OUR TOWN. By William Allen White. Illustrated by F.R. Gruger and W. Glackens.

Made up of the observations of a keen newspaper editor, Involving the town millionaire, the
smart set, the literary set, the bohemian set, and many others. All humorously related and
sure to hold the attention.

NATHAN BURKE. By Mary S. Watts.

The story of an ambitious, backwoods Ohio boy who rose to prominence. Everyday humor of American
rustic life permeates the book.

THE HIGH HAND. By Jacques Futrelle. Illustrated by Will Grefe.

A splendid story of the political game, with a son of the soil on the one side, and a "kid
glove" politician on the other. A pretty girl, interested in both men, is the chief figure.

THE BACKWOODSMEN. By Charles G.P. Roberts. Illustrated.

Realistic stories of men and women living midst the savage beauty of the wilderness. Human
nature at its best and worst is well portrayed.

YELLOWSTONE NIGHTS. By Herbert Quick.

A jolly company of six artists, writers and other clever folks take a trip through the National
Park, and tell stories around camp fire at night. Brilliantly clever and original.

THE PROFESSOR'S MYSTERY. By Wells Hastings and Brian Hooker. Illustrated by Hanson Booth.

A young college professor, missing his steamer for Europe, has a romantic meeting with a pretty
girl, escorts her home, and is enveloped in a big mystery.

