A LECTURE ON HEADS

By Geo. Alex. Stevens

WITH ADDITIONS,

By Mr. Pilon

AS DELIVERED by Mr. Charles Lee Lewes.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, AN ESSAY ON SATIRE.

WITH FORTY-SEVEN HEADS By Nesbit, From Designs By Thurston.

1812.

ADDRESS TO THE PUBLIC.

There having been several pirated editions published of this Lecture, it is necessary to describe
their nature, and to explain the manner in which they were obtained; from which the public
will judge, how much they have been imposed upon by the different publishers.

When the Lecture was first exhibited, a very paltry abridgment was published by a bookseller
in the city. This edition was so different from the original delivered by Mr. Stevens, that
he thought it too contemptible to affect his interest, which alone prevented him from commencing
any legal process against the {VI}publisher for thus trespassing on his right and property.

Mr. Stevens, having exhibited his Lecture with most extraordinary success in London, afterwards
delivered it, with a continuance of that success, in almost every principal town in England
and Ireland. During this itinerant stage of its exhibition, it had received great additions
and improvements from the hints and suggestions of Churchill, Howard, Shuter, and many other
wits, satirists, and humourists, of that day. It therefore re-appeared again in London almost
a new performance. This, I suppose, induced another bookseller in the Strand to publish his
edition, with notes, written by a Reverend Gentleman: however this might be, Mr. Stevens obtained
an injunction against the continuance of that publication; he was dissuaded from proceeding
to trial by the interposition of friends, who persuaded the litigants, over a bottle, to terminate
their difference; Mr. Stevens withdrew his action, and the publication was suppressed. I relate
this circumstance from {VII}the authority of Mr. Stevens himself. The public will, no doubt,
be surprised to find that this Lecture should ever have been pirated, by one who is now complaining
of a similar act against himself. I am no advocate for any infringements of right or property;
but I cannot avoid thinking, that complaints of this nature come with a very ill grace from
those who have committed the same species of literary depredations themselves. The last piratical
publication of this Lecture was by a stationer in Paternoster-Row, who has had the assurance
to use my name without having my authority, or even asking my permission. He likewise very
falsely and impudently asserts, that he has published it as I spoke it at Covent-Garden theatre.
It is so much the contrary, that it contains not a syllable of the new matter with which it
was then augmented. With respect to the rest, it is taken from the spurious and very imperfect
abridgment first mentioned in this piratical list. It is, therefore, evident, that the original
Lecture was never before published until this opportunity {VIII}which I have taken of thus
submitting it to the Public, for their approbation and patronage, whose

Most humble and devoted servant

I am,

CHARLES LEE LEWES.

July 22, 1785.

PROLOGUE,

Written By Mr. Pilon Spoken At The Theatre Royal, Covent-Garden, June 24, 1780.

