The two officers, not wishing to hurt K----'s feelings more than was absolutely necessary,
and residing in the vicinity, suggested that they should meet us at a certain point at a given
time to escort us into Cologne. The appointment being settled to mutual satisfaction they departed
and we at once busied ourselves with preparations for another sojourn in prison, which we considered
to be our certain fate. Our hostess packed a huge reserve of dainties of all descriptions sufficient
to last us several days, by which time we fondly concluded that any formalities demanded by
the authorities would be completed, and we should once more be allowed to go free on "passes."

We kept the appointment with the two officers who, out of respect for our host, had discarded
their uniforms for mufti. Consequently, to the casual man in the street, we appeared to be
only a little party going into the city for a mild junketing.

We were told that the official fiat had gone forth that all Britishers within the German Empire,
both resident and touring, were to be arrested. All sorts of reasons were advanced to explain
this action but they were merely speculative. There is one feature about the Teuton Government
which is far from being characteristic of the British authorities. The Germans never do things
by halves. What they authorise to be done is carried out to the letter. What they say they
mean and there is no delay in executing an order once it is issued. The Teuton system may have
shortcomings but hesitation and vacillation cannot be numbered among them. Directly the order
concerning the re-arrest of the British was issued, extreme activity was displayed in carrying
it out. Possibly it was a mere temporary measure, as K---- half hoped, but that was immaterial.
Every alien was rounded up within a few hours and placed safely under lock and key.

We were not kept in doubt as to our future for many minutes. We learned at the Polizei Prasidium
that we were to be immured in Klingelputz prison. Many of our number were gathered there, having
once been released on "pass," and from the circumstance that they were business men in practice
and residence in Germany the confident belief prevailed that after re-registration all would
be released. But we were speedily disappointed. All of us without the slightest discrimination
were placed under restraint.

Directly we entered Klingelputz and had passed into the main building I could not restrain
my curiosity. This penitentiary was vastly dissimilar from Wesel. It is a huge building not
only covering a considerable tract of ground, but is several floors in height, thus providing
cell accommodation for hundreds of prisoners.

But it was the method of securing the prisoners which compelled my instant attention. Ahead
of me I saw what I first took to be an iron-railed barrier behind which a number of men were
crowding as if to catch a glimpse of us. But to my astonishment I discovered, as I advanced,
that this was not an iron barrier keeping back a curiosity-provoked crowd but the cells and
their inmates. I was startled to hear frantic hails, "Mahoney! Mahoney! Hooray! Come on!"

I stepped forward to ascertain that I was being called by two or three compatriots whom I had
left behind at Sennelager, but who had afterwards been released on "pass" and re-rounded up
as aliens. I returned the greeting hilariously, upon which one of the British prisoners, who
was remarkably agile, swarmed the bars, and poised thus above his comrades, was emulating the
strange and amusing antics of a monkey at the Zoological Gardens, thereby conveying by his
actions that he and his friends were caged after the manner of our simian prizes at home.

The cells were indeed cages, as I discovered upon closer inspection, and recalled nothing so
much as parrot cages upon a large scale. All sides were barred in the self-same manner so that
from any point one could see every corner of the cell and discover what the inmate or rather
inmates were doing, because each cell was really six cells in one. The cage was rectangular
in plan, each cell measuring about seven feet in length by three feet in width, and fairly
high. But it was the internal arrangement of the cell which struck me. In plan it was set out
something like the following:--

The middle gangway A not only served as the approach to the sub-divisions or cells B on either
side, but also constituted the space occupied by the prisoners during the day. Each of the
sub-divisions was large enough to receive a bed and nothing else. There was only sufficient
space to stand beside the couch. Upon retiring for the night the prisoner was compelled to
disrobe in the central space or gangway A, then, picking up his clothes he had to sidle round
the door and climb over his bed to get into it. In the morning, upon rising, he either had
to stand upon his bed to dress or to come out into the central gangway, the space beside his
bed being scarcely sufficient to permit free movement.

Normally, I suppose, each cell or cage is designed to receive six prisoners, one to each sub-division,
in which event circulation in the dividing open space would be possible. But the facilities
of Klingelputz were so taxed at the time that every morning further prisoners were brought
from the masonry cells below and locked in this open space for the day. The result was considerable
overcrowding, there being no fewer than twenty-six men in one of the cages including some of
our fellow-countrymen from Sennelager upon the day I entered. But the men from the latter camp
happened to be some of the most irrepressible spirits among us. They considered it to be huge
fun to swing and climb about the bars like monkeys, and their quaint antics and badinage kept
their comrades buoyant.

While I made application to be put in one of these extraordinary cells, merely to experience
the novelty, my four comrades expressed their sincere hope that we should meet with superior
accommodation. In this we were not disappointed, if the quarters to which we were taken were
capable of being called superior. We were escorted down flights of steps which appeared to
lead to the very bowels of the State hotel. Finally we were ushered into a long subterranean
apartment, which was really a cellar, and was evidently intended to house five prisoners at
one time, seeing that there were this number of beds. Except for the fact that it was a cellar
and very little light penetrated its walls, little fault could be found with it. Certainly
it was scrupulously clean, for which we were devoutly thankful, while on the table an oil-lamp
was burning.

Life at Klingelputz would have been tolerable but for one thing--the prison fare. At six o'clock
we were served with a basin of acorn coffee and a small piece of black bread for breakfast.
At twelve we were treated to a small dole of skilly, the most execrable food I have ever tasted
even in a German prison camp. It was skilly in the fullest sense of the word. Whatever entered
into its composition must have been used most sparingly; its nutritive value was absolutely
negligible. At five in the afternoon we received another basin of the acorn coffee together
with a small piece of black bread, and this had to keep us going for the next thirteen hours.

Fortunately the food which we had brought with us served as a valuable supplement to that provided
by the State. It not only kept us alive but enabled us to maintain our condition. The old fellow
who was our gaoler was tractable; indeed he was somewhat apologetic for having to look after
such estimable gentlemen, an attitude which was doubtless due to the fact that he knew we should
look after him! We endeavoured to see if he could supply a little more "liberty and fresh air"
but the old warder shook his head sorrowfully.

[*large gap]

Lights had to be extinguished by nine o'clock, and it was the evening which taxed our endurance.
We had to while away the hours as best we could. First we improvised an Indian band, using
our basins as tom-toms and singing the most weird music. As a variety we dressed up in our
blankets to resemble Red Indians and indulged in blood-curdling war-dances. Such measures for
passing the time may sound extremely childish to readers, but it must be remembered that there
was nothing else for us to do unless we were content to sit down with our chins in our hands,
with the corners of our mouths drooping, and our faces wearing the expression of undertakers'
mutes. Had we not participated in the admittedly infantile amusements we should have gone mad.

When we had demolished our food reserves and were utterly dependent upon the prison diet, we
speedily began to betray signs of our captivity and deprivations. We petitioned for permission
to purchase food from outside but this met with a curt refusal. Eventually the prison authorities
relented and we were permitted to purchase our mid-day meal from a restaurant, for which privilege
by the way we were mulcted very heavily.

During the day we were permitted to stretch our limbs in the exercise yard for about fifteen
minutes. No steel-bound rules and regulations such as I had experienced at Wesel prevailed
here. We were free to intermingle and to converse as we pleased. This relaxation was keenly
anticipated and enjoyed because it gave us the opportunity to exchange reminiscences. We learned
enough during this brief period to provide material for further topics of conversation. This,
however, was the experience of our party. Others fared worse and were shut up in single cells
in which, as I had previously done at Wesel, they were compelled to pace.

We only shared the large underground cell together at night because of its sleeping accommodation.
We were shut in separate cells during the day, which prevented interchange of conversation
and inter-amusement during the day except in the exercise yard. But solitary confinement was
rare, and in the majority of cases we learned that the aliens were placed in small parties
of four or five in a single cell. After a few days our party was swelled by five new arrivals
from different parts of Germany. We were a cosmopolitan crowd, comprising every strata of society,
from wealthy men down to stable lads. One boisterous spirit, a Cockney, confessed far and wide
that he had once suffered imprisonment at home for horse-stealing, and he did not care a rap
for anything or anybody. He was always bubbling over with exuberant merriment and was one of
those who can project every situation into its relative humorous perspective. Another prisoner
was an Englishman who had been resident in Germany for twenty-five years, and at the time of
his arrest occupied a very prominent position in one of the foremost banking institutions.

This man felt his humiliation acutely. He paced his cell from morning to night, peevish and
nervous, brooding deeply over what he considered to be an atrocity. He was a well-known man
and on intimate terms with many of the foremost members of the Government and of the Services.
He wrote to every man whom he thought capable of exerting powerful and irresistible influence
upon his behalf, but without any tangible results. The fact that this man, apparently more
Teuton, from his long residence and associations in the country, than British, had been thrown
into prison brought home to us the thorough manner in which the Germans carried out their task
of placing all aliens in safety. It was immaterial how prominent the position of the Britisher,
his wealth, or his indispensability to the concern with which he was identified. Into prison
he went when the general rounding up of enemies order was promulgated.

The Cockney who had been imprisoned for horse-stealing badgered this superior fellow-prisoner
unmercifully. He was incessantly dwelling upon the man's descent from a position of comfort
and ease to "quod" as he termed it. He would go up to the prisoner, pacing the exercise yard,
and slapping him on the back would yap:

"Now then, old sport! Don't get so down in the mouth about it!"

The prisoner would venture some snappy retort.

"All right, Cocky! Crikey, you'd look mighty fine stuck up against a wall with half a dozen
bloomin' Prussian rifles looking at yer. Blime if I don't believe you'd dodge the bullets by
caving-in at the knees!"

A fierce look would be the response to such torment.

"Gawd's trewth! My fretful bumble-bee, I'd write to old Tight-Whiskers about it if I was you.
Get 'im to come an' bail yer out!"

At first we wondered who the personality so irreverently described as "Tight-Whiskers" was,
but subsequently we were enlightened. He was referring to Von Tirpitz, "Th' bloke wot looks
arter th' Germin Navy!"

When the Cockney, who appeared to be downright proud of his ability to keep his "pecker up,"
found banter to be unproductive, he would assume a tone of extreme sympathetic feeling, but
this was so obviously unreal as to be more productive of laughter than his outspoken sallies.

Once a week there was a sight from which, after my first experience, I was always glad to escape.
On this day the prisoners were taken into the exercise yard to meet their wives and children.
On these occasions when supplies of food were brought in, some very heart-rending scenes were
witnessed, the little toddlers clinging to their fathers' coat-tails and childishly urging
them to come home, while the women's eyes were wet and red.

The sanitary arrangements in Klingelputz were on a level with those of other prisons. Two commodes,
with ill-fitting lids, sufficed for ten men, and in the underground apartment to which we were
condemned, and of which the ventilation was very indifferent, the conditions became nauseating.
To make matters worse the vile prison food precipitated an epidemic of acute diarrhoea and
sickness, so that the atmosphere within the limited space became so unbearable as to provoke
the facetious Cockney to declare that "'e could cut it with a knife," while he expressed his
resolve "to ask th' gaoler for a nail to drive into it" to serve as a peg for his clothes!
But it was no laughing matter, and we all grew apprehensive of being stricken down with some
fearful malady brought on simply and purely by the primitive sanitary arrangements. Only once
a day were the utensils subjected to a perfunctory cleansing, a job which was carried out by
the criminals incarcerated in the prison.

These criminals would do anything for us. The first night they tapped at the door to our cellar,
and, peeping through the cracks, we saw a number of these degraded specimens of German humanity
in their night attire. They had heard who we were and begged for a cigarette. We passed two
or three through the key-hole. The moment a cigarette got through there was a fearful din in
the fight for its possession, culminating in a terrific crashing. The gaoler had appeared upon
the scene! Quietness reigned for a few minutes, when they would stealthily return and whisper
all sorts of yarns concerning the reasons for their imprisonment in order to wheedle further
cigarettes from us.

We were "clinked" in Klingelputz, as the Cockney expressed it, on November 6, 1914, and were
kept in a state of terrible suspense. At last one morning the prison officials entered and
called out the name of the three managers of the large works at the village in which K----
resided, who had been imprisoned with us. My friend and I naturally expected that their order
for release had arrived, and we waited expectantly for their return to congratulate them, since
their release would be a happy augury for us. They returned shortly, laden with bulky parcels
of food which had been sent to them, and we all sat down to a Gargantuan spread. But we had
scarcely started the meal when the gaoler entered and calling our names, ordered us to follow
him to the office. Here we had to answer to our names once more. Then the Governor, in a sonorous
voice, went on:

"Gentlemen! You are free men. Passes will be re-issued to you, but you will have to go to the
Polizei Prasidium to have the requisite papers prepared."

At this intelligence we became wildly excited. K---- had been anticipating such a development,
but the process of deciding the issue had been protracted from the slow pace and roundabout
journey which such matters have to take through the German Circumlocution Office. We started
off to the Prasidium, escorted, strange to say, by the two officials who had arrested us at
K----'s residence, and with whom my friend was now conversing gaily. As we passed the cages
the English boys caught sight of me, and there were frantic yells of congratulation and good
wishes upon our good fortune.

Reaching the Prasidium we were ushered into an outer room, the two officials proceeding into
an inner room armed with our papers. While we were waiting K---- turned to me and remarked:

"I hope they'll get us fixed up jolly quickly. Those two officers told me that to-morrow all
aliens are to be sent from Klingelputz to the internment camp at Ruhleben. If we get our 'passes'
we shall dodge that excursion very neatly!"

While we were talking the two officials came out and hurriedly left the building. They did
not glance at us, and from their bearing I surmised that something had gone wrong at the last
minute. I turned to my friend.

"Did you notice those fellows' faces? They looked pretty solemn. I'll bet you something's in
the wind, and it won't be to our advantage."

At that moment we were summoned into the inner office. The official called out our names, to
which we answered, mine being the last.

"Ach! Ma-hone-i!" he exclaimed, "Englische Spion! Eh?"

I acknowledged the accusation. Although I was fully accustomed to the repetition of these words
by now, since they were hurled at me at every turn, they were beginning to become somewhat
irksome. Upon each occasion when the interrogation was flung out for the first time by a new
official, it was delivered with a strange and jarring jerk.

"Well, you were to be free on 'passes,' but the papers are not in order. They have been sent
from the wrong place. They should have come from Coblentz. So they will have to be returned
to be dispatched through the correct channel!"

How we cursed that German Circumlocution Office and this latest expression of Teuton organisation.
The papers were correct, but because they had happened to come from the wrong office they were
to be sent back to be re-dispatched from Coblentz, although they would not suffer the slightest
alteration or addition in the process. Prussian red-tape was going crazy with a vengeance.

We were escorted to a cell in the basement of the Prasidium. Were we going to be kept here
until the papers came to hand again? However, seeing that the trip would take some days, this
was scarcely likely unless something extraordinary supervened. While we were discussing this
latest and totally unexpected dénouement we heard the low rumbling of heavy wheels. K---- cocked
his ears with an acute tension.

"Hark!" he blurted out. "Damn it all, Mahoney, that's the 'Black Maria!' We are going back
to Klingelputz or somewhere else!"

It was indeed the Teuton "Black Maria," and we were hurried upstairs to be tumbled into it.
It was a dismal vehicle, there being barely sufficient space to accommodate our party, which
had been further encumbered by two German demi-mondaines, who had been arrested for some infraction
of the German law as it affected their peculiar interests. We were so tightly packed that we
had to stand sideways, and I amused myself by working out the allowance of air space per person.
It averaged about fourteen cubic inches!

We rumbled into the courtyard at Klingelputz, dejected and somewhat ill of temper at our disappointment.
We were worrying because apparently the alien prisoners were to be dispatched to Ruhleben on
the morrow. Unless we received our "passes" in time the chances were a thousand to one that
we should be doomed to the self-same camp.

As we re-entered the prison we were greeted with a deafening yell. It came from the caged British
prisoners.

"Hullo, boys! What cheer, Mahoney!" they shrieked. "Have they dished you again? Thought you
were going home? Well, we're mighty pleased to see you back at the 'Zoo'!" and there was another
wild exhibition of simian acrobatics upon the bars for our especial amusement.

But I had become so inured to the juggling tactics of Prussian officialdom that I was far from
showing my inner feelings of chagrin. I entered into their banter as energetically, and with
a parting "See you to-morrow, boys!" vanished down the steps with their frantic hails ringing
in my ears.

The following morning we were marshalled, and as K---- had been dreading, the worst had happened.
We were consigned "British Prisoners of War for internment at Ruhleben!" Home was now farther
from me than ever!

PRISON FOUR--RUHLEBEN

CHAPTER XVIII

THE CAMP OF ABANDONED HOPE

It was 4.30 in the morning of November 12 when the blare of the bugle echoed through the long,
dreary passages of Klingelputz Prison. To the British prisoners--in fact to all the aliens--that
crash was of fearful import.

We were commanded to parade at 5 a.m. in one of the long upper corridors flanked on either
side by cells. We were formed in a double line, and as our names were called we had to step
forward. The roll-call was bawled out, not once, but half a dozen times to make positive it
had been read correctly. Then we were counted, also some half-a-dozen times, to assure the
totals tallying.

These preliminaries completed, preparations for our transference to Ruhleben were hurried forward.
We packed up our belongings, together with all the food upon which we could place our hands,
and re-lined up. Under a strong guard we were marched to Cologne station. On the way, several
of us, anxious to communicate with our friends and relatives, notifying them of our new address,
dropped post-cards into the roadway. The idea was to attract the attention of the guards to
them, and then by bribe to induce them to place them in the post. But the officers were too
eagle-eyed. They evidently anticipated such a ruse and accordingly kept the soldiers under
severe surveillance. One soldier who picked up a post-card, which I had dropped in this manner,
was caught in the act and received a terrifying rating on the spot. Thus we who dropped the
cards had to rely upon the tender mercies and good-natured feeling of whoever chanced to pick
them up to slip them into the post, but I fear very few were dispatched.

We were huddled into the train at Cologne, but it was not until 8.30 that we steamed out of
the station. We travelled continuously throughout the day until we reached Hannover at 9 in
the evening. During the journey, those who had exercised the forethought to bring food with
them had every reason to congratulate themselves, because this was all upon which we had to
subsist during the twelve and a half hours' travelling. The authorities did not furnish us
with so much as a crust of bread or a spoonful of water. Moreover, if we chanced to pull up
at a station where refreshments of any kind might have been procurable, we were not allowed
to satisfy our cravings. At one stop, owing to one of our comrades falling ill, we asked the
Red Cross for a drop of water. We paid a mark--one shilling--for it, but after taking the money
they merely jeered, spat at us, and refused to respond to our request.

At Hannover we were permitted to buy what we could, but I may say that it was very little because
the buffet attempted to rob us unmercifully. A tiny sandwich cost fourpence, while a small
basin of thin and unappetising soup, evidently prepared in anticipation of our arrival, was
just as expensive. Still the fact remains that throughout the whole railway journey the German
authorities never supplied us with a mouthful of food.

After a wait of three hours at Hannover the train resumed its journey, reaching the station
adjacent to the camp at Ruhleben at 6.0 a.m. Thus we had been confined to our carriages for
21½ hours, suffering intense discomfort from the stifling atmosphere and our cramped quarters.

Our first impression of Ruhleben was by no means inspiriting. The camp had been started some
two or three months previous to our arrival on November 14th, 1914, but it was in a terribly
chaotic condition. German method and organisation recorded a dismal and complete failure here.

Having reached the grounds, and registration completed to the satisfaction of the authorities,
we were marched off to our quarters. The party to which I was attached was escorted to a stable
which was of the ordinary single floor type, characteristic of these islands, with a row of
horse-boxes and a loft for the storage of hay and other impedimenta above. The horse-boxes
measured ten feet square and had only been cleaned out perfunctorily. The raw manure was still
clinging to the walls, while the stalls were wet from the straw which had been recently removed.
Indeed in some stalls it had not been cleared out.

The atmosphere had that peculiarly pungent ammonia smell incidental to recently tenanted stables.
The prisoners who were allotted to those stalls in which the wet straw still remained were
compelled to lie down upon it so that they had a far from inviting or savoury couch. Yet there
were many who preferred the unsalubrious and draughty stalls to the loft overhead, and prices
for the former ruled high, as much as 100 marks--£5--being freely given for this accommodation.
This speculation in the quarters for the prisoners constituted one of the greatest scandals
of the camp during its early days, inasmuch as it acted unfairly against those who were "broke."
Who pocketed this money we never learned, but there was a very shrewd suspicion that certain
persons were far from being scrupulous and did not hesitate to pursue their usual shark tactics,
even under such circumstances.

K---- and myself were compelled to shake ourselves down in the loft. It was reached by a creaking
and crazy wooden staircase. Gaining the upper regions we nearly encountered disaster. The loft
was practically void of natural illumination, the result being a kind of perpetual dismal gloom,
which to us, coming out of the broad daylight, appeared to be darkness until our eyes grew
accustomed to it.

The floor was of stone or concrete and in the centre of the space the height from floor to
the highest point of the gable roof was about 7 feet, sloping to 4 feet 6 inches at the sides.

The authorities cannot be credited with being liberal in assigning us space. The roof rafters
were spaced 10 feet apart and between each two of these five men had to shake down their beds.
Thus each was given a space 2 feet in width by 6 feet in length in which to make himself at
home and to stow his belongings. The quarters were so cramped that to dress and undress it
was necessary to stand in the centre of the gangway which ran down the middle of the loft.
Once in bed it was almost impossible to turn over. To make matters worse the roof was far from
being watertight and when a heavy shower swept over us the water would trickle and drip through,
while the slits in the wall allowed the wind to whistle and rush into the loft with ear-cutting
force.

When we entered into possession the floor was perfectly bare, but we were given a miserable
allowance of trusses of straw, each of which was divided up sparingly between so many men.
This we threw loosely upon the floor to form a couch, but the allowance was so inadequate that
no man could keep himself warm, because the cold from the stone drove through the thin covering,
while it was quite out of the question to find comfort.

Only a few blankets were served out. I, myself, made eighteen distinct applications for one,
but was denied the luxury, if such it can be called, until eleven months after my arrival at
the camp. Had it not been for the generosity of K----, who freely gave me one of his blankets,
coupled with one or two overcoats which I secured as a result of my trading operations in the
camp, to which I refer later, I should have been compelled to face the bone-piercing, marrow-congealing
wintry weather without the slightest covering beyond the clothes in which I stood. Those who,
unlike me, were lacking a liberal friend, lay shivering, depending purely upon the warmth radiating
from one another's bodies as they laid huddled in rows.

We protested against this lack of blankets to the United States Ambassador, time after time,
but it was of little avail. The authorities persisted in their statements that a blanket had
been served out to every man. In fact it was asserted in the British papers, as a result of
the Ambassador's investigations, that each man had been served with two blankets. But for every
man who did possess two blankets there were three prisoners who had not one! The authorities
endeavoured to shuffle the responsibility for being without blankets upon the prisoners themselves,
unblushingly stating that they had been careless in looking after them, had lost them, or had
been so lax as to let them be stolen. If the Ambassador had only gone to the trouble to make
a complete and personal canvass he would have probed the matter to the bottom. If a parade
with blankets had been called, the German Government would have been fairly trapped in its
deliberate lying.

About ten months after I entered the camp, blankets were purchasable at the camp stores. They
cost us nine shillings apiece and they were not our exclusive property. When a prisoner received
his release he was not permitted to take his blanket with him. Neither had it any surrender
value. It had to be left behind. If the prisoner could find a purchaser for it he was at liberty
to do so, but if no sale could be consummated then it had to be presented to a comrade. The
blanket was not allowed to leave the camp because it contained a certain amount of wool!

The food supplied by the authorities did not vary very pronouncedly from what I had received
in other camps, but if anything it was a trifle better, especially in the early days, when
Germany was not feeling the pinch of the British blockade. For breakfast there was the eternal
acorn coffee and a hunk of black bread. The mid-day repast comprised a soup contrived from
potatoes, cabbage, and carrots with traces of meat. One strange mixture which the authorities
were fond of serving out to us was a plate of rice and prunes garnished with a small sausage!
I invariably traded the sausage with a comrade for prunes, this so-called German dainty not
appealing to my palate in the slightest. After a while, however, this dish vanished from the
limited menu. Tea was merely a repetition of the morning meal.

Our first emphatic protest was in connection with our sleeping accommodation in the loft. A
representative came from the American Embassy and we introduced him forthwith to our sleeping
quarters. We not only voiced our complaints but we demonstrated our inability to get warm at
night owing to the cold floor striking through the straw. He agreed with us and ordered the
authorities to provide us with sleeping arrangements somewhat more closely allied to civilized
practice. The Germans obeyed the letter but not the spirit of the Representative's recommendations.
They sent us in a few boards spaced an inch or two apart and nailed to thin cross battens.
In this way our bodies were lifted about two inches off the floor!

The straw when served out to us was perfectly clean and fresh, but it did not retain this attractiveness
for a very long time. The soil in the vicinity of Ruhleben is friable, the surface being a
thick layer of fine sand in dry, and an evil-looking slush in wet, weather. As the prisoners
when entering the barracks were unable to clean their boots, the mud was transferred to the
straw. Not only did the straw thus become extremely dirty but the mud, upon drying, charged
it heavily with dust. When a tired man threw himself down heavily upon his sorry couch he was
enveloped for a few seconds in the cloud of dust which he sent from the straw into the air.
Whenever we attempted to shake up our beds to make them slightly more comfortable, the darkness
of the loft was rendered darker by the dense dust fog which was precipitated. Naturally violent
coughing and sneezing attended these operations and the dust, being far from clean in itself,
wrought fearful havoc with our lungs. I recall one prisoner who was in perfect health when
he entered the camp, but within a few weeks he had contracted tuberculosis. He declined so
rapidly as to arouse the apprehensions of the authorities, who hurriedly sent him home to Britain.

After lying upon this bare straw for three months we were given some coarse sacking and were
peremptorily ordered to fill these bags with the straw. This task gave the sand and dust a
spirited opportunity to penetrate our systems. Had a stranger outside the building heard our
violent coughing he would have been pardoned had he construed our loft to be a hospital for
consumptives.

We had been lying for quite six months upon this straw when we were suddenly paraded to receive
the order to re-appear a quarter of an hour later with our beds. Re-parading we were commanded
to empty the sacks to form a big pile, and it was a repulsive-looking accumulation. But we
observed this straw was collected and carted away very carefully, although at the time we paid
little attention to the incident.

Naturally we concluded that we were to be given a supply of new straw, and not before it was
wanted. But we were not to be treated as milksops. We were marched off to the railway station
where there was a quantity of wooden shavings which we were told to pack into our sacks. When
we attacked the bundles we recoiled in horror. The material was reeking wet. The authorities
might just as well have served us with soddened sponges.

What could be done? Visions of rheumatic fever and various other racking maladies arising from
sleeping upon a wet bed haunted us. However, the day being fine we rapidly strewed the bedding
material out in the hope that the sun would dry it somewhat. This precaution, however, was
only partially successful. Our couches were damp that night.

We thought no more about the straw which we had been compelled to exchange for the shavings
until we learned that a German newspaper was shrieking with wild enthusiasm about Teuton resourcefulness
and science having scored another scintillating economic triumph. According to this newspaper
an illustrious professor had discovered that straw possessed decidedly valuable nourishing
qualities essential to human life, and that it was to be ground up and to enter into the constitution
of the bread, which accordingly was now to be composed of at least three constituents--wheat-meal,
potato flour, and straw. Some of us began to ponder long and hard over the straw which had
so suddenly been taken away from us, especially myself, as I had experienced so many of the
weird tactics which are pursued by the Germans in their vain efforts to maintain their game
of bluff.

I asked every member of our party, in the event of discovering a foreign article in his bread,
to hand it over to me because I had decided to become a collecting fiend of an unusual type.
Contributions were speedily forthcoming, and they ranged over pieces of dirty straw, three
to four inches in length, fragments of coke, pieces of tree-bark, and odds and ends of every
description--in fact just the extraneous substances which penetrated into our loft with the
mud clinging to our boots and which, of course, became associated with the loose straw. I cherished
this collection, which by the time I secured my release had assumed somewhat impressive proportions.
I left these relics in safe keeping near the border, and they will come into my hands upon
the conclusion of the war if not before.

From these strange discoveries I was prompted to make inquisitive enquiries. I discreetly and
in apparent idleness cross-questioned the guards and any other sources of information which
were likely to prove fruitful. My interrogations were so seemingly innocent as to draw immediate
and comprehensive replies. Stringing these fragments of information together, it was impossible
to come to any conclusion other than that I had formed in my own mind, namely, that the straw
upon which we had been lying for six months had been whisked off to the granary and had re-appeared
among us in the guise of the staff of life! It was not conducive to our peace of mind to think
we had probably been eating our beds!

[*large gap]

During the early days, owing to the insufficiency of nutritious food, we were hard-pressed.
There were no canteens, but presently these appeared and we were able to purchase further limited
supplies of food, at an all but prohibitive price I might mention, because the rascally German
speculators had paid heavily for the privilege of being able to fleece the British. When, at
a later date, we received a weekly allowance of five shillings, the plight of everyone became
eased materially, although, unfortunately, this sum went a very short way owing to the extortionate
prices which prevailed.

One particularly atrocious scandal was associated with the arrival of some big crates of comforts
sent out to us by one of the philanthropic missions at home. The local stores suddenly blossomed
forth with a huge and extremely varied stock of wearing apparel--mufflers, socks, and other
articles of which we were in urgent need. I, among others, did not hesitate to renew my wardrobe,
which demanded replenishment, particularly as the prices appeared to be attractive. We were
ignorant as to the origin of this stock, but it did not trouble our minds until my purchase
of a pair of socks. This precipitated an uproar, because within one of the socks I found a
small piece of paper on which was written, undoubtedly by the hand which had diligently knitted
the article, "With love from----. To a poor British prisoner of war in Germany," followed by
the name of the Mission to whom the articles had been sent, doubtless in response to an appeal.

This discovery revealed the maddening circumstance that what had been sent out to Ruhleben
for free distribution among the prisoners was actually being sold. There was an enquiry which
yielded a more or less convincing result according to one's point of view.

There was also an outcry over the crates in which these articles were sent to us. The party
of which I was a member had removed from the loft to a horse-box beneath which had been vacated.
When we entered this attractive residence the walls were still covered with manure--they were
not given a dressing of whitewash until later--while lying upon the bare floor, with only a
thin sack of doubtful shavings between us and the stone, did not heighten our spirits. But
as we were becoming reconciled to our captivity, we decided to make our uninviting stall as
homely as we could. We decided upon a wooden bed apiece. The authorities, after persistent
worrying, only partially acceded to our demands by providing three primitive single beds for
occupation by six men.

As we could not persuade the authorities to serve us with a bed apiece, we decided to build
the three extra beds ourselves. But we were faced with the extreme difficulty of procuring
the requisite wood! The authorities had none to give away and very little to sell. When we
saw these empty packing cases, which were of huge dimensions, we thought luck had come our
way at last, so we approached the proprietor of the stores for permission to break them up.
But to our disgust he informed us that he had already parted with them--for a consideration
we discovered afterwards. Two had been secured by a German sentry in the camp to be converted
into wardrobes, while the others were in the hands of the camp carpenter. We approached this
worthy, but he ridiculed the suggestion that he should give some of the wood to us for our
intended purpose. We could buy the boards if we liked. As there was no alternative source of
supply we did so, and the price of purchase showed that the carpenter cleared nine shillings
on each crate! With much difficulty we built our three extra beds between us, but the outlay
for materials alone was eighteen shillings!

The cold during the winter affected us very severely because the barrack was absolutely devoid
of any heating facilities. When the snow was carpeting the ground to a depth of from six to
eight inches, and the thermometer was hovering several degrees below zero we lay awake nearly
the whole night shivering with cold. Indeed on more than one occasion, I with others, abandoned
all attempts to sleep and trudged the loft to keep warm.

We appealed to the American Ambassador in the hope that he would be able to rectify matters.
When he came upon the scene there was another outburst of indignation. He ordered the authorities
to instal a heating system without further delay. By driving through our sole protector in
this manner, we, as usual, received some measure of respite. But the heating was useless to
those living in the horse-boxes. The side partitions of the latter were not carried up to the
ceiling, but a space of some two feet was left. To protect ourselves from the fierce ear-cutting
draught which swept through the stables we blocked these spaces with brown paper. But the means
which somewhat combated the onslaughts of the draughts also shut out the heat, so that, in
our case, and it was typical of others, we really did not benefit one iota from the "complete
heating system" with which, so the German press asserted, Ruhleben Camp was lavishly equipped.

Christmas Day, 1914, was an unholy nightmare. Our fare could not, by any stretch of imagination,
be described as Christmassy. We had several pro-Germans among us--they preached this gospel
in the hope of being released if only on "passes," but the thoroughbred Prussian is not to
be gulled by patriots made-to-order--and they kept up the spirit of Yule Tide with candles
and what not, somewhat after the approved Teuton manner. It was impressive, but so palpably
artificial and shallow as merely to court derision and mockery among the Britishers.

The great meal of the Day of Days was a huge joke! One barrack received what might be excusably
described as something like a chop, with potatoes and gravy. The next barrack had a portion
of a chop and potatoes, but no gravy. By the time this barrack had been served apparently all
supplies had been exhausted, thanks to the wonderful perfection of German method, organisation,
and management. The result was that a third barrack had to be content with a raw rasher of
bacon, while a further barrack received only potatoes swimming in a liquid which was undoubtedly
set down officially as gravy. But barrack six got nothing! This barrack is occupied by members
of the Jewish persuasion, but only those who partook of Jewish food received anything to eat
that day. The Jews generally fared better, because they were tended by the Rabbi, who indeed
exerted himself untiringly upon their behalf. He drove into the camp every day in his motor
car, accompanied by his wife, and they went diligently around the members of their flock, ascertaining
the requirements of each man, and doing all in their power to satisfy him so far as the rules
and regulations of the camp permitted. The Jews who supported their Rabbi had no complaint
to offer on the score of food, because they received it in variety and plenty through the munificence
of their co-religionists in Berlin.

In the evening we attempted a sing-song to keep up the spirit and atmosphere of the season
as far as practicable within our modest limitations, but this was promptly suppressed by our
task-masters. We were compelled to spend the evening in miserable silence or to crawl into
bed to muse over our unhappy lot. So far as Ruhleben was concerned, the sentiment of "Good-will
to all men" had sped by on the main line, and had forgotten all about us poor wretches in the
siding.

While in Cologne on "passes" I and my friends frequently learned from the Berliner Tageblatt
and other leading newspapers that the foremost artistes performing in Berlin paid visits to
Ruhleben in the evening to amuse the prisoners. At that time we were somewhat prone to envy
the good time our compatriots were evidently having at the internment camp and the bed of roses
upon which, according to the press, they were lying. But when we entered the camp and made
enquiries, we discovered that the newspaper assertions were not merely gross exaggerations,
but unblushing fabrications.

To satisfy ourselves upon this point we went to the corner of the camp where the delightful
entertainments were said to be given, but the only artistes we discovered were a dozen hungry
prisoners trying to coax a tune out of a rebellious mouth organ! Our belief in German statements
received another shattering blow. During my twelve months in this camp I never caught a glimpse
of or heard a note from an eminent German impressario or artiste of any description. All the
amusements we ever obtained were due to our own efforts, and I am glad to say that they evidently
were vastly superior to any that the much-vaunted city could offer to its estimable citizens.
At least this was the only impression we could gather from the statements of visitors who were
occasionally permitted to attend our theatrical and vaudeville performances and concerts. We
had nothing for which to thank the Germans in the way of diversion than we had in any other
direction.

CHAPTER XIX

ORGANISING THE COMMUNAL CITY OF RUHLEBEN

When I reached the internment camp it was in a wildly chaotic condition. Every semblance of
management was conspicuous by its absence, while the German authorities never lifted a finger
or uttered a single word towards straightening things out. Some of the enlightened spirits
among us maintained that the Germans would not assist us, but it is my firm impression that
they could not: it was a problem beyond their capacities. Such a state of affairs seems remarkable
when one recalls how persistently the Teuton flaunts his vaunted skill in organisation, scientific
management and method before the world at large. As a matter of fact it is only when one secures
a position behind the scenes in Germany, to come into close contact with the Hun as he really
is, when he has been stripped of the mask and veneer which he assumes for parade and to impress
his visitors, that the hollowness of the Teuton pretensions is laid bare in all its ghastly
nakedness.

The result in Ruhleben camp was terrible. It was every man for himself and the Devil take the
hindmost. If one, in desperation, approached the authorities for a word of suggestion to improve
this or that, officialdom merely shrugged its shoulders and candidly admitted impotence to
recommend a remedy. So we had to depend essentially upon our own exertions and initiative.

Each barrack elected a captain, whose position was somewhat analogous to that of the Governor
of a State, while over the camp as a whole reigned a super-captain. Seeing that there were
several thousand prisoners at the time of my arrival on November 12, 1914, accommodated in
twelve barracks, which presented a ghastly exhibition of congestion, and that neither law nor
order, except as interpreted and maintained by the rifle and the bayonet of the unscrupulous
German sentries, prevailed, the necessity to turn the colony inside out and to inaugurate some
form of systematic control and operation was only too obvious.

In the early days we were entirely dependent upon the authorities for our food supplies, and
they were invariably inadequate, while still more often the victuals were disgustingly deficient
in appetising qualities. There were no facilities whatever for supplementing the official rations
by purchases from a canteen such as we had enjoyed for a time at Sennelager. At last a German
frau, animated by desire to improve the shining hour at the expense of the interned civilians,
opened a small booth where some extras such as we so urgently desired could be procured. This
booth, about as large as the bathing machine common to our seaside resorts, was situate in
the centre of the camp. The diminutive dimensions of the "shop" prevented the woman carrying
extensive stocks, and, as a rule she was cleared right out before mid-day. Her specialities
were sweets, fruit, canned foods, herrings, and such like, but in extremely limited quantities.

This shop became known throughout the colony as the "Pond-side" stores, and the nickname was
apt. Why, constitutes a little story in itself. It virtually occupied the centre of the main
thoroughfare, and certainly became the busiest corner in the community. But at this point the
land made a sudden dip. Consequently, when we were visited by rainstorms, and it does rain
in Germany, rendering a British torrential downpour a Scotch mist by comparison, the rain water,
unable to escape, gathered in this depression, forming a respectable pond, with the booth or
stores standing, a dejected island, in the middle.

If the storm were unduly heavy this pond assumed imposing dimensions. One day I decided to
measure it, so arming myself with a foot-rule I waded deliberately through its length and width
with my crude measuring device to find that it was 133½ feet long by 25 feet wide, and ranged
from 6 inches to 2½ feet in depth. While engaged in this occupation I was surprised by an officer,
who, catching sight of my rule, sharply demanded what I was doing? I told him frankly, and
there was a lively breeze between us.

[*large gap]

Naturally one will ask how it was that such a pond could form in the heart of the camp. To
the British mind, saturated as it is with blind faith in German superior abilities in every
ramification of human endeavour, it may seem incomprehensible, and the formation of the lake
may be charitably attributed to the rain-water drainage system becoming choked, thus effectively
preventing the escape of the water. But there was no drain to cope with this water, and what
is more to the point the nuisance was never overcome until the British prisoners themselves
took the matter in hand.

When the water was lying in this depression a trip to the Stores became an adventure. To obviate
the necessity of wading through the noisome water we secured a plank gangway upon boxes and
barrels. The pathway thus formed was only a few inches in width and precarious. The gangway
ran out from one bank to the stores, thence on to the opposite bank, so that it was possible
for the men to pass to the shop and to dry land in single file. If one were at the extreme
end of the queue one might confidently expect to wait from two to three hours before reaching
the shop, only then to be disappointed because it had been cleared out of everything edible.

When the water was up, the German frau, acting as shopkeeper, would perch herself on a box
or barrel with the murky fluid swishing and snarling around her, because her stores always
suffered inundation at such times. Walking the plank to make a purchase was highly exciting
and mildly diverting. No little effort was required to maintain one's balance, while time after
time the crazy foundations, as represented by the boxes and barrels, would give way, precipitating
a long string of patient customers into the dirty water.

The inadequacy of these stores was felt very severely. At last, after a short and determined
deliberation, it was resolved to run the colony upon communal lines. This was the only feasible
form of control in order to protect the prisoners against scandalous robbery, extortionate
prices, and to ensure a sufficiency of the essentials which were in such urgent demand. A simple,
although comprehensive form of civic government was drawn up, involving the formation of educational
facilities, a police force, a fire brigade, the establishment and maintenance of shops and
canteens, all of which were operated by the community for the benefit of the community, the
receipts being pooled in the camp treasury.

Such a system was absolutely imperative. Some of the prisoners were without money and were
denied the receipt of contributions from home, their relatives and friends doubtless being
too poor to help them. Naturally these luckless prisoners were speedily reduced to extremely
straitened circumstances and distress among them became very acute. Furthermore parcels of
clothing and other articles were being sent in bulk, addressed merely to the camp as a whole,
instead of to individuals, the objects of the senders being the fair and equitable distribution
of the articles among the prisoners indiscriminately. The handling of these supplies led to
frequent and unblushing abuses, the men who were not in need of such contributions receiving
them at the expense of those who sorely wanted them.

After our civic government had been reduced to practical application and was working smoothly,
the task of distributing these unaddressed bulk supplies was entrusted to the captains of the
barracks. The captain was selected for this responsibility because he knew all the deserving
cases in his own party and was able to see they received the alleviation of their distress.
When a crate of goods came in the captain compiled a list setting out the names and precise
needs of every man in his party. If you were in a position to do so you were expected to pay
a small sum for the articles, the price thereof being fixed, although you were at liberty to
pay more if you felt disposed. This money was paid into the camp treasury. But if you were
"broke," no money was expected. Consequently every man was certain to secure something of what
he needed, irrespective of his financial circumstances.

The camp government also embarked upon trading operations. Shops were erected, one or two at
a time, until at last we had a row of emporiums. The requisite material was bought from the
Germans or from home with money drawn from the camp treasury. It must not be forgotten that
the Teuton authorities resolutely refused to supply us with a single thing, declined to participate
in any improvements, and refused to contribute a penny to defray the cost of any enterprise
which was considered imperative to ameliorate our conditions. Indeed they robbed us right and
left, as I will narrate later. By building shops in this manner we were able to boast a Bond
Street, from which in a short time radiated other thoroughfares which were similarly christened
after the fashionable streets of London--we had a strange penchant for the West-End when it
came to naming our streets. The result is that to-day Ruhleben can point to its Fleet Street,
its Trafalgar Square, and so on.

Goods were purchased for the various departments according to the specialities of the shops--boots
for the bootshop, clothes for the clothiers and groceries for the provision stores. The communal
government selected competent men to take charge of these establishments at a weekly salary
of five shillings. Every shop in the camp, with the exception of a very few, such as mine in
which I specialised in engraving, the ticket-writers and so forth, belonged to the community
and were run by the community for the benefit of the community. No prisoner was permitted to
launch out upon his own account as a shopkeeper if he intended to deal in a necessity. Only
those trades which involved no stock or might be described as luxuries were permitted to be
under individual management for individual profit.

As the inter-trading in the camp developed we were able to purchase large stocks of essentials,
and it was astonishing to observe the prosperity with which our trading endeavours flourished.
Great Britain has always been contemptuously described by our commercial rivals as a nation
of shop-keepers, and in Ruhleben Camp we offered our German authorities, right under their
very noses, the most powerful illustration of this national characteristic, and brought home
to them very conclusively the fact that our national trait is no empty claim. Thousands of
pounds sterling were passed over the counters every week.

While the shops dealt only in what might be termed necessities for our welfare, we were able
to procure almost any article we desired. A "Special Order Department" was created to which
we took our orders for special articles not stocked in the camp. If the order, upon scrutiny
by the authorities, was deemed to be reasonable and did not infringe the prohibited list, the
arrival of the goods in due course was certain.

The value of this system of managing the colony may be illustrated from one example, typical
of many, which reflects credit upon the captains and civic organising committee. Butter was
a luxury and could not be purchased in the camp for less than 3s. 2d. per pound. Yet this figure
was decidedly below that ruling in the shops of Berlin for this article of food. Under these
circumstances one might wonder how we were able to sell butter at a cheaper figure than the
native tradesmen, and readers might be disposed to entertain the opinion that here, at all
events, we did receive a valuable concession from the German authorities. But it was no such
thing. The camp treasury secured a quotation for butter and at once realised that the terms
were far too high for the prisoners as a whole. Consequently they decided to place this and
margarine upon sale at attractive and possible prices. The purchasing department was allotted
a certain figure for purchasing, but as this was insufficient the difference in the prime cost
was taken from the common fund. Hence we never paid more than 3s. 2d. per pound retail in the
camp, although the price was soaring in Berlin, so long as the article was obtainable. This
division of the cost between the communal shop and the common fund brought butter within the
reach of those who otherwise would have had to be content with dry bread, because very few
of us could have afforded the luxury had Berlin prices prevailed in Ruhleben. Incidentally
the price of butter serves to convey a tangible idea of the economic conditions reached in
Germany and that within nine months of the outbreak of hostilities!

When the prisoners discovered that they could obtain the majority of things which serve to
make life bearable even under depressing and oppressive conditions they commenced to launch
out in the acquisition of things for improving creature comfort. With the money drawn from
the banks and other institutions they purchased beds, cupboards, utensils, electric reading
lamps, clothes, and what not to render their living quarters attractive and to improve their
personal appearance and conditions. This extra work threw a heavy strain upon the clerical
department which, within a short time, demanded organisation. The position of auditor was assumed
by J----, who gathered a competent staff, and they worked like Trojans on behalf of the camp.
Many times, while on night patrol as a policeman, I found J---- and his assistants burning
the midnight oil at 1 a.m., straightening out the accounts and posting the books of the treasury.
He and his staff deserve the greatest credit for the high-spirited manner in which and the
hours they worked on behalf of their fellow-prisoners.

The shop-keeping industry received a decided impetus when the British Emergency Relief Fund
was inaugurated. Under this scheme, five shillings per week were paid regularly through the
American Embassy to all prisoners who were in need of financial assistance.

[*large gap]

Notwithstanding the elaborate precautions which had been brought into operation to ensure that
this relief should get only into deserving hands, the fact remains that up to the day of my
departure it was being paid directly into the pockets of some of our enemies. The scheme had
been brought into operation some little while, when one morning, upon parade, the authorities
requested all those who sympathised with the German cause to step out. Many, doubtless thinking
that here was the opportunity to secure preferential treatment or the golden chance to obtain
release from the Prison Camp of Abandoned Hope, answered the call. The numbers were appreciable,
but as they advanced from the lines they were assailed by vicious hooting, groaning and hissing
from the others who were resolved to maintain their patriotism at all hazards. Still it was
an excellent move upon the part of the Germans. It eliminated dangerous enemies from our midst.

But if the pro-Germans, now chuckling merrily and rubbing their hands with childish delight,
considered their release to be imminent they received a very rude awakening. The German authorities
are not readily gulled. To them a pro-German is every whit as dangerous as an avowed enemy.
They merely marched these traitors to another part of the camp where they were forced to re-establish
themselves in their own isolated barrack quarters. They received no improvement in treatment
or food. The only difference between the two divisions of what is now described as the "split
camp" is that whereas the true Britishers are free to sing "Rule, Britannia," "God Save the
King," and other patriotic songs, the traitors have to while away their time singing "Die Wacht
am Rhein," "Deutschland Uber Alles," and other German jingo melodies.

The position of the traitors became aggravated a little later, when they learned that the German
authorities were quite ready to release them upon one simple condition--that they joined the
German Army! I am ashamed to say that some of them even took advantage of this infamous avenue
of escape. But the majority, after their dropped jaws and long faces resumed their normal positions,
thought they might just as well change their national coat once more.

Some of these scoundrels, after openly enlisting under the German banner, did not disavow their
pension but coolly continued to draw the five shillings per week. Moreover, in one instance
at least, one of these scapegoats after declaring his pro-German proclivities was enabled to
return to England as an exchanged prisoner. I could reveal unpalatable truths concerning the
laxity of our authorities in dealing with the exchange of prisoners, but the moment is not
opportune.

One day one of these renegades came to my booth to have some engraving carried out. He asked
me a price and I quoted half a crown. To my surprise he urged me to make it five shillings.
Somewhat astonished I suggested that the work was not worth five shillings and that my estimate
was perfectly fair.

"Oh, it doesn't matter," he replied, laughing gaily. "I draw five shillings from the British
Prisoners' Relief Fund, which I never spend because I don't want it, and one week's draw might
just as well pay for this job!"

I was so exasperated by this cool confession from the "P.-G."--our colloquialism for a pro-German--that
I whipped round my bench and confronted the amiable traitor. We commenced to argue, I told
him what I thought about him, words grew hot and soon the fur commenced to fly. He landed out
at me and then I pitched into him unmercifully. It was useless for him to appeal for help.
We knew every "P.-G." among us and he was now fairly in the hands of the Philistines. My colleagues
merely gathered round, jeering and cheering like mad as I got some stinging blows home. The
renegade subsequently slunk off rather badly battered, only to act quite up to his traitorous
principles. After being thrashed in fair fight he crawled off to one of the German officers
to whom he explained in a wheedling, piteous voice that he had been assaulted and went in fear
of his life.

The officer came over to me and accused me of fighting. I explained the whole circumstances,
emphasising the fact that the sneaking, drivelling humbug was drawing five shillings from the
British Pension Fund and yet was parading and voicing his anti-British sentiments far and wide,
when there were many admitted and honourable British prisoners walking about and in greater
need of the money. The officer was evidently impressed with my point of view and undoubtedly
concurred in my contention that my attitude was perfectly justified.

At all events he unostentatiously and unconsciously betrayed his opinion of a pro-German. He
never uttered a word of reprimand to me; the discomfited "P.-G." was advised to make himself
scarce; and although I had been guilty of the grave offence of fighting I never heard another
word about the incident. It is evident that the officer in his own mind concluded that the
less he said about the episode the better. Still I had got satisfaction. I had given one of
our enemies a drubbing which he would not forget in a hurry.

Yet the one fact remains. At the time I left the camp there were several of these whimpering,
cold-footed, British Judas Iscariots still drawing unblushingly their five shillings per week!
I might add that this constituted one of the greatest scandals of the camp, and precipitated
a feeling of smouldering rebellion, not against the German authorities, but against the traitors
who did not refrain from attempting to fraternise with us after the diabolical repudiation
of their nationality. It was fortunate these back-boneless, long-faced and drooping-mouthed
Britons were forced to live away from us; otherwise I am afraid there would have been some
tragedies and endless fighting.

Another rule of the camp somewhat grated upon our nerves. We opened several canteens which
we stocked with our own goods, and operated upon communal lines so that the prisoners might
secure ample food-stuffs. Naturally these articles were sold to the men at the lowest possible
prices. But to our dismay we learned afterwards that they might have been sold at a lower figure
had the German military not demanded a commission, or perhaps it should be called a "royalty"
upon the turnover of 7½ per cent.! This applied equally to the "Special Order Department,"
and I am afraid, if the subject were probed to the bottom, it would be found that every article
sold in Ruhleben--fully ninety per cent. of which probably would be construed as articles saleable
from the canteen if shops were unavailable--contributes its toll of seven-and-a-half per cent.
to the German authorities. When one recalls the thousands sterling which pass through the shops
and canteens during the course of the week, the German officials must have derived a handsome
revenue from this iniquitous practice. If all the camps were mulcted in the manner of Ruhleben,
looking after the British prisoners must be an extremely lucrative occupation.

This scandalous impost hit us at every turn. It meant that we had to pay for every article
and through the nose at that. For instance, the Camp Committee laid down a house equipped with
four large boilers to supply boiling water, which we had to fetch, and with which we were able
to brew beverages and soups in the secrecy of our barracks. We purchased this convenience,
of which the Germans took a proportion, so that we really paid a prohibitive price for the
water which we consumed! The supply of hot water, no matter for what purpose, was construed
by the Germans as coming within the business of the canteen! Shower baths were also introduced,
the cost being defrayed out of the camp treasury. I wonder if the British authorities follow
a similar practice among the German internment camps in this country? It is an excellent method
of making the prisoner pay for his own board and lodging.

The educational classes proved a complete success. Almost every language under the sun could
be heard among the prisoners. The classes were absolutely free, of course, although you could
contribute something, if you desired. Individual tuition was given, but in this instance the
tutors were free to levy fees. The mastery of languages became one of the most popular occupations
to pass the time. I myself had a class of dusky members of the British Empire, drawn from various
Colonies, and speaking as many dialects, to whom I undertook to teach English, reading, writing,
drawing, and other subjects. At the time the class was formed, they could only muster a few
English words, conducting conversation for the most part by signs and indifferent German. But
my pupils proved apt and industrious, and by the time I left they had mastered our tongue very
effectively, as the many letters they sent me, before leaving Ruhleben, striving to thank me
for what I had done, testify.

Camp life was not without its humour. Around the boiler-house stretched a large wooden hoarding
which served as a notice-board. Every day there were posted the names of prisoners, set out
in alphabetical order, for whom parcels had arrived. The remaining space was covered with advertisements
of a widely varied order. The humour unconsciously displayed upon that board probably has never
been equalled in the pages of a humorous journal yet printed. It is impossible to narrate every
quaint announcement as they were so prolific, but I have never forgotten some of them. One
I recall was an advertisement of a tutor setting forth his terms for teaching English. But
only one word in the announcement was spelled correctly! Another, posted by a sailor, ran,
"Talking Parrot for Sale. Guaranteed not to swear!" It remained up for three days and apparently
there was nothing doing. Such an article was evidently a drug upon the Ruhleben market. After
the bird prisoner had been in the camp a while the advertisement re-appeared, but the word
"not" was blotted out! The advertisement disappeared almost instantly, which led one to surmise
that someone had purchased Polly to repeat Ruhleben conversation at a later date, beside the
fireside of an Englishman's home, as a reminder of the times and the vernacular of a German
prison camp.

The various reports which have been published in the German and British newspapers from time
to time, relative to life at Ruhleben, have dwelt at length upon the social amenities of that
imposing colony. People at home have read about the tennis courts, our football field, the
theatre, and other forms of recreation. Possibly they think that the Germans have been very
generous and sympathetic in this direction at least. But have they? For the use of a section
of the cinder track to serve as tennis courts the German authorities demanded and received
£50! We paid them another £50 for the football field, while for the use of the hall under the
Grand Stand which had never been used since the outbreak of war, and which we converted into
a theatre, we were forced to hand over a third £50. The camp treasury met these demands, and
probably an examination of the books would reveal many other disbursements of a similar character
for other facilities. The Germans have never spent a penny on our behalf, and have never given
us anything.

When the camp is broken up and the prisoners are released, there will be a pretty problem for
some person to unravel. By now Ruhleben has the appearance of a healthy and thriving little
town. The prisoners have toiled unceasingly to improve their surroundings. When we entered
into occupation of our horse-box, its solitary appointment was the manger. We needed a shelf,
and had to pay heavily for the wood. As time went on our ingenuity found expression in many
other ways. We made tables, chairs, wardrobes, sideboards, and other furniture. In some instances
these embellishments were purchased from German firms. The result is that to-day some of the
quarters are as attractive and as comfortable as a flat. When the camp is broken up these articles
will have to be left behind. Although under the hammer prices will and must rule low, in the
aggregate many thousands of pounds will be realised. What is to be done with this money? Who
is to have it? Scores of buildings have been erected with money drawn from the common fund.
Is any compensation going to be paid by the German authorities for the fruits of our labour
and ingenuity which will fall into their hands? We have paid for all the materials used out
of our own pockets, and the work carried out upon these lines already represents an expenditure
of tens of thousands sterling. Are the prisoners to lose all that?

The community is run upon the most rigid business-like lines. Nothing is given away at Ruhleben.
This explains how we have built up such a wealthy camp treasury. The Camp Authorities govern
the concerts, theatrical and vaudeville entertainments, troupes, band, newspapers, programmes--in
short everything. Individual enterprise has but a negligible scope in Ruhleben. The initial
outlays have admittedly been heavy, but the receipts have been still larger, so that there
must be a big balance somewhere. It has not all been spent, and the question arises as to what
will be done with the accumulated funds.

To convey some idea of the possible and profitable sources of income it is only necessary to
explain the system of handling the prisoners' parcels. These are sorted in a large building.
I learned that a parcel was waiting for me by perusing the notice-board. I presented myself
at the office window to receive a ticket which I exchanged for the parcel, the ticket serving
as a receipt for due delivery. But the ticket cost me one penny! Seeing that the average number
of parcels cleared every day is 3,000, it will be seen that the sale of the necessary tickets
alone yields roughly £12 per day or over £4,000 a year. Recently the price of the ticket has
been reduced fifty per cent., but even at one halfpenny the annual income exceeds £2,000. This
one branch of business must show a handsome profit, and there are scores of other prosperous
money-yielding propositions in practice in the camp.

No matter how spendthrift the treasury may be the accumulated funds must now represent an imposing
figure, because, with only one or two exceptions, everything is run at a profit. Will the camp
treasury carry the precepts of communal trading to the logical conclusion? Will it distribute
the accumulated funds among the prisoners, pro rata according to the term of imprisonment,
at the end of the war? If that is done it will serve as some compensation for the break-up
of homes in Britain and other countries which has taken place, because those who were left
behind were deprived--through no fault of aught but the German authorities and their ridiculous
regulations--of their wage-earners.

As the result of frequent representations the German authorities permitted us to inaugurate
our civil police force for the maintenance of law and order throughout the camp. After this
force came into being and had proved satisfactory, the military guards were withdrawn, and
we were encircled only by the cordon of sentries outside. We suffered no military interference
whatever. The force, of which I became a member, numbered forty all told. Our badge of office
was an armlet--blue and white bands similar to that worn by the British constabulary, and carried
upon the left wrist over our private clothes--together with a button inscribed "Police. Ruhleben
Camp." The selection of the police force was carried out upon extremely rigorous lines to ensure
that only the most capable men were secured for this exacting duty. We patrolled the camp night
and day, the duty under the former conditions being two hours, at the conclusion of which we
reported ourselves to the police station, and then proceeded to our barracks to rest, waking
up our successor on the way, who thereupon went on duty.

All things considered the camp was extremely well-behaved, the British naturally being amenable
to discipline. One or two thefts occurred, the offenders, when caught, being handed over to
the German authorities to receive punishment. At times there were manifestations of rowdiness,
but they were speedily and readily quelled. The police required to be unconscionably patient,
tactful, and sympathetic, because we were all chafing under restraint, and our nerves were
strained, while tempers were hasty. Indeed, the German authorities marvelled at the manner
and the ease with which we kept the camp upon its best behaviour, and I think we taught them
many valuable lessons concerning the enforcement of law and order without the parade of any
force or badgering, judging from the assiduity with which they studied our methods. Even the
"drunks"--and they were not strangers to Ruhleben, despite the fact that alcoholic liquor was
religiously taboo, the liquor being smuggled in and paid heavily for, a bottle of Red Seal
costing fifteen shillings--never gave us the slightest cause for anxiety.

One day there was a serious explosion of discontent. We had been served at our mid-day meal
with a basin of evil-looking skilly. We took it back, and protested that we ought not to be
served with prison fare.

"Skilly?" repeated the cook. "That isn't skilly. It's Quaker Oats."

"'Strewth!" yapped a sailor, "That's the bloomin' funniest Quaker Oats I've tasted. Quaker
Oats will keep you alive, but that bloomin' muck 'd poison a rat!" saying which he disdainfully
emptied the noisome contents of his basin upon the ground.

We were told we should get nothing else, which infuriated us. We gathered round the cook-house,
and the discontented, grumbling sailors and fishermen, unable to make any impression by word
of mouth, commenced to bombard the kitchen with bricks, stones, and clods of earth. The fusillade
grew furious, and the cat-calls vociferous.

The turmoil had been raging for some time when a mounted officer dashed up. Securing silence
he ordered us all into barracks. There was an ominous growl. Then he told us he had brought
a battalion of soldiers and a machine gun section from Spandau, and if we did not disperse
in five minutes he would fire on us.

We looked round, thinking he was bluffing, but there, sure enough, were the soldiers with their
rifles ready, and we discovered afterwards that the machine guns had been brought up to the
gates ready for use at a moment's notice. We shuffled for a few minutes, frowning, glowering,
mumbling, cursing and swearing, but as the Germans always mean what they say, we sullenly moved
off as ordered. Still the protest bore fruit; no further attempts were made to serve us with
that fare.

The highways of the camp were in a deplorable condition. They were merely tracks trodden down
by our feet and carts, heavily rutted, uneven, and either a slough of mud and water, or a desert
of dust, according to the weather. We persistently urged the German authorities to improve
these roads, but they turned a deaf ear to all our entreaties.

At last the Camp Authorities decided to carry out the work themselves. There was a call for
labourers, who were promised a steady wage of five shillings per week. Although enrolled in
the first instance to build roads, this force was afterwards kept on as a working gang to carry
out any jobs which became necessary. These men laid out and built an excellent road system,
following the well-accepted British lines with a high camber and a hard surface so that the
water could run into the gutters.

These roads aroused intense interest among our captors. They used to come in and follow the
men at work, studying the method of building up the fabric, and upon its completion they inspected
and subjected it to tests. A little later they coolly sent in a request to the road-builders
to go outside to continue urgent work of a similar character. However, investigation revealed
the disconcerting fact that these men were required to take the places of those Germans generally
associated with this task, who had been called up for service at the front. Needless to say
the suggestion met with a unanimous and determined refusal.

As time went on our conditions became worse. Bread became unobtainable at almost any price.
Pathetic advertisements commenced to steal upon the notice-board, some of which I vividly remember.
One in particular revealed a poignant story of silent suffering. It ran "Good Swan Fountain
Pen. Will exchange for loaf of bread." Yet it was only typical of scores of others couched
in a similar vein. All sorts of things were offered in exchange for food. Our treasury redoubled
its efforts, but food could not be got even at famine prices. This was early in March, 1915,
so that the country was speedily being compelled to concede the strangling force of the British
blockade.

One morning we were paraded, and every man was ordered to produce any bread he might have in
his possession. Some of us had been storing the official rations against the rainy day which
we felt must come sooner or later. This had to be surrendered. The guards also carried out
a thorough search to assure themselves that none had been left behind or concealed under beds.
When the bread had been collected the authorities calmly cut it up and served us with a small
piece each--that is they gave us back a portion of what was already our property, and which
we had not eaten merely because we had been making ourselves content with purchases from the
canteens.

This proceeding brought home to us the vivid prospect of being reduced to a perilous position
within a very short time. So in our letters home we emphasised the need to send us bread and
other food-stuffs. As about three weeks elapsed before we received a loaf after it had been
dispatched, we kept it another week, then soaked it in water and took it to the cook-house
to be re-baked, for which we were charged one penny.

Some of the unfortunate members of the party had no bread come from home. But with true camaraderie
those prisoners who were in the land of plenty invariably divided their prizes, so that one
and all were reduced to a common level. In this way considerable misery and discontent were
averted. Of course, when stocks ran out, we had to revert to the official rations. Here and
there would be found a few hard-hearted and unsympathetic gluttons. They would never share
a single thing with a comrade. A prisoner of this type would sit down to a gorgeous feast upon
dainties sent from home, heedless of the envious and wistful glances of his colleagues who
were sitting around him at the table with nothing beyond the black bread and the acorn coffee.
He would never even proffer a spoonful of jam which would have enabled the revolting black
bread to be swallowed with greater relish.

There is one prisoner of this type whom I particularly recall. He had plenty of money in his
pockets, and was the lucky recipient of many bulky hampers at regular intervals. Yet he never
shared a crust with a less fortunate chum. But this individual did not refuse the opportunity
to trade upon the hospitality of a fellow-prisoner when he himself was in a tight place. He
became the most detested man in the camp, and to this day, with the rest of his selfish ilk,
he suffers a rigid boycott, and at the same time is the target of every practical joke which
his colleagues can devise. To quote the vernacular, we had "Some jokes with him," and often
stung him to fury, when we would laugh mercilessly at his discomfiture.

At the time I left the camp the outlook had assumed a very black aspect, and now we hear things
have reached a climax. Money is worse than useless now because it can purchase nothing. The
prisoners are reduced to subsist upon what meagre rations the authorities choose to dole out
to them, and essentially upon what they receive from home. Starvation confronts our compatriots
suffering durance vile in Ruhleben. The dawn of each succeeding day is coming to be dreaded
with a fear which baffles description because it is unfathomable.

CHAPTER XX

HOW I MADE MONEY IN RUHLEBEN CAMP

The aimless life, such as it was generally pursued in Ruhleben Camp, became exceedingly distasteful
to me. It conduced to brooding and moping over things at home, to fretting and becoming anxious
as to how one's wife and family were faring? While recreation offered a certain amount of distraction,
it speedily lost its novelty and began to pall. There were many of us who were by no means
sufficiently flush in pocket to indulge wildly in amusements, and yet money was absolutely
indispensable, because with the sinews of war we were able to secure supplementary food from
the canteen.

Some of the methods which were practised to improve the shining hour were distinctly novel.
There was a young Cockney who, upon his return home, will undoubtedly blossom into a money-making
genius, that is if his achievements in Ruhleben offer any reliable index to his proclivities.
He would gather a party of seventy or eighty prisoners round him. Then, producing a five-mark
piece, he would offer to raffle it at ten pfennigs--one penny--apiece. The possibility of picking
up five shillings for a penny made an irresistibly fascinating appeal. It struck the traditional
sporting chord of the British character and a shower of pennies burst forth. The deal was soon
completed, and everyone was content with the result. Someone bought the five-shilling piece
for the nimble penny, while the Cockney chuckled with delight because he had raked in some
seven shillings or so for his five mark piece!

When I decided to experiment in commerce I was in some doubt as to what would offer the most
promising line. After due reflection I decided to start as a launderer, specialising in washing
shirts at ten pfennigs, or one penny, apiece. A shirt dresser was certainly in request because
the majority of the prisoners, possessing only a severely limited stock, were compelled to
wear the one garment continuously for several weeks. At the end of that time it was generally
discarded once and for all. But the shirts I found to be extremely soiled, and demanded such
hard and prolonged scrubbing, in which operation an unconscionably large amount of soap was
consumed, that I found the enterprise to be absolutely unprofitable, while I received little
else than a stiff, sore back and soft hands. So this first venture, after bringing in a few
hard-earned shillings, was abandoned.

Then I undertook to wash up the table utensils, charging a party twopence per meal. This would
have brought me greater reward had I adhered to my original intention. But one day the member
of a party genially suggested, "We'll toss for it! Twopence or nothing!" I accepted the offer
good-humouredly and--lost! By accepting this sporting recommendation I unfortunately established
a ruinous precedent. The practice became general, and I, having a wretched run of bad luck,
found that, all things considered, it would be better for my hands and pocket if I were to
look farther afield for some other enterprise.

My third attempt to woo Fortune was to set myself up as a dealer in cast-off boots and shoes,
my idea being to buy, sell and exchange. To my chagrin I speedily discovered that this calling
demanded unlimited capital, because it was easier to buy than to sell or to exchange. Seeing
that the average price I was prepared to pay was one shilling per pair, and the state of excruciating
depression which prevailed in this field, I conjured visions of immense stocks of second-hand
boots, representing a heavy investment of capital, which would lie idle for an indefinite period.
So I retired discreetly from the second-hand boot and shoe trade to seek more promising pastures.

While pondering over the situation a happy idea struck me. In my younger days I had practised
engraving, intending to adopt it as a trade. I devoted some six years to the craft and had
achieved a measure of success and dexterity. Thereupon I decided to launch out in this direction.
Although I felt that my hand had lost some of its cunning through lack of practice--I had not
touched an engraving tool for about thirteen years--I decided to take the risk, feeling sure
that it would soon return when I settled down to the fascinating work in grim earnest.

I confided my intention to one or two of my friends, but the majority, except my bosom chum
K----, who is a far-seeing business man, with their innate shrewdness, wanted to know where
I was going to get any custom in such a place as Ruhleben Camp. I explained that my idea was
to engrave watches, coins, studs links, indeed any article which the prisoners possessed, thus
converting them into interesting souvenirs of their sojourn in a German prisoners' camp during
the Great War. But with the exception of K---- they declined to see eye to eye with me. Still
I was not to be dissuaded, and consequently decided to commence operations upon my own initiative.

I was in a quandary. I had not sufficient capital to buy the necessary tools. However, K----,
as usual, came to my assistance by financing me to the extent of seven-and-sixpence! This money
I laid out upon tools, [*gap] Now I was confronted with another problem. How was I to keep
the tools in the necessary sharpened condition. The only stone I could borrow was quite useless
for engraving tools, while cutting plays such havoc with the edges of the tools as to demand
frequent recourse to sharpening operations. However this obstacle did not daunt me. I found
that with a sufficient expenditure of energy I could get a passably sharp edge for my purpose
by grinding the tools on the floor and finishing them off upon a razor strop which I borrowed.

Now I had to seek for eligible premises. I sauntered round the camp to alight upon a tiny vacant
building. As it appeared to have no owner, and was fulfilling no useful purpose I entered into
possession. Directly I had installed myself the authorities came along and unceremoniously
ejected me, bag and baggage. As soon as their backs were turned I re-entered into occupation.
I was thrown out a second time, but still as resolutely determined as ever to continue my project
I cast around and ultimately found an empty kiosk, standing forlorn and neglected, a silent
memory of the brisk racing days at Ruhleben in pre-war times. I installed myself therein, not
caring two straws whether the authorities endeavoured to turn me out or not. They would have
to smash the place over my head before they evicted me this time, but they were scarcely likely
to proceed to such extreme measures seeing that they would have had to break up their own property.

Numerous jealous individuals attempted to eject me time after time but I sat tight. I remember
one tender and amiable official who endeavoured to convince me that the kiosk and other similar
buildings were under his charge, and that he was responsible for them. As he narrated the situation
I observed that he kept the open palm of his hand extended before me. When he found this broad
hint to be of no avail he ordered me out of the building. Turning to him I suggested, in as
suave a voice as I could command, that he should accompany me to the "Wachter" to ascertain
the extent of his responsibilities and to have the matter thrashed out once and for all. Needless
to say he declined this invitation, protesting that it was unnecessary. He invited me to retain
occupation of the kiosk. My bluff completely outwitted the official in question, while I achieved
my end for once without recourse to bribery and corruption of the official Teuton mind.

Several subsequent attempts were made to coax me out of my tenancy, but I may say that in sticking
to the building I played the Germans at their own game. When the guard came up and authoritatively
demanded by what manner of right or permission I had taken possession of the kiosk I politely
referred him to a certain officer in the camp. When the latter, upon receiving the complaint,
interrogated me in a similar vein, I referred him to another official. When this third individual
appeared upon the scene I switched him off to another officer. By playing off the officials
one against the other in this manner I precipitated such a tangle among them that no single
official could say whether he had or had not given me permission. While these tactics were
being pursued I was gaining the valuable time I desired, and took the opportunity to entrench
myself firmly in my position. The outcome was that when finally the matter had been trotted
through the Ruhleben German Circumlocution Office, and my eviction was officially sealed, I
warded off the fate by announcing that I was overwhelmed with engraving orders for the military
officers of the camp. It was a desperate bluff, but it succeeded. Officialdom apparently decided
that I was better left alone, so I suffered no further molestation.

The whole of the night before opening my engraving business I sat up writing flaring signs
and tickets to advertise my intentions far and wide, and soliciting the favour of orders which
under my hand would convert this or that object into a priceless souvenir of our novel experience.
I also canvassed the camp to explain my ideas, and, as I expected, orders commenced to flow
in. The souvenir idea caught on to such a degree as to compel me to take in two fellow-prisoners,
who evinced an aptitude for the work, as apprentices, and they speedily blossomed into craftsmen.
My first week told me I had struck the correct money-making line at last. I found I had scooped
in 200 marks--£10! This was not bad for the first week's trading and I entertained no apprehensions
concerning the future. Out of this sum I was able to repay many little debts I had incurred.

The business developed so rapidly that an extension of premises became urgent. I rigged up
an addition to the kiosk, but it had to be of a portable character, so that it could be taken
down every evening. As I found my time was so occupied I reluctantly decided to keep only to
the kiosk. I dressed its interior with shelves and further improved my premises by contriving
show cases for attachment outside.

When I felt my feet I blossomed out in various directions. I bought a small stock of odds and
ends in the cheap jewellery line, which were suitably engraved. Button decorations was one
line I took up and these sold like wildfire. There was plenty of money in the camp, some of
the prisoners being extremely wealthy, and this explains why my trade flourished so amazingly.
Indeed, the results exceeded even my most sanguine anticipations.

One branch of my fertility nearly landed me into serious trouble. I fashioned souvenirs out
of German coins. I erased the Imperial head and in its place engraved a suitable inscription.
When the defacement of the money was discovered there was a fearful uproar, but as usual I
contrived to escape the terrible punishment which was threatened.

Naturally one will wonder how it was I secured my supplies, seeing that purchases outside the
camp were forbidden except through the officially approved channels. While it is inadvisable
for me to relate how I did secure my varied stocks I may state that I never experienced any
disappointment or even a hitch in this connection. Time after time I was taxed by military
individuals, eager to secure incriminating evidence, but although they cajoled, coaxed and
threatened I could not be induced to betray my secret. Indeed, at last, I point-blank refused
to furnish any information upon this matter whatever, and with this adamantine decision they
were forced to remain content. Doubtless they had their suspicions but it was impossible to
bring anything home to me and so I was left in peace.

From cheap jewellery I advanced to more costly articles. I purchased a job lot of silver wrist
watches from a Jew who had gone "broke," and these I cleared out within a very short time.
I always paid spot cash and that was an overwhelming factor in my favour. Indeed, my trading
operations became so striking that my name and business proceeded far beyond the confines of
the camp. Within a few weeks of opening my shop I was receiving calls from men in the camp
who were acting as representatives for some of the foremost Jewish wholesale houses in Germany,
and they were almost fighting among themselves to secure my patronage. My biggest individual
purchasing deal was a single lot of jewellery for which I paid nearly 1,000 marks--£50! From
this, bearing in mind the difficulties which I had to overcome in securing delivery, it is
possible to gain some idea of the brisk trade I was doing.

Everything and anything capable of being converted into a souvenir by the dexterous use of
the engraving tool was handled by me indiscriminately. I bought a large consignment of briar
pipes. Upon the bowls of these I cut a suitable inscription and filled the incisions with enamel.
These caught the fancy of the smokers and I soon found my stock exhausted. As things developed
I became more ambitious, although not reckless, until at last I had articles ranging up to
£30 in price upon my shelves, in the disposal of which I experienced very little difficulty.

My shop became my one absorbing hobby although it boasted no pretensions. I contrived attractive
show cases, some from egg-boxes, emblazoning the exterior with striking show cards and signs
which I executed in the confines of my horse-box in the barracks after my comrades had gone
to sleep. Not satisfied with this development I lighted the building brilliantly by means of
electric lamps and a large flame acetylene lamp.

I did not confine myself to any one line of goods, but handled any thing capable of being turned
into money quickly. In some instances I had to resort to extreme subterfuge to outwit the authorities.
On one occasion I purchased a consignment of silk Union Jacks for wearing in the lapel of the
coat. I knew full well that if I placed these on sale in my shop the stern hand of authority
would swoop down swiftly and confiscate the hated emblem without the slightest compunction.
So I evolved a special means of clearing them out and that within a very few minutes.

I went round to each barrack and button-holed a capable man to undertake to sell a certain
number of the flags among the prisoners domiciled in his building. On the offer of a good commission
the man was ready to incur great risks, although there was no risk in my plan. Each man thus
received a territorial right as it were, and was protected against competition. The price was
fixed and the arrangements for effecting the sale carefully drawn up. After the morning parade,
the custom was to dismiss us to our barracks a few minutes before nine o'clock. We were compelled
to stay within doors for some twenty minutes or so. This I decided to be the opportune occasion
to unload my stock. I enjoined every vendor, when I handed him his stock overnight, to be on
the alert in the morning, and as the clock struck nine to pass swiftly from man to man with
his flags. The favour was a distinct novelty and I was positive they would sell like hot cakes.

The scheme proved a howling success. Within five minutes after the appointed hour every man
had been cleared out. The flags were triumphantly pinned to the lapels of the coats. When the
prisoners re-emerged from the barracks the guards were astounded by the brilliant display of
Union Jacks. The array was so imposing that the authorities even realised the futility of stopping
each prisoner in turn to rob him of his prize. In this manner I got rid of several hundreds
of the little trophies in one swoop.

As may be imagined there was an enquiry to ascertain how these flags had been introduced into
the camp. The prisoners were interrogated, but no prisoner appeared to know anything about
the matter. He invariably retorted that he had purchased it from "some fellow or other" and
had stuck it in his button-hole. Never for a moment did the authorities suspect that I had
anything to do with the transaction. It was out of my ostensible line, so that I escaped suspicion.
The chortling which took place at the complete discomfiture of the authorities and the manner
in which they had been outwitted is recalled vividly to this day. It was one of many incidents
which served to vary the monotony of camp life.

[*large gap]

On August Bank Holiday, 1915, the authorities considerately permitted us to have a day's junketting.
We were to be at liberty to do exactly as we pleased. Indeed, we were urged to enjoy ourselves
thoroughly and we did not require a second urging. The football ground was converted into a
fair. No restrictions whatever were imposed upon us. The authorities themselves were so enthused
with this concession to us as to give us several days' notice of their intentions to enable
us to make any preparations we considered fit, while we were not faced with any obstacles in
the rigging up of side-shows, gambling halls and what not.

The concession was particularly attractive to me, as I recalled that it was upon the previous
August Bank Holiday I had been arrested on the charge of espionage and consigned to Wesel Prison.
The rivalry amongst us was astonishing, while there were many wonderful manifestations of fertility
and ingenuity. One prisoner spent 1,000 marks--£50--in rigging up his booth, which was somewhat
reminiscent of an Aunt Sally at home. My two friends, K---- and F----, contrived a golfing
game which proved a huge financial success. I myself rigged up a billiard table on which was
played a very unorthodox game of billiards, and which, because of its departure from conventionality,
created a sensation. It was really a revival of a game or wheeze which I had learned many years
before.

The billiard table was contrived from the wooden sides to my bed. I secured them side by side
to give a flat surface 6 feet long by 5 feet wide. Over the upper surface I stretched and tacked
down a sheet to form the cloth. I bought a broomstick and with the assistance of the camp carpenter
shaved it down to form a passable cue, tipping the end with a small piece of leather cut from
my boot. The table was rigged up in the open air, boxes and barrels serving as the legs, while
it was levelled as far as practicable. There was only one ball. At the opposite end--on the
spot--I placed two match-boxes set at an angle to one another and just sufficiently far apart
to prevent the ball passing between them. The unusual game was to play the ball at the boxes
in such a manner as to knock both of them over together. It seems a simple thing to do, but
I would merely advise the reader to try it. Probably he will learn something to his advantage.

I assumed fancy dress. I secured a big top hat, a pair of trousers much too baggy and big for
me, a swallow-tail coat with tails formed of white and red strips--a regular Uncle Sam's costume--had
a big flaming bow about twelve inches in width and a ridiculous monocle. I think my rig-out
transformed me into a hybrid of Brother Jonathan, Charlie Chaplin and an English dude. My dress
was completed by a biscuit tin suspended by a band from my shoulder and in which I rattled
my money. On the face of the tin I wrote--

    Come along! Come along!! Come along!!!
    Always open to make. Always open to lose.
      Come along B'hoys!

I then stood on a box and told the tale characteristic of a man at the fair for the first time
in my life.

Seeing that I was the only man attired in fancy dress I became the centre of attraction as
I desired and as much among the guards who mixed and joked with us freely on this Great Day,
as among my fellow-prisoners. It also served as a striking advertisement for my game of unconventional
billiards, which was my intention. My terms were ten pfennigs--one penny--a shot and round
my table the fun grew fast and furious. It seemed so absurdly easy to knock the two boxes down
at once, but when the billiard experts settled down to the game they found that only about
one shot in fifty proved successful. Indeed the ability to knock the two boxes over simultaneously
was found to be so difficult as to be exasperatingly fascinating, and as a result of their
repeated and abortive efforts I made money quickly. The table was kept going hard the whole
day, by the end of which I found I had raked in several pounds in nimble pennies.

The other side-shows also did excellent business, especially the gambling tables where roulette
was in full swing. At the end of the day all the roulette boards and other gambling impedimenta
were confiscated. This was the arrangement. But between sunrise and sunset we did not suffer
the slightest interference with our enjoyment and merriment. This unexpected spell of free
action revived the spirits of the prisoners to a remarkable degree, and we were all warmly
grateful to the German authorities for allowing us to do and to enjoy ourselves exactly as
we pleased for even one brief day. It was a Bank Holiday according to the British interpretation
of the term, and I, in common with all my fellow-prisoners, must certainly admit that it was
the jolliest day I remember during the whole period of my incarceration, and the only day on
which we were allowed to indulge in sport ad lib. and according to the dictates of our fancies.
I mention this concession because I am anxious to give credit to the Germans where it is due.

[*large gap]

I was not only making sufficient money out of my various commercial transactions to keep myself
in clover within the camp, but I was successful in finding means to remit some of my income,
earned in Ruhleben, to England "To keep the Home Fires Burning." This I considered to be a
distinct achievement, especially as I was making it at the expense of my captors.

Only once did I have an acute shock. It was at the time when the Germans were making such frantic
efforts to rake in all the gold upon which they could place their hands. In my stock was a
certain gold article which had cost me £30, as well as another item also of this metal which
I had secured at the low price of £20. An officer swooped down upon my kiosk and went through
my stock. I trembled as to what would happen when he alighted upon the two valuable articles.
He picked up the first named article, examined the metal critically, and then asked me how
much I wanted for it.

"Three marks!" I ventured nonchalantly, with a view to taking him off his guard.

"But it's gold," he persisted, staggered at the idea of being able to buy such an adornment
for the trivial sum of three shillings.

My heart thumped as he held the article hesitatingly. If he offered me three shillings for
it I should be bound to accept it in which event I should be a heavy loser over the deal. So
I went on desperately:

"Well, if you think it's gold why don't you buy it for three marks? I will give no guarantee,
so don't come back and say it's only metal!" Then assuming a deprecating tone I continued:
"It is got up only for show. It looks very pretty, but you couldn't give it to a lady!"

He appeared to be quite satisfied because he replaced it, while when he picked up the other
item I pitched a corresponding yarn. After he had taken his departure I promptly transferred
the two articles to a place of safety in case he should take it into his head to make another
examination.

It was on June 1 when I embarked upon my engraving venture, and my two apprentices and myself
were kept hard at it the livelong day, the pressure of business being so great. My own working
hours, so long as daylight permitted, were from 5 a.m. to 9 p.m. About September I concluded
the moment to be ripe to consummate my one absorbing idea--to get home. I was now in a position
financially to complete the plans I had laid long since. I had to tread warily, but by the
end of October I was secure in my position. Still, although confident of success, I did not
relax my interest in business, because my plans were just as likely to go wrong as to succeed
at the last minute. Moreover at the end of November I had the intense satisfaction of learning
that my profit as a result of five months' trading was £150! I considered this to be extremely
satisfactory. An average profit of £7 10s. per week exceeded my rosiest anticipations, and
it now seems additionally remarkable when I recall the limited confines and the restricted
clientèle of Ruhleben Camp. But the greatest satisfaction I have is knowing that I completely
outwitted my oppressors, because I was not supposed to trade as I did. It was a telling example
of stolen fruits being the sweetest.

CHAPTER XXI

HOW THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR WAS DECEIVED

As is well known the British prisoners in Germany have only one person within the Central Empires
to whom they can appeal for protection, and through whose good offices alone they are able
to secure redress of their grievances. This is Mr. Gerard, the Ambassador of the United States
of America to Germany. Mr. Gerard has toiled indefatigably and unremittingly upon our behalf.
In his magnanimity and determination to give a square deal all round, he has made the signal
error of accrediting the Germans with being a highly-developed, civilised, and cultivated race.

Unfortunately for Mr. Gerard's sense of duty the German does not accept the principles of the
precept, "Do unto others as you would others should do unto you," but has evolved a code of
his own construction which is peculiarly Teutonic--"Do unto others as you know others will
not dare or deign to do unto you!" The American Ambassador has always responded promptly to
any calls for his intercession and has ever listened courteously and patiently to tales of
woe. Whenever he has considered the complaint to be well-founded he has spared no effort to
secure an immediate improvement in conditions. Yet it is to be feared that many of his recommendations
have never been, or have only been partially and indifferently, carried into effect.

In his determination to hold the scales of justice evenly Mr. Gerard has been prone to accept
the German at his own valuation. Every prisoner in Germany to-day knows from painful experience
that the Teuton's word counts for nothing; it is not worth the breath expended upon its utterance,
or the paper upon which it is written. The German is an unprincipled liar and an unmitigated
bluffer, in which art, if such it may be called, he has become a super-master.

The German has always laughed, and still is laughing up his sleeve at the courteous American
diplomat. The imperial authorities have never hesitated to throw dust in his eyes and to outwit
him when the occasion suited their purpose. Indeed, they scheme deliberately and unceasingly
to side-track him and to prevent the true conditions and affairs penetrating to his knowledge.

I had one striking instance of this carefully premeditated and unscrupulous gulling and thwarting
of the American Embassy. The accidental discovery of the circumstance that the baseless charge
of espionage levelled against me was still hanging over my head somewhat worried me. I ascertained
one exceedingly disturbing fact which was communicated to me within the camp. Had I committed
any offence, no matter how trivial, while in the camps, I should not have been arraigned upon
that particular delinquency, but, in all probability, would have had the original charge retrumped
up against me. I learned that this was the German practice. Moreover, the old charge was liable
to be trotted out at any odd moment at the caprice of my oppressors. The authorities had never
acquitted me of being a spy. On the other hand they had never pronounced me guilty. I was forced
to accept the former interpretation from my transference to the internment camps, as if I had
been merely a detained civilian. My reasons for believing that I had been acquitted of the
grave charge were supported by the fact that in Germany, a person who has been found guilty
of espionage, and who escapes the death penalty, is condemned to solitary confinement in a
military prison.

The charge of espionage being in a condition of suspended animation as it might be termed,
coupled with the fact that no one knew whenever, wherever, and how it might suddenly be revived
to my detriment, did not conduce to my peace of mind. On one occasion I received a pretty rude
shock. I filled up an application for release upon medical grounds, but upon being summoned
before the authorities I was told point-blank that I should be kept a prisoner until the end
of the war, exchange or no exchange.

The uncertainty became intolerable. I wrote a lengthy letter to the American Ambassador explaining
my unfortunate and doubtful position and expressing the hope that he might be able to bring
the matter to a decision. In common with my fellow-prisoners, I had always cherished the belief
that a letter addressed to the American Embassy was regarded as confidential and inviolable;
at all events was not to be opened, except with the express permission of the prisoner or the
Ambassador. But my faith was rudely dispelled. I dispatched my communication only to receive
a curt summons to appear before an officer, who bluntly informed me that my letter could not
be sent to the Embassy because it was sealed. It was handed back to me with the injunction
that the envelope must be left open.

Now, if letters containing complaints and addressed to our sole Protector are sent unsealed
it is only logical to assume that the German officials apprise themselves of the character
of the "grouse." By so doing they become as wise as the Ambassador--if the letter ever reaches
him. By having access to all communications, a letter is permitted to go forward if it suits
the officials, but not before they have made a note of the grievance in order to be able to
take the necessary remedial steps before the Ambassador intervenes.

In my particular instance I prepared a lengthy explanatory communication, requesting an audience
if at all possible. The letter was so worded as to compel an acknowledgment, unless the Germans
were disposed to suffer exposure of their methods and duplicity. In due course a representative
appeared. He seemed to have only a hazy recollection of my communication so I related all the
essential details to him. I was more than positive that the German authorities had filed a
copy of my letter because their attitude towards me changed suddenly and adversely, and by
a strange coincidence this metamorphosis agreed with the date on which I had dispatched my
communication to the Embassy.

I urged the representative to ascertain whether I had, or had not, been acquitted of the espionage
charge. I particularly desired the official acquittal in writing from Wesel, because it would
be of far-reaching value in the event of my being haled before the authorities upon some other
flimsy offence. He listened attentively and sympathetically, appreciated the situation as it
affected me personally and promised to do everything he could on my behalf. But evidently,
subsequent conversation with the Teuton authorities exercised the desired German effect. A
few days later I received a curt acknowledgment saying that my affair, which was somewhat unusual,
was purely one for military decision. I was also informed that the papers referring to my case
were at Wesel fortress, and I was advised to write direct to the Commandant at the military
centre for them. With this consolation, if such it can be called, I had to rest content.

The fact that I have never heard another word upon the subject from that day to this proves
conclusively that the authorities, although doubtless profuse in their apologies and regrets
to the Ambassador over the delay, and unctuous in their promises to settle the issue immediately,
never really intended to stir another finger in this direction. No one disturbed the official
serenity and forthwith the whole question was permitted to slide and to be forgotten in accordance
with German machinations.

Upon the receipt of the ambassadorial letter I was inclined to stir up the whole issue for
all I knew how, but upon second thoughts I refrained from pursuing the matter any further.
I had thoroughly made up my mind as to the course of action which I would take, and so concluded
that it would be far better from my point of view to "let sleeping dogs lie." I think my attitude
must have completely disarmed the Germans. To them I assumed an air of complete resignation,
but all the time I was working silently and zealously towards my own salvation.

At frequent intervals the emissary from the Embassy visited us. He was invariably received
graciously by Baron von Taube, whom we facetiously dubbed Baron von Facing-both-ways, and other
members of his staff to form as escort through the camp. The representative thus saw and heard
exactly as much as the authorities determined should be the case and nothing more. Whenever
he was disposed to become uncomfortably inquisitive he was deftly steered clear of the troubled
waters. We were told that we were quite at liberty to speak to the Ambassador if we desired,
but unofficially we were warned to think twice before we took such a step, the hint being thrown
out that it would be better for us to refrain from talking to him unless first questioned.
The shallowness of the official decree was vividly brought home to us when we were forcibly
confined to barracks, and this frequently occurred while the ambassadorial visitor was in the camp.

On one occasion complaints concerning the living quarters were made. The representative came
and explained the object of his mission to the Commanding Officer. Ostensibly this worthy was
overwhelmed with surprise at any such grievance having been formulated, although, as a matter
of fact he knew full well why the representative had called, owing to the rule concerning all
letters being posted unsealed.

The Commanding Officer protestingly laughed at the suggestion that the living quarters were
untenable. But there! The representative could see for himself. With every semblance of complete
complaisance the representative was escorted into the camp. With unassumed unconcern, but with
deliberate intention, he was accompanied to Barracks 1 or 2, to see with his own eyes a typical
illustration of the living quarters provided within the camp.

The situation was exceedingly ludicrous, although it was of considerable moment to us who had
lodged the complaint. The representative could not have been taken to more convenient buildings
from the German point of view. They are the show-barracks of Ruhleben, and certainly are excellent
specimens of the prisoners' quarters. They indubitably served as a powerful illustration of
how prisoners could make themselves comfortable. They were held up far and wide throughout
Ruhleben as a pattern for all others to copy. One and all of us would willingly have emulated
this attractive model--if we had possessed the money to spend upon luxuries! Barrack No. 2
is the domicile of the élite and wealthy of Ruhleben. The prisoners, flush of funds, have been
permitted to gratify every whim and fancy. They have expended large sums of money upon the
purchase of furniture and knick-knacks, the result being favourably comparable with a smart
and fashionable flat, that is if a flat can be squeezed into a horse-box ten feet square!

The representative was solemnly assured that these barracks were only typical of the other
buildings in the camp. But had the American visitor walked a few dozen yards upon his own initiative,
to enter Barrack 3 or 5, he would have received a convincing demonstration of unprincipled
German lying. There the inmates were compelled, willy-nilly, to lie upon the floor. At that
time beds had not been served to more than one-half of the prisoners.

During one of these visits the prisoners of Barrack 6 defied authority. They had petitioned
the officials incessantly to improve their quarters but to no purpose. The cause for the greatest
discontent was the absolute lack of light. The loft was nothing more nor less than a "Black
Hole." On this occasion the tenants had been sent to barracks with the strict injunction that
they were not to come out again until the ambassadorial inspection had been completed. But
the prisoners were not disposed to permit this deliberate hoodwinking of our protector to continue
indefinitely. The representative had been taken to a typical [sic] barrack to observe the appointments
and to satisfy himself concerning the German efforts which had been made to render the tenants
comfortable. As usual he found no apparent justification for the complaints which had been made.

He was being escorted to inspect some new latrines which had recently been completed. To reach
the latter point he had to pass Barrack 6, in which the boys were on the alert to seize the
opportunity for which they had been waiting quietly. When the representative was but a few
yards distant up went the shout in unison, "Come and see our barrack! Come and see our barrack!"

The guards endeavoured to smother the hail, but for once they were too slow. The representative
heard the cry, stopped, and doubtless impressed by the vehemence of the invitation, expressed
his intention to make an investigation. I mention this incident to emphasise the point that
the Embassy was always ready to deal fairly with the prisoners, and to prove that a great deal
more would have been done on our behalf had the visitors been given a freer hand.

The chagrin of the German entourage escorting the ambassadorial deputy was amusing to observe.
Behind his back they frowned, glowered, and glared fiercely, shook their fists, and muttered
stifled incoherent curses, but when he turned to them they assumed a meekness and pleasantry
which quite disarmed suspicion. Still, their anger, as they followed him into the building,
was so intense as to defy being masked and afforded us, who were witnessing the episode, the
most complete satisfaction and ill-disguised delight.

The expected happened. The representative entered Barrack 6. He climbed the rickety staircase
leading to the loft with difficulty to dive into the "Black Hole." He condemned it in unmeasured
terms. Apparently he realised how neatly he had been hoodwinked, he became furious, and in
tones which brooked no argument or discussion, ordered the instant removal of the prisoners
to more congenial surroundings. The officials were beside themselves with rage at the turn
which events had taken, but they hesitated to give offence. They were profuse in lame excuses
and pleaded that the accommodation in this loft was only temporary. The German interpretation
of the word "temporary" may be gathered from the fact that this particular loft had been occupied
for nearly six months. But the representative gained the day. The loft was forthwith vacated
and subsequently, when certain improvements had been carried out, was used only as a schoolroom.

About March, 1915, as previously narrated, we commenced to experience a severe shortage of
bread. We were not receiving sufficient of the staff of life to keep us alive. The representative
drove into the camp one day to investigate some other matter. When he had departed upon his
mission, accompanied by the inevitable entourage, some of us gathered around his motor-car
which was covered with dust. While one or two were chatting with the chauffeur one of the party
slipped a letter, pointing out our dire straits and describing how famished we were, beneath
the ambassador's seat, and in such a manner as to compel his attention upon re-entering the
automobile. Another prisoner, with his finger, scrawled in the dust upon the rear of the tonneau,
"We want bread!" while other notices were chalked up in commanding positions, so as to arrest
instant attention, "For God's sake, give us bread!"

When the German guards spotted the flaming appeal upon the rear of the car they fussed up in
indignant rage. One advanced to obliterate the damning words, but the chauffeur whipped round
the car. He caught sight of the mute request, and intercepting the officious sentry remarked:--

"You mustn't touch this car! It's the property of the United States Government!"

The guard pulled himself up sharply, glaring fiercely and evidently contemplating defiance
of the warning. The chauffeur was a white man. He eyed us quizzically for a moment or two.
Realising from our faces that we were not playing a joke, but ventilating a serious grievance,
he stood between the officious sentry and the vehicle until the representative returned. The
Embassy car drove out of the camp with the letters still staring out in a gaunt appeal from
the thick dust. Evidently the chauffeur drew the representative's attention to our cry, while
it is only reasonable to suppose that the emissary from the Embassy discovered the letter which
we had secreted beneath his seat, because an improvement in the allowance of bread immediately
ensued.

And so it went on. No trick was too knavish or too despicable to prevent our guardian learning
the truth concerning our plight. He very rarely walked about unaccompanied. Tongue in cheek,
the Germans, who always were cognisant of the object of his visit, and who had always taken
temporary measures to prove the grievance to be ill-founded, strode hither and thither with
him, throwing knowing glances and winks among themselves behind the representative's back.
Doubtless it was the successful prosecution of these tactics which persuaded the Embassy to
believe that the majority of our complaints were imaginary and arose from the circumstance
that the inhabitants of Ruhleben would persist in ignoring the fact that they were the victims
of war and not pampered pets.

One of the most glaring instances of the effective manner in which the Germans sought to disarm
and to outwit an official visitor was narrated to me by a fellow-prisoner who had been transferred
from Sennelager to Ruhleben. I conclude that the incident must have happened, during the interregnum
when I was "free on Pass" in Cologne. I cannot vouch for the accuracy of the statement, but
I do not think there is the slightest reason to doubt the word of our compatriot, because he
was in Sennelager at the time and actually passed through the experience. Furthermore it is
typical of Teuton methods in matters pertaining to the treatment of prisoners.

X---- stated that, despite the havoc wrought during the "Bloody Night" of September 11, all
the prisoners were still herded on the field at Sennelager until long after my departure. They
were exposed to the heavy rains and were all reduced to a miserable condition. Suddenly an
order came up commanding all prisoners to return instantly to their old barracks. This sudden
manifestation of a humane feeling upon the part of the Commandant provoked widespread amazement.
What had happened?

The surprise of the prisoners became accentuated when they regained the permanent buildings
which had formerly comprised our home. They were hurried into their quarters and shaken down
with incredible speed. Fires were set going and the unhappy prisoners made themselves comfortable
confident that their trials now were over, and that they were destined to prolonged residence
under weathertight roofs.

The following day an august visitor arrived at the camp. Whether he was an emissary from the
American Embassy or not my informant was unable to say, for the simple reason that no one knew
his identity, and every precaution was observed to prevent any information upon this matter
from becoming known among the prisoners. Be that as it may he made a detailed tour of the camp,
investigating the arrangements and accommodation provided for the hapless inhabitants' welfare.
Under no circumstances whatever were the British prisoners permitted to speak to the mysterious
stranger. Any attempt in this direction was sternly and forcibly suppressed by the guards who
swarmed everywhere. Evidently, judging from his demeanour, the stranger was deeply impressed--and
satisfied--with what he saw with his own eyes.

But the moment he had left the camp the prisoners were paraded and re-transferred to the field.
This story, if accurate, and I see no reason to doubt its veracity, is interesting from one
circumstance. When we were summarily turned out upon the field by the inhuman Major Bach, he
advanced as his reason for such action that vast numbers of German recruits were momentarily
expected, and that the buildings were required to house them. But according to the foregoing
incident the barracks were still empty. The lying Commandant of Sennelager Camp was thus condemned
out of his own mouth, while the minute precautions he observed to prevent the mysterious stranger
from learning a word about our experiences on the field proves that he merely turned us out
into the open, herded like animals in a corral, to satisfy his own personal cravings for dealing
out brutality and torture.

But the most glaring example of German duplicity and astuteness in throwing our protector off
the track provoked Ruhleben to hilarious merriment, despite the seriousness of our position.
Leastways, although the Teutons may have regarded the movement as one of serious intention,
we regarded it as a deliberate piece of hoodwinking. One morning we were solemnly informed
that the authorities had completed arrangements whereby every prisoner was to receive a good
substantial meat meal once a week. It was to comprise a chop, potatoes, some other vegetable,
and gravy. It sounded so extraordinarily luxurious and appetising as to provoke incredulity
and caustic comment. Those who, like myself, had suffered internment in other camps and who
had become thoroughly grounded in Teuton shiftiness and trickery divined that something unusually
crafty and cunning was afoot.

I might mention that by this time Ruhleben comprised a small town of twenty-three barracks
housing a round 4,000 prisoners. This represented an average of 174 men to a barrack, although,
as a matter of fact, some of the buildings accommodated over 200 men. The culinary arrangements
were fulfilled by only two kitchens. Now, the problem which presented itself to the minds of
the more sophisticated and suspicious prisoners was this--How would the authorities grapple
with the preparation and serving of 4,000 chops in one day with the cooking facilities available?
Were we to be treated to another staggering example of Germany's wonderful powers of organisation
and management?

The glamour of the proposition suddenly disappeared. We learned that the "tuck-in" was not
to be general throughout the camp on a certain day. The delight was to be dealt out in instalments,
and in such a manner that so many men would be able to partake of the gorgeous feast upon each
successive day of the week.

So far so good. We in Barrack 5 were among the first to receive the promised meat meal, which
we had been anticipating with ill-disguised relish. It reached us on the Tuesday. The meal
was swallowed greedily and keenly enjoyed, although the meat was of inferior quality. But I
never saw another chop in our barrack for a month! Crash went another alluring Teuton promise.

We became inquisitive and to our amusement learned what the more shrewd and doubting among
us had suspected. Sufficient chops were being cooked every day to ensure so many men regularly
receiving the meat meal. Every man received his chop as promised although he was perhaps compelled
to wait an inordinate time for his turn. As there were twenty-three barracks with two kitchens
to fulfil their demands meat dinners were being prepared every day. Indeed, the Germans appeared
to be always cooking chops!

It was a masterpiece of German cunning. Whenever a visitor, animated by desires to ascertain
how the prisoners were being treated, visited the camp he was piloted to the kitchen. There
could be seen an imposing array of chops sizzling and spitting gaily, and emitting an appetizing
aroma. Were prisoners of war ever treated so sumptuously as those at Ruhleben? The visitor
was gravely assured that the chops he saw represented but a portion of what were being prepared
for the prisoners, in which statement the Germans were perfectly correct, but they artfully
refrained from saying that only a certain number of men received the dainty dish each day,
the idea being to convey the impression that this was merely the daily routine for the whole
of the camp.

It did not matter when the American representative or any other visitor came into the camp--chops
were being cooked. The visitors naturally concluded that we were being treated in a right royal
manner, and one quite in accordance with the most noble traditions of the German nation. It
never occurred to these visitors, apparently, to make enquiries among the prisoners to ascertain
how they enjoyed their daily meat meal? Had they done so they would have been surprised.

The German explanations were so verbose and ostensibly so sincere as to be received without
the slightest cavil. Naturally our task-masters studiously declined to extend any enlightenment
upon the matter, preferring to lull the visitors into a false haven of credibility. Unfortunately
we discovered that we had to pay indirectly for the delectable dainty and Teuton liberality--the
dinners upon the other days steadily grew worse in quantity, quality, and variety!

We all admire the unceasing efforts which the American Ambassador has, and still is exerting
upon our behalf, and we are extremely thankful for the many and far-reaching improvements he
has wrought. His work is one of extreme difficulty, demanding unremitting patience, tact, and
impartiality. It must be remembered that he was submitted to an unceasing bombardment of complaints
from 4,000 prisoners, overwrought from their incarceration, and ready to magnify the slightest
inconvenience into a grievance.

Unfortunately his task is aggravated by the unprincipled lying, bluffing, and crafty tactics
of the German authorities. They have no more compunction in fooling the American Ambassador
than they have in depriving the prisoners of sufficient food to keep body and soul together.
The task of Mr. Gerard in the immediate future is certain to become more perplexing, intricate,
and delicate, but we hope that he will prove equal to the occasion.

       *       *       *       *       *

Early in November, 1915, my arrangements for leaving Ruhleben were so far advanced that I could
scarcely restrain my excitement. On December 6 I disposed of my business. It was of no further
use to me. The day for which I had been waiting so patiently and longingly had dawned at last and--

I got home safely!

Although arrested and tried upon the false, frivolous, trumped-up charge of being a British
spy, I have never been acquitted of that indictment. It still hangs over my head.

Shortly after reaching home I received a letter from a friend with whom I had been interned.
He secured his release some months before I shook the dust--and mud--of Ruhleben from my feet.
On the day we parted he sympathised deeply with me at the prospect of being condemned to languish
in the hands of the enemy until the clash of arms had died down. I did not seek to disillusion
him, although, even at that time, I had made up my mind to get away by hook or by crook.

This former fellow-prisoner had heard of my safe return to my own fireside. The envelope contained
nothing beyond his visiting card, across the back of which he had scrawled, "How the devil
did you get out?"

But that is another story.

The London and Norwich Press Limited, London and Norwich, England