For many centuries no bat was known, but in those games requiring the ball to be struck, the
hand alone was used. In France there was early played a species of hand-ball. To protect the
hands thongs were sometimes bound about them, and this eventually furnished the idea of the
racquet. Strutt thinks a bat was first used in golf, cambuc, or bandy ball. This was similar
to the boys' game of "shinny," or, as it is now more elegantly known, "polo," and the bat used
was bent at the end, just as now. The first straight bats were used in the old English game
called club ball. This was simply "fungo hitting," in which one player tossed the ball in the
air and hit it, as it fell, to others who caught it, or sometimes it was pitched to him by
another player.

Concerning the origin of the American game of base-ball there exists considerable uncertainty.
A correspondent of Porter's Spirit of the Times, as far back as 1856, begins a series of letters
on the game by acknowledging his utter inability to arrive at any satisfactory conclusion upon
this point; and a writer of recent date introduces a research into the history of the game
with the frank avowal that he has only succeeded in finding "a remarkable lack of literature
on the subject."

In view of its extraordinary growth and popularity as "Our National Game," the author deems
it important that its true origin should, if possible, be ascertained, and he has, therefore,
devoted to this inquiry more space than might at first seem necessary.

In 1856, within a dozen years from the time of the systematization of the game, the number
of clubs in the metropolitan district and the enthusiasm attending their matches began to attract
particular attention. The fact became apparent that it was surely superseding the English game
of cricket, and the adherents of the latter game looked with ill-concealed jealousy on the
rising upstart. There were then, as now, persons who believed that everything good and beautiful
in the world must be of English origin, and these at once felt the need of a pedigree for the
new game. Some one of them discovered that in certain features it resembled an English game
called "rounders," and immediately it was announced to the American public that base-ball was
only the English game transposed. This theory was not admitted by the followers of the new
game, hut, unfortunately, they were not in a position to emphasize the denial. One of the strongest
advocates of the rounder theory, an Englishman-born himself, was the writer for out-door sports
on the principal metropolitan publications. In this capacity and as the author of a number
of independent works of his own, and the writer of the "base-ball" articles in several encyclopedias
and books of sport, he has lost no opportunity to advance his pet theory. Subsequent writers
have, blindly, it would seem, followed this lead, until now we find it asserted on every hand
as a fact established by some indisputable evidence; and yet there has never been adduced a
particle of proof to support this conclusion.

While the author of this work entertains the greatest respect for that gentleman, both as a
journalist and man, and believes that base-ball owes to him a monument of gratitude for the
brave fight he has always made against the enemies and abuses of the game, he yet considers
this point as to the game's origin worthy of further investigation, and he still regards it
as an open question.

When was base-ball first played in America?

The first contribution which in any way refers to the antiquity of the game is the first official
report of the "National Association" in 1858. This declares "The game of base-ball has long
been a favorite and popular recreation in this country, but it is only within the last fifteen
years that any attempt has been made to systematize and regulate the game." The italics are
inserted to call attention to the fact that in the memory of the men of that day base-ball
had been played a long time prior to 1845, so long that the fifteen years of systematized play
was referred to by an "only."

Colonel Jas. Lee, elected an honorary member of the Knickerbocker Club in 1846, said that he
had often played the same game when a boy, and at that time he was a man of sixty or more years.
Mr. Wm. F. Ladd, my informant, one of the original members of the Knickerbockers, says that
he never in any way doubted Colonel Lee's declaration, because he was a gentleman eminently
worthy of belief.

Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, several years since, said to the reporter of a Boston paper that
base-ball was one of the sports of his college days at Harvard, and Dr. Holmes graduated in 1829.

Mr. Charles De Bost, the catcher and captain of the old Knickerbockers, played base-ball on
Long Island fifty years ago, and it was the same game which the Knickerbockers afterward played.

In the absence of any recorded proof as to the antiquity of the game, testimony such as the
foregoing becomes important, and it might be multiplied to an unlimited extent.

Another noticeable point is the belief in the minds of the game's first organizers that they
were dealing with a purely American production, and the firmness of this conviction is evidenced
by everything they said and did. An examination of the speeches and proceedings of the conventions,
of articles in the daily and other periodical publications, of the poetry which the game at
that early day inspired, taken in connection with the declarations of members of the first
clubs still living, will show this vein of belief running all the way through. The idea that
base-ball owed its origin to any foreign game was not only not entertained, but indignantly
repudiated by the men of that time; and in pursuing his investigations the writer has discovered
that this feeling still exists in a most emphatic form.

In view of the foregoing we may safely say that base-ball was played in America as early, at
least, as the beginning of this century.

It may be instructive now to inquire as to the antiquity of the "old English game" from which
baseball is said to have sprung. Deferring for the present the consideration of its resemblance
to base-ball, what proof have we of its venerable existence? Looking, primarily, to the first
editions of old English authorities on out-door sports, I have been unable to find any record
that such a game as "rounders" was known. I may have been unfortunate in my searches, for,
though I have exhausted every available source of information, I have not discovered any mention
of it.

The first standard English writer to speak of rounders is "Stonehenge" in his Manual of Sports,
London, 1856. Since then almost every English work on out-door sports describes the "old [with
an emphasis] English game of rounders," and in the same connection declares it to be the germ
of the American base-ball; and yet, curiously enough, not one of them gives us any authority
even for dubbing it "old," much less for calling it the origin of our game. But in 1856 base-ball
had been played here for many years; it had already attracted attention as the popular sport,
and by 1860 was known in slightly differing forms all over the country. To all these later
English writers, therefore, its existence and general principles must have been familiar, and
it is consequently remarkable that, in view of their claim, they have given us no more particulars
of the game of rounders. Are we to accept this assertion without reserve, when an investigation
would seem to indicate that baseball is really the older game? If this English game was then
a common school-boy sport, as now claimed, it seems almost incredible that it should have escaped
the notice of all the writers of the first half of the century; and yet no sooner does base-ball
become famous as the American game than English writers discover that there is an old and popular
English game from which it is descended. Many of the games which the earlier writers describe
are extremely simple as compared with rounders, and yet the latter game is entirely overlooked!

But upon what ground have these later writers based their assumption? Many, doubtless, have
simply followed the writings from this side of the Atlantic; others have been misled by their
ignorance of the actual age of our game, for there are even many Americans who think base-ball
was introduced by the Knickerbocker and following clubs; a few, with the proverbial insular
idea, have concluded that base-ball must be of English origin, if for no other reason, because
it ought to be.

It is not my intention to declare the old game of rounders a myth. There is ample living testimony
to its existence as early perhaps as 1830, but that it was a popular English game before base-ball
was played here I am not yet ready to believe. Before we accept the statement that base-hall
is "only a species of glorified rounders," we should demand some proof that the latter is really
the older game. In this connection it will be important to remember that there were two English
games called "rounders," but entirely distinct the one from the other. Johnson's Dictionary,
edition of 1876, describes the first, and presumably the older, as similar to "fives" or hand-ball,
while the second is the game supposed to be allied to base-ball. "Fives" is one of the oldest
of games, and if it or a similar game was called "rounders," it will require something more
than the mere occurrence of the name in some old writing to prove that the game referred to
is the "rounders" as now played. And if this cannot be shown, why might we not claim, with
as much reason as the other theory has been maintained, that the "old English game of rounders"
is only a poor imitation of the older American game of base-ball?

Up to this point we have waived the question of resemblance between the two games, but let
us now inquire what are the points of similarity.

Are these, after all, so striking as to warrant the assumption that one game was derived from
the other, no matter which may be shown to be the older? In each there are "sides;" the ball
is tossed to the striker, who hits it with a bat; he is out if the ball so hit is caught; he
runs to different bases in succession and may be put out if hit by the ball when between the
bases. But with this the resemblance ceases. In base-ball nine men constitute a side, while
in rounders there may be any number over three. In base-ball there are four bases (including
the home), and the field is a diamond. In rounders the bases are five in number and the field
a pentagon in shape. There is a fair and foul hit in base-ball, while in rounders no such thing
is known. In rounders if a ball is struck at and missed, or if hit so that it falls back of
the striker, he is out, while in base-ball the ball must be missed three times and the third
one caught in order to retire the striker; and a foul, unless caught like any other ball, has
no effect and is simply declared "dead." In rounders the score is reckoned by counting one
for each base made, and some of the authorities say the run is completed when the runner has
reached the base next on the left of the one started from. In base-ball one point is scored
only when the runner has made every base in succession and returned to the one from which he
started. In rounders every player on the side must be put out before the other side can come
in, while in base-ball from time immemorial the rule has been "three out, all out." The distinctive
feature of rounders, and the one which gives it its name, is that when all of a side except
two have been retired, one of the two remaining may call for "the rounder;" that is, he is
allowed three hits at the ball, and if in any one of these he can make the entire round of
the bases, all the players of his side are reinstated as batters. No such feature as this was
ever heard of in base-ball, yet, as said, it is the characteristic which gives to rounders
its name, and any derivation of that game must certainly have preserved it.

If the points of resemblance were confined solely to these two games it would prove nothing
except that boys' ideas as well as men's often run in the same channels. The very ancient game
of bandy ball has its double in an older Persian sport, and the records of literary and mechanical
invention present some curious coincidences. But, as a matter of fact, every point common to
these two, games was known and used long before in other popular sports. That the ball was
tossed to the bat to be hit was true of a number of other games, among which were club ball,
tip cat, and cricket; in both of the latter and also in stool ball bases were run, and in tip
cat, a game of much greater antiquity than either base- ball or rounders, the runner was out
if hit by the ball when between bases. In all of these games the striker was out if the ball
when hit was caught. Indeed, a comparison will show that there are as many features of base-ball
common to cricket or tip cat as there are to rounders.

In view, then, of these facts, that the points of similarity are not distinctive, and that
the points of difference are decidedly so, I can see no reason in analogy to say that one game
is descended from the other, no matter which may be shown to be the older.

There was a game known in some parts of this country fifty or more years ago called town-ball.
In 1831 a club was regularly organized in Philadelphia to play the game, and it is recorded
that the first day for practice enough members were not present to make up town-ball, and so
a game of "two-old-cat" was played. This town-ball was so nearly like rounders that one must
have been the prototype of the other, but town- ball and base-ball were two very different
games. When this same town- ball club decided in 1860 to adopt base-ball instead, many of its
principal members resigned, so great was the enmity to the latter game. Never, until recently,
was the assertion made that base-ball was a development of town-ball, and it could not have
been done had the writers looked up at all the historical facts.

The latest attempt to fasten an English tab on the American game is noteworthy. Not content
to stand by the theory that our game is sprung from the English rounders, it is now intimated
that baseball itself, the same game and under the same name, is of English origin. To complete
the chain, it is now only necessary for some English writer to tell us that "in 1845 a number
of English gentlemen sojourning in New York organized a club called the Knickbockers, and introduced
to Americans the old English game of base-ball." This new departure has not yet gained much
headway, but it must be noticed on account of the circumstances of its appearance.

The edition of Chambers' Encyclopedia just out, in its article on "base- ball" says that the
game was mentioned in Miss Austen's Northanger Abbey, written about 1798, and leaves us to
infer that it was the same game that we now know by that name. It was not necessary to go into
the realm of fiction to find this ancient use of the name. A writer to the London Times in
1874 pointed out that in 1748 the family of Frederick, Prince of Wales, were represented as
engaged in a game of base-ball. Miss Austen refers to base-ball as played by the daughters
of "Mrs. Morland," the eldest of whom was fourteen. In Elaine's Rural Sports, London, 1852,
in an introduction to ball games in general, occurs this passage: "There are few of us of either
sex but have engaged in base- ball since our majority." Whether in all these cases the same
game was meant matters not, and it is not established by the mere identity of names. "Base,"
as meaning a place of safety, dates its origin from the game of "prisoners' base" long before
anything in the shape of base-ball or rounders; so that any game of ball in which bases were
a feature would likely be known by that name. The fact that in the three instances in which
we find the name mentioned it is always a game for girls or women, would justify the suspicion
that it was not always the same game, and that it in any way resembled our game is not to be
imagined. Base- ball in its mildest form is essentially a robust game, and it would require
an elastic imagination to conceive of little girls possessed of physical powers such as its
play demands.

Besides, if the English base-ball of 1748, 1798, and 1852 were the same as our base-ball we
would have been informed of that fact long ago, and it would never have been necessary to attribute
the origin of our game to rounders. And when, in 1874, the American players were introducing
base-ball to Englishmen, the patriotic Britain would not have said, as he then did, that our
game was "only rounders with the rounder left out," but he would at once have told us that
base-ball itself was an old English game.

But this latest theory is altogether untenable and only entitled to consideration on account
of the authority under which it is put forth.

In a little book called Jolly Games for Happy Homes, London, 1875, dedicated to "wee little
babies and grown-up ladies," there is described a game called "base-ball." It is very similar
in its essence to our game and is probably a reflection of it. It is played by a number of
girls in a garden or field. Having chosen sides, the "leader" of the "out" side tosses the
ball to one of the "ins," who strikes it with her hand and then scampers for the trees, posts,
or other objects previously designated as bases. Having recovered the ball, the "scouts," or
those on the "outs," give chase and try to hit the fleeing one at a time when she is between
bases. There must be some other means, not stated, for putting out the side; the ability to
throw a ball with accuracy is vouchsafed to few girls, and if the change of innings depended
upon this, the game, like a Chinese play, would probably never end. It is described, however,
as a charming pastime, and, notwithstanding its simplicity, is doubtless a modern English conception
of our National Game.

To recapitulate briefly, the assertion that base-ball is descended from rounders is a pure
assumption, unsupported even by proof that the latter game antedates the former and unjustified
by any line of reasoning based upon the likeness of the games. The other attempt to declare
base-ball itself an out-and-out English game is scarcely worthy of serious consideration.

But if base-ball is neither sprung from rounders nor taken bodily from another English game,
what is its origin? I believe it to be a fruit of the inventive genius of the American boy.
Like our system of government, it is an American evolution, and while, like that, it has doubtless
been affected by foreign associations, it is none the less distinctively our own. Place in
the hands of youth a ball and bat, and they will invent games of ball, and that these will
be affected by other familiar games and in many respects resemble them, goes without saving.

