10 mo. 2. Berne.--We found many letters from England waiting for us here, one of which, from
my nephew John Yeardley, brought the sorrowful intelligence of the sudden and unexpected removal
of my dearly-beloved brother Thomas, of Ecclesfield Mill. This took place on the 6th of the
Ninth Month, about 20 minutes past 2, without sigh or groan, even as a lamb. These are the
expressions of J.Y.; he adds several sweet expressions of my precious brother's, which show
that the solemn change to him was a joyful one: and I do believe his tribulated spirit is now
at rest. On recurring to the 6th ultimo to see where we were, and what were the contemplations
of my mind, I find we were at Zurich. That morning the following lines which I heard when a
child, and had not repeated for the last twenty years, came forcibly into my mind:--

    It's almost done, it's almost o'er,
    We're joining them that are gone before;
    We soon shall meet upon that shore
    Where we shall meet to part no more.

I not only repeated them to myself the whole of the day, but even sung them aloud so often
that my dear M.Y. said to me, "Whatever can be the meaning that thou so often repeats these
lines?" I replied, "I do not know that I have repeated them for the last twenty years, but
to-day they are continually with me." This can have been nothing but the spirit of sympathy
with the soul of my dear departing brother, for the awful impression of sorrow and solemnity
in my mind on that day will never be forgotten; I mourned with the bereaved family without
knowing it. My M.Y. had opened her portfolio to begin a letter to our sister Rachel, and I
wrote the verse on a piece of loose paper, and she slipped it into her papers, and said to
herself, Surely these lines are not prophetic of something that is going to happen? Last evening
she banded me out of her portfolio the piece of paper containing the lines.

At Berne they received also the tidings that "the excellent" M.A. Calame was no more; the Christian
mother of 250 orphan children was taken from the scene of her labors and the conflicts of time
to the heavenly rest in her Saviour. The following appear to be among the last words which
she wrote; they were no doubt addressed to her faithful companion Zimmerlin:--

In my numerous shortcomings I have enough constantly to humble me, and without being surprised
at it, since evil is my heritage; but my help is in the Lord, who delights in mercy. I have
hope also for all my brethren whom I love, whatever name they hear. There are twelve gates
by which to enter into the Holy City, and if they have passed through the great gate, which
is Christ, I am sure that those who enter from the east, as well as those who have been brought
in by the west, will be there; but those who enter with me are better known to me than the
rest whom I shall meet in that celestial Jerusalem, whither my sighs daily carry me, yet in
submission to the heavenly decrees, desiring only that the will of God our Saviour be done.

You think my task is light? Ah, no! the love which the Lord has given me spends itself on so
many hearts closed to their true interests; I see the hand of the enemy in their souls; I am
so often deceived in my hopes, that my work is watered by my tears. From time to time, however,
the Lord gives me hope; a soul awakes from sleep, and is kindled into light by the torch of
the gospel.

And now, dear sister, have no longer any esteem or consideration for me; only let the love
of Christ live in thy heart for me: the desires of my heart carry you with it to the feet of
Him who is Love.

When they returned home, John and Martha Yeardley printed a short memoir of this extraordinary
woman, whose name, though comparatively little known upon earth, is doubtless enshrined in
the hearts of many who still survive, and shall one day shine with a lustre which the most
brilliant of her sex, whose ambition it is to adorn the court, the concert or the drawing-room,
will desire in vain to wear.

At Berne J. and M.Y. commenced a Bible class, similar in kind to the Scarborough reunion, which
was continued until their departure, and was the source of much pleasure and profit to those
who attended. Before quitting Berne, thinking it might perhaps be the last opportunity they
should have of meeting with their numerous and beloved friends in that city, they invited them
to join them in worship in their apartment.

Many, says John Yeardley, gave us their company; much tenderness of spirit was felt, and through
the mercy of Divine Love many present were, I trust, comforted and refreshed.

We quitted Berne on the 30th. We had become so affectionately attached to many Christian friends,
that parting from them was severely felt. But what happiness Christians enjoy even in this
world I those who love the Saviour remain united in Him when outwardly separated.

Neufchâtel, for the sake of those who resided there, was equally attractive to them as Berne.

We arrived at Neufchfâtel, writes John Yeardley, on Fifth-day, and on Seventh-day (11 mo. 1)
settled into a comfortable lodging on the border of the lake. It feels to us the most like
home of any residence we have had during our pilgrimage in foreign lands. Our suite of cottage-rooms
runs alongside the water, with a gallery in front, and the little boats on the lake, and the
mountains in the distance, covered with snow, are objects pleasing to the eye. What gives us
the most satisfaction is the feeling of being in our right place, and to meet with such a warm
reception from our dear friends.

This feeling was succeeded by some religious service of an interesting character, in reviewing
which John Yeardley says:--

23rd.--Among those who meet with us, a little few know how to appreciate true silence, others
are not come to this. But for what purpose are we here? If it may please our Heavenly Father
to make use of us as feeble instruments of drawing a single individual into nearer communion
with the Beloved of souls, we ought to be content; and, blessed be his Holy Name, his presence
is often felt in our hearts.

As has been already said, they looked forward to spending the winter at Neufchâtel. This intention,
and their ulterior project of visiting Germany in the spring, were frustrated by the alarming
illness of Adey Bellamy Savory, Martha Yeardley's only brother, the news of which reached them
on the 29th of the Eleventh Month.

This day's post, writes John Yeardley, brought us the sorrowful news of the severe illness
of our dear brother A.B. Savory. The family at Stamford-hill have expressed a strong desire
for us to return, if we could feel easy so to do, and seeing that we have pretty much got through
what we had in prospect in Switzerland, we are, on the whole, most comfortable to go direct
for London, and leave Germany for the present. Our great Master is very gracious to us, giving
us to feel sweet peace in the termination of our labors, and to look forward with hope to seeing
our native land once more.

The next day was First-day; the parting with their Neufchâtel friends was very affecting.

11 mo. 30.--A precious meeting this morning. The presence of Him who died for us was near,
to help and comfort us; our hearts were much tendered by his divine love. The taking leave
of our dear friends here was almost heartrending. There is a precious seed in this place, which
I trust, is a little deeper rooted since our last visit, and it is the prayer of my heart,
that the Saviour may water and watch over it, and that it may produce abundance of fruit to
his praise.

They took their departure on the 2nd of the Twelfth Month, and arrived in London on the 13th,
travelling through the north of France twelve days and six nights.

Through divine mercy we arrived safe in London, on Seventh-day evening, and lodged with our
beloved relations at Highbury, who received us with all possible affection. Our spirits on
meeting, mingled in silent sorrow, while we were enabled to rejoice in God our Saviour. On
First-day morning we went over to Stamford-hill, and soon were introduced to our beloved brother,
who was perfectly sensible, but extremely weak. The peace and serenity which we were favored
to feel by him was an inexpressible comfort to our sorrowful hearts.

A.B. Savory died the next Third-day evening, and his remains were interred on the First-day
following.

21st.--This was the day fixed for the solemn occasion of accompanying the remains to the tomb.
The body was taken into the meeting-house at Newington, and the company of mourners and all
present were, I believe, comforted and edified through the tender mercies of our Heavenly Father.
J.J. Gurney's communication was particularly precious; he also paid a consoling visit to the
family after dinner.

We shall conclude this chapter with some reflections made by John Yeardley, on reviewing the
changes which death had produced in the circle of his relations:--

1835. 1 mo. 31.--Waking this morning, I took a view of the great ravages death had made in
our families; when this exhortation pressed suddenly and with peculiar force on my heart,--Be
thou also ready. My soul responded, Thou Lord, alone, canst make me ready. O gracious Saviour,
who died for me, be pleased to redeem me from the bond of corruption, and purify my heart from
earthly things.

During the seven years comprised in this chapter, the materials which exist for delineating
John and Martha Yeardley's history are meagre. Of the numerous journeys which they made in
the course of this period, the record kept by the former frequently consists of a mere itinerary.

After attending the Leeds Quarterly Meeting in the Third Month, they returned to their home
at Scarborough, but soon left it again to be present at the Yearly Meeting in London. The Society
of Friends began about this time to be agitated by differences of opinion, chiefly on points
of doctrine. John Yeardley not only kept himself sedulously free from the spirit of party,
but, whether from a natural aversion to public life, or from the fear of exceeding the limit
of his own calling and abilities, he abstained from taking a prominent position, and left it
very much to others to sway the affairs of the Church. But he was not unmindful of the dangers
by which the Society was assailed, and he bent the force of his mental vigor and Christian
experience towards the promotion of individual growth in grace and faithfulness to the divine
call, and the diffusion of clear and comprehensive views of Scriptural truth; and when the
hour came for sympathising with those who were harassed by doubts, or such as were subjected
to trial by the effect of religious dissension, he was ready, with his beloved partner, to
share the burden of the afflicted, to probe the wounds of those who had been bruised, and to
pour in the oil of heavenly consolation.

His note regarding the Yearly Meeting is short:--

The business was of a most important nature, and sometimes very trying. We had strong proof
that many spirits professing to have made long progress in the Christian life were not enough
subdued by the humbling power of divine grace; but through all, I trust, our heavenly Father
dealt with us in mercy, and sent help and wisdom to direct and strengthen his poor tribulated
children.

On returning to Scarborough, he writes:--

I humbly trust our hearts are truly grateful to the Author of all our mercies, who has granted
us once more a little rest of body and sweet peace of mind; but, as it regards myself, I must
say that inward poverty has prevailed more since my return home than it has done for the last
two years of absence. It is well to know how to suffer want, as well as to abound.

Want of occupation was not one of John Yeardley's trials, even when "standing," as he expressed
it, "free from any prospect of immediate service, and feeling much as a vessel not likely to
be brought into use again." Scriptural inquiry, the study of languages, and of the history
of the Church, watching the progress of religious light and liberty on the Continent of Europe,
his garden, the binding of his books--these were the employments of his industrious leisure.
To these must be added the time bestowed on several small publications from his own and his
wife's pen (the latter chiefly poetical), of which the "Eastern Customs," a volume which was
the product of their united labor, and the materials for which were supplied by their journey
to Greece, is the best known.

But there was another object which drew largely on John Yeardley's time during his residence
at Scarborough. This was the unsectarian schools established in the town for the education
of the industrial classes. Of these the Lancasterian School for girls was his favorite, and
the deep and steady interest which he manifested for the improvement of the children, as well
as the peculiar talent which he evinced for attracting and developing the youthful mind, are
shown in an affectionate tribute to his memory by the late mistress of the school:--

For many years he was a visitor at our Lancasterian School, where it was his delight to impart
knowledge to a numerous class of girls. He had a happy method of communicating information.
The children used to listen with the greatest attention and delight; they never wearied of
his lessons. Scriptural instruction was his first object; the children were questioned on what
they had read, and it was delightful to watch their countenances whilst he explained portions
of Scripture, which he frequently illustrated by the manners and customs of Eastern nations;
and this he did in a way that rendered his teaching valuable, as he did not fail to make an
impression and gain the affections of his hearers.

One little girl we had whom he used to call the oracle; and indeed she was not inappropriately
so-called; for whenever any of the girls were at a loss for an answer, they invariably turned
to her, and seldom failed to receive a response to their silent appeal. This gifted child died
between the ages of sixteen and eighteen; he was a frequent visitor at her bedside during a
lingering illness, and it was his privilege to see that his labors had not been in vain.

I shall never forget him, not only for the important instruction I derived from him, but also
for his valuable assistance. During my labors of more than twenty-five years, I had none to
help me as he did. When at home he never failed to visit as every afternoon: no matter what
the state of the weather was--snow, wind or rain--he was to be seen at half-past two, with
his large cape folded round him, bending before the blast, toiling up the hill near the school.
So accustomed were we to him that his coming was deemed a matter of course.

After our Scripture lesson a portion of time was devoted to geography, particularly Bible geography;
then he would talk to them of places where he had travelled: his descriptions of the Ionian
Islands, the people and the schools he had visited there, used to be a favorite theme, and
very interesting. In this way our afternoons were passed, and truly they were times of profitable
instruction.

He seemed to care less for the boys' school; he did occasionally visit them, but the girls
were his pets. I have sometimes thought his knowledge of the ignorant and degraded state of
the females in Greece was the cause of his taking so much interest in the education of the
females in his own land.

In addition to J. Yeardley's labors at the Lancasterian School, some of the older girls and
a few others who belonged to the school assembled at his house one evening in the week, whom
he instructed in reading and Scriptural knowledge. Some of these still speak with gratitude
of the benefit they then received.

In the Ninth Month of 1835, John and Martha Yeardley visited Settle Monthly Meeting, and Knaresborough,
under appointment of the Quarterly Meeting. On their way thither they took up at York their
aged and valued friend Elizabeth Rowntree of Scarborough, who was on the appointment.

Her company, says J.Y., was a strength and comfort to us; she exercised her gift as an elder
in a very acceptable manner, in many of the families we visited, as well as in the meetings
for discipline.

This notice is succeeded almost immediately by the record of Elizabeth Rowntree's sudden decease:--

On the 25th of the Eleventh Month, we were introduced into deep affliction by the sudden removal
of our precious elder, E. Rowntree. Her dependence for salvation was fixed on her Saviour,
the Lord Jesus Christ, through the help of whose Spirit she had been enabled to lead a life
of godliness and of usefulness to her fellow-mortals, and was always concerned to give the
praise to Him to whom it was due,--the Lord of Lords.

This event, with the removal of another pilgrim to become an inhabitant of the world of beatified
spirits, and the pressing subject of the divisions in the Society, form the topics of the following
letter from Martha Yeardley to Elizabeth Dudley:--

Scarborough, 12 mo. 5, 1835.

During our long sojourn last spring, in and about my native city, my spirit was deeply oppressed,
nor did the conflicts endured appear to produce much benefit either to myself or others. Here
the way is more open, and, although we also deeply feel the effects of the storm which has
been permitted to assail our little Society, we are more able to endure it; and desire to abide
in our tents, except when called upon to defend that immediate teaching of the blessed Saviour,
upon which we depend for our little portion of daily bread. I can truly sympathise with thee,
my beloved Betsy, an having to bear more of the burden and heat of the day, and I do fervently
believe with thee, that the more, as individuals, we commit and confide the cause to the Great
Master, in humble prayer, the sooner it will be extricated from the perplexities which now
harass and distress those who are truly devoted to it.

We have deeply to mourn for our endeared and highly valued E. Rowntree, suddenly taken from
us about ten days since. She and her sister R.S., from Whitby, had spent the preceding evening
with us; she was in usual health, and sweetly cheerful, rejoicing that she had been enabled
to assist dear Sarah Squire in a family visit to Friends of this meeting, though she did not
sit with her in the families. I heard of her illness and hastened to her; she appeared sensible
but for a very few moments after having been got to bed; yet was heard begging for patience
under extreme agony; then added, We had need live the life of the righteous, for it is an awful
thing to die. Then she suddenly sank into a slumber, and lay till a little after nine at night,
when her purified spirit was peacefully liberated.

We have got through Pontefract and some meetings in the neighborhood to our comfort, and on
the journey had an opportunity of sitting beside the dying bed of dear Sarah Dent, which was
indeed a peaceful scene. She was perfectly sensible, and so animated that I could hardly give
up hope of her restoration. But she had not herself the least prospect of life, and said that,
although she had found it a hard struggle to give up her husband and children, she had, through
the mercy of her gracious Redeemer, attained to perfect resignation. This was about a week
before her death, and we have heard since, that a little before the close, she said, The Lord
Jesus is near, I want you all to know that He is near indeed!

Dear Ann Priestman has united with us in visiting this Monthly Meeting: it seems now best for
us to remain at home for a short time, under the bereavement which our own meeting has suffered.

In 1836 they again attended the Yearly Meeting; of which John Yeardley thus speaks:--

The Yearly Meeting was, I think, on the whole, satisfactory, much more so than many Friends
could look for, considering the discouraging circumstances under which we came together. The
main bent in all the important deliberations on subjects of great moment to the well-being
of our small section of the universal church, was to adhere to the long-known principles of
the Society, and to turn aside the sentiments of opposing individuals in the spirit of gentleness,
forbearance and love.

They visited many meetings in going from and returning to Scarborough. The most interesting
of these visits was at Thame, in Oxfordshire, which John Yeardley thus describes:--

6 mo. 14.--Went in the evening to Thame, and had a meeting with a few who have met in the way
of Friends for about five years at Grove End. There are only seven or eight who meet regularly,
but they are often joined by a few others. No notice had been given to their neighbors of our
coming, but on seeing us go to the meeting many followed; the room was quite filled, and a
precious meeting it was. Their hearts are like ground prepared for the good seed of the kingdom.
The nature of spiritual worship was pointed out, and testimony borne to the teaching of the
Holy Spirit.

This little company reminded us of many such which we met with in foreign countries, particularly
in Switzerland and Germany. We had a good deal of conversation with William Wheeler, who was
one of the first to meet in silence. He was a leader in the Wesleyan congregation, and became
uneasy with giving out hymns to be sung with those whose states he knew did not correspond
with the words. He would then sometimes select a hymn most suited by its general character
to the company; at other times he would leave out a few verses, and select others which he
thought might be sung with truth by the whole congregation; but the thing became so burdensome
that he was obliged, for conscience' sake, to leave it altogether, and sit down with a few
others in silence. At first they met with opposition, and even persecution, from persons who
came to their meeting to disperse them. On one of these occasions a few rude young men had
banded together to beset them the next meeting-day, and disperse them. W.W. was strongly impressed
that it was right for him to proclaim an awful warning to some--that the judgments of the Almighty
awaited them, that eternity was nearer than they were aware and he wished them to consider
and prepare for it. One of the disturbers was taken suddenly ill, and died before the next
meeting-day; which produced such an effect on the others that they never more molested the
little company in their worship.

In reviewing this journey, J.Y. says, under date of the 25th of the Sixth Month:--

I trust my faith is afresh confirmed in the gift of the Holy Spirit to lead in the way of religious
duty, and to give strength to do His will. Lord, grant that the remainder of my days, whether
few or many, be entirely devoted to the holy cause of endeavoring to promote the Saviour's
kingdom on earth.

In 1837, John and Martha Yeardley were occupied with making circuits in the service of the
gospel through several counties of England. They were attracted to Lancashire, which they visited
in the autumn, by the peculiar state of some meetings in that county, an extensive secession
having taken place not long before. The difficulties which they had to encounter on this journey
are represented in a letter from Martha Yeardley to her sisters, written at Manchester the
4th of the Ninth Month, 1837.

I do not recollect that, in my little experience, I ever had more preparatory exercise of mind
to pass through; and I believe it has been the same with my dear J.Y. We have, however, in
many of our visits, been much comforted under the belief that those who remain firm in the
testimonies given us to bear are in a more lively state, and more banded together, than has
been the case heretofore, and that, through the mercy of our holy Head and High Priest, there
is a renewed visitation to many. In the public meetings, of which we have had many, there has
been a rather remarkable openness to receive the truths of the gospel, united with our view
of the spirituality of this blessed dispensation.

We approached this place in deep prostration of spirit; and truly we feel that all the previous
baptism has been needful, in order to enable us in any degree to perform our duty here. There
has been a sore rending of the tenderest ties, and the wounds are not yet healed. There are
a few who entertain ultra views, and their over-activity tends to keep up excitement in those
who are wavering and have not yet left the Society: this makes it very difficult for moderate
people to stand between them, and calls for very deep indwelling with the blessed source of
love. On the other hand there are, I fear, very many who rejoice in the delusive suggestions
of our unwearied enemy--that the cross of Christ is not necessary--that they may speak their
own words and wear their own apparel, and still be called by the name of Him who died for them.
I think we never have had more to suffer than in some of the meetings we have attended, from
a disposition, perhaps in some degree on both sides, to criticise ministry: still there are,
I believe, many precious individuals among the young and middle-aged who are under the forming
hand for usefulness. There is indeed a loud call for laborers in this large and mixed meeting;
and we are ready to weep over the vacant seats of those who have deserted their post, and,
I greatly fear, are seeking to warm themselves and others with sparks of their own kindling.

Another letter from M.Y., written at the conclusion of this journey, supplies a few more traits
of the Christian service into which they were led in the course of it.

Scarborough, 10 mo. 7.

We remained nearly a month in our lodgings at Manchester, receiving and paying visits, some
of which were very interesting. Dear H. Stephenson and family were extremely attentive, and
her daughter Hannah was our constant guide in that large place. We spent First-day at Rochdale,
and in the evening a large number of young Friends took tea with us, between thirty and forty.
This has mostly been the case on First-days, both at Manchester and elsewhere, and these opportunities
have tended to our relief.

After this we bade farewell to Lancashire, under feelings of thankfulness which I cannot describe,
for having been mercifully helped and preserved through such a warfare.

In the autumn of 1839 they again travelled southwards, directing their steps through the eastern
counties of England, and London, Surrey, and Hampshire, to the Isle of Wight, where they spent
five weeks exploring its coasts and corners, in search, not of the naturally picturesque, but
of the beautiful and hopeful in the moral and religious world. They returned home by Bristol
and Birmingham.

So attractive to their spirits was the Isle of Wight, that the next year they repeated the
visit, going thither after the Yearly Meeting. In the Seventh Month they attended the Quarterly
Meeting at Alton, and on their return to Newport were accompanied by Elizabeth and Mary Dudley
and Margaret Pope. They remained in Newport and the vicinity several weeks, during which time,
amongst other engagements, they conducted a Scripture class with some young persons three evenings
a week. In a letter dated the 27th of the Sixth Month, J.Y. says:--

My dear Martha feels deeply for the Unitarians in this place; we sometimes think the way may
open for us to help them a little. Their great stumbling-stones are, the want of clearness
in the mystery of the oneness in the Godhead, and of faith in the practical influences of the
Holy Spirit, as operating on the heart of man. Our morning reading opens a suitable door of
communication for those whose curiosity prompts them to seek our company.

In company with Elizabeth Dudley they hold several public meetings at various places on the
island. They have left no record of this service, but we have a notice of the meeting at Porchfield,
in a letter from E.D.

The meeting was very satisfactory, sweet and refreshing to our spirits. The road was rough
and hilly. We were behind time, and our friends being punctual, the house looked full when
we got there, though more followed, until not only within but outside the walls there was a
crowd of orderly, attentive people. Many of them were happily acquainted with the power of
religion in their hearts, and prepared for spiritual worship. The assembly was composed of
various denominations from a straggling village and more remote habitations. The chapel was
built many years ago, by a pious man, now above eighty years old, who was with us, and who
enjoys to have the place used by any who from love to Christ and the souls of men are attracted
to visit them. The simplicity and openness to be observed and felt that evening was a comforting
indication of freedom from party spirit, and those vain disputations which in so many instances
keep Christians at a distance, and mar their individual peace as well as usefulness.

Before they left Newport, they provided, with the help of several friends, suitable accommodation
for the little meeting of Friends in that town. On taking leave of the island, which they did
in the Eighth Month, John Yeardley remarks:--

We have had much comfort and satisfaction in our sojourn in this place: a strong evidence is
felt in our hearts that it has been ordered by the Lord. We have cause to acknowledge that
our labors have been owned by the Divine Presence in our various exercise for the promotion
of the Saviour's kingdom.

In the spring of 1841 they repeated their visit to the Isle of Wight, spent great part of the
summer in religious service in Essex, and visited afterwards Bristol, Bath, and other parts
of Somersetshire.

At Bath they remained for some weeks. Soon after their arrival in the city, they were introduced
into sympathetic sorrow on account of the death of John Rutter, whose guests they were, and
who was suddenly removed, by an accident, from time to eternity. This event is described in
a letter from John Yeardley to his sister R. S.

Bath, 9 mo. 24, 1841.

The affectionate family of the Rutters gave us a hearty reception, and we remained under their
hospitable roof until Second-day, when they were plunged into deep distress by the awfully
sudden removal of their beloved father. He went out before breakfast, and called at his son's
wharf. A cart of coals being about to be weighed, he was leading the horse on to the machine;
the animal, being a little unruly, suddenly rushed forward and pushed down J. R, and the wheel
passed over his body. He was immediately conveyed to his own shop, when the spark of life became
extinct, and he ceased to breathe, without apparent pain or emotion. We were nearly ready to
leave our room, about half-past 6. o'clock, when one of the sons knocked at our door, and related
the awful occurrence. I went down immediately: the scene may be more easily imagined by you
than described by me. We endeavored to calm them as much as possible; and, though deeply afflicted,
they bear the stroke with sweet resignation. I wrote letters at their request to most of their
near relatives; and as we could not think of leaving the sorrowing family to go as proposed
to Bristol, we immediately procured a lodging and settled in, in the evening.

On Third-day afternoon we went to the Quarterly Meeting at Bristol, and returned to Bath on
Fifth day, not wishing to be long absent from the dear sorrowing ones. We have a pleasant situation
on the hill-side, called Sidney Lodge, from which, when the gas is lighted, the city is presented
to our view like a beautiful panorama.

Their minds had been for some time in preparation for renewing, on the Continent of Europe,
Christian intercourse with some of their old friends, and for exploring new veins of religious
life in countries which they had not yet visited. Accordingly, in the Fourth Month of 1842,
they acquainted the Friends of their Monthly Meeting with the prospect of missionary service
which had opened before them, informing them that from the conclusion of their last European
journey they had believed it would one day be required of them to re-enter that field of labor.
The Monthly Meeting accorded its full and sympathetic approbation, which was endorsed by the
Quarterly Meeting at a conference of men and women Friends, of which John Yeardley says:--

The great solemnity which prevailed was truly refreshing to our spirits, and I believe to the
spirits of many others. Our friends gave us their full unity, encouragement, sympathy, and prayers.

Martha Yeardley thus expresses the feelings with which she contemplated this arduous journey,
in a letter to Josiah Forster:--

It is indeed an awful engagement, now in the decline of life, and, with respect to myself,
under increasing infirmities; but I believe it best for me not to look too far forward, but
simply to confide in the mercy and guidance of that blessed Saviour who has been our support
and consolation under many deep trials, humblingly believing that whether enabled to accomplish
the important prospect or not, it was an offering required at our hands, and that we must leave
the event to the Great Disposer of all things.

In the same letter she mentions their having heard of the death of Louis A. Majolier of Congenies,
which, she says, although a cause of rejoicing as it regards him, was read by us with mournful
feelings, from the recollection of his fatherly kindness in days that are past, and also from
renewed solicitude for the little flock in that country.

Before their departure they went once more into the West Riding, to see how their brethren
of J.Y.'s earliest acquaintance fared. They were joined by William Dent of Marr, near Doncaster,
with whom they were "sweetly united in the fellowship of the gospel;" and they returned to
Scarborough with "grateful and peaceful hearts."

CHAPTER XV.

THE FOURTH CONTINENTAL JOURNEY.

1842-3.

In the journey which now lay before them, John and Martha Yeardley were about to explore a
part of Europe hitherto untried,--the province of Languedoc, conspicuous in past ages for its
superior enlightenment, but now, owing to the temporary mastery of error, wrapt in ignorance
and gloom. In this mission, the opportunities which they found for reviving and gathering together
the scattered embers of truth, were nearly confined to social intercourse; in seeking occasions
for which, they availed themselves of introductions by pious Prostestants from place to place,
whilst they were careful, as had always been their practice, to wait, in every successive step,
for the direction of the Divine Finger. The mission was performed in much weakness of body,
and under frequent spiritual poverty; yet it will be readily acknowledged that theirs was a
favored lot, to be able, with the clue of gospel love in their hand, to trace the pathway of
Christian truth, and the footsteps of true spiritual worship, and of a faithful testimony for
Christ, through the midst of a degenerate and benighted land.

They went to London on the 2nd of the Eighth Month, and spent the time before they sailed in
gathering information and counsel for their approaching journey, and in social visits. Speaking
of one of these visits (to their nephew J. S., at Clapton), John Yeardley says:--

Before parting we had a religious opportunity, in which a word of exhortation flowed in gospel
love, and ability was granted to approach the throne of mercy in solemn supplication. I often
wish we were more faithful in raising our hearts to the Lord before separating from our friends
when met on social occasions; a blessing might attend such simple offerings.

In a visit they paid to Thomas and Carolina Norton, the subject of establishing a school for
the children of Friends in the South of France came under consideration; a project which, as
we shall see, they were able in their visit to that part of the country to carry into effect.

They left London on the 16th, and on the 19th arrived at Amiens, where they halted for a few
days. They found in this city a movement among the Roman Catholics, a number of whom had joined
the Protestant worship. The Protestant Pastor, Cadoret, was very friendly to them; when he
heard that they belonged to the Society of Friends, he pressed John Yeardley's hand and said,
I am very glad to make your acquaintance; it is the first time I have seen any of your Society,
of whom I have heard much.

On the 20th J.Y. writes, in allusion to the spiritual darkness which so generally covered the
land of France;--

My soul is cast down, but when I am afflicted because of the wickedness of the people, I call
to remembrance these words: "Fret not thyself because of evil-doers. 1, 3.

A large number of workmen of various nations are employed at Amiens in weaving. J. and M.Y.,
visited several of these in their cottages, and before they left the city invited the people
of this class to a meeting, especially intended for their own countrymen, but open to all who
were willing to come. The meeting, says J.Y., was an occasion precious to our souls; the Lord
gave us ability to declare his word. I spoke in English and my dear Martha in French.

At Paris, whither they proceeded on the 22nd, they were disappointed in finding that the majority
of the persons at whose houses they called were in the country, and some with whom they had
taken sweet counsel in former years had been removed by death. Pastor Audebez was at home,
and received them with a cordial welcome. They were detained in Paris longer than they had
anticipated, by the illness of Martha Yeardley, and did not leave till the 9th of the Ninth
Month. The morning after they had entered Paris the words of Job were brought to J.Y.'s recollection
in a forcible manner:--"Thou hast granted me life and favor, and thy visitation hath preserved
my spirit." 7-9.

Some letters which John and Martha Yeardley received from England during their sojourn in Paris
show, the strong sympathy which accompanied them in their journey, and contain, at the same
time, references to events which will be interesting to the reader.

South Grove, Peckham, 8 mo. 12, 1842. And they shall put my name upon the children of Israel,
and I will bless them." To be pronounced by Aaron the high, priest and his successors, as the
type of Him by whom all blessing and favor are bestowed on the church and her children.

The above portion of Holy Scripture, with the 121st Psalm, has been so sweetly in my remembrance
since parting with my beloved friends John and Martha Yeardley, that, before retiring for the
night, I transcribe the words which convey, so much better than any language of my own, the
renewed and abiding desire under which they are committed to the care and guidance of the Good
Shepherd, in humble but confiding belief that he will equally watch over, guard and keep, those
who go and those who stay; causing each, amidst all variety of circumstances, to realize the
soul-cheering truth, that, at the throne of grace, mercy is obtained and grace to help in time
of need. May the peace which passeth all understanding keep our hearts and minds through Jesus
Christ, prays your nearly-attached friend and sister,

E. DUDLEY.

THE SAME TO MARTHA YEARDLEY.

Peckham, 8 mo. 21, 1842.

While in the sick-chamber of my sister, instead of at meeting, it feels pleasant to devote
part of the evening to thee, my beloved friend. I have enjoyed the thought of your having a
good Sabbath at Paris, where, no doubt, a sphere of duty will be found, and perhaps many exercises
of faith and patience attend the labor of love which may await you there; while, in the spirit
of true dedication and acquiescence so mercifully bestowed upon you, no commandment will be
counted grievous, nor any service for your Lord too hard or painful. His words come sweetly
to my mind as really the portion of a brother and sister dear in the bond and power of an endless
life,--"Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear."

Accounts from various parts of this land continue to indicate much unsettlement, and there
have been large companies of Chartists in the immediate vicinity of London; but happily the
civil power proved equal to their dispersion. One would hope the abundant harvest, now ready
to be gathered, may turn the current of feeling, and induce the desire rather to praise the
Lord for his goodness, than to spend time and strength in murmurings and disputings with their
fellow-mortals. The destruction, not only of property, but of life; in some recent contests,
is quite appalling, and we certainly live in very eventful times; the tendency, however, both
of the good and evil, is so obviously towards an increase of light and knowledge, that it seems
warrantable to expect all will be overruled to better views and practices becoming more general,
and the kingdoms of this world being thankfully surrendered to the righteous government of
the Prince of Peace. But alas! deep and complicated may be the sufferings yet behind for the
church and her children to endure, whether in being sharers in, or but the witnesses of, what
is pronounced upon the world of the ungodly.

FROM JOHN ROWNTREE.

Scarborough, 8 mo. 29, 1842.

The account of your proceedings at Amiens has been particularly interesting to me. Whether
manufacturing employments are unfavorable or otherwise to moral and religions character; or
whether it is merely the larger earnings which artizans receive, enabling them more glaringly
to gratify their natural and corrupt inclinations than agricultural laborers, can do; whether
the passive ignorance of the country laborer, or the more active and intelligent habits, yet
combined with moral darkness, of the manufacturing operative, most retards the diffusion of
religious truth, are serious questions for us in this country. Our manufacturers have been
alarming the whole nation, and threatening us with something like political revolution; but
they have received a severe lesson, and many of our jails are filled with the victims of unprincipled
agitators. Considering how little of the Christian spirit is generally found in the operations
of government, the treatment of these poor creatures has on the whole been lenient, and no
very severe punishments are anticipated.

Whether the people of this nation have learned more of righteousness from the judgments of
the Lord, which have I think evidently been made known in this part of his earth, is perhaps
known only to Him who knoweth all things. I often fear;--for surely there is very much of darkness
and wickedness among us--yet I can not unfrequently hope that light is spreading, and that
although the powers of evil are active and strongly developed, yet the active diffusion of
the means of good more than keeps pace with them. "Greater is He that is in you than he that
is in the world," is still a consoling assurance to many dejected yet hoping believers. Our
dear friend Hannah C. Backhouse is strong in the faith that light increasing, that the fields
are white already for harvest, and that the Lord of the harvest is preparing and sending forth
laborers into his harvest.

The Protestants whom you found at Amiens, and in some other places, would probably remain totally
unknown to ordinary travellers, and perhaps we do not enough consider how little known in a
great nation the salt that preserves it may be. The reports from the agent of the Bible Society
in France seem to me more than usually encouraging. I hope you may be enabled to impart some
spiritual gift or knowledge to many hidden ones who appear to be hungering and thirsting after
righteousness in that vain-glorious nation, and that your faith may be strengthened by meeting
with such.

John and Martha Yeardley arrived at Lyons on the 13th, and, after making some calls, intended
to proceed to Nismes the next day. But not feeling satisfied to leave the city so soon, they
concluded to remain there one day more; and they had cause to be thankful in having taken this
course.

For, says J.Y., we have made the acquaintance of several religious persons. An evangelist and
colporteur named Hermann Lange, a German Swiss, took us to see some Protestant converts, amongst
whom we have found much of the interior life. The Lord gave me a word of exhortation for them,
and helped me to utter it in French. We had a conversation with our friend Lange respecting
the ministry in our Society. Like many other persons he supposed we had no recognized ministers;
we explained the usage of Friends, and showed him our certificates, with which he was pleased.
He admired the good order in use amongst us, and said that he had for a long time desired to
be informed respecting the principles of Friends; that he thought as we did, that an express
call of the Holy Spirit was necessary to the ministry, and that women as well as men ought
to be allowed to preach, I felt intimately united to him in spirit: on parting we gave him
some tracts explanatory of our principles.

Lyons is the head-quarters of popery; the Jesuits here exert a strong influence with the government
against the Protestants. We visited a good man named Elfenbein, who with his wife, is very
useful to the awakened Protestants. He is a colporteur, and introduces the Holy Scriptures
into families to whom he speaks concerning the things of God. He and his wife called upon us
in our hotel. On parting he proposed we should pray together. This gave us the opportunity
of explaining our sentiments regarding prayer; and we proposed remaining a while in silence,
and if it should please the Lord to put words of prayer into our heart, we would express them
with the help of the Holy Spirit. After a time of silence, Elfenbein prayed for us with unction
in a few words: it was a favored time; thanks be to God.

On the 15th they resumed their journey, and passing through Nismes proceeded to Congenies.
They found there Edward and John Pease, who were travelling on a religious errand, and were
about concluding their labors in those parts. The meeting was a source of comfort on both sides.
The next day, which was First-day, was a solemn season: the gospel message was largely delivered
in the little meeting-house, and Christine Majolier interpreted for those who spoke in English.
The Two-months' Meeting was held, and here, as well indeed as on every other occasion, the
English Friends missed the company and help of their valued friend, Louis A. Majolier.

After residing for a while at Congenies, they removed to Nismes, where they preached to the
strangers who attended the usual meetings for worship, distributed religious tracts in the
city and its environs, and instituted a Scripture Reading Meeting for the young. But the object
which most strongly engaged their attention at Nismes was the foundation of a boarding-school
for the daughters of Friends. Louis Majolier, during a great part of his life had conducted
a day-school at Congenies: this school was, of course, not accessible to the children of those
Friends who lived at a distance; and soon after L.M. died even this was given up, and the means
of education in the Society failed altogether. In their project for supplying this deficiency,
John and Martha Yeardley found the parents and other Friends ready to second their efforts;
and at the Two-months' Meeting in the Eleventh Month, it was resolved to establish in the first
place a school for girls only at Nismes, and a committee was appointed to carry this resolution
into effect. A mistress was found without much difficulty in Justine Bénézet, a valuable Friend,
who had had for sixteen years the superintendence of the Orphan Asylum, and whose health had
in some degree given way under the too onerous charge. I often think of these words of the
prophet, and they [have supported me] when my soul has been cast down on account of the school.

During their abode at Nismes they visited the little congregations of Friends which lie to
the westward of that city, and had to record that the presence of their Divine Master went
with them, giving them his word to declare, and inclining the hearts of the hearers to receive it.

A letter from John Rowntree, which reached them towards the end of the year, contains some
observations on the work they had found to do in their journey, with an interesting notice
of what was passing in England.

Scarborough, 11 mo. 14, 1842.

MY DEAR FRIENDS,

.... The plan of your meetings for Scripture instruction seems to me particularly good; you
will, through them, have numerous opportunities for impressing on the minds of your hearers
the inestimable value of the Holy Scriptures, when properly received, and made available by
the enlightening influence of the Holy Spirit, and the worthlessness--nay, the danger--of resting
satisfied with a mere knowledge of their words. The words of our Lord were "spirit and life"
to those who would receive them as such; yet how many who heard them were to be judged by them
at the that day, because they believed not.

We still hear sad accounts of distress in the manufacturing districts of the country. Some
of your friends have probably informed you that at our last Quarterly Meeting much sympathy
was expressed for the destitute artizans, and a liberal subscription was commenced, and was
to be carried forward in all our meetings for their relief: a few days ago it amounted to £800--I
hope it will exceed £1000: but what is that, it may be said, among so many? yet I hope much
good may be done by it, and Friends in other parts of the nation seem to be considering whether
they ought not to make some efforts for similar purposes. At Liverpool we hear that upwards
of £200 has been raised.

You will probably have heard of the very sudden death of Jonathan Backhouse, whilst his wife
was laboring under a religious engagement in the north of our county. His change seemed a translation
from that state of strong but imperfect love which a member of the militant Church might feel
here below, to that fullness of love which his Saviour had purchased for him above.

In the Third Month, 1843, they quitted Nismes, taking their young friend Jules Paradon as their
companion.

The parting, says J.Y., from the dear family at the school was sorrowful. Before taking leave,
we had a religious opportunity with the children, in which all hearts were touched.

They arrived at Montpelier on the 7th. The pious characters to whom they were introduced in
this city were mostly of the upper class--bankers, doctors, lawyers, and professors. They found
that the principles of the Society of Friends were very little known there, but that many were
desirous of being acquainted with them. Being pressed in their spirit to propose a meeting
for worship with such as were disposed to give their company, their new friends readily agreed
to it, and about thirty-five persons sat down with them at their inn. The assembly was, as
they believed, owned by the great Master, who showed himself to be their strength in the time
of weakness, and gave them power to preach the gospel and explain the nature of true worship.
Pastor Lissignol and Dr. Parlier were amongst those to whom they were the most united. The
latter filled the office of mayor when Josiah Forster and Elizabeth Fry were at Montpelier.
He told John and Martha Yeardley that the meeting they had just held had been strengthening
to his faith. That the Lord by his Spirit should move the hearts of his children in a distant
land to visit his heritage in other countries, he regarded as a proof of his love; and he spoke
of the unity of spirit which is felt by those of different nations who love the same Lord,
as a precious mark of discipleship.

The town of Montpélier, say J. and M.Y., is built with taste and elegance, and the situation
is most delightful: there are 4,000 Protestants in a population of 86,000. On Sixth-day (the
10th) we left this place of deep interest, with hearts grateful to the God and Father of all
our sure mercies, in that he had enabled us to bear a testimony to the spirituality of worship
as set forth by our Saviour himself.

After leaving Montpélier, they continue the narrative of their journey as follows:--

We lodged that night at Passanas, a dark Roman Catholic town. Inquiring if there were any Protestants,
the chambermaid replied, "Protestants! what is that?" When we had made her understand, she
said there were a few, but they went to Montagnac to mass.

11th.--We slept at Narbonne, an ancient town of 10,000 inhabitants. No openness to receive
even a tract; the inquiry for a Protestant excited an evident bitterness in the reply.

On the 12th, held our little meeting with our faithful friend Jules, in which ability was granted
to supplicate for the spread of divine light over this benighted district. At 9 o'clock we
set out to make a Sabbath-day's journey: the wind extremely high and always in our face, which
fatigued Nimrod [their horse] as well as ourselves. We dined at Lesengnan: not a Protestant
in the place, yet we met with a circumstance worth recording. Jules, who is ever watchful to
find out who can read, gave a few tracts to some boys in the stable-yard. When I went out,
writes J.Y., to see our horse, several rather bright-looking boys followed me, asking for books.
After ascertaining that they, could read, I supplied them. This was no sooner known, than boys
and girls came in crowds, soon followed by many of their parents. As our visitors increased,
I ran upstairs to fetch my dear M.Y., and we embraced the opportunity to speak to them on the
importance of religion. No doubt curiosity drew many to us, for we were a novel sight there,
and the mingled multitude was not less so to us. Among our auditors was a messenger of Satan
to buffet us. He was a good-looking man, who expressed a seeming approval of what we had done,
saying we made many friends. We told him they were all children of the same Almighty Parent,
and that there was but one true religion, and one heaven. This observation drew off his mask,
and he began to express doubts whether either heaven or hell really existed, and brought forward
the threadbare argument of not believing what he could not see or prove. We asked him if he
had a soul: he said he had. We asked him how be knew that he had a soul, for he could not see
it: he replied, he believed that he had a soul, but that his soul would die with his body.
We then asked him why two and two made four: he said he could not tell, and yet acknowledged
he was bound to believe it. The countenances of many around beamed with joy at seeing this
darkling perplexed; and we did not shrink from exhorting him to repentance and faith in Christ,
who died for him and for all men.

On returning to our room the landlady entered with a fine-looking girl, for whom she begged
a book. This opened our way to speak to her of things connected with salvation. She said,--"We
have not much of religion here." "Why so?" we asked. "Because the people do not like to confess
to the priests." "And what is the use," said we, "of confessing to man?" "Because," she replied
in somewhat trembling accents, "we think it eases our consciences, for the priests are the
appointed ministers to take charge of our souls." "What," we replied, "a man take charge of
immortal souls! God never committed the power to forgive sins to man: Jesus Christ alone can
pardon sins; he died to save us!" I shall never forget the countenance of this dear woman,
which seemed to express her long-shaken confidence in her spiritual guides. We exhorted her
to come to the Saviour, who intercedes for us without the aid of man, and gave her a New Testament,
which she said she would read.

12th.--Went to Maux to sleep. The landlady was communicative: she told us that some travellers
like ourselves some time ago had given her a New Testament, which she had lent about the village,
together with tracts, and that she wished for more. We inquired if there were any persons in
the village who would like to come to us for books. She soon sent us an interesting young woman,
a schoolmistress, to whom on her entrance we presented some tracts. She regarded them with
an air of thoughtfulness which seemed to measure the quantity to be taken by the price she
would have to pay for them. When she found they were to be had gratis, her countenance brightened,
and with it the brightness of her mind showed itself. On speaking with her of the responsibility
of her profession, and the importance of imbuing the minds of children with just principles,
she said, "I am desirous of instructing the children in the religion of the heart. Religion,"
added she, "though a good thing, is badly put in practice in our church; the people do not
like to confess to the priests, and there is a great desire for instruction and to receive books."

They saw again at the Inn at Maux the man who had opposed them at Lessengnan, and found him
much better disposed than he had been the day before. He told them he had been a Romish priest,
but being disgusted with the practices of his church, he had left it and joined the army: he
promised to read the books they gave him.

Our present mode of travelling (with our own horse), they continue, though somewhat slow, affords
opportunities of endeavoring to do a little good, which we should miss in travelling by Diligence
or extra-post. It is curious and instructive to observe the various dispositions of the people
in the dark places through, which we pass: sometimes they are so fanatical as to tear a tract
before our face; others receive them with joy. During a half-hour's rest for our horse at a
village near Castelnaudry, my M.Y. made the acquaintance of an aged woman at the door of her
cottage, who really did us good. On inquiring if she could read, "It is my consolation," said
she, "to read the Scriptures." "And we have great need of consolation," we answered. "Yes,"
said she, "I am a widow of near eighty years, and have had many cares; but I pray to God, and
he grants me the consolation of his Holy Spirit, and if I confide in him he will never forsake me."

At Castelnaudry they left the main road and crossed the mountains to Saverdun, in order to
visit the Orphan Institution in that place.

By not going first to Toulouse, remarks John Yeardley, we saved about thirty miles of travelling;
but it was ill-spared, for one part of the road was so bad that it required a forespan of two
oxen to drag the carriage through the deep mire and over the dangerous ditches. After a little
dinner at a poor place in the mountains, we procured a mule as a reinforcement; for we stuck
so fast in the mud that I never expected we should be able to extricate ourselves. My poor
M.Y. had to walk a great part of the way; I am quite sure extra strength was given us for the
emergency. We lodged at Mazères, where we called on the Protestant minister Bésière, a most
open-hearted Christian. He knew some of our Society, and wherever this is the case it insures
us a welcome. On our telling him the dangers we had encountered on the road, and that we had
escaped unhurt, he sweetly said,--"The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear
Him, and delivereth them."--Psal. xxxiv. 7.

On arriving at Saverdun, on the 17th, we immediately pursued the object of our visit, and proceeded
to the Institution, where we delivered our letters of recommendation, and received a cordial
reception from the director, Pastor Enjalbal. When the little porters opened the door, they
cried one to another, "Voilà des Anglais!" The director seems to be wonderfully fitted for
the post he fills. He was once a captain in the army. After his conversion, his heart was penetrated
with gratitude to his Saviour for bringing him to a knowledge of the truth, and he desired
to devote the remainder of his days in doing good to his fellow-creatures, particularly in
the instruction of youth. The project of the Saverdun school was then in agitation, and a manager
was wanted. The excellent Pastor Chabrand applied to him, knowing him to be the man for the
office if he would only undertake it. When he visited him for this purpose on behalf of the
committee, he found him in his chamber weeping, and, as his confidential friend, he asked him
what was the matter. "Why," said he, "my heart overflows with love to the Saviour, for all
that he has done for me, and I seem to live without doing anything for his cause in return."
"Well," said the pastor, "but the way is now open for you; I am come with a proposal from the
committee for you to accept the government of the Saverdun Institution; but I will not have
an answer from you at present: weigh the matter for a fortnight, and I will come again and
receive your decision." A sense of duty decided him to accept the offer.

The superintendent conducted us to the members of the committee, to whom we had brought a kind
introduction from Pastor Frossard of Nismes. The supporters of this institution, are the most
influential in the town, rich, and withal pious characters. The Mayor, their secretary, is
very active: he with his wife, an excellent woman, and several members of the committee, met
us in the evening at our inn; they appeared to be greatly interested in works of benevolence,
and in everything connected with religion and education.

Toulouse, 3 mo. 20.--We arrived in this great and busy city on Seventh-day evening. Our first
call was on the brothers Courtois, to whom we had letters of introduction from our Christian
friends at Nismes. They received us in a most cordial manner and were very open and communicative.

On First-day morning, after our little meeting, we called on Professor F. Banner; he was rejoiced
to see my M.Y., whom he knew at Congenies twenty years ago. He was then a Roman Catholic; indeed,
in name he is not changed; but he is become very spiritually-minded, and much attached to Friends
and our principles, believing them, as he said, to be the nearest in accordance of any with
the doctrines of the New Testament. He has been, with his wife, several times to our hotel,
and we feel sweet unity with his quiet exercised spirit. His situation here is important, having
a boarding-school for the children of Protestants, with a few Roman Catholics, his piety and
sincerity securing to him the confidence of both parties, which is matter of wonder in this
day of religious conflict. He is one of those characters, more of whom we are desirous of finding;
one who wishes rather to enlighten than to censure the dark prejudices of men.

We spent the evening with our kind friends the Courtois, and attended worship in their house.
F.C. read the parable of the great supper (Luke xiv.), and made some remarks in explication
of it; after which Pastor Chabrand spoke with much feeling on the influence of the Holy Spirit,
the gradual operation of the Spirit in the secret of the soul, and the preciousness of dwelling
in Christ, as the branch in the vine, in order to bear fruit.

Pastor Chabrand told us in conversation that the first time he really saw the state of his
soul and his need of a Saviour, was in the meeting-house at Westminster during half an hour's
silence. After this time of precious silence a minister arose[8] and spoke in so remarkable
a manner to his state, unfolding the history of his life, that he was melted to tears. Ever
since that time he has appreciated the principles of our religious Society, and particularly
our practice of waiting upon God in silence. These remarks opened our way to speak on a subject
which has often given us pain in our intercourse with pious people, viz., the practice of going
suddenly from one religious exercise to another. We expressed our opinion that Christians,
in general, in their worship, would derive more edification from what is spoken, if they were
to dwell under the good feeling which is sometimes raised, before passing so precipitately
to singing, or even to prayer. With this he entirely agreed, and thought it a point of the
utmost importance; he wished it could be put in practice, for their church in general suffered
loss for want of more quiet gathering of spirit before God.

John and Martha Yeardley did not go further towards the west than Toulouse; on quitting that
city they turned northwards to Montauban.

For several days, so they write, before reaching the extent of our journey westward, we travelled
through a fertile country, having the Pyrenean mountains on the south, covered with snow, a
magnificent sight for those who travel to see the beauties of nature, but our hearts are often
too heavy to enjoy them.

Montauban, 3 mo. 23.--Last evening we reached this pretty town, part of which is built on a
high cliff overlooking the river Tarn, and commanding an extensive view over a fertile plain.
Our first call was on Professor Monod; his wife is an Englishwoman; she was pleased to see
her compatriots, and introduced us to Professor de Félice and some other pious individuals.
Professor Monod invited us to spend the evening at their house, along with a number of persons
who join in their family reading, and we did not think it right to refuse the invitation. A
pretty large company assembled in the professor's room at 8 o'clock, among whom were some students
of the college. The eighth chapter of the Epistle to the Romans was read, and some remarks
made by the professor; he then kindly said, if we had any word of exhortation in our hearts,
he hoped we should feel quite at liberty to express it. We felt it right to make some observations
with reference to the fore-part of the chapter, which sets forth that state of Christian experience
in which the mind is prepared to participate in the many precious promises contained in the
middle and latter portions; ability was also given us to express our faith in the one Saviour
and Mediator, and in the influence and guidance of the Holy Spirit, and his office in the sanctification
of the soul. This favored opportunity closed with supplication. We are well satisfied with
our visit to this place; it has removed some prejudices from our minds, and perhaps may have
shown to those with whom we have had intercourse that Friends are sound in the faith. The short
time we spent with Professor de Félice has left a sweet impression on our minds. He mourned
over the want of spiritual life among the Protestants of Montauban, amid, as he said, "much
preaching, and many appeals to conscience."

At Castres, where they stopped on the 26th, they visited the Orphan House, and held intercourse
with the pastors, and with a pious lawyer.

On our journey, says John Yeardley, we had heard of a man near this town who bore the name
of Quaker, and we inquired of the lawyer if he knew whether he was sound in the Christian faith.
The lawyer spoke with respect of the so-called Quaker, but thought that in his opinions he
favored Arianism. "If so," said I, rather hastily, "we will not seek him or recognize." "Why,"
said the advocate, "it is the very reason you should go to see him, and try to do him good."
At this reply my conscience was stung on account of my hasty conclusion; and after reflecting
on the matter, we walked next morning five or six miles into the country in search of the new
Friend. He received us with joy, and we soon satisfied ourselves as to his soundness in the
Christian faith; but he was rather ardent in his expectations of the reign of Christ on the
earth. Twenty years ago he refused to take an oath on a jury; the judge told him he must go
to prison, to which the Friend replied, "I am willing to go to prison, but I cannot swear to
condemn any person to death; if you place me as juryman I shall acquit all the criminals."
The judge, believing his scruples to be sincere, dismissed him without further trouble. This
dear man attached himself to us in such a manner that it was difficult to part from him; he
pressed us to remain some days in his house, but this our duty did not permit.

From Castres they returned through Béziers to Nismes, visiting various little companies of
Protestants by the way, and arrived in the latter city on the 1st of the Fourth Month. They
found that the school had increased in numbers, and the scholars had made good progress.

On entering the school-room, says J.Y., the girls all flocked to us, their black eyes sparkling
with joy, while they clung round us with their little arms to be embraced. The harmony and
peaceful feelings which pervade the family are truly comforting to our hearts.

In taking a retrospect of what they had done up to this time, they write thus to their Friends
in England:--

The manner in which our gracious Lord has condescended to open the way for a portion of labor
in this part of his vineyard, adds a grain to our faith: the service which has hitherto fallen
to our lot on this journey is of that nature towards which we had a view before we left our
native land; and we are bound gratefully to acknowledge, amid many conflicts and discouragements,
that sweet peace is sometimes our portion. But our dear friends in England will readily conceive
that our baptisms are various and deep, during our separation from the bosom of our own little
visible church; and we hope to retain a place in their sympathy and prayers, when they are
favored with access to the throne of mercy. Our love flows freely and unceasingly to all our
dear friends, from whom it is always comforting to hear. Brethren, pray for us, that the word
of the Lord may have free course and be glorified.

On the 18th of the Fourth Month they again left Nismes, and commenced their journey towards
Switzerland, accompanied, as before, by Jules Paradon. On their way to Grenoble, they had opportunities
of spreading many copies of the Scripture Extracts, which they had with them, among the Roman
Catholics; and they had also some interesting conversation with individuals of that profession.

At Tullins, they write, the eagerness to receive books was so great, that a crowd soon assembled
around us, and we found it difficult to satisfy them; again, at the moment of our departure,
they pressed round our carriage, and we could hardly separate ourselves from them.

On the 22nd (to continue their own narrative) we arrived at Grenoble, with a view to spend
First-day there. A letter from one of our acquaintances at Nismes to Pastor Bonifas procured
us a kind reception, and he invited us to spend First-day evening at his house, where a meeting
was to be held. We did not, however, feel quite at liberty to attend, as we found the regular
church-service would be performed. The next day we received another invitation from the Pastor
to a meeting where only the Scriptures would be read. We thought it best to accept it, and
by going a little before the time proposed, we had a very interesting conversation with the
Pastor, his wife, and a young Englishwoman, on our peculiar views. The meeting was an assembly
of various classes, with a preponderance of young persons, and was a very interesting occasion:
many of the young people were deeply affected. In the morning of this day we had been to see
an aged Catholic woman of the Jansenist persuasion: she appeared to have no dependence but
on her Saviour, and, full of faith and love, to have her conversation in heaven; she gave us
a sweet benediction at parting.

They left Grenoble on the 25th, and pursued their way by Chambéry to Geneva, taking care to
dispose of most of their French tracts by the way, lest they should be stopped at the Savoy
custom-house. They arrived in the city of Calvin on the 27th.

Here, as on former occasions, they found much to interest them. Several of the ministers and
professors whom they had known before, seemed to have become more spiritually-minded; and with
the flock of the deceased Pastor Monnié, in particular, "of precious memory," they were united
in near Christian fellowship.

It seems to us, they write, that the feeling is spreading of the necessity of the immediate
guidance of the Holy Spirit; and we believe that this view of the gospel, with that of the
universality of divine love, is much more calculated to win upon unbelievers, and to enlighten
Romanists, than the high Calvinistic doctrines which have so generally prevailed, and which
impede the growth of Christian humility and daily dependence on divine help.

At our little meeting on First-day morning, we had the company of a widow and her daughter.
The former is like a mother to those around her who are seeking spiritual things, and we were
much comforted together. She invited us to tea, and to have a meeting in her house the next
evening: a considerable number were collected, among whom were a pastor, several professors,
and many females. The pastor read a chapter; and when, after a time of silence, the way opened
for communication, it was like casting seed into prepared ground, and the retirement of spirit
before the Lord which we recommended seemed really to be experienced before we separated; it
was a silence to be felt better than expressed.

Amongst other pious persons in this city, they had an introduction to the Countess de Sellon.

She received us, says J.Y., with open heart, saying, "I am fond of the principles of your Society,
believing they have the real substance of religion, stripped of its forms." She asked us many
questions, and we felt sweet unity with her.

On the 3rd of the Fifth Month they went to Lausanne, where they renewed their friendship with
Professor Gaudin, and had interviews with several other seeking persons.

We were, they say, most interested by a pious magistrate, Frossard de Saugy, near relative
to a dear friend of ours at Geneva. He inquired respecting the education of children, of whom
he has many--by what means he could make them sensible of vital religion. We replied that all
we could do was to represent to them the love and mercy of our blessed Redeemer, and recommend
them to cherish the convictions of his Holy Spirit, which are very early bestowed upon us all:
he entirely united in our views.

From Lausanne they went to Yverdun, and the day after to Neufchâtel. Since their last visit
in 1834, some who were very dear to them had been summoned to eternal rest, which cast a shade
of natural sorrow over their entrance into the place: and they were called upon, in addition,
deeply to sympathise with some of those who remained.

The family of Professor Pétavel has sustained a great loss in the death of his eldest son,
accompanied, by circumstances peculiarly striking. This young man was about nineteen years
of age. He had been very serious for some time before his illness, and wished much to be employed
as a missionary. Early instructed by his mother in the importance of seeking divine influence,
his mind was prepared to receive the baptism of the Holy Spirit; and he had a deep conflict
to pass through, which he confided to his mother, and which he seemed to think was the presage
to suffering. In performing some gymnastic exercises he received a fall on the head, which
after some time was followed by a paralytic affection of the whole body, so that he became
entirely helpless, and his speech was taken away. It was only his tender mother who could ascertain
his wants and administer to them, which she did with unceasing assiduity. After about six months
his speech was almost miraculously restored, and he used it in praising the Lord for the remarkable
support and consolation of his Spirit. He said he had been sensible of all that had passed,
and that he had been abundantly confirmed in the belief that true religion consists in hearing
the voice of our blessed Redeemer, and seeking to do his will. After some time the capability
of speaking much again forsook him; yet he lingered some months longer, and when M.Y. beheld
him soon after our arrival, he appeared like a precious lamb purified, and waiting to be gathered
to the everlasting fold. The resignation of his parents was truly edifying: they proposed that
we should both come the next day, and sit quietly beside him for a while. This proved a deeply
impressive time; the presence of the Great Shepherd was evidently with us, and called forth
thanksgiving for the mercies received and the deliverance anticipated. While listening to a
few words addressed to him at parting, he fixed his dying eyes upon us with an expression not
to be forgotten, and before midnight the precious spirit was received into the arms of its
Saviour. As we left for Locle early in the morning, we did not hear of this until our return
the day following.

Their visit to their favorite orphan-institution was, as ever, very interesting. They thus
describe the state in which they found it:--

Our dear German friend M. Zimmerlin, the associate of dear M. A. Calame, still lives: she received
us with overflowing affection. After tea, which we took there, she hastened to show us the
improvements in the premises, which, she said, our kind friends in England had contributed
to procure by their donations through us. The institution appears to be now in excellent order.
In the evening, the children, 138 in number, were collected with the mistresses and family,
and we had a very satisfactory opportunity with them. The same precious influence seems to
prevail which we have noticed heretofore.

They returned to Neufchâtel the next evening, where they heard that the remains of Paul Pétavel
were to be interred the next day.

His father, they add, was desirous that the meeting we intended to hold with our friends should
be held at his house that evening. When M.Y. went to see the family, she found the parents
fall of gratitude and praise. The funeral was attended by the students from the college, and
a large number of others; for the professor is much beloved, and the affecting situation of
his son has been a lesson of instruction to the young people who used to associate with him,
and seems to have had an effect on the whole town. The evening of this day proved to be a memorable
time: a considerable number were collected, among whom were several pastors and a number of
young persons. I seldom, says J.Y., remember to have attended a more solemn occasion. The Saviour's
presence was near, to console and instruct. After my M.Y. and I had relieved our minds in testimony
and supplication, the professor and the other pastors spoke with much feeling; I think it was
evident they were constrained by the Spirit. We parted (to resume the words of their joint
epistle) from the family under a strong conviction of the support and consolation which those
experience who depend in living faith upon their blessed Redeemer.

From Neufchâtel, John and Martha Yeardley went to Berne, where they renewed the bond of friendship
with those to whose spiritual state they had ministered in former years. With these they united
several times in worship and in social religious intercourse. At the close of one of these
meetings, the lady of the house, an active and benevolent character, acknowledged, that she
was sensible of the truth of what they had heard, and believed that in the present day the
Lord was leading many of his devoted children to listen to his voice, that they might be brought
more under the teachings of his Spirit, and from this would flow their consolation. "This (they
observe) is the more remarkable, as, when we were here before, she held views on election and
the finished work of grace, almost to the exclusion of the work of 'regeneration and the renewing
of the Holy Ghost.'"

We find in some here, writes John Yeardley in his Diary, a desire for food of a more spiritual
nature: they really enjoy waiting on the Lord in silence; but the customary activity is strong,
and not easily broken through. I trust the day will come when silence will more prevail in
the assemblies of the people. We left Berne with feelings of peace and of much affection for
many in that place, and thankful to our Heavenly Father, in that he had prepared the hearts
of his people to receive the invitation to feed on that spiritual food which alone can nourish
the soul to eternal life.

They arrived at Basle on the 17th. Since they had visited this city in 1834, Hoffmann, the
director of the institution at Kornthal, had succeeded Blumhardt in the superintendence of
the Mission-house. He received them with his usual kindness, and one evening they supped with
the students, and had a religious meeting with them. They spent another evening with a pious
family, where several missionaries and pastors were present. In speaking of this occasion,
John and Martha Yeardley were led into a reflection which deserves to be pondered by Christians
of every name.

Before separating, they say, the Scriptures were read, and some of the missionaries spoke on
the importance of uniting in desire for a more general outpouring of the Spirit: J.Y. also
spoke much to the same effect. It was, we trust, a profitable season; but the reflection arose
on this occasion, as it has done on some others when among serious persons not of our profession,
that if they would but suffer the degree of divine influence mercifully afforded thoroughly
to baptize the heart with the true baptism, much creaturely activity would be done away, and
the light of the gospel would shine in them and through them in much greater purity.

We paid and received visits, they continue, from some of the Intérieurs whom we had known before,
and had to lament something of a visionary spirit in the midst of right feeling. We recommended
simplicity, and close attention to the Scriptures and to the Shepherd's voice.

One day John Yeardley went into the mountains to see an establishment called the Pilgrim Mission
Institution, where he was interested in meeting three young men from Syria, who had come there
to escape the scenes of war in their own country, and with the desire to be rendered capable
of instructing their countrymen.

They left Basle on the 22nd, and entered Germany. They were, for a time, a good deal embarrassed
with the change of language from French to German, having had little or no occasion to use
the latter tongue during their journey. They stopped at Carlsruhe, where they called, with
an introduction, on the Princess of Würtemberg.

She received us, they say, very kindly, and we had a satisfactory interview with her, and also
with an interesting female who has the charge of her children. After much conversation with
the princess in French, she introduced us to her three lovely children, and asked J.Y. to give
them a word of exhortation. We remained silent awhile, and, under a precious feeling, offered
prayer for the divine blessing on this family and all its branches; after which the word of
sympathy and exhortation flowed freely. At parting, the princess took a cordial leave of us,
and said she received our visit as a blessing from the Lord.

The next day they pursued their way towards Pyrmont. Being weary with travelling, and their
horses also needing rest, they tarried two days at Frankfort. Here they saw their old friend
Von Meyer; and spent much of their time in the company of Dr. Pinkerton. "I was instructed,"
says J.Y., "with seeing the charity and Christian meekness in which he daily lives."

On the 3rd of the Sixth Month they reached Pyrmont, where they remained a few weeks. They attended
on the 2nd of the Seventh Month the Two-months' Meeting, at Minden. Many peasants were present
in the meeting for worship, and on John and Martha Yeardley's return to Pyrmont, some of them
came to the meeting there on First-day, and begged the Friends to go to Vlotho to meet a company
of their brethren. They gave the peasants liberty to call a meeting at that place for Third-day,
the 18th.

On Second-day, as they were setting off, an accident happened to John Yeardley.

He had left the horse's head, writes M.Y., to attend to placing the baggage, when, hearing
another carriage drive rapidly up, our horse set off, and my J.Y., in attempting to stop him
by catching hold of the reins, fell, and was much bruised, but through mercy no limb was broken.
We applied what means were in our power, and I urged our remaining at Pyrmont, and sending
to defer the meeting; but he would go on to Lemgo. His whole frame was much shaken, and we
passed a sleepless night, so that the meeting next day was not a little formidable. It proved
a much longer journey to Vlotho than we had expected; when we arrived we found a large number
assembled. Five of our Friends came from Minden to meet us, and it was a remarkable meeting,
notwithstanding we had gone to it under so much discouragement: we have cause to bless and
adore our Divine Master, who caused his presence to be felt amongst us. August Mundhenck interpreted
for J.Y. and for me. J.R. also suffered his voice to be acceptably heard in testimony, after
which the meeting closed in solemn supplication. We pursued our way that night to Bielefeld
and the next day towards the Rhine.

On their way home they stopped at Düsseldorf. The ten years which had gone by since they had
visited the Orphan Asylum at Düsselthal, near this town, had wrought a great change in the
physical condition of Count Von der Recke. He looked worn and ill, the effect of care and anxiety
for his numerous adopted family; but he evinced a spirit of pious resignation, and had a hearty
welcome ready for his visitors. They returned to England through Belgium, and arrived in London
on the 8th of the Eighth Month.

They did not at once return to their home at Scarborough, but spent a month in Hertford, Oxford
and Buckinghamshire, attending the meetings of Friends in these counties, and visiting that
of Berkhamstead several times.

The tour which John and Martha Yeardley made in and around Buckinghamshire, and which is mentioned
at the conclusion of the last chapter, was undertaken in quest of a new place of abode. In
a letter from Martha Yeardley to her sister, Mary Tylor, written on the 3rd of the Eleventh
Month, she says:--

Thou art aware that we have thought, if way should open of going nearer to you, and of pitching
our tent within the Quarterly Meeting of Buckinghamstead. We offered to purchase a cottage
at Berkhamstead, but for the present that has quite fallen through: we therefore intend to
rest quietly here for the winter, in hopes that in the spring or summer something may offer,
either at B. or in that quarter, to which we feel attracted; yet desiring to commit this and
all that concerns us into the all-directing hand of our great Lord and Master, who has a right
to do with us what seemeth him good.

Not long afterwards they purchased a house at Berkhamstead, called Gossom Lodge, to which they
removed in the Fourth Month, 1844.

Very soon after they had taken possession of their new dwelling, they made a circuit through
the meetings of Buckinghamshire and Northamptonshire, holding a few public meetings by the
way: and the next summer they undertook a more extensive religious visit--viz., to the six
northern counties of England.

In the course of the same year we find them meditating a further removal, into the immediate
vicinity of London. One of the few entries in his Diary which were made by John Yeardley during
this period, speaks of the apprehension of duty under which they contemplated this change:
it was written after their removal.

For some years past I have often thought the time might come when we might see it right to
settle within Stoke Newington Meeting. This feeling now began (1845) to fasten more strongly
on our minds than it had done before, and we thought it right to make an effort to let Gossom
Lodge, and seek a residence at Stamford Hill; and we have reason to believe that in this important
step our prayer has been answered, and that all our deliberations have been guided by that
wisdom which is from above. Very strong is my conviction that our Heavenly Father is not unmindful
of the outward circumstances of those who seek his counsel, and desire to act under the guidance
of his Holy Spirit. We were favored to let our house at Berkhamstead without trouble; the very
first person to whom we made it known took it off our hands: and with equal ease we found another
dwelling at Stamford Hill, which I consider as a proof that our prayer was heard and answered
in this serious step: the signs I had asked were granted.

They removed to Stamford Hill on the 2nd of the Twelfth Month, 1845. As soon as they had settled
in, John Yeardley became seriously indisposed with his old complaint, which ended in the jaundice.
In the course of the spring and summer of 1846 he repaired with M.Y. to Bath, and afterwards
to Harrowgate, to seek a restoration of his health.

The waters of the last-named place proved, he says, very efficacious both to my beloved M.Y.
and myself. My precious dear, he continues, suffered much in her health through the fatigue
of nursing me during the winter. How my soul overflows with gratitude to my Heavenly Father
that he has united me to such a partner, who takes more than a full share in all my sorrows;
and, thanks be unto our God, we have often to rejoice also together in Him!

On their return from Harrowgate they visited many of the meetings in London and the vicinity,--a
service which they had always had in view, in looking towards a residence at Stamford Hill;
and from the Eleventh Month, 1846, to the First Month, 1847, they were occupied in a religious
visit to the families of the members and attenders of Gracechurch-street Monthly Meeting, in
which their service was very acceptable.

The friends appointed to arrange the visits, says J.Y., have done so with willingness and efficiency,
and we have, I believe, the help of their spirits. In passing from house to house, we are made
sensible of our inability to render aid to others unassisted by the Spirit of our Divine Master.
Wherever we have gone we have been received with kindness and Christian cordiality; and in
thus being permitted to mingle our feelings with those who are bound up with us in religious
profession, we feel sweet peace and comfort, and our hearts are filled with thankfulness to
the Lord, that he has enabled us to do that which we believe he put in our hearts.

They returned the minute which had been granted them for this service on the 6th of the First
Month. Many who read this Memoir will remember how the tidings of the death of Joseph John
Gurney, who suddenly expired on the 5th, spread through the Society, and produced wherever
it came an impression of sorrowful but heavenly solemnity. The event is referred to in the
notice of this meeting which is contained in the Diary.

The meeting for worship was particularly solemn. The spirit of our dear departed friend J.J.G.
seemed present with us. The event had impressed our minds with the awful uncertainty of time.
My dear M.Y. ministered to our comfort, and so did dear ----. I was constrained, under a sense
that the Lord had withdrawn many laborers from his vineyard, to lift up a prayer for the remnant
that is left, to crave prosperity for the blessed work of grace in the hearts of all present,
and to ask for more devotedness to the Lord's cause.

The next day they received intelligence of the decease of one of their Scarborough friends,
whose dying words are worthy to be preserved in lasting remembrance.

1 mo. 7.--On returning from meeting we found a letter informing us of the sudden decease of
Isaac Stickney of Scarborough. When the doctor attempted to give him brandy in his sinking
state, he said, Doctor, don't cloud my intellect; if this be dying, I die in the arms of Jesus.
These last words of my beloved and long-known friend are sweetly consoling to my spirit.

In the Second Month of 1848, John Yeardley again prepared to go forth and preach the Gospel
in several countries on the Continent of Europe. He was accompanied by his beloved wife, partly
in the character of a fellow-laborer, constrained by the force of Christian love to the same
field of service, and partly as his companion and helper in countries where she did not otherwise
feel herself called to labor. The course of their anticipated travel is described in the following
extract from the Diary. They were unable, as it proved, to obtain admission into the Russian
Empire; and this part of the mission was accomplished by John Yeardley alone, and at a later
period.

1848. 2 mo. 8.--At our Monthly Meeting at Gracechurch street, I proposed my concern to visit
some parts of South Russia, particularly the German colonies; also some places in the Prussian
and Austrian dominions, parts of Switzerland and France, particularly Ardêche, and a few places
in Belgium, and to revisit parts of Germany. My precious M.Y. also was constrained in gospel
love to tell her friends that she had long thought of a visit to France and Belgium; and, if
health permitted, should think it her religious duty to accompany me to South Russia. We had
the full unity of our friends, who expressed much sympathy and encouragement, to our great
comfort. It is about twenty years since I first thought seriously that I might have to visit
the Crimea, and for thirty years I have had a prospect of some parts of Bohemia. Truly the
vision has been for an appointed time; and if the period be now come, I trust it is the Lord's
time, and that his presence may go with us. Many have been the conflicts and deep the baptisms
through which I have passed, before coming to a willingness to offer to do what I believe to
be the will of my Divine Master. Feeble as are my powers, I desire they may be devoted to his
cause for the remainder of my days; and I do esteem it a great mercy to have arrived at a clear
pointing in this important prospect. May the blessing of preservation rest upon the beloved
partner of my sorrows and my joys, and on myself; and may He whom we desire to serve heal all
our maladies of body and mind!

While their attention was thus turned to foreign lands, a storm was gathering in France which
in the course of this month burst upon Europe with extraordinary violence, and overturned or
endangered half the thrones on the Continent. This convulsed state of the European nations
rendered it needful for them to wait a few months before they commenced their undertaking.
In the Seventh Month, John Yeardley speaks of having obtained the further concurrence of the
church, and of the feelings which the immediate prospect of the journey awakened in his mind.

7 mo. 1.--At the Quarterly Meeting, and also at the Yearly Meeting of Ministers and Elders,
our friends entered very fully into our proposed visit to the Continent. The expression of
sympathy and full unity was abundant; there was a strong evidence of the good presence of the
Lord being near during the deliberations, which proved a strength and comfort to myself and
my beloved partner. The needful certificates are now all in our possession, and are expressed
in terms the most appropriate and encouraging. My mind is deeply humbled at the near approach
of our departure, in the present state of affairs on the continent of Europe: but I feel a
confiding hope in the divine power for protection and safe guidance. May the Lord Almighty
give us strength and resignation to commit our lives into his hand, and to say, Thy will be
done. Amen!

This series of travels was the last in which John and Martha Yeardley were to be engaged as
joint-laborers in their Lord's work. The health of the latter had been for several years seriously
affected; and although she continued to take a deep interest in the spiritual condition of
the countries they had visited before, and was enabled to the end to afford her husband the
assistance of her strong sympathy and of her religious exercise of mind, the fatigue of constant
travelling told more and more upon her enfeebled frame, and she did not long survive the accomplishment
of this journey. John Yeardley, less advanced in years, and possessing a hardy constitution,
had not yet lost the fire of his earlier days. The same spring and impulse was still strong
within him which had animated him in former journeys, and which those who knew him in middle
life will not fail to remember. Some of these will have before them the mental image of his
person and manner--the fixed resolution, the concentrated mind, the ardent and devoted spirit,
which shone through his impressive countenance and his whole figure, when he was engaged in
his Lord's work; and perhaps also they may call to mind the very words of faithful counsel,
or of encouragement, drawn from the well-spring of gospel sympathy, which fell from his lips.

John and Martha Yeardley did not accomplish the extensive mission which now lay before them
at one stroke, but in three stages, returning to England between each. The most prominent object
in the first journey was Belgium; in the second, the Rhine country; in the third, they were
called to sow seeds of Christian doctrine in lands lying beyond the limit of any former travel--viz.,
in Silesia and Bohemia.

This was the first time that the Roman Catholic country of Belgium had called forth the exercise
of their Christian charity. They left London in the Seventh Month, and spent about three weeks
in travelling through the country, resting chiefly at Ghent, Brussels, Charleroi and Spa. They
were accompanied as far as Brussels by Robert and Christine Alsop, and through the whole journey,
by an ingenuous young man whom they had engaged to assist them, named Adolphe Rochedieu. The
religious opening which awaited them at Brussels was very encouraging; few incidents which
arose in the course of their numerous journeys were of a more animating character than the
acquaintance which they made with the pastor Van Maasdyk and some of his flock. We give the
narrative from J.Y.'s Diary and letters.

7 mo. 19.--H. Van Maasdyk paid us a long visit this morning. He was educated in a convent in
Belgium, and becoming a priest, he exercised the functions which devolved upon him with much
credit to himself, and to the satisfaction of his superiors, until the year 1836. He possessed
a Bible in Latin, which he never read. He had the cure of a large parish, in which, down to
the year above mentioned, there was not a single copy of the Scriptures in the Flemish tongue.
About that time the colporteurs introduced the New Testament in Flemish, and some copies of
the Bible, which greatly excited the priests, and in particular the bishop, who said the translation
was mutilated and falsified, and commanded that the members of the Catholic Church who had
received copies, should either burn them themselves, or bring them to the curés for that purpose.
Van Maasdyk's parishioners accordingly brought their Bibles and Testaments (five copies) to
him to be burned. He was zealous in the Romish faith, and had preached violently against the
distributors of the wicked books, as they were called; and he was about to fulfil the command
to burn them, when suddenly he felt something in his heart which restrained him, and he thought,
I will at least first examine the foundation of the bishop's charges. He took up his Latin
Bible, and placing beside it the copy in Flemish, began with the charge of mutilation. He found
it not at all abridged. He then went to the charge of falsification, and found the two copies
to agree with slight variations here and there; in fact, the modern translation proved to have
been made from the Vulgate, which was the one in his possession. He read the denunciation of
our Saviour, "Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites," and it struck him forcibly;
he felt that he must say, "Woe is me, I am one of those who deceive the people." He read again,
"There is one Mediator between God and man;" and here again his conscience smote him: "Woe
is me, I teach the people in their confessions that the saints make intercession." His sorrow
was so deep, that he thought he could die a thousand deaths rather than continue a Romish priest.

Now his persecution began. He was beloved by his flock, who entreated him not to leave them.
After much conflict of mind, he wrote a decided letter to his bishop, who in the end gave him
his dismissal. Still feeling himself called to proclaim the Gospel, he began to assemble the
people in little companies, and to instruct them in the Scriptures. At the entreaty of his
friends he settled at Brussels, where there was a wide field for labor amongst the poorest
of the Roman Catholics, who speak only Flemish. His congregation consisted at first of some
fifteen or twenty persons; but such was the success he met with, that they have been obliged
four or five times in succession to seek a larger building, and his congregation now consists
of 500. He is said to be one of the most powerful preachers in the Flemish language. It is
delightful to be in his company; his heart is filled with gratitude, and his eyes sparkle with
joy, when he is with those who love the Saviour. Nothing is paid him by his congregation; he
has a little property of his own, and sometimes receives a little help from the Adolphus Society.

After a long conversation with him on the spiritual nature of worship, he took us to see some
of his flock, with whom we had family sittings from house to house. This is exactly the class
our hearts longed to visit; thanks be to our Heavenly Father who has thus opened our way.

20th.--The meeting at Pastor Marzial's last evening was much larger than we had expected. Van
Maasdyk came in unexpectedly after the service which had been held at his dwelling, and with
him a part of his flock. Many of the company were those who had renounced Romanism; some of
the young men interested us exceedingly. I had a deal of conversation with them as to their
religious experience. There were several young Germans among them, who are residing in Brussels;
with these I conversed in their own language, which was highly gratifying to them. As Pastor
Marzial speaks English well, I clung to him in the hope of having him for an interpreter; but
he encouraged me to speak as well as I could in French, as the natives like it much better,
and consider it a compliment to their language. This made me very low, it being a company of
well-educated persons, and I asked Van Maasdyk what I should do. I would rather, he replied,
hear ten words from your own mouth, than ten thousand through the mouth of another; we shall
understand you, and what comes from the heart goes to the heart. This settled the question;
I gave myself up to the language, and was helped through. My M.Y. was favored in her communication.
After a short address from M., I concluded the meeting with supplication, also in French. I
do believe the Spirit was poured upon us from on high; many hearts were touched, and tears
flowed freely from many eyes.

The Lord has indeed opened a wide door for us in this place; the dear people follow us from
meeting to meeting, entreating us for an opportunity of the like kind in their own houses;
but we must be watchful to see our own way. However, if the oil is staid, it is not for want
of vessels, for what we have to communicate seems like seed cast into the prepared ground.
May the Lord himself be their teacher, and carry on his own work; for it is most assuredly
his. To those who are spiritually minded, to hear of a society holding spiritual views, is
like marrow to their bones. It is not so much what we are able to say to them, but our being
as living witnesses to the truth which these awakened people feel in their own hearts.

21st.--Attended a meeting of Van Maasdyk's in the poorer district of Brussels; about seventy
to eighty persons present, consisting of converted Romanists, seeking Protestants, and two
awakened Jews. Two of the company were blind men, very pious, who gain their living by selling
matches. Our friend read, explained, and applied the tenth chapter of John, in Flemish; he
also interpreted for me a few words, which I spoke in German.

On their way to Charleroi, after passing through Mons, they traversed the great Belgium iron
and coal country, where the people speak a patois but understand French. Here they made a free
distribution of the religious tracts they had taken with them, and found an able co-adjutor
in their postillion. When he understood what their object was, he allowed few opportunities
to pass by without putting these little messengers into the hands of his fellow-countrymen.

At Charleroi, where they arrived on the 22d, they enjoyed Christian association of the most
interesting kind, especially with Pastors Poinsot and Jaccard, and with Marzial, who followed
them from Brussels. They seem to have found much more of the life of religion among the newly-awakened
in Belgium than they had expected.

We have, says J.Y., good reason to believe that the burden we have so long felt for the inhabitants
in some parts of Belgium was laid upon us by our Divine Master, who is now pleased to make
way for us to throw it off; thanks be to his great name.

From Charleroi they went by Liège to Spa, where they procured a lodging in order to enjoy a
period of needful rest. The tracts they gave away on the road were received with eagerness.
Adolphe handed them out freely right and left, and when any one hesitated to take them, a significant
nod from the postillion never failed to secure a ready reception.

The country from Namur to Liège, writes John Yeardley, and particularly from Liège to Spa,
is beautiful, the road running along the banks of the Meuse, amid wooded rocks. These are the
works of my Heavenly Father, but I sigh after the workmanship of his hands, created after his
own image.

Passing over several incidents of religious intercourse and labor, we select a circumstance
which illustrates the state of the country, and of their own feelings in relation to it.

Under date of Spa, the 2nd of the Eighth Month, John Yeardley says:--

My M.Y. made acquaintance with an interesting young woman in a shop, and gave her some of the
Scripture Extracts. She came to us last evening, and remained some time conversing on the Romish
religion. She had never seen the Bible. When we asked her what was the nature of the mass,
she said she did not understand it, but she attended it because others did. We gave her the
Bible used by ourselves, having no other at our disposal. Her eyes sparkled with joy at the
newly-acquired treasure. Her heart is touched by the Spirit of God, and I humbly hope her eyes
will be enlightened to seek for strength independently of her blind guides. I never saw and
felt more sensibly the awful account the priests will have to give for thus deceiving the people
in the things which belong to their salvation.

On the 3rd they quitted Belgium, and proceeded to Bonn. Here they had the pleasure of meeting
their old friend, Charles Majors, formerly of Strasburg. In a walk which they took with him,
they renewed the sweet intercourse of former days.

8 mo. 5.--We took a walk with Majors and his family to the top of "Mount Calvary," and mounted
a steep hill pitched with sharp stones, on which the poor Romanists go barefooted, repeating
prayers at each station, supposed to be as many as the times when our Lord rested when bearing
his cross from the gate of Jerusalem to Mount Calvary. Having descended, we sat down at the
foot of a cross, and spoke of Him who bore our sins on the cross in his own body. A desire
was felt and expressed that the little company might ever dwell near to Him who died on the cross.

At Mannheim, John Yeardley writes:--

I took a walk in the public gardens, opposite the Hotel de l'Europe, where we lodge. All very
quiet without, and I felt peaceful within myself, reading a chapter and sitting alone. The
Spirit of my Divine Master was near, and I felt assured that there was something in this place
with which we could unite.

They found here a little company, who met together without any regular pastor.

"They gave us", says John Yeardley, "a cordial reception, and their countenances indicated
that they had been with Jesus; and, although scattered as sheep among wolves, they appeared
to belong to the fold of the true Shepherd. After a few family calls, we were conducted to
the house of a pious widow, where the meetings were usually held. As we were in haste, these
Christian people kindly appointed a meeting for worship, to be held the same evening, to receive
our visit, which, through divine mercy, proved like a refreshing brook by the way: the Saviour's
presence being over us, his doctrine dropped like dew on the thirsty ground."[9]

At Strasburg they found Pastor Ehrmann, and several other pious persons whom they had known
in 1833, with whom and with some others they had much conversation on religious subjects, and
were called upon to explain the views held by Friends, particularly on marriage, education,
and the care of the poor.

"Before parting", says John Yeardley, M. Passavant asked for silence, and we had a sweet time
of religious communion, in which consolation and encouragement were offered, and thanks rendered
for the favor of being permitted to meet together, and for the favor of the Divine Presence.

Basle was their next halting-place. A letter written by Martha Yeardley from this city, contains
some notice of the social and religious life by which their tarriance in foreign cities was
characterised, and of her own peculiar position as a gospel minister.

The pious Spittler, she says, has just been with us; he is still full of faith and good works.
M.L., whom we knew as a nice girl at Corfu, is married to a serious merchant of this place;
a sister of C. Majors' wife at Bonn, with her husband, also resides here; and we have fixed
to take tea with them and some of their friends to-morrow evening. My J.Y. is gone with a converted
Jew, Spittler, and one who has been a missionary to Jerusalem, to a lecture this afternoon,
where it is probable he may have an opportunity of speaking to those assembled. As it is to
be all German, I excused myself in order to rest and continue my letter. I have deeply felt
on this journey, as on others, that it is difficult for females to make their way as gospel
ministers; we have always found it tolerated, but I am always sensible of a prejudice against
it. On some occasions my J.Y. has explained our views on this important subject.

15th.--Yesterday we went to see a remarkably interesting institution for missionaries, on the
top of a high mountain, called Chrischona Berg. It was established by Spittler, and, is well
worth the trouble of a little fatigue in getting to it. Twelve young men of the poorer class,
who have offered themselves from a sense of duty to become missionaries, are there taught various
languages, and retained until some field of labor opens for them to which they feel bound.
It is also a working institution; they are taught various trades, in order that when they go
out they may earn their living. After viewing the premises and hearing a lesson in Arabic,
we saw the pupils assembled in the schoolroom. Instead of a hymn in English, which they had
learned, we asked for a little silence, which was felt to be precious. My J.Y. then addressed
them in German, and was much helped. The superintendent, a very interesting man, was in England
for some time; and in consequence of a hurt received on the head in Malta, was sent to the
Retreat at York, where he became acquainted with several Friends, Samuel Tuke in particular.
Under the gentle treatment there he recovered, but he lost his wife and one child at York,
and has left two others in England. I felt much for him, and ventured to offer him a little
consolation, and also to express my interest for the institution, which Spittler desired him
to repeat in German.--(Letter to Mary Tylor, 8 mo. 13.)

Whilst at Basle they visited Pastor Lindel, an old friend of theirs. He related to them that
he had been some time before applied to, to join the Evangelical Alliance. "I told them," he
said, "we have got further than you have. In looking over your rules, I observe there is a
class of Christians in England whom you exclude; and we can receive them. Our bond of union
extends much beyond yours; it embraces, without any distinction, all who love the Lord Jesus
Christ."

From Basle they went to Berne and Neufchâtel. Their visit to these favorite spots was, as at
former times, accompanied by a good measure of the blessing of the gospel of Christ.

18th. Berne.--Many of our former friends having heard of our arrival, came this morning to
our inn; and having called together a few other serious persons, we had a precious meeting.
They have suffered much since our last visit; our hearts were dipped into sympathy for them,
and our tears were mingled together. The Lord's presence was over us, and he caused the word
of consolation, exhortation, and supplication to flow freely. Some precious souls whom we have
known in this place have been taken to their rest since we last saw them. Soon shall we also
be inquired after and not found! Lord, grant that we may be prepared to meet thee at thy coming!

20th. Neufchâtel, First-day.--The meeting was held in a saloon at our hotel, (Des Alpes). The
room was quite crowded; we were surprised to see them continue to come in, by twos and threes
together, at so short a notice. The unhallowed thought arose, Where shall we find bread to
feed this multitude? But, thanks to Him who is the Bread of Life, he dispensed food to the
refreshing of our souls. My M.Y. supplicated for us, and the gospel-word flowed freely: the
meeting closed with thanksgiving by me.

Sad reflections on the political and religious state of the country oppressed their minds while
travelling through Switzerland.

21st.--In all the times we have visited Neufchâtel, I never saw it look more beautiful. But
the place was dull, and a depressed feeling manifested the life of religion to be wanting.
Switzerland has suffered through the recent changes in the governments: infidelity is sorrowfully
increasing. An abundant harvest has been gathered into the barns, and Nature everywhere smiles
on ungrateful man. Woe to the nations when the ungodly bear rule! Persecution still rages in
the Canton de Vaud.

Speaking of the great advantage which an acquaintance with the French and German languages
afforded them, John Yeardley observes:--

How I long that some of our dear young friends in England might give up their minds and a portion
of their time to the acquisition of these languages--and, above all, give up their hearts to
be prepared for the Lord's work! How wide is the field of labor!

From Neufchâtel they proceeded to Geneva, and thence to Grenoble. Here they were received in
the most open-hearted manner by the Protestant minister, Amand; but their feelings were severely
tried by the martial display which the city presented.

26th.--On arriving at Grenoble, we inquired the name of the Protestant minister, and called
on him without loss of time. So soon as he understood the object of our journey, he offered
us his chapel for a meeting; or, if it would be more agreeable to us, he would convoke a meeting
in the schoolroom for to-morrow evening with a number of persons who usually meet there. We
accepted the latter proposal. It is comforting to find such a brother in the gospel; but O
for the morrow! how my heart fails me for fear! Lord, help us, and give us to trust in thee!

27th.--This day is a day of suffering. The soldiers, the drums, the trumpets, with the shouting
and dancing of the people, is enough to sink the heart of the reflecting Christian beyond hope,
had he not a refuge in retirement before the Lord. The whole course of the military system
tends to evil, and the corruption of manners.

The meeting was well attended, and they were thankful in being enabled to mingle in spirit
with a company of sincere and pious Christians. The pastor called on them the next day. He
had succeeded their good friend Bonifas, spoken of in the journey of 1843. Conversing with
him on points on which Christians may differ, he observed, "The Church of Christ is like a
great house built on a rock. There are different apartments for the various classes of Christians;
but they are in the same house, and on the same rock, Christ."

After attending to some other gospel-service at Grenoble, they resumed their journey, held
meetings in Valence and the neighborhood, and crossing the Rhone, entered Ardêche. A meeting
which they held at Privas was an occasion of remarkable stillness and solemnity.

31st.--There was a room filled with serious persons, who immediately settled into silence like
a Friends' meeting: indeed, I wish our meetings in England were always times of as much good
feeling. A chapter, the second of the Acts, was read; after which I supplicated, and my M.Y.
spoke in testimony, as well as myself. M.Y. closed the opportunity in supplication.

They held another meeting at Vals, a village in the Cevennes mountains, near the town of Aubenas.
Lindley Murray Hoag, from America, had had a meeting there not long before. There was no resident
pastor, and the schoolmaster called on John and Martha Yeardley, and informed them that when
no one was present to preach, the congregation were accustomed to read a sermon, the liturgy,
and prayers. They explained to him their objection to written sermons, and he appeared to be
sensible of the inconsistency of them with true gospel ministry, but alleged that the people
would not be satisfied without having the greater part of the time occupied with "service."
As they could not undertake that this should be the case, it was agreed that they should be
informed when the usual engagements were concluded, and that the schoolmaster should give notice
of their intention to hold a religious meeting. In the morning (First-day), unexpectedly, a
young man arrived, who came to see if he could be established in the place as pastor, and the
schoolmaster introduced him to J. and M.Y. He raised no objection to their speaking after the
service, but the sermon which he preached, as they afterwards found, was on the politics of
the day, and when it was concluded, they were still kept waiting during a conference which
the consistory had with him. This delay, and their persuasion that the members of the consistory
were not the men to sympathise with them in their religious exercise, was exceedingly proving
to faith, and they entered the chapel under a pressure of mind almost beyond utterance. After
a pause John Yeardley rose and spoke in French, in which he felt himself to be much helped;
an influence superior to words was spread abroad, lifting up the messengers above the fear
of man. Martha Yeardley followed, inviting the people to come under the teaching of the Holy
Spirit, through faith in Christ Jesus, and especially addressing herself to the mothers.

They remained at Vals a week.

Our lodging, says J.Y., is situated amid scenery the most romantic: high-planted rocks, deep
glens, and purling streams. For reading and writing we spend much time on a spacious open gallery,
protected from the penetrating rays of the sun by a roof; and in the interstices are creepers,
vines, and flowers, delightful and airy.

11th.--This has been a trying week. I have been low in mind and suffered much in body, but,
thanks to a merciful God, I am restored to comparative health, and my beloved one is better.
The peasants who inhabit the mountains can only come to the town on First-days; and as they
live dispersed in places almost inaccessible, we concluded to wait over another First-day to
see some of them at Vals. We had them invited to the schoolroom. A small number only assembled,
but it was a feeling time: I hope a few were instructed, and we were satisfied in having done
what we could.

From Vals John and Martha Yeardley proceeded to Nismes, where they had some interesting service,
both within and beyond the little Society of their fellow-professors. The account given by
J.Y. of the way in which one of their evenings was spent may be transcribed.

15th.--The wife of De Hauteville came to invite us to spend the evening with a few religious
friends, who met at her house for reading the Bible. We had known the pious young woman years
before, and were most easy to accept the invitation. The little company mostly knelt down,
and waited some time in silence; and then a young man offered a short and sweet prayer. The
fourth chapter of the Hebrews was then read, and nearly all present offered a sentiment on
the subject, in meekness and in love, though they did not agree in their interpretation. They
spoke one after the other, until all seemed tired; looking earnestly at me, as wondering what
I would say, not having spoken on the question. At length one of the company asked my opinion.
I felt freedom at once to say I found no difficulty in the matter; I could well understand
the text, but I could not understand their interpretation of it. This remark surprised them,
and raised an air of pleasantness on every countenance. My remarks on the passage closed the
subject, and I think they were accorded with in the general. Stillness was then had, and myself
and dear M.Y. spoke to the company. There was a precious feeling, and we were glad in not having
missed uniting with such spirits in passing an hour or two instructively together.

The service which remained for them to do before returning to England consisted chiefly of
religions labor amongst the Friends of Congenies and the vicinity, and in printing and distributing
a large number of tracts. They found the Society of Friends in a drooping condition as to spiritual
things, and in going round to their little meetings, Martha Yeardley felt it to be her last
visit, and she labored to clear her conscience towards those among whom she had long been conversant,
and for whose eternal welfare she felt deeply concerned.

They returned to London on the 20th of the Tenth Month.

CHAPTER XVII.

COMPLETION OP THE FIFTH CONTINENTAL JOURNEY.

1849-50.

The disorganized state of Germany presented a serious obstacle to John and Martha Yeardley's
resuming their labors on the Continent.

FROM JOHN YEARDLEY TO JOHN KITCHING.

Scarborough, 6 mo. 23, 1849.

We spent two days at Malton with our dear friends Ann and Esther Priestman, in their delightful
new abode on the bank of the river: we were comforted in being at meeting with them on First-day.
On Second-day we came to Scarborough, and soon procured two rooms near our own former residence.
The sea air and exercise are beneficial to the health of my M.Y. and myself. Scarborough is
certainly a most delightful place. The changes in the little society here are great: we miss
many whom we knew and loved when we were resident here. It feels pleasant, though mournful,
once more to mingle our sympathies with the few Friends who are left.

We sometimes sigh under the weight of our burden on account of poor Germany, from which land
the accounts continue unsatisfactory. Mannheim, where we had such a sweet little meeting with
a few pious persons last year, is now being bombarded; also in several other parts of the Rhine
the insurrection is not yet subdued. Our friend Dr. Murray returned on Second-day last from
a tour through part of France, Belgium and the Rhine. He told us he was obliged to return after
having proceeded as far as Mayence, as the steamers were interrupted in their course beyond
that place, south. This is the very line which we had thought to pursue; we cannot tell how
soon an alteration may suddenly take place for the better. We must wait in patience, faith
and hope.

The political horizon soon became clearer, and they resumed their journey on the 2nd of the
Eighth Month. They again passed through Belgium, stopping at several places, and distributing
a large number of religious tracts.

On reaching Elberfeld they were received in a very cordial manner by R. Hockelmann, and they
held a satisfactory meeting in that city with a company of serious persons, originally Roman
Catholics, who had at first followed Ronge, but afterwards separated from him. John Yeardley
says of them:

They are rejected by the Lutheran and Reformed Churches. They have adopted the name of German
Catholics to attract the Romanists to them. There is real life of religion with some of them;
perhaps with still a little obscurity on some important points of doctrine. Light does not
always shine clearly all at once; nor is it always obeyed, so as to be received in its fulness.

Still more interesting was a meeting they had at Mühlheim on the Ruhr, where, it will be remembered,
they found an open door for their ministry on their first continental journey. We give the
narrative in John Yeardley's words:--

8 mo. 17.--On our arrival at Mühlheim we received a visit from the three pastors resident here
and in the neighborhood, along with Pastor Bochart, from Schaffhausen, whom we had known some
years before. One of them, Schultz, immediately asked me if we were not the parties who had
held a meeting in a school-room in this place twenty-four years ago. We entered very fully
into the awakening that had taken place in this neighborhood. The spiritual seed of Tersteegen
has never died out; and they told us of a person, Mühlenbeck, in Sarn, who represents those
who are acquainted with the interior life. The youngest minister said directly, I will fetch
him. In an hour's time he came again, accompanied by a middle-aged man, much like a good old
Friend. He recollected us again, and spoke of our meeting. When we went to see him the next
day in the village, he took us to the house in which he had lived in 1825, and placing me in
the centre of the room said, There stood thou twenty-four years ago, and preached the gospel
in this room; there sat thy dear wife and her friend, with the young man who interpreted for her.

They soon set about making a meeting for us, which is to be held this evening in a large room
in the house of one of the brethren. O, my Saviour, strengthen us for this evening's work,
and forsake us not in the time of need!

18th.--The meeting last evening was got well over. There were two rooms filled with men and
a few women; their minds seemed sweetly centred on the Source of good. A precious silence prevailed,
and I was enabled to address them in German from Acts xi. The nature of silent worship was
also dwelt upon, and freedom from sin, through repentance and faith in Christ. My M.Y. spoke
a few words in German, and I supplicated in the same language. Many hearts are prepared to
receive the doctrine of the influence and guidance of the Holy Spirit: it seemed like marrow
to their bones.

After the meeting some came to our inn, and remained till 10 o'clock. They seemed as if they
could not part from us. We spoke of our ministry, missionary journeys, baptism and the Supper,
in which we seemed to be one in sentiment and heart. Our short tarriance here has excited curiosity
to know who and what we are, and a great desire for books; and a liberal supply has been furnished
them. Those tracts on our religious principles are just the food many are prepared to receive.

In coming this morning from Mühlheim to Elberfeld, my heart was tendered under a sense of the
Lord's mercies. I feel poor and unworthy, but it is impressed on my heart from day to day that
my little remaining strength and my few uncertain remaining days must be devoted to my Great
Master's cause. I am thankful that we have not through discouragement been deterred from entering
on this part of our religious service; for, after all we have passed through on the occasion,
I do believe the present time is seasonable.--

(Diary and Letter)

Before leaving the neighborhood, they had a second meeting at Elberfeld, the holding of which
was endangered by the animosity which prevailed between the different religious parties. After
the place and hour were advertized, it appeared the room would be required for a missionary
meeting. The president of the missionary society was so unfriendly to those who associated
with John and Martha Yeardley, that he not only refused to let them have the room, but refused
also to let notice be given at his meeting of the alteration in time and place which it was
needful to make in theirs. They therefore hastily arranged their meeting for another day, and
the alteration was announced in the daily newspaper. The disappointment proved, in the end,
to be a subject for thankfulness on their parts; for just before the hour of assembly of the
missionary society, an alarming fire broke out, and threw the whole town into commotion; and
the missionary meeting was obliged to disperse as soon as the opening hymn had been sung.

The Friends' meeting, which took place two days afterwards, was held in quiet. John Yeardley
preached on a subject which seems to have engaged his mind ever since he had entered the place,--viz.,
the Fall of Man. While in Elberfeld he printed a tract on this subject; and in a conversation
which he and Martha Yeardley had with a doctor from Charleroi, the doctor told them it was
the very thing which was wanted, being exactly adapted to the condition of the numerous sceptics
in that part, of whom he had once been one.

Their sojourn at Bonn, where they arrived on the 31st of the Eighth Month, was exceedingly
cordial to their religious feelings. The persons with whom they were the most intimately united
were two ladies, Alexandrine Mackeldey and the Countess Stynum; the latter of whom had come
to know the way of salvation during a visit to England. J.Y. describes the opening for service
which they found in this city, in a letter to Josiah Forster:--

This morning, the 1st of the Ninth Month, we received an early visit from a pious young woman,
interior. On her entering the room we felt the Spirit of Jesus was near. As soon as we discovered
the piety of her mind, and her sweet and open disposition, I said to her: Now, tell us who
there are in this place who are really spiritually-minded persons. She said, I will; and instantly
took the pen, and put down about six or seven names, among which was the name of the Countess
Stynum. This lady, said she, I am sure, will be rejoiced to see you; she is too weakly to leave
her house, but I am going to her and will tell her you are here.

Our kind helper soon returned with the expression of a warm desire from the Countess that we
would remain tomorrow and hold a meeting in her saloon in the evening, and invite any of our
acquaintance, and she would give notice to her own friends. There was so evidently a pointing
of the Great Master's finger in this matter, that we were at once constrained to accept the
invitation.

9 mo. 3.--A little before six o'clock last evening the Countess sent for us to take coffee
with her, to have an hour of our company before the meeting. She gave us a hearty reception,
and in such Christian simplicity, that we soon felt at perfect ease in her company. She has
a well-informed and enlightened mind and a strong understanding, and lives, believe, in the
fear of the Lord. She asked many questions about the religious sects in England, as to the
state of real piety, their forms, baptism, &c. Then she came to our own Society. I was in poor
plight for answering questions; however, I explained the spiritual view we took of those subjects,
and asked permission to send her books, in the reception of which she seemed to promise herself
much gratification.

Her commodious and elegant saloon was conveniently seated and pretty well filled. Our manner
of worship was quite new to every one present. We first explained it privately to the countess,
who immediately comprehended our view; there was no wish at all shown to sing or read; a precious
solemnity prevailed, and I was enabled to speak, in German, first on the nature of our silent
worship, then on what [else] rested on my mind. The young woman above-mentioned, A. Mackeldey,
interpreted for my dear M.Y., who, I thought, had the best service; and she did it so well
and so seriously that the right unction seemed to be preserved, and prevailed over us; and
after a supplication in German we parted under a very precious solemnity.

A.M. said afterwards that she had been instructed by what she had heard, and was prepared to
appreciate the value of silence. She observed, I think it a marked favor of Providence that
you should have come at the present perplexing time, to comfort and confirm the faith of some
in this place, and of me in particular.

Speaking of those with whom they had intercourse in this city, John Yeardley says:--

9 mo. 2.--Should it be the will of our Heavenly Father, I hope we may be permitted to see those
precious souls again, and water the seed the Great Husbandman has deposited in their hearts.
I consider such little companies, or individuals, as a little leaven working silently in a
corrupt mass.

I never remember, he writes the next day, to have had more satisfaction in distributing Friends'
books, or having intercourse with pious persons, than thus far on the present journey. The
thinking part of the people, under the tossing of the present moment, are really thirsting
for food more spiritual than they have hitherto received.

At Neuwied they were informed that the Inspirirten whom they saw there twenty-four years before,
had, with the exception of a few families, emigrated to America, and that those whom they visited
at Berlenburg had done the same.

From Neuwied they went to Kreuznach. This was a place to which they had no thought of going
when they left England; indeed, John Yeardley, though passing near it on former journeys, was
not aware of its existence. But when they were at Elberfeld, a swarthy youth from Cape Town,
an inmate of the Mission-house at Barmen, mentioned to them that four of his fellow-countrymen
had been for a time at Kreuznach. On hearing this place named, it occurred to J.Y. that it
would be well for them to take it in their way. They had good reason to believe, before they
left the place, that it was the Lord who had directed their steps thither, and that he had
prepared the hearts of some who dwelt there to receive them. John Yeardley thus relates what
occurred:--

9 mo. 6.--On our sending to a tailor named Ott, he could not come to us by reason of bodily
infirmity; but on paying him a visit I found him a meek and spiritual man. He undertook to
speak with some others of the same way of thinking, to meet us in our hotel at 7 o'clock. On
making it known he found more were desirous of coming than he had expected; a number of young
people asked permission to be present, so that our commodious saloon was pretty well filled.
We read the fourth chapter of John, and then I addressed the company with great freedom; my
M.Y. also spoke in German, and was well understood. Friend Ott said, "You may travel about,
and think your journeyings and labors will do but little good, but they will be blest far beyond
what you may expect. What you have said this evening has gone to my heart. If we had only some
one to whom we could look in holding meetings, we should grow." He was reminded of Him, the
Head of his church, to whom we must all look. Of this he was fully aware, but said, as they
were mostly of the lower class, they had no room, and the pastors did not encourage such meetings.

7th.--This morning our new-made friend accompanied us to three of the villages, to visit several
of his friends. We were pleased with the simplicity and real Christian feeling with which,
they received us. We arranged for a meeting in one of these places for First-day afternoon,
and one with our Kreuznach friends in the evening. My poor soul can only say, Lord, help![10]

8th.--Called again on J.A. Ott, and found him looking very serious. He told me he had read
farther in the books we left with him, and the more he saw, the more conviction was brought
into his mind that what they unfolded was the truth; and that he believed it his duty thoroughly
to weigh the matter, and then speak with a few of those who united with him, to see whether
they could unite in holding a meeting after our manner, but that it was a serious matter, and
they required time to mature it. We were quite of his mind in this respect; at the same time
I believe if they had strength to meet together it would be advantageous.

10th.--Yesterday we met the little company in Horweiler, a room well filled with souls thirsting,
I believe, for spiritual food. "All thy children shall be taught of the Lord," was much dwelt
upon by me. My dear M.Y. was wonderfully helped in German. It was a precious season; the presence
of the Lord was near, uniting our hearts in him.

At 7 o'clock we had the meeting in our room. It was not so lively as the one in the country;
but we can thankfully acknowledge the Great Master was near to help in the needful time. It
was a day of great exercise of body and mind. Our friend Ott accompanied us throughout the
day's labor, and I felt the help of his spirit.

There are several villages around Kreuznach (some of which we have visited), where dwell a
good many spiritually-minded people, who meet together for improvement. We have just received
a sweet visit from Adam Tiegel of Schwabenheim, who is come to have a little talk with us.
He seems to be the first who was awakened in 1805, and was made the means of awakening others,
who now hold meetings in an old monastery.[11]

Passing on to Mannheim, they saw the effects of the revolution in Baden; the fine stone bridge
over the Rhine had been blown up, and not yet replaced. The handful of pious persons with whom
they had met in 1848 had been preserved in the midst of the danger; and their meetings had
been maintained and were increased in numbers. One of these, a widow, told them that, during
the bombardment of the city, a cannon-ball had entered her house, and had passed by her bedside
when her children were in the room, and also that a shell had burst before her door; but on
neither occasion were any of the family hurt.[12]

At Stuttgardt they received the affecting intelligence of the decease of Elizabeth Dudley,
who died of cholera on the 6th of the Ninth Month. The removal of this, one of her earliest
and dearest friends, was a severe stroke to Martha Yeardley, and sensibly affected her bodily
health. In a letter to her sisters, of the 14th of the Ninth Month, she thus gives vent to
her feelings:--

It would not be possible to set forth in words what we have felt from the affecting intelligence
contained in dear R.'s letter. What shall we do but seek ability at the Divine footstool to
bow in humble resignation to this afflictive dispensation? I have had for some time a strong
impression that something of this kind awaited us in our immediate circle; and it was with
a trembling hand that I opened the letters. The tie which bound me to her, and which is now
perhaps for a very short time broken, as far as relates to earthly things, was sealed upon
my heart by a communion of more than forty-eight years, and includes all the various changes
of an eventful life, during which my best feelings were ever cherished and encouraged, both
by example and precept, and by the tenderest affection. But I must not dwell upon this subject,
lest I become unfitted for the duties which our present engagement daily calls for.

To these afflictive tidings was added some discouragement in respect to their proposed journey
to Russia. The little hope that John Yeardley still entertained of being allowed to cross the
Russian frontier was extinguished by the information he received at Stuttgardt. A large number
of the German emigrants who settled in the South Russian colonies were from the neighborhood
of this city, and John Yeardley inquired of some of their ministers, who had served in the
colonies, how far the country was likely to be accessible to a foreigner going thither to preach
the gospel. The information he received was unfavorable, and his endeavors to obtain in this
city the signature of the Russian ambassador to his passport were fruitless.

They had, however, something to console them under these trials.

In all our former travels in Germany, says J.Y., we never experienced such an open door and
spirit of inquiry among the people as in the present journey. It is said that there is scarcely
a village in all Würtemberg where meetings for worship are not held in private houses. The
late revolutionists declare vengeance against these people, the pietists, as they call them,
and that if the war breaks out again, they are to be the first to be cut off. But the present
king gives them their liberty and his protection, and has openly said the pietists have saved
his country.--(Letter of 9 mo. 15.)

Before they left Stuttgardt they were refreshed by a social evening's recreation, one of those
occasions of the familiar intercourse of friendship, under the canopy of divine love, in which
John Yeardley especially delighted.

17th.--Our two young friends, Reuchlin, came to conduct us to their garden among the vine-hills
in the environs of the town. We there met their precious mother, and were joined by a good
many interior ones, who had been invited to meet us. We had a precious little meeting in the
arbor, after which we gave them some account of the religious movement in Belgium, &c., which
pleased them much. We afterwards partook of fruit, biscuits, and wine. I shall reckon this
garden visit among the happy moments of my life, because the presence of the Most High was with us.

On the 18th they went to Kornthal to visit the interesting society in that place. Hoffmann's
widow, who seems to have returned from Basle after the death of her husband, was there, but
so aged and infirm as to be confined to the house. The inmates of the establishment were therefore
convened in some apartments adjoining her chamber, so that she could partake in the spiritual
repast. Their kind friend Reuchlin had prepared the way for them; and when the assembly took
their seats, a solemn silence ensued. John Yeardley and "Brother" Kölne addressed the meeting,
and the former supplicated at the conclusion. On their way back to Stuttgardt, Madame Reuchlin
interrogated them on the doctrine of election, and was rejoiced to hear from them their full
belief in the universality of the grace of God; and as they communicated to one another their
convictions respecting this great truth, their spirits were knit together in the love of the
gospel.

From another pious person in this city, John Yeardley received a word of timely encouragement.
He was anxious about their going into Bohemia, not having, as he thought, a sufficiently clear
guidance to determine his course.

9 mo. 19.--A very acceptable visit from a worthy brother, Weiz. He introduced himself and commenced
speaking on the guidance and consolations of the Holy Spirit, and spoke of his own experience
as though he had known the thoughts of my heart. I have, said he, sometimes earnestly prayed
to the Lord for direction what way to take, and have received no intimation; all has been dark
within; I knew not whether to go right or left, and I have been compelled to go forward. I
have then said, Lord, thou knowest my heart, be pleased to prosper my way; I leave the consequence
to thee.

The conclusion to which they came in regard to Bohemia was, not to attempt the journey at that
time, but to return to England for the winter, and leave the remoter districts of the circuit
which they had in prospect till another year. They therefore returned by Heilbronn to Kreuznach,
where they again found many opportunities of instructing and strengthening such as had made
some progress in the Christian course.

26th.--This evening had about a dozen serious persons to tea. After a long conversation, we
read a chapter, and made some remarks: there was also a time of silence, with supplication.

10 mo. 1. First-day.--This afternoon we attended a meeting at Schwabenheim, a few miles from
here. Notice had been given of our intention to be present, and the company was consequently
larger than usual. They meet in an old convent, the other end of which forms the parish place
of worship. After the singing and a short prayer, the good old A. Tiegel read a chapter in
the New Testament, and was proceeding to make some remarks upon it, when I stopped him, feeling
something on my mind to say to the people. I was led to recommend a patient waiting upon God
for the renewed help of his Spirit, and also to speak on the progress of the Gospel Church
from Isaiah ii. 2, 3, &c. My M.Y. spoke a little in German on the "still small voice," and
the teaching of the Spirit. I did not in this instance feel quite easy to put aside the whole
of their service. After meeting we had coffee with Tiegel, and took back in our carriage a
few of our Kreuznach friends who had walked to the meeting.[13]

4th.--Yesterday evening we had a few friends with us two hours, by appointment, to speak concerning
the rules, &c., of our Society. Many questions were asked, and a pretty detailed account given
by us, as well as we were able. The company were all satisfied, and wished to come again.

6th.--To-day we received a visit from a young English lady. She came to ask how we understood
the passages in Paul's Epistles forbidding women to speak in the church. We soon gave her an
answer, and handled the matter so fully that she was quieted down before she left, little thinking,
as she acknowledged, that so much could be said in defence of the practice among Friends. She
even said she thought it to be a general loss to the Christian Church that women are not permitted
to take part in the ministry. She is a thorough Millenarian, and said the prophecy in Joel,
that the Spirit should be poured out on all flesh, referred to the coming of Christ to reign
on the earth, until I reminded her of what happened on the day of Pentecost, when Peter said
expressly that it was the fulfilment of the prophecy of Joel. Two other ladies were with her.
We parted friendly, and she thanked me for the information I had given her.

7th.--Went to Treisen to a meeting. The little company meet only about eight persons usually,
but we found about thirty assembled in a small room. I thought it one of the most lively meetings
we have had. They wished me to conduct it in our own way. I told them we always commenced our
worship by sitting in silence. They said, We will also sit still. I was favored with strength
to speak to them of the pool of Bethesda, when the angel troubled the water, and on the nature
and advantage of true silence before God. At the close, none seemed to wish to depart, but
entered into serious conversation. I think I never saw more satisfaction exhibited at receiving
books than on this occasion. After coffee, we returned to our lodgings with thankful hearts.

In the evening came three young women, with an elderly lady, the mother of one of them. We
had much conversation, and a precious little meeting, which concluded with solemn supplication--a
nice finish to our sojourn in interesting Kreuznach.

Our friend Ott has accompanied us; he has been to us as eyes in the wilderness.

From Kreuznach they returned to Bonn, stopping at Darmstadt, Wiesbaden and Neuwied. John Yeardley
had allowed some discouragement to enter his mind in regard to the meeting they had had the
previous month at the Countess Stynum's. They found, however, on repeating their visit to this
place, that the occasion in question had been one "of peculiar benefit and encouragement."
They renewed their religious intercourse with the Countess and her friends to their great refreshment
and joy.

12th.--The evening was spent with the Countess, in a quiet and more private interview than
she had with us the last time, owing to so many strangers being present. After tea we had a
long conversation on various religious subjects, particularly on some points relating to the
principles of Friends, arising from what she had read in the books we left with her in our
former visit. We were glad of an opportunity to answer her questions. A few of her private
friends were present, much to our comfort. Before leaving, the forty-sixth Psalm was read,
and we had a comforting time together: the Lord be praised! How sweet in him is the fellowship
of the gospel!

Writing to Josiah Forster from Bonn, John Yeardley makes some general remarks on the religious
state of Germany, as they had found it in their frequent intercourse with individuals of various
character during this journey.

There is no doubt that there is in the German character generally a tendency to the visionary.
We have found a few who hold doctrines on certain points, which it might do harm to publish;
but we find or hear nothing of fanaticism now as formerly. Those who are spiritually-minded
are more chastened, and more sound and scriptural in their views of religious truth; but not
without exception.

A meeting at Mühlheim "not large, but a good time," closed their religious service in this
part of their long and arduous engagement.

They arrived in England on the 20th of the Tenth Month, "with peaceful feelings, and in gratitude
to their Heavenly Father for all his mercies towards his unworthy servants;" but "mourning
the loss of some beloved ones who had died in the Lord in their absence."

After about five months passed in the quiet of home, they made preparation once more for accomplishing
the work to which they had been called. The prospect of distant travel was discouraging, both
on account of Martha Yeardley's weak health and of the state of the Continent; but, writes
John Yeardley, "my mind is peaceful, and I have an abiding conviction that it is right to proceed,
trusting in the Lord for light, strength and safety."

On their way through Belgium, the same feeling was strongly impressed upon his mind.

1850. 4 mo. 7.--In the train, soon after leaving Brussels, my spirit was melted under a feeling
of the Lord's goodness. The object of our journey came weightily before me, and I considered
we had left our home and every object most dear to our natural affections, with the sole view
to serve our Lord and Master, and in the desire to use our feeble powers to draw souls to Him,
that they might partake of spiritual communion with the Beloved of souls, through his grace.
A degree of precious resignation followed; and, whatever may be the result as it regards ourselves,
I believe it is the Lord's will for us thus to go forth, in his name; and should I or the precious
partner of my bosom not be permitted again to see our native land, we shall be happy and at
rest, through the mercy of that Saviour who gave his precious life for us.

On arriving at Berlin their first duty was to apply to the Russian ambassador for his signature
to their passport, with permission to enter the Russian territory at Odessa. Their application
met with an immediate and positive refusal, and the extinction of his hopes in this respect
was to John Yeardley a grievous disappointment.

The next evening, after they had borne their burden all the day, dejected in spirit, and uncertain
which way to turn, their hearts were lightened by a visit from August Beyerhaus, who at once
attached himself to them and offered them help. He could indeed do nothing to facilitate their
entrance into Russia, but he was the means of diverting their minds from the consideration
of what had now become hopeless, and of opening to them, in Berlin, a door of usefulness. Through
his introduction they became acquainted with several devoted Christians, some of them of wide
reputation in the Church. These interviews, which were occasions of heartfelt spiritual communion,
are thus noticed in the Diary:--

4 mo. 22.--Samuel Elsner is an aged warm-hearted Christian, full of faith and good works: he
gave us important information, and will send me some names of pious persons in Silesia.

Pastor Gossner we found green in old age; seventy-five years of a variegated life have taught
him many useful lessons. His refuge now is strong faith in the Saviour. He was at work in his
arm-chair, and was much pleased to see us.

23rd.--Pastor Knack, successor to Gossner, is a man of a lively spirit, to whom we at once
felt united. He very liberally offered us the liberty of speaking to his flock (the Bohemian
congregation in Berlin); and also invited us to visit the little company in the village where
we propose going this evening.

At 3 o'clock we had a sweet interview with Professor Neander, an aged man of a striking figure
and a Jewish countenance, pervaded by heavenly calmness, and illumined by the bright shades
of gospel light. His eyes are become dim through excessive study; his heart is very large,
full of love and hope in Jesus Christ. He seemed pleased to hear some account of the order
of our Society, particularly with regard to the ministry and gospel missions, observing, "With
you, then, there is liberty for all to speak when moved by the Holy Spirit, just as in the
primitive church." This observation led us to several points of our discipline, and he seemed
delighted that a society existed whose practice, in many things, came so near to that of the
primitive church. Before parting the spirit of supplication came over us, under which prayer
was offered, particularly for this aged servant of the Lord. His disinterestedness is great.
The king will sometimes give him money, that he may take relaxation in going to the baths,
&c. But so susceptible is his heart for many who are necessitous, that he will often give to
others all that he has received. The good king has then to repeat his gift, and send him away
almost by force from his labors.

After these choice visits, John Yeardley says:--

24th.--A ray of light and hope has broken in upon our gloomy path,--not into Russia; there
Satan is still permitted to hinder; but in this city.

They spent two days at Rixdorf, the village alluded to above, three miles from Berlin, where
was a small congregation of Bohemian Brethren, who took refuge there in 1737. The women of
the society held religious meetings by themselves twice a week. These meetings had been instituted
many years before by Maria Liestig, to whom John and Martha Yeardley were introduced, and whom
they found to be of a meek and intelligent spirit. She gave them a relation of her extraordinary
conversion, which John Yeardley published in No. 3 of his Series of Tracts, under the title
of the Conversion of Mary Merry. They held a meeting in the village, in which they both had
to "speak closely on the necessity of silence in worship." They had also a small meeting at
their hotel in Berlin, when "the gospel message flowed freely, in speaking of the spiritual
dispensation in which we live, and the progress of light."

On the 29th they left Berlin, and went to the beautiful watering-place of Warmbrunn, in Silesia.
The dwellings of the laborers in Silesia struck them as being of a wretched description. "What
they do." says J.Y., "in a rigorous winter, like the last, I cannot tell; they appeared to
be mostly. Roman Catholics."

They resided a month at Warmbrunn. Some of the simple incidents which befel them there form
the subjects of the following extracts:--

5 mo. 10.--Yesterday was a thorough rainy day; but in the afternoon, to our surprise, came
in eight men together, who had heard of strangers having arrived in Warmbrunn to visit those
who love the Saviour. We explained to them our religious principles; their countenances brightened
when we spoke of the Spirit being poured out upon all--sons and daughters. A sweet feeling
was present with us, and supplication was offered under much solemnity.

11th.--I have had a long conversation with C.W. Grossner, of Breslau, on the Supper, &c. We
opened the Testament, and read the various passages, and I explained our views as well as I
could. I think he is brought under serious thoughtfulness, and half convinced of our principles
with regard to the rites, which he acknowledges are vain without the substance. "Religion with
many, nowadays," he observed, "is like a polished shell without kernel."

13th.--The Countess Schaffgotsch sent her butler with a message from the castle that she would
be glad if we would call on her. She gave us a hearty reception, and thanked us for taking
so much interest about the people. On our presenting her with some books;--But I am a Catholic,
she said. We told her that made no difference to us; we loved all who loved the Lord Jesus.
She spoke very sweetly of the influence of the spirit.

14th.--The Countess paid us a long visit, and spoke much of the Roman Catholic faith. She has
no more faith in the efficacy of the prayers of the saints than I have, and said she had not
prayed to them now for four years; their church only advises, not commands it.

16th.--We went to dine with the Countess Reden and her sister, who live at the castle in Buchwald,
one of the most lovely spots in the most lovely of countries. It is truly a peaceful abode,
whose inmates fear their God, love their neighbor, and greatly esteem their king. We had been
announced to the Countess from Berlin a week before; she and her amiable sister received us
as a brother and sister beloved in the Lord. I never witnessed more intelligence combined with
Christian politeness and real simplicity. The Countess is about seventy-six years of age; she
is the president of the Bible Society, and the spiritual mother of all that is good in the
neighborhood. She nursed the present king on her lap when he was a baby, and her great influence
with him now she always turns to good account in serving benevolence and religion. Both she
and her sister spoke with much affection of dear Elizabeth J. Fry, and her visit with Joseph
John Gurney.

26th.--Our last meeting, on First-day evening, consisted of all men, several of whom had come
from Erdmannsdorf and the colonies of the Tyrolese. They seemed to appreciate the time of silence,
and expressed much satisfaction with having made our acquaintance, and with the meeting.

On the 30th of the Fifth Month, J. and M. Y. quitted Warmbrunn and proceeded towards Bohemia.

We passed, says the former, through Hirschberg. Goldberg, Liegnitz, and to Dresden, Leipzig,
and Halle, making acquaintance in all these places with serious persons, and, I hope, scattering
here and there a little gospel seed; but truly we may say, It is sown in weakness. At Halle
we were much gratified with our visit to Dr. Tholuck, but I think, not less so with his wife,
a most lovely person, delighting to feel and to do good.

On arriving at Dresden, it became evident that Martha Yeardley, who had, suffered much for
some time from an affection of the windpipe, required repose and medical care; and they concluded
to rest awhile at the baths of Töplitz. The illness of his wife, and some degree of bodily
indisposition from which he himself suffered, did not prevent John Yeardley from employing
the time in the diffusion of evangelical truth.

He had heard at Berlin that within a few months several hundred Bibles and Testaments had been
sent into Bohemia, and had been eagerly bought there by awakened persons. He thought that if
a translation could be made into the Bohemian language of some simple religious tracts, much
good might be done by their dissemination; but he supposed that the intolerant laws of the
Austrian Empire, which forbad all freedom of religious action, were still in full force. His
account of his feelings and those of Martha Yeardley under the burden which this supposition
imposed on them, and of the agreeable manner in which permission was unexpectedly granted them
to print and circulate their little messengers of peace, must be given in his own words:--

Our hearts yearned towards the people, but we were afraid to give them tracts, which in other
places had often been the means to conversation and to making acquaintance. This brought us
low in mind; the body was already weak enough before. We thought it would not do to pass through
the country in this state of depression, without trying to remove the cause. I went, therefore,
the next morning to the head of the authorities, took with me one of our little tracts, mostly
Scripture extracts, and asked whether I might be allowed to have the little book, or such as
I then presented to him, printed for circulation. He received me politely, indeed kindly, and
looked pleased with my tract, saying as be turned over its innocent little pages, Ah, nothing
about politics; nothing against the religion of the country: it is very good, it is beautiful.
You are quite at liberty to print and circulate such tracts as these. And when he found that
the object was to do good to all, without cost to the receiver, he said, That is lovely.--(Letter
of 6 mo. 23.)

The Bohemian translations were not made until J. and M. Y. went to Prague, which they did on
the 22nd. Their feelings on entering this city, and the manner in which they were helped in
their work of love, are described in the following diaries:--

6 mo. 23.--Last evening we arrived at Prague. Our heart sunk on approaching this great city.
The twenty-eight statues of saints, &c. on the bridge, with the many lamps devoted to these
images, the crucifixes, &c., all indicated that superstition rages rampant.

We lost no time in sending to the Protestant pastors, one of whom kindly came to us in the
evening, and we conversed till late. I showed him my little Spiritual Bread for Christian Workmen,
with which he was much pleased. I told him I wanted it translated into the Bohemian language.
This afternoon he paid us another visit, and brought his wife to see my M.Y. He produced the
translation of the introduction to the little tract. We are to have 2000 printed. Most of the
poor people read only the Bohemian language. I have promised to place 1000 at the disposal
of the pastor; he is delighted with the opportunity of having anything of the kind printed
in Prague.

Much, adds J.Y. in a letter, as I have suffered in the long prospect of a visit to this place,
I feel a peculiar satisfaction that it has been deferred until there is liberty to print and
circulate gospel tracts. Small as such a privilege may appear, until very recently such distribution
of books would have been visited with a very inconvenient imprisonment on the individual transgressing
the law.--(6 mo. 23.)

24th.--I gave Pastor Bennisch for perusal, and choice for translation, William. Allen's Thoughts
on the Importance of Religion, and our tracts on the Fall, Regeneration and Redemption, True
Faith, and the Voice of Conscience. There is a great movement among the Catholics; they have
need to be instructed in the first principles of Christianity, and it is very important that
the doctrine of faith in Christ should be combined with that of the practical working of the
Spirit as set forth in many of our tracts. On this account, I am glad they are likely to take
precedence of others in their circulation; for I do not hear that any tracts decidedly religious
have yet been printed in Prague.

During their stay in the city, and after they left, there were printed 12,000 copies of the
tracts in Bohemian, and 1000 in German.

At Töplitz, which they revisited before leaving Bohemia, occurred the interesting incident
of the Bohemian soldier, which is related under that title in John Yeardley's series of tracts,
No. 4.

When they finally quitted the country, they took the nearest road to Kreuznach. On the way,
they distributed tracts in the villages, at one of which, where they were detained for want
of horses, the inhabitants flocked so eagerly to them to receive these little messengers, that
they had difficulty in satisfying them. Notwithstanding this circumstance, the reflection with
which John Yeardley concludes his account of their travels in Bohemia was, "It will require
a power more than human to make the dry bones of Bohemia live."

They spent three weeks at Kreuznach, confirming the faith of the brethren, and printing German
translations of several tracts. In passing through Neuwied, they intended only to spend the
night there; but hearing that much inquiry after the way of salvation had recently manifested
itself in the villages around, they decided, after the horses had been ordered for departure,
to remain and visit one of these villages. A meeting was called, and so many attended that
the room could not contain them all. It was a good season; De Freis, the friend who had made
them acquainted with the religious condition of the place, accompanied them as guide, and was
a true helper in the work. He had been twenty years missionary in Greenland and South Africa.

They returned home, both of them worn with travelling, and Martha Yeardley exhausted with disease,
which was making sure progress in her debilitated frame; but they were supported by the peaceful
consciousness of having accomplished all the service to which they had been called to labor
in common.

Martha Yeardley continued very unwell during the autumn, and by the end of the year her disorder
assumed a more alarming form. It soon became evident that her dedicated life must at no distant
period be brought to a close; and after many weeks of suffering, with confinement to the chamber
during the latter part of the time, she expired, full of peace and hope in Christ Jesus, in
the Fifth Month, 1851. The following memorandum, touchingly descriptive of her illness and
death, was penned by her bereaved husband, probably soon after her decease.

After our return from the Continental journey my beloved M.Y. became more poorly. A severe
influenza cold weakened her much; and a second attack she seemed never to recover. It was succeeded
by a regular rheumatic fever. From the commencement of 1851, with but little exception, she
was confined to the house, and for a little while to her bed, until the 8th of the Fifth Month,
when her sweet and purified spirit ascended to her Saviour, and commenced an eternity of bliss.

Thus was I deprived of my only earthly treasure. She was the Lord's precious loan, granted
me for nearly a quarter of a century, for which I can never be sufficiently [thankful]. She
was his own, bought with the blood of his dear Son, and he saw meet to take her from me. Ours
was a blessed union, and a happy life, spent, I hope, unitedly in the service of our Lord.
In all our imperfections we did desire, above all earthly things, to do the work of our Divine
Master, and to labor for the promotion of his kingdom, and for the spread of his knowledge
in the earth.

I was her only nurse till within ten days of her happy close. Long had a covenant been made
between us, in the time of health, that whichever of us was taken ill the first, should be
nursed by the surviving one, if permitted and strength afforded; which it mercifully was to
me, and a happy season was the sick-room. We seemed to live together in heaven; never, I think,
could two mortals be more favored with the answer to prayer.

In the early part of her illness she spoke much of the satisfaction she had felt in our three
last journeys to the Continent, and that she was thankful in having been enabled to go through
the whole of the service which her Lord had put into her heart. I have since thought it was
a mercy that I did not proceed into South Russia, as, in all probability, my precious one would
have fallen on the journey, and never seen her peaceful home again.

During the whole of the illness her delight was to speak of the joy of heaven. My sins of omission
and of commission, she said, are all passed by; my iniquities are all forgiven, and washed
away in the blood of the Lamb; and now I rejoice in God my Saviour. His love and mercy to me
are beyond all bounds; and so strong is my faith in my precious Saviour, that I have scarcely
known, the whole of the illness, what it has been to be troubled with an evil thought.

When she expressed a desire to go to Heaven, I reminded her of my loneliness when she should
be taken from me. The Lord will care for thee, was her constant reply. He has promised me over
and over again that he will care for thee; the answer to my prayer has always been, I will
care for him.

Nearly the last conversation she had with any of her beloved relatives was with ----, to whom
she observed: My affection for thee is strong; I believe thou lovest thy Saviour: I desire
that thou mayest keep nothing back that the Lord may require of thee, but serve him with greater
devotedness of heart; and if ever thou art called to bear public testimony to his truth, be
sure to preach the whole gospel, faith in Christ, and the necessity of the practical work of
the Holy Spirit to produce holiness of life. To [another of her near relatives] she observed:
Thou hast often been sweetly visited by the love of thy Saviour, and be assured thou wilt never
find any joy equal to that of yielding thy heart in prompt obedience to the will of thy Lord.
Her last words to her affectionate sisters were, The Lord bless you all: Farewell.

Towards the end of the year John Yeardley again communed with himself in the language of sorrow,
but also of humble resignation. At the same time he speaks of an engagement of gospel labor
from which he had then recently returned, the first which he had undertaken alone since his
marriage with Martha Savory. Having seen his faithful and well-tried comrade fall by his side,
he had now to learn again to gird himself and enter, as in the days of his youth, alone into
the combat.

1851. 12 mo. 13.--How often have I prayed that the portion of her Lord's spirit which animated
her devoted life may rest on me! Her heart, her tongue, and her pen were all employed in promoting
the cause of her Divine Master, whom she delighted to serve. All my earthly joy was now gone
to heaven, and I felt alone in the world; but my spirit seemed never to be separated from her:
she seemed to be hovering over me constantly. My heart does sorrow for the loss of her sweet
society; to me she was a wise and sound counsellor, and a never-failing consoler in all my
troubles. I do mourn, but I dare not murmur. I hope my merciful Heavenly Father will keep me
in the hour of temptation, and be with me in the last trying hour, and prepare me to join this
precious one and all by whom she is surrounded with her God and Saviour in the centre of bliss.

I had often mentioned to my precious one a prospect of religious service in Ireland, and once
since our return home from our last Continental journey; when she replied, "I have no concern
to go to Ireland--thou must do that when I am taken from thee." It cost me many tears and prayers
before I could be resigned to request a certificate, alone, for the first time since our union;
but, looking seriously at the subject, the language was constantly in my heart, The hour cometh
when no man can work. Life is uncertain, and I can only expect sustaining grace by faithfully
following my Lord: and, blessed be his name, he has kept and sustained me in every trial.

This day would have been the twenty-fifth anniversary of our union. How near it has brought
my precious one to me in spirit, and how strong are my prayers that my Lord may preserve me
faithful to the end of the race! I can say my desire is, when he cometh, he may not find me idle.

The visit which John Yeardley made in Ireland was general, comprehending all, or nearly all,
the meetings of Friends in the island, and including a few public meetings in Leinster province.
He has left very few notes of this journey, except an itinerary of the places at which he stopped,
but makes frequent mention of the hospitality and kindness of Friends. From Cork he writes:--

I am in the midst of a family visit to the Friends of Cork, and shall have, I expect, from
ninety to a hundred sittings. I am lodged a few miles in the country, in a mansion surrounded
by beautiful grounds, and all the beloved inmates most affectionate and helpful to me. They
send me to my work in or about the city mostly to breakfast; and I return, in the evening,
and enjoy the refreshing breezes and the quiet: but then I have the family visits to resume
next morning. In riding to town to-day, I tried to raise my heart to God; when the language
sweetly occurred to me, Bread shall be given thee, thy water shall be sure.--(Letter of 8 mo.
5, 1851.)

A few days after his return from Ireland, he left home again to visit the Isle of Man, in company
with Barnard Dickenson. On his return, he was refreshed by a visit to Dover, where he spent
three weeks in the company of his kind and sympathising friend Margaret Pope.

The interval which elapsed before the recommencement of his missionary labors was to be short.
In the First Month of 1852, we find him again under exercise of mind for foreign travel; having,
this time, to direct his course towards the interesting community of religious persons in Norway,
whose principles and practices are the same as those of Friends. The Diary which follows is
the utterance of his heart in the prospect of this work.

1852. 1 mo. 24.--This has been a precious morning unto my soul; such a season of spiritual
comfort I have not been permitted to experience for a long time. I think it is vouchsafed me
through the efficacy of earnest prayer, which has brought me to resignation to my Lord's will.
I have now no more doubt as to Norway. Light springs on my path. How powerful is the love of
God when it fills the heart; there is not a place on the Lord's earth where I think I could
not go, if favored with the strength, and blessed with the presence of my God and Saviour.

Unto thee, Lord, do I commit all my concerns, spiritual and temporal; do thou give to thy unworthy
servant an answer of peace. Keep me faithful and patient to the end of the race. Lord, grant
that my ministry, which thou hast entrusted to me, may proceed purely and entirely from thy
love, and be exercised in thy fear and under the unction of thy Holy Spirit. Lord, keep my
heart fixed, on the last, last awful moment that I may have to breathe; grant that it may be
breathed out in the bosom of my adorable Saviour; all sting of death taken away, my robes washed
in his blood, and my spirit purified and ready to be united to those beloved ones who are already
enjoying a blissful eternity with thee!

The next entry in the Diary was made at Christiania, where he thus speaks of the unity and
concurrence which his friends had testified with his mission.

Since I last wrote any notes in this journal, I have passed through many conflicts respecting
my long-thought-of visit to Norway. When the subject was proposed to my friends in London,
it met with the warm encouragement and sympathy of all, in every stage, to the receiving the
full unity of the Yearly Meeting of Ministers and Elders.

I am accompanied by my dear friend, Peter Bedford, whose sweet and constantly cheerful spirits
comfort and cheer me. We have already had many proofs that our being joined together in this
laborious journey is of the Lord. Our friend William Robinson proves an efficient helper.

John Yeardley and his companions left London on the 9th of the Sixth Month, and went first
to Homburg, as he wished to place a young person in whom he was interested, at the school kept
by the sisters Müller at Friedrichsdorf, near that town. Whilst at Homburg he was suddenly
attacked with a severe and painful disorder, and was reduced to great extremity. After about
two weeks of suffering, he was restored to convalescence, when he thus breaks forth:--

How can I sufficiently record the mercy of my God in sustaining me in a time of great extremity,
even when there was but little prospect of my ever seeing Norway. He blessed me with resignation
and sustaining grace, so that I could rest as on the Saviour's bosom, for life or death. I
knew my Lord and Master could do without my poor unworthy service in Norway; but if he had
work for me to do in that land he would raise me up in his own time; and so he has done.

As soon as he had sufficiently recovered his strength, they set forth for Kiel; but not before
John Yeardley had had a religious meeting with the pupils in the school.

I was, he says, enabled to address them in German; a precious feeling was over us, and many
spirits were tendered before the Lord. F. Müller expressed her great satisfaction with this
parting visit.

They reached Kiel by easy stages in seven days. From this place he writes:--

My very soul pants to be in Norway; had I wings I could fly there. And yet how few are the
days since the cloud between me and that land was so dense that I could not see through it.
But even then, O, what sweet peace and resignation were the clothing of my humbled spirit.
There seemed nothing in my way to heaven, whether from Germany or Norway. I do believe my eye
and heart are fixed on my precious Saviour, and he has been my stay in the hour of sore conflict
of body, but none of mind. All seemed peace and bliss when I glanced at the happy home above,
already inhabited by my precious one and many more who were dear to us on earth.--(Letter of
7 mo. 2, 1852.)

On the 5th of the Seventh Month they proceeded to Christiania, John Yeardley employing the
time on the voyage in adding to the little stock of the Norse language which he had acquired
at home in anticipation of the journey. On landing at Christiania they were refreshed by seeing
Asbjön Kloster of Stavanger, who had come to meet them, and for two weeks had been waiting
their arrival.

At a meeting which they held in this city, both John Yeardley and Peter Bedford were engaged
to minister to the spiritual wants of the people; A. Kloster interpreting for them. The company
were so much interested, that many of them went afterwards to the hotel to converse and ask
for tracts.

The Friends left Christiania on the 10th, and sailed through the rock-bound sea to Christiansand,
the passage between the cliffs being in some places so narrow that there was no more room than
was sufficient for the vessel to pass.

In this town they enjoyed much freedom in the gospel, and held two public meetings. Regarding
the first of these, John Yeardley says:--

7 mo. 13.--Our large room at the hotel was filled half an hour before the time appointed, and
it was with difficulty that we made our way to our seats. A little unsettlement prevailed from
the desire to enter, which subsided after a few explanatory words. A time of quiet ensued,
and there was much openness to receive the gospel message. Before the close of the meeting
I became exceedingly thoughtful about appointing another for the next evening; and on intimating
the same to P.B., I found he was under the same impression. It was, therefore, announced to
the assembly before they separated, and appeared much to satisfy them. The dear people were
unwilling to part from us without a shake by the hand.--(Diary and Letter.)

At one of the meetings which they held in this town, whilst John Yeardley was preaching, he
became sensible that his interpreter had himself received something to communicate to the congregation;
he therefore stopped speaking, and the interpreter, faithful to his duty, took up the word
until he had cleared his mind from its burden. After he had finished, John Yeardley resumed
his discourse.

On the 14th the Friends drove out a few miles into the country to "pay some family visits."
They had two double carrioles, or gigs: the road over which they passed was "steep and rugged
beyond description." In returning, the carriole in which Peter Bedford rode struck against
a rock at a sharp corner and was overset. Peter Bedford's right shoulder was dislocated, and
he otherwise bruised. In conveying him into Christiansand he suffered much from the shaking
of the car; but the joint was quickly set by a skilful surgeon; and, in the evening, the love
he felt for the people was so strong, that he could not remain absent from the meeting which
had been appointed for that time, and he even took part in its vocal exercise.

It was, writes John Yeardley, a favored time. Peter Bedford gave some account of the difference
between our religious Society and other professing Christians. It opened the way for me to
speak on the peculiar doctrines and practices of Friends at more length than I ever remember
to have done before; after which the glad tidings of the gospel flowed freely, and the people
were invited to come to Christ and partake of the full blessedness of his teaching by the Holy
Spirit. A precious solemnity prevailed, and the serious attention of the company was great.
A good many soldiers, and some officers, were present; but the expression of our dissent from
all wars and fightings had not displeased them, for they shook hands with US most kindly.--(Diary
and Letter.)

Besides being interested for the people of Christiansand in general, John Yeardley and Peter
Bedford were especially attracted towards several young men who had embraced the doctrines
of Friends, without any knowledge of the Society, and without any instruction from man. With
these persons they met more than once. John Yeardley writes:--

"We had a precious meeting with them. They were invited to embrace the doctrines of the gospel
in living faith, and to give full room to the workings of the Spirit of Jesus, whose voice
they had already heard inviting them to come under his teaching. We encouraged them to meet
for divine worship."

On the 16th the Friends proceeded thirty-five miles to Mandal, travelling post. From thence,
John Yeardley and Asbjön Kloster went by the road to Stavanger, leaving Peter Bedford and William
Robinson to follow by steam-vessel, the former being unable to bear the motion of the Norwegian
carriages.

John Yeardley, in one of his letters, in a lively manner describes the mode of travelling:--

The usual vehicle in this country is the single-seated carriole, made exactly to fit the figure
of the traveller, and no spare room except a little well under his feet. The seat is placed
on two crossbars fixed to the long shafts, the spring of which is intended to mitigate the
jolting of the road. We chose double cars on iron springs, which we found not too easy: they
were like old-fashioned, worn-out, and very shabby English gigs. The posting is under government
regulation, and is performed by sure-footed ponies kept by the farmers, who are obliged to
supply them under any circumstances after having had notice. A forbud is sent on with printed
notices filled up with the time at which the traveller expects to arrive at each station. This
avant-courier is often a little boy, and sometimes, to save the expense of a horse, for which
the traveller has paid, he is sent on foot. On one occasion we met a young girl, with bare
feat, who had walked sixteen miles with notice papers, as our forbud. Now away goes the traveller,
accompanied by a man, or more often a boy, or it may be a little girl, to bring back the pony.
They run by the side, but down hills always seat themselves behind on the luggage as best they
can. The traveller drives himself, and the little horses are so brisk that, whatever the state
of the road may be, they run down the mountains as fast as they can clatter, and so sure-footed
that they are scarcely ever known to fall; but a person of weak nerves has no business to be
the rider.

From Christiansand to Stavanger is about 200 miles, which took us four days. Our road lay occasionally
over a wild and stony heath by the sea, sometimes along the river-banks, lakes, or fiords,
but more often among and upon the high and rugged rocks; the passing of some of which is, I
think, more difficult than crossing the Alps between Switzerland and Italy.--(letter of 8 mo. 3.)

On the way towards Stavanger John Yeardley had a public meeting at Flekkefiord, the first time
such a meeting had been held in the place. It was "a good time," and so well attended that
the town-hall could not contain nearly all who came together.

Immediately on arriving at Stavanger, the Friends commenced visiting the families of the Friends
in the town and on the adjacent islands; and on the next First-day held a meeting about eleven
miles up one of the fiords, to which so many flocked from all directions that they were obliged
to assemble in the open air:--

It was, says J.Y., a lovely sight to see so many clean-dressed peasants, in their mountain
costume, with a seriousness in their countenances which indicated that a motive better than
curiosity had brought them together. I was reminded and had to speak of the miracle of our
blessed Saviour, when he commanded the multitudes to sit down on the grass, and fed them with
five barley loaves and two fishes.

Since this time, he says in a letter, we hold our public meetings in the open air, and the
stillness that prevails is quite remarkable. Last evening we had a solemn opportunity in a
plantation belonging to one of our Friends by the seaside. The hushing of the trees, the gentle
rolling of the waves behind a strong sea-wall, and the warbling of the little birds, all seemed
to aid our worship; but these would have been nothing had not the presence of our Divine Master
been near. After the meeting, as many as could be seated partook of tea, &c. The seriousness,
simplicity, kindness and hospitality, are great. All flock together as if they were one family.--(7
mo. 28.)

After this the Friends availed themselves of the efficient assistance of Endré Dahl, and of
the active peasants who form a large portion of the Society of Friends there, in a more extensive
excursion which they made up one of the fiords which in so remarkable a manner intersect the
country. John Yeardley gives a graphic description of this voyage.

Our efficient helper prepared his own boat; our ship's company are all volunteers. We set out
with seven, but were joined by others on the way, so that this morning we started with ten
men. They are a most cheerful and playful company, all interested in the object of our voyage.
It does my heart good to see with what delight they bring planks for seats, and run in all
directions to give notice of our meetings. Each seems to strive which shall show us the most
attention, even anticipating our wants. They enjoy our family readings and worship; their conduct
is instructive; and the solemnity on these occasions precious.

On Fifth-day we landed on an island (Findon) sprinkled with trees, and with a park-like bank
sloping to the water. This was refreshing to the eye after having seen nothing but bare rook
for many days. The meeting was at our friend's house who owned the pretty little farm. It was
sweet and refreshing; and afterwards a number of these people accompanied us to the boat, and
did not quit their standing till we were out of sight. My heart yearned towards them in gospel
love.

Next morning we started before 6 o'clock, and when we had rowed fourteen English miles put
into a little village, Ielsom. We were all strangers in the place, and Friends and their principles
unknown. Our friend Endré Dahl had a pointing that we should try for a meeting, which was appointed
for 2 o'clock. After waiting till 3, only one or two persons came, and we had a consultation
whether we should proceed on our voyage, but concluded it safer to go in and sit down. When
we were seated (I may say in faith), first one and then another came in, till the large room
and passage were filled, and a number were outside under the windows. It was quite a remarkable
meeting, and we were well satisfied in having exercised patience as well as a little faith.
We were informed that it was the custom of the place not to attend any appointed meeting till
an hour after the time named.

We arrived at Sand about 9 o'clock, after hard rowing, the tide being against us. Sand is beautifully
placed at an opening in the rocks, at the mouth of a river where salmon-fishing is good. As
soon as we landed, our ship's company made the object of our journey known, when a serious-looking
man immediately offered to go about six miles to inform a person who he knew would like to
attend. Two individuals in this place have for some time been in the practice of holding a
silent meeting for worship; they had no knowledge of Friends, nor Friends of them.

Fixing the meeting for the First-day evening, John Yeardley and his companions pursued their
way the next morning, which was Seventh-day, to Sävde, situated at the head of the fiord, and
consequently the extreme point of their voyage. Before starting they went a little way up the
Sand river, to view one of the grand Norwegian waterfalls, and also to see how the salmon-fishery
is conducted.

A hamper of about six feet in diameter, and the same height, made by the fisherman of the roughest
wicker-work, is placed in a side stream of the rock, in the bed of the river. The anxiety of
the salmon to mount up the stream is so great, that he forces himself through a hole into the
hamper, as the easiest way of advancing upwards, from which position he cannot again escape.
In this manner, in a favorable season, sixty-three salmon have been caught in one night in
a single basket. It is a source of wealth to the little town of Sand.

At Sävde they held a meeting on First-day morning.

We reached the head of the fiord, writes John Yeardley by 12 o'clock, and found but poor accommodation.
We three had one room with three beds; Endré Dahl with his willing-hearted and contented men
lodged in a barn on straw. There was time enough to arrange for a meeting in the morning, and
we applied for a room at the inn; but a little knot of illiberal Haugeans [followers of Hauge],
or Saints, as they call themselves, persuaded our landlord not to let us meet in his house.
But we obtained better accommodation under the rocks in a house containing two rooms connected
by a passage, and, seating ourselves in the centre, could be well heard by those outside the
door. We had a good meeting.

Returning to Sand, he continues:--

The wind being against us, the men had to work very hard at the oar to bring us in time for
the meeting appointed for 6 o'clock at Sand. Some of the Friends from near Sävde accompanied
us in their small boat; and some from Sand had gone many miles to attend the meeting at Sävde,
and returned to the one at Sand. Their zeal is great and their love fervent. This was a very
crowded meeting, and proved a satisfactory time. We found here a few of the Saints, but of
a more liberal cast; they expressed great grief that their brethren at the head of the fiord
had refused the peaceable messengers of the gospel from a far country a house in which to meet.
This unwelcome news had reached them long before our arrival.

At a later date, John Yeardley relates an occurrence which happened at Sand, worthy of note
in itself, and which must have been not a little confirmatory of his faith. It came to his
knowledge after his return to Stavanger.

When we were at Sand, one of the Friends who joins in holding the silent meeting invited several
of our ship's company to his house; but the man's wife was so exasperated that she drove them
away, saying she would not have such folks under her roof. She had confounded the principles
of Friends with those of some wild persons who had gone about the country spreading ranterism,
and giving the people the idea that they were of our Society. It was in vain to reason with
her, and the husband, for the sake of peace, mildly consented to let the Friends withdraw.
However, she attended our public meeting, where the gospel doctrine of our Society was pretty
fully illustrated; and I felt constrained also to preach on the unreasonableness of persecution
for conscience' sake, either by the government, private persons, or families. Conviction seized
her heart, and she became broken to pieces. After the meeting she sought up the Friends whom
she had driven from her house, and told them she could not be happy unless they would give
her a proof of forgiveness by taking up their abode in her family so long as they might remain
in the place. Several of them accepted the invitation, which gave them an opportunity for free
and satisfactory conversation.

How merciful are the Lord's doings with us in sending help in the needful time! I was so spent
when we arrived at Sand, having had nothing from breakfast till 5 o'clock, that I said in my
heart, It is impossible to get through the meeting this evening.

The Friends had some religions service at several other places about Stavanger, and on the
6th of the Eighth Month proceeded northward to Bergen, accompanied by Endré Dahl and his wife
and Asbjön Kloster. Their chief service in this city was a public meeting, at which there was
a large attendance. John Yeardley says of the meeting:--

There was a great mixture of feeling. Many pious, thirsty souls, I believe, were present, and
I hope such were encouraged and comforted; but the strong impression on my mind was to call
the sinner to repentance.

On their way back to Stavanger, among the passengers were two Finland convicts, for whose peculiar
case they felt much sympathy.

On board our steamer were two prisoners on the deck, in heavy irons. They were natives of Finland,
and had been sentenced to some months' confinement in irons at Christiania, for having, it
is said, committed some outrage on the priest in disturbing the national worship. There has
for some time past been a great awakening about religion in Finland and other parts of the
North, and the most active among this number, in their zeal not tempered with right knowledge,
have transgressed the law. I heartily pitied the two poor creatures, inasmuch as I feared justice
had not been done them; the prejudices of the priests and judges are so great in all matters
connected with any separation from the national worship. They were chained together, and were
clothed in their native reindeer skins, and on their ironed feet were snow-sandals turned up
with a long toe. We offered them money, but they turned from it; and when acceptance of it
was pressed, their change of countenance indicated anger. They understood nothing but the Finnish
language.

On their return to Stavanger, Peter Bedford felt that his share in the work was accomplished,
and that it was not his part to accompany John Yeardley in the service which remained for the
latter to do in Norway. After being present at another public meeting in Stavanger, and in
a parting interview with the Friends of the town, he went with William Robinson direct to Kiel.
John Yeardley had two or three more meetings in the neighborhood of Stavanger, where the desire
of the people to attend was more remarkable than ever.

On the 11th of the Eighth Month he bade farewell to this interesting place, and, accompanied
by Endré Dahl, again crossed the mountains to Christiansand, holding meetings at several places
on the sea-coast, where none had ever been held before. His notices of some of these meetings
are well worth transcription.

14th--Journeyed about fourteen miles up the fiord, into the mountains, to Aamut in Qvindesdalen.
This meeting was the most solemn of any we have had. Many said, in tears, at the conclusion,
This is a doctrine that we cannot resist; it goes to our heart, and meets the conviction of
our own experience. What shall we do?--our heart burns within us!

15th.--We returned to Foedde to a meeting this afternoon, which was, I think, the largest we
have had. There were two large rooms filled, and a number seated on planks on the grass; not
less than about 700 persons were present. Many followed us to the lodging, to converse on subjects
that lay near their hearts, and to ask for tracts and books. Among them was a man who goes
about to exhort the people to amendment of life. He appeared to be a simple, sincere character,
and was much satisfied with our meeting, saying, as if from the bottom of his heart, How remarkably,
how wonderfully, have the truths of the gospel been opened and explained to us this day!

16th.--At Fahrsund we had some difficulty to procure a place for a meeting. It is a brandy-drinking
place. No one would bear anything of our business. A rich old lady has a large room which she
lets for all kinds of purposes except for anything connected with religion; she gave an abrupt
refusal to the application. E. Dahl and I went to the English vice-consul, showed him my certificate,
and explained to him the object of my visit to Fahrsund. He kindly accompanied us to the old
lady, and told her that we belonged to a respectable religious society in England and were
not the persons she supposed, come to preach wild doctrines. She consented to let us occupy
the entrance-hall, which was good and spacious. The consul then went with me to call on the
sheriff; he said he and his lady would attend the meeting, which they did, with a good many
of the respectable inhabitants, but the common people would not come near us. One man to whom
a notice was offered, when he saw the word worship, immediately tore it to pieces. The lady
to whom the room belonged sat near me all the meeting, and looked serious before the close;
and she took leave of us with very different feeling from that in which she first met us. The
sheriff came to me after the meeting and offered his hand, saying, I thank you for the present
occasion--I shall never forget it.

Before the meeting at Foedde John Yeardley had an opportunity of refreshing his mind with the
charms of Norwegian nature.

My friend E. Dahl and I went out for a quiet walk. It was a lovely Sabbath morning; the sky
cloudless, and the sun shining brightly on the water as it rapidly foamed down the cliffs.
After gathering a few cranberries we seated ourselves on a shady rock to meditate. All was
silent around--nothing heard but the shepherd-boy playing his horn; the sound coming from the
distant mountains into the wooded valley where we sat, first shrill, then softening into a
simple irregular note. My friend asked me what I thought the instrument was. It is made, said
he, of a goat's horn, and is blown to keep the fox from taking the young lambs, and as a means
of communication with other shepherds when widely separated on the mountains; the sound of
this horn also keeps the sheep from straying.

They arrived at Christiansand on the 19th; and Endré Dahl, finding a vessel sailing for Stavanger,
engaged a passage in it for himself. After parting with him, John Yeardley writes:--

E. Dahl and I have been closely united in the gospel bond; he has been a truly affectionate
sympathizer and efficient helper. I am thus, he continues, left alone in a strange land; but
I do feel a peaceful and a thankful heart to my Heavenly Father that he has in mercy blessed
me with light, strength, and faith to go through this service in Norway. Imperfectly has it
been performed, I know; but I have done what I could, and a song of thanksgiving is due to my Lord.

John Yeardley returned by Germany to England. At Obernkirchen, near Minden, where some persons
had not long before been convinced of Friends' principles, he had a meeting, in which he was
joined by a number of Friends from Minden. A few years before, Thomas Arnett, from America,
desired to hold a meeting for worship in this place, but was prevented by the police. The object
was now accomplished by engaging a room without the limits of the state of Bückeburg, in which
the town is situated, and within the Hessian frontier, which includes, in fact, a part of Obernkirchen.

A public meeting for worship in that place (says John Yeardley, in a letter written after his
return home,) was such a new thing, that on our arrival we found a press of persons whom the
room could by no means contain. The landlord readily granted us his barn, which was commodious,
and we threw open the large doors into the yard, which was seated; besides which, the people
stood in numbers. We had a solemn meeting. There is a little company who hold a meeting at
Obernkirchen; several of these have suffered on account of their religions scruples in refusing
baptism to their children, &c. These we invited after meeting to take coffee with us, about
thirty persons, all serious. It was a delightful occasion. After the coffee we had a sweet
parting meeting with this truly interesting company. We had been given to expect that, although
we had taken the precaution to pitch our tent without the limits of the intolerant place, the
police would be present, and would most probably disperse our assembly. But no such thing;--all
was quiet.

I was thankful (he adds in his Diary) that the meeting was held in quiet, for there is a bitter
feeling of persecution in the neighborhood. I was previously much cast down, but "thanks be
unto God who always causeth us to triumph in Christ."

CHAPTER XIX

HIS JOURNEY TO SOUTH RUSSIA.

1853.

The call which John Yeardley had received to visit the German colonies in South Russia, and
which had lain for a long time dormant, now revived. A friend who had watched with regret his
unsuccessful attempts on former journeys to enter that jealous country, and who augured from
the political changes which had taken place that permission might probably now be obtained,
brought the subject again under his notice. The admonition was timely and effectual. After
carefully pondering the matter--with, we doubt not, as on former occasions, a childlike dependence
on his Omniscient Guide for direction,--he came to the conclusion that it was his duty once
more to address himself to this undertaking: and when it was accomplished, and he had returned
in safety and peace to England, he alluded more than once to the manner in which the concern
had been revived, saying he had been, before he was thus aroused, like the prophet asleep.

He re-opened the prospect of this service before his Monthly Meeting, on the 3rd of the Fifth
Month, 1853. In a letter written the same day, he says:--

I am just returned from our Monthly Meeting in London, where I mentioned to my friends my concern
to visit the German colonies in the South of Russia, which, thou wilt probably recollect, was
included in my certificate for religious service on the Continent of Europe, five years ago.
I received the expression of much sympathy and unity from my friends, and the certificate was
ordered, including on my return, if permitted, any service that may present in Constantinople,
the island of Malta, and some places in the South of France. Weak as I am, I cast myself once
more into the hand of our Lord and Blessed Protector, in holy confidence that he will do all
things well.

On receiving a passport from the Secretary of State, with the requisite counter-signature of
the Russian Ambassador, he wrote to John Kitching, the 25th of the Fourth Month:--

I want thee to know that, through the kind and efficient aid of our mutually dear friend Samuel
Gurney, I have at length been enabled to procure a Russian passport, and also a letter of recommendation
to one of the first houses in Petersburg. Thou knowest, my dear friend, for a long time this
matter has been heavy on my mind. It is a great comfort to have the ground cleared in this respect.

John Yeardley left London at the end of the Sixth Month, and went to Hull to take the steam-packet
direct to Petersburg. In the narrative which follows, we have interwoven with the Diary extracts
from his letters to his sisters; and we have been allowed the use of William Rasche's Journal,
in relating and describing many circumstances of which J.Y. himself made no record.

Petersburg. 7 mo. 10.--On the 30th of the Sixth Month I left my peaceful home at Stamford Hill
for my Russian journey. At our kind friend Isabel Casson's at Hull I met my young companion
William Rasche. We were affectionately cared for by dear I. C. and her daughter, and she and
several other friends saw us on board the steamer. It is a fine ship, well ventilated, with
good sleeping accommodation and provisions: the captain is a kind, religious man.

On First-day evening, the captain invited us to the ship's service--an invitation which we
gladly embraced. When he had finished, I addressed the company, much to my own comfort: great
seriousness prevailed. After I had relieved my mind, the captain closed with a few sweet and
feeling words. When the occasion was over, he came to me and expressed his thankfulness that
I had been enabled to strengthen his hands by throwing in a word of exhortation. He said that
sometimes, when he had felt indisposed and unprepared for his religious duty, he had given
himself to a quiet dependence on the Lord, and had been mercifully helped, to the benefit of
his own soul, in endeavoring to do his duty to others.

There is great uncertainty (he says in a letter written during the voyage), how we shall find
things at Petersburg, and whether they will permit us to proceed to the South; but this I must
leave. Whatever way it may please Providence to turn the matter, as it regards myself I believe
I shall be relieved from Russia in having made this last attempt.

They arrived at Petersburg on the 9th of the Seventh Month, after a safe and agreeable passage
of seven days.

Before we reached Cronstadt, to quote from J.Y.'s Diary, we encountered a strong gale, so that
the officers from the guardship, who came to see that all was in order, had hard work to get
on board. There were eighteen Russian sailors with oars, yet they could not draw the boat,
and our steamer was obliged to throw ropes and haul her in. The sight of Cronstadt was formidable;
for more than two miles in and near the harbor there was a line of ships of war. At Cronstadt
we had to be put on board a smaller steamer, which caused us much detention. At the custom-house
all passed off well; they were more civil and less strict in their examination than in England.
The Russian sailors look very unbright; they are not active in managing a boat. They not unfrequently
received a few strokes from the fist of the helmsman, or a rope's-end, either of which they
took with that unconcerned composure which showed they were accustomed to it. We are located
at the hotel of H. Spink, an intelligent Yorkshireman; his wife is very kind and attentive.

13th.--Spent this day at Peterhoff, with W.C. Gillibrand and wife, with two of their friends.
It is the first opportunity we have had for serious conversation in this place, and I hope
it was to mutual comfort. They took us a drive after dinner to see several of the Emperor's
pavilions, mostly surrounded by beautiful pieces of water. There was an intelligent man present,
who had spent some time in India, ---- Watson; he now has charge of the British school in Petersburg.
We find the Scripture Lessons are no more in use in the school; nor is the New Testament in
the Russian language allowed to be circulated in the country. The Bible Society is just alive,
but can hardly breathe; other institutions languish for want of support; party spirit has crept
in to their great injury. The law is still very stringent in not allowing a member of one religious
body to join another; but the different sects are allowed their own worship and schools.

20th.--Left Petersburg by the train at 11 o'clock yesterday, and arrived at Moscow about nine
this morning. The road, with but little exception, is flat and uninteresting. The forests are
immense, mostly of firs and birch, which being thickly set grow small. Many of the stations
are superb. The line of railway did not conduct us near any towns or villages that I could
observe, but by some of the poorest scattered huts I ever saw in any country.

At Moscow, John Yeardley and his companion called on Pastor Dietrich, a German, residing a
little out of the city:--

He is, says J.Y., in one of his letters, a worthy pastor of the Old Lutheran Church, a sweet
venerable-looking man with long white locks. He was at dinner with his family when we called,
but he would not allow us to go away, but took us up to the attic story to his study; primitive
indeed, but clean, and to him I have no doubt a room of prayer, as well as of study. He seemed
delighted to find our mission was to the Colonies. "But what will you do about the language?"
said he; "they speak nothing but German." I wish the dear girls could have seen his countenance
lighted up with cheerful brightness, when he found we could speak German: "Ah, I need not trouble
you any longer with my poor English!" He knows a great many of the pastors, and will give us
letters of introduction to the little flocks in the Colonies and the Crimea.

As might be expected, it was with a sinking heart that John Yeardley contemplated the formidable
journey before him; but, as in other times of extremity, he cast himself wholly upon the Lord,
and found his soul to be sustained, and his courage renewed to undergo the hardships that awaited
him.

7 mo. 21.--Rose this morning much cast down in mind at the thought of our long journey, and
a want of a knowledge of the Russian language. Poured my complaint in fervency of soul before
the Lord, and was a little comforted in believing that he would still care for us and preserve
us in this strange and long wilderness travel. It is his own cause in which I am engaged, and
I am willing to endure any bodily fatigue if I may only be strengthened to do the works to
which my blessed Master has called me. The Divine Finger seems pointing to the place where
the people I am seeking are to be found.

I went after breakfast to the dear Pastor Dietrich. His heart was filled with love for me,
and I felt the sweetness of his spirit to encourage me; preciously was the divine unction spread
over us. He gave me some information of the religious state of things here. There seems to
be about 800 of the evangelical party in Moscow, including the French and English Protestants,
and the different classes of Lutherans; a small number out of 350,000 souls which the city
contains; the rest are Roman Catholics and of the Greek church, mostly the latter. God knows
the hearts of all.

22nd [?]. "In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never be ashamed: deliver me in thy righteousness.
Bow down thine ear to me; deliver me speedily: be thou my strong rock, for a house of defence
to save me."--(Ps. xxxi. 1, 2.) "Hear the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry; give ear unto
my prayer, that goeth not out of feigned lips."--(Ps. xvii. 1.) The above sweet words were
brought home to my heart with power this morning after a time of conflict in spirit. Lord,
grant me faith and patience to the end of the race, when I shall have to say, Now, Lord, lettest
thou thy servant depart in peace. Amen.

Providing themselves with food, and with small change of money for the journey--two things
indispensable to Russian travel--John Yeardley and William Rasche left Moscow on the 23rd,
by malle-poste for Orel. They stopped some hours at Toula: the land south of this town they
found to be well-cultivated, and the harvest had begun; it consisted mostly of rye. The journey
to Orel occupied forty-four hours. Among their fellow-travellers was a resident of Moscow,
Charles Uyttenhoven, who spoke English, German, French and Russ, and who, like themselves,
was going to Kharkov. He was a pleasant and gentlemanly companion, and was of great service
to them in acting as spokesman on the road.

From Orel there was no malle-poste in which they could continue their journey, and they were
obliged to hire a tarantas, or posting-carriage, a very inferior kind of conveyance. In consequence,
besides, of the fair at Pultowa, every vehicle of this description had been taken up except
one, which was of course the worst in the town. When they had loaded their luggage and spread
hay to lie upon, they started; but before they were out of sight of the stable the crazy vehicle
broke down, and they were detained till nearly eleven o'clock at night, whilst it was being
repaired. In this new kind of conveyance they experienced great discomfort: they could neither
sit nor lie with ease, as the space was much too small for three passengers. The country they
passed, through was very rich; it may be called the granary of Russia; they found the harvest
more advanced the farther they penetrated into the south.

At Koursk they hired a fresh tarantas. The roads were inferior to those along which they had
travelled, but the country was more picturesque, still fertile, and producing much wheat; the
weather was very hot, as it had been all the way from Petersburg. On the 27th, at midnight,
they reached Kharkov.

We have travelled, says John Yeardley, four days and nights in succession from Moscow to this
place. The conveyances of the country are exceedingly bad; they almost shook our bones asunder.

The next day they visited Pastor Landesen, to whom they had a letter of introduction from Pastor
Dietrich. They spent the day with the family of this intelligent and pious man. Tea was spread
in the garden, to which meal a number of Christian friends were invited.

The pastor's wife, says John Yeardley, is a sweet-spirited woman. After much social converse
our garden-visit closed with a religious occasion, in which I expressed a few words of exhortation.
I think we were sensible of the nearness of the presence of our Divine Master, which proved
a brook by the dreary way. We met at the pastor's Louse Superintendent Huber, a worthy and
experienced Christian, kind and fatherly to us.

The next day William Rasche went with Pastor Landesen to hire a carriage. No such thing, however,
was to be had, and they would have been happy if they could have engaged as good a vehicle
as their old crazy tarantas; for the only alternative was a bauer-wagen (peasant's cart), if
we except the very expensive extra-post carriage, with which they would have been obliged to
take a conductor. It happened that a young man, an apothecary's assistant, wanted to go to
Iekaterinoslav; his ancestors were German, and he could speak both that language and Russ.
By Landesen's recommendation they took him as their companion, and he was very useful to them
on the road. The bauer-wagen was much more uncomfortable than the tarantas had been; travelling
in it was like gallopping over a bad road in an English farmer's waggon; and, as the vehicle
had no cover, the travellers were exposed without protection to the full power of the sun.
The floor of the waggon was spread with mattresses, and, thus furnished, it served them for
parlor, kitchen, and lodging-room.

They travelled in this way through the night, but the next day were obliged to wait at a small
dirty station for horses till the afternoon; and in the evening John Yeardley became so ill,
from hard travelling and exposure to the heat, that they were compelled to alight at another
little station near Novomoskovsk, and make the best of the poor accommodation they could procure.
The next morning, somewhat refreshed by rest, they went forwards to Iekaterinoslav, where they
happily met with a clean inn, the Hotel Suisse, kept by a German.

The same day they went in a boat up the river Samava, to Rybalsk, seven miles, to see a German
schoolmaster named Schreitel, to whom they had a letter of introduction. This is a colony of
twenty-five families, founded in 1788: the schoolmaster, who was also the minister, received
them in a brotherly manner. It was here that their mission properly commenced. From this place
a succession of German colonies extend in a south-easterly direction to the Sea of Azov. The
villages are all built on the same pattern, being formed of one straight street of neat houses
on both sides, adorned with trees in front and gardens behind. The German colonists consist
principally of Mennonites and Lutherans. The former are the most numerous and thriving; they
were invited to settle there by Catherine the Great, in order to improve the state of agriculture;
but their example has not had the desired influence on the surrounding districts. Although
his German neighbor is in an infinitely better condition than himself, the Russian peasant
will not imitate the husbandry which is practised so successfully before his eyes.

At Rybalsk, John Yeardley had a Scripture reading and a religious opportunity with a few serious
persons who came to the house; and the next evening he held a meeting for worship with the
colonists.

On the 3rd, they left for Neuhoffnung. They travelled in a covered carriage, which, though
without springs, was a great improvement on their last vehicle. They came the first day as
for as Konski, where they passed the night, sleeping in the carriage, the air being very mild
the night through. In the afternoon they arrived at another Mennonite colony, Schönweise, where
they had a short interview with Pastor Obermanz and a few of his flock. These people produce
a small quantity of silk. The travellers were now on the Steppes; they found them very thinly
peopled, so that all the country out of sight of the villages appeared like a vast desert.
On the 4th they passed through three colonies--Grünthal, Priship, and Petershagen. The settlers
here are from all parts of Germany, mostly from Prussia and Würtemberg. Next came Halbstadt,
the seat of the Bishop, and Alexanderwohl, where the Friends passed the night. They were surrounded
by a large number of settlements on all sides.

These were the places where, according to his previous impressions and apprehension of duty,
John Yeardley was to have entered on that work of gospel-labor to which he had so long looked
forward. But, instead of finding, as on former occasions of a similar kind, his heart enlarged
and his mouth opened to preach the word, he seems now to have felt himself straitened in spirit,
and to have been obliged to pass in silence from colony to colony, a wonder perhaps to others,
a cause of humiliation to himself. Never before, in all his many journeyings, had such a trial
befallen him; and it may be supposed that, coming so soon after the copious and unrestrained
exercise of his gift which he had experienced in Norway, it would press upon him with peculiar
force. The people to whom he was now come, seem, it is true, to have been in a different state
from the simple-hearted Norwegians, who thirsted for the "pure milk of the word;" and their
comparative indifference to spiritual things may have been a main cause of the silence which
he felt to be imposed upon him. With the reserve natural to him, he has left but little clue
to the motives and feelings under which he acted. Great must have been the relief when, as
happened on several occasions, his bonds were loosened, and the command was renewed to speak
in the name of his only-loved and gracious Lord.

On the 5th they passed through several colonies to Gnadenfeld, where, says J.Y.:--

We halted to breakfast with one of the colonists, and found him a sweet-spirited man, and his
family pious. His name is David Voote. He appreciated the object of our mission, and spoke
of the awakening that had taken place of late; telling us that devotional meetings had been
established, but that some of their preachers did not approve of them. We sent for one of the
ministers, with whom I was pleased; he invited us to hold a meeting with them on a future occasion
if we could make it accord with our journey, which I hope will be accomplished.

We obtained some information respecting the Molokans, and were directed to Nicolai Schmidt
in Steinbach, who often has communication with them. We found him a delightful man, quite of
the right sort to be useful to us. As the Molokans speak nothing but Russ, we shall be in want
of an interpreter in our visit to them. I told him he must go with us; and he immediately said.
I will go with pleasure; whenever you return here and incline to go, I will be at home and
will accompany you. This seemed an opening of Providence, and removes one great difficulty
in the way of a visit to this people, for whom I have felt more than towards any others in
South Russia. N. Schmidt is a wealthy farmer, and sets himself at liberty to promote the extension
of the Saviour's kingdom; I felt at once at home with him as a friend and brother.

From Steinbach, which lay a few versts out of the direct road, they proceeded to Stuttgardt,
and the next day, the 6th, to Neuhoffnung, where they were accommodated at a farmer's, and
had the comfort of a good clean apartment and kind attention to their wants. This is the principal
seat of the German Lutheran colonists.

On Seventh-day, says John Yeardley, we attended the school-children's meeting, about 200 present.
After Pastor Wüst had questioned on or explained the Scriptures, I had an opportunity to address
them. On First-day afternoon we held an appointed meeting [with Wüst's congregation], which
was not large, on account of many [with the Pastor himself] having to attend an interment in
the neighborhood. After the meeting we received a salutation from some of the young sisterhood,
who came to us and surprised us with their sweet melodious voices, singing in concert a hymn
well suited to our present situation. After they had ended I went out and had a long conversation
with them.

In all my journeyings, he touchingly continues, I was never so much cast down as in this scene
of labor; I never before so much missed the help and consolation of my precious one as I now
do; but, blessed be a gracious God, she is safe with Him, and free from a toil which she could
never have endured. I marvel, and praise his great name for upholding me thus far; I am astonished
at the way in which I am enabled to bear the hardships of this journey, and am preserved in
health. It is the doing of my gracious Saviour, and I thank him out of a grateful heart. Should
I never be permitted to return to my earthly home, I have a joyful hope he will take me to
a glorious rest with himself and with those I have so tenderly loved on earth.

On the 8th, William Rasche went to Berdjansk, on the Sea of Azov, to change some English money,
and to inquire if there were any religious people there. He met with some interesting persons,
who seemed at first to be prejudiced against the Friends but after some conversation became
very loving, and desired he would bring J.Y. to see them the next day. Accordingly, on the
9th, J.Y. and W.R. went to Berdjansk, accompanied by Pastor Wüst and several others. The meeting
which they went to attend was held in a private house. It commenced in the usual manner, with
singing; after which, ---- Buller read a chapter, and the pastor commented upon it; and then
they asked J.Y. what he had to say regarding it. He answered by giving his view of the subject,
and afterwards addressed them in the ministry. Various individuals then related their experience,
one after the other, as is usual in the more private religious meetings in these churches.

---- Buller (writes J.Y. in recording this meeting) is an interesting man; I had much conversation
with him as to his own conversion. It seems to have been a work of the Spirit, without, in
the first instance, any other instrumentality than reading the Bible. I met several pious persons
in the meeting-room, and held converse with them to mutual comfort. They are simple and sincere.
We took tea in the garden after the meeting, and did not reach our lodging in Neuhoffnung until
12 o'clock the same night.

10th.--This morning they started for Elizabethsdorf, accompanied by Robert Lehmkuhle, a teacher
from Kharkov. Their way lay entirely through the boundless steppes, where so many ways ran
into each other that the driver missed the road, and they wandered about until 10 p. M., when
they took shelter at a German colonist's. The inmates, who had gone to rest, rose to give them
milk and bread.

The next day they proceeded to Elizabethsdorf, being escorted on the way by hospitable members
of the settlements through which they passed. At Elizabethsdorf they were received by schoolmaster
Seib, a brotherly Christian man, whose conversation was "seasoned with grace."

After tea, says John Yeardley. we held a devotional meeting, in which I had an opportunity
to address the little company; but the people generally in the colonies are busy till late
in the evening. Being much weary with our jolting journey, I retired to the waggon for the
night, as I supposed; but W.R. soon came to inform me that a number of young persons, men and
women, were come, it being as early as they could be liberated from their day's labor, to have
some of our company. I sprang from the waggon with joy, and we had a delightful meeting, with
a pretty large company. They sang repeatedly, and betweentimes I related to them something
of my travels in Germany and Greece, with which they appeared wonderfully pleased. We were
all served with tea out of doors, and the company remained together till after eleven o'clock,
and then returned joyfully home.

I was much pleased with Seib. He and another schoolmaster, named Kapper, have been dismissed
from their office of teacher, because of their holding private meetings and preaching in them,
or explaining the Scriptures. Some of the Lutheran ministers are so lifeless that they will
not allow the people to meet in private for their edification. The dead persecute the living,
and light struggles with darkness. This is even the case in some districts among the Mennonites.
The ministers fear that their people should go before them in religious light. The more I see
of the one-man system, the more I prize the gospel liberty in my own beloved religious Society.

They returned to Neuhoffnung, and on the 13th went to Nicolai Schmidt's at Steinbach.

Attended the meeting there in the morning, and at Gnadenfeld in the evening, in both which
places opportunity was given me to communicate what was in my heart for the people.

The settlements of the Molokans, consisting of three villages, each of about a thousand inhabitants,
lie to the south of the German colonies. These people are native Russians and seceders from
the Russo-Greek church; they receive their name from the word Moloko, milk, because they drink
milk on fast-days, which is forbidden by the national religion. The Steppes are their Siberia,
to which they have been banished. Their worship is simple, commencing with silence and prayer,
and they do not use the ceremonies and discipline common among most other Christians; but they
are firm believers in the Christian faith, and many of them are spiritually-minded people.

On the 15th John Yeardley and William Rasche, under the conduct of N. Schmidt, left Neuhoffnung
to visit the Molokans. The first village they came to was Novo-Salifks, a prosperous colony
in worldly matters, but said to be behind the others in spiritual life. At the next, Wasilowkov,
they met with Terenti Sederhoff, the apostle of the Molokans, whose remarkable history J.Y.
related in a tract called The Russian Peasant, forming No. 12 of his series. Here they also
met with A. Stajoloff, who remembered William Allen's visit in 1819. Sederhoff accompanied
them to the third village, Astrachanka, where they had a conversational meeting with several
of the chief men, but the intercourse was carried on at a double disadvantage.

They spoke, says John Yeardley, nothing but Russ. T never regretted more the want of the language.
Schmidt had a manifest unwillingness to interpret all I wanted to say, because it did not accord
with his own sentiments, and he feared it might strengthen the people in those views from which
the Mennonites would draw them. There was a precious feeling over us, and I felt assured they
appreciated our motive in visiting them; they often pressed my hand when comparing Scripture
texts on which we were of one mind. I felt satisfied in having done what I could to direct
them in the right way, and to strengthen them in it. They are well read in the Scriptures.

The travellers passed the night at this village, sleeping as usual in their carriage; and the
next day, taking a loving leave of their friends, directed their course over the steppes into
the Crimea. Here they found themselves in the heart of the Tartar country, beyond the verge
of civilized life.

The Tartar villages, says John Yeardley, are the meanest possible, consisting sometimes of
mere holes dug in the earth, or huts standing a little above the ground. The men wear wide
drawers with the pink shirt over them; the women have a chemise reaching to the calf of the
leg, dirty and coarse, an apron round the waist, sometimes so scanty or so ragged that it will
not meet, and a handkerchief tied in a slovenly manner on the head. In these three articles
of dress they drive the horses and oxen; the sun burns them to a dark brown, almost black.
The children we saw were quite naked. Various attempts have been made to civilize and instruct
them, but without success. One missionary pursued the work so far as to feed and clothe the
children, and collect them for instruction, which they received for a while, but all at once
and with one consent it was at an end. When I see the Tartar galloping over the steppe as if
riding on the wind, it constantly makes me think of the wild Arabs. When we are anxious to
find a well of water where we may take our meal, and when we see travellers assembled to water
their cattle and flocks, and the camels running loose on the steppes--which they do till autumn,
when they are sought up for work,--all reminds us of customs of the East.

This evening they halted at a Tartar village, where the occupant of the traktir, or house of
entertainment, persuaded the driver to take out his horses for the night. The conduct of this
man and his companions was suspicious; they eagerly examined the mattresses of the travellers,
which were of superior quality; and when William Rasche came to make the tea, which he did
by the moonlight outside the hut, the boiling water which he poured in to rinse the teapot
came out into the tumblers a white liquid; and after the tea was put in the innkeeper held
up the pot against the moon, and looked curiously into it. Instead of retiring early, as the
Tartars always do, the men in the hut kept a watch upon the travellers; and the suspicions
even of the driver were awakened, when one of them came to him, as he was lying by his horses,
to borrow his knife. His horses, however, were so weary, and he himself so unwilling to move,
that the travelers contented themselves with harnessing the horses, and making ready to depart
in case of necessity. Soon after midnight, finding they were still watched by the Tartars,
and apprehending that these waited only till they should all be asleep, to carry off their
horses or to rob their persons, they decided to make the best of their way out of their hands.
The driver being slow to move, W.R. jumped into his place, seized the reins, and drove quickly
off, thankful to have effected a safe escape. It is very common for the Tartars to prowl about
in the night, and steal the horses and waggons, of their more settled and thrifty neighbors.

After about three hours' driving, the moon shining so bright that they could see to read by
it, they arrived at another village, of a less suspicious character.

On the 18th they reached Simpheropol, where they were glad to rest. The next day they wished
to visit Pastor Kilius of Neusatz, to whom they had an introduction: as they were considering
how they should get to him, he opportunely came to the hotel. He introduced them to several
estimable persons, and took them the next day to his dwelling, situate in a picturesque mountain
village, twenty versts from the city. At Neusatz commences another chain of German colonies,
settled by the Evangelical Lutherans. The next morning they attended the public worship, and
in the afternoon the Scripture-teaching for the children. On the 22nd they went to Zürichthal,
a village formed of well-built houses, but where they found the school in a very low state.
The 23rd they started early for the Sudag colony, intending to spend the time there until the
departure of the steamer for Odessa; but they found nothing to interest them in this settlement,
and accordingly proceeded to Feodosia, (or Kaffa,) a watering-place on the south coast of the
Crimea. The German inns in this place were all full, and to procure a wholesome lodging, the;
drove the next day four miles among the hills, where they hired a large apartment at the house
of a German. The situation was romantic, with an extensive prospect over sea and mountains;
and on the hill-side was a thicket, forming a delightful bower, where John Yeardley and his
companion "live by day, walked, talked, reposed, and wrote." In this retreat, breathing cool
air and quietude, J.Y. received the physical refreshment he so much needed, while he reviewed
the course of his laborious journey. Notwithstanding his discouragements, he was able to cast
all his burden upon his Saviour, with whom he seems to have dwelt in nearer communion as his
day on earth went down.

8 mo. 26.--This morning I felt more sweet union with my God in spirit than for a long time;
and a strong desire has arisen to live in closer communion with Jesus, the beloved of my soul,
the only access to the Father--the only place of rest, safety, and true peace. I long more
than ever not to be troubled with cross occurrences over which I have no control, and which
have too long perplexed me and disturbed my inward peace. I long more than ever to spend my
few remaining days on earth as with my God in heaven, to refer everything to Him, and to pray
more earnestly and diligently for his grace to preserve me near to himself under all circumstances,
until he shall have prepared me to be taken to heaven, to join the happy company there in a
blissful eternity.

On the 1st of the Ninth Month they sailed to Odessa, where they had to remain eight days. In
this city they received a visit from a pastor, who conversed with them on the work of the heavenly
kingdom then going on in the Bast, especially in Constantinople and Asia Minor.

The Saviour's kingdom, writes John Yeardley, in allusion to this conversation, is spreading,
and many instruments are being raised up in various nations to help forward the great work.
The kingdom of Satan is in danger; he sees it, and stirs up the jealousy of men, setting them
against one another, and, by their seeking through party-spirit to exalt their own particular
religion, hindering the Lord's work. Into whatever nation the beams of the Sun of Righteousness
shine, the inhabitants begin to inquire the way to Zion, and turn their faces thitherward.
This alarms the rulers whose kingdom is of this world.

From Odessa to Constantinople they had a quick and safe passage. At Constantinople John Yeardley
was deeply interested in the institutions which the American missionaries have founded for
the religious and temporal improvement of the Armenians. He visited two of these, the high
school at Bebek and the girls' seminary at Has-keuï, both beautifully situated on the shores
of the Bosphorus. In the former they found forty-eight young men,--sixteen Greek and thirty-two
Armenian. The industrial part of the education was particularly gratifying to him.

Cyrus Hamlin, he says, who has the superintendence of their studies and labor, is wonderfully
adapted for his vocation. He is assisted only by native teachers. The young men looked serious:
some of their countenances were peculiarly impressive, indicating that they had been with Jesus.
I saw them assembled in the school-room, and addressed them for some time; and C. Hamlin most
willingly interpreted into Armenian what I said. It was a sweet and memorable time. The Armenian
teacher would scarcely let go my hand after the meeting, he had been so touched with the power
of divine love. In the girls' boarding-school we found twenty-five girls, all Armenians, with
the exception of two or three Greeks. It was a lovely sight to see so many of this class under
a course of religious and useful instruction. Many of the countenances were marked and pleasing,
and were fixed on me with great apparent seriousness while I addressed them, along with some
of the neighbors.----Everett (the conductor of the school) kindly and most willingly interpreted
what I had to communicate. He and his wife have also a day-school for boys and girls. I consider
these institutions as bright and hopeful spots in the East, from which much good may arise.

The persevering and well-directed efforts of the American missionaries for the evangelization
of the Armenians, and the field of Christian labor which was thus opened, took firm hold of
J.Y.'s mind; he longed to visit the schools and congregations in Isnik and Brusa, and probably
only abandoned the journey at this time in the hope of undertaking it at some future day. John
Yeardley describes Constantinople as--

Built entirely on the hills which slope from a considerable eminence down to the Bosphorus.
The trees towering among the houses, the high spires and gilded domes, have a most imposing
effect; but what is the astonishment of the traveller when he commences his ascent up steep,
narrow, clumsily-pitched streets. I could only compare them to the worst-constructed bridle-roads
in England which the packhorses traversed centuries ago. The three days we were in the city
I only saw one or two carriages,--the most curious vehicles; indeed, there is scarcely a street
in which two carriages can pass. Donkeys are the chief carriers. As to dogs, they are born
and bred in the streets and are the property of the town, and in the day-time He by dozens
in the streets, young and old, are always under the feet of the traveller, and he must constantly
poke them out of the way with his stick; by night they are furious. The shops present a jumble
of all kinds of wares; and the Turks sit cross-legged in the window, or work at their trade inside.

They left Constantinople on the 15th, and on the 17th went on shore at Smyrna, where, at the
house of the American missionary Ladd, they met with another missionary, named Stacking, returning
with his family from Persia, where he had labored sixteen years among the Nestorians. The account
which he gave John Yeardley of the creed and condition of the Nestorian Church, and of the
schools which had been opened in Persia, aroused his deep sympathy and produced an abiding
impression on his mind.

Smyrna, like the other Turkish cities which they saw, vividly impressed the travellers with
its Oriental character.

Like Constantinople, says J.Y., it is a town of all nations. The streets are narrow, with a
run of dirty water down the middle. We met docile camels in great number, bringing figs from
the interior. In the fig-market were thousands of boxes being prepared and packed for exportation.
It is a sight of interest to see Turks, Greeks, &c., huddled together, walking, talking, or
sitting cross-legged and smoking their long pipes. We took donkeys and ascended the hill, where
we obtained a good view of the town, and then examined the ruins where the ancient city stood,
and saw the place where the message from Heaven was received by the angel of the church of
Smyrna. The church of Polycarp stood not far from that of John the Baptist. After a visit of
peculiar interest, I returned to the steam-ship and read the message to the church of Smyrna,
which gave rise to more reflections than I can here record.

Steaming on the sea of Marmora, (to continue J.Y.'s narrative of his homeward journey), the
Bosphorus and the Greek waters, was very pleasing. We had a good sight of the walls of ancient
Troas, where the apostle Paul received the message in vision from the man of Macedonia, to
come over and help them. The quarantine prevented us from landing at Syra; but I conveyed a
note through the English Consul to my old friend Hildner, who came alongside our steamer. I
learned from him that Argyri Climi was five years in his school, and usefully filled the office
of teacher of the higher classes; had been married about ten years to a lieutenant in the army;
had three children, and was living happily with her husband at the Piraeus. It appears she
retains her religious principles.

21st.--Arrived at Malta. Ours is the first steamer that has reached the island since the removal
of the quarantine; we went on shore directly after breakfast. Isaac Lowndes was rejoiced to
see me. We met in the street, and he conducted us to his house. He has been in Malta seven
years, acting for the Bible Society; he gives no bright account of among the Greeks, as to
spiritual religion, nor of the island generally. The present governor has admitted the Jesuits
into the island, who are doing mischief; privileges are being granted to the Romanists to the
prejudice of the Protestants; and a regulation has been proposed which would subject a Protestant
to six months imprisonment for not taking off his hat when he meets the procession of the Host.

Isaac Lowndes took John Yeardley and William Rasche to visit Selim Aga, or, as he was named
after baptism, Edward Williams; who with his wife, sister-in-law, and four children, formed
an interesting Christian household. J.Y. published the history of this man in No. 13 of his
series of tracts, Turkey and the Converted Turk, where also he has depicted several scenes
from the latter part of this journey.

Arriving at Marseilles, they proceeded quickly on to Nismes. It was with a gush of natural
sorrow that J.Y. revisited a place whore he had often sojourned with his beloved wife.

The thought, he writes, of the difference in my circumstances now and when last in this place
fills me with sorrow. The beloved one of my bosom, then the stay and solace of my heart, is
no more with me to help and comfort me in the toils of life. Yet when I consider what a large
amount of suffering she has escaped, I cannot but rejoice that she is at rest with her God
and Saviour, where I humbly hope soon to meet her. Lord, prepare thy unworthy worm for that
awful but joyful day!

John Yeardley held a small public meeting at Nismes, and the next day, the 3rd of the Tenth
Month, set out for the bathing-place of Bagnères de Bigorre, in the Pyrenees. His principal
reason for going there was to recruit his shattered health. "On our arrival at Nismes," he
says, "and during our few days' sojourn there, I began to feel the effects of my long, toilsome
Russian journey; and, in the hope of preventing a return of my suffering complaint, I thought
it justifiable to make trial of the sulphur baths and water of Bagnères." But he had also another
object in view: "I had long thought," he adds, in a letter from Bigorre, "whether there was
not a seeking people in this neighborhood, and now I think there is."

His first care on arriving at Bigorre, was to call on Pastor Frossard, formerly of Nismes,
who feelingly reminded him of the changes which had happened to each of them since they had
met before. He proposed to John Yeardley to meet some Christian friends at his chapel. This
was just what J.Y. had been wishing for. The meeting was held; and after it was over he gave
the company an account of his travels in Russia, with which they were highly gratified.

In a letter to his sister, Mary Tylor, which he wrote from this place, is the following characteristic
sentiment:

Thy welcome letter duly readied me at Nismes, and drew forth my tender sympathy for thee and
your whole circle in the loss of a kind and beloved brother. It is another link taken from
the family chain, and the shorter it becomes the nearer we are drawn together in the bond of
affection. How the spirit seems to ascend with those loved ones who are taken from us, and
from earth to heaven! Our desire for a blissful eternity becomes more ardent, because they
have already entered upon it; but above all, we desire to be with Him in whom we shall be one,
and all will be glory.

Returning to Nismes, he occupied himself with holding meetings in many places in that neighborhood.
In some meetings which he attended in the city, he had for fellow-laborers Eli and Sybil Jones,
from the United States, with their companions. Amongst the audience at one of these meetings
were three soldiers, who, with two others, had been awakened at Lyons, and who manifested the
progress they had made in Christian doctrine by refusing to kneel before the procession of
the Host. Their officer observing their disregard of this required practice, held his sword
over the neck of one of them, saying he would strike off his head if he did not bow down. The
man was firm in his refusal, and was sent to prison. To encourage one another in their new
profession, these men were accustomed to keep religious meetings. They were in consequence
accused of sedition, and when they asserted the simply religions character of their meetings,
one of them was required to swear to the truth of his statement; he refused to take an oath,
pleading that the New Testament commanded him not to swear. A second was then called upon in
the same way; he also refused; and their stedfastness was reported to the commanding officer
as an act of contumacy. The officer happened to be a Protestant, of an enlightened and pious
disposition; he said that soldiers were called upon to vindicate the innocence of their companions,
not to procure their condemnation, and that if they did not choose to give evidence the law
would not compel them. Two of the five received their discharge from the army; the rest were
removed to Nismes. John Yeardley had some conversation with these three after the meeting,
with which he was well satisfied. They told him that when they were awakened they wrote and
received so many letters that it excited suspicion, and that the police who examined the letters
took the texts of Scripture, or rather the figures that referred to the chapters and verses,
for a secret language, used to deceive their vigilance.

On the 8th of the Eleventh Month, J. Yeardley and W. Rasche, accompanied by Jules Paradon,
went to Valence, and visited Bertram Combe, at Pialoux, where they remained a few days. B.C.
had fitted up a commodious room adjoining his own dwelling, where he held meetings regularly:--

And where, says J.Y., we had several solemn and edifying occasions; and as our being there
became more known the attendance increased, so that the last gathering was quite a large one,
and peculiarly quiet and satisfactory. Among some meetings which we appointed in the neighborhood
two were held in the temple of the Protestant Church, which was a mark of great liberality;
these two occasions were peculiarly favored. In the latter B.C. alluded to the persecution
he had had to endure on account of the disuse of the Supper and Baptism. He boldly avowed the
conviction he felt as to the non-use of these things, and that the preaching of the gospel
ought to be free. I have seldom been in a district where there is more openness for the gospel
message in its simplicity, than in this mountain region.

From Valence, John Yeardley returned direct to England, only stopping at Friedrichsdorf. where
he visited the boarding-school.

I reached my home, he says, on the 24th of the Eleventh Month, with a thankful heart to my
Heavenly Father for his merciful preservation.

CHAPTER XX.

FROM HIS RETURN FROM RUSSIA TO HIS LAST JOURNEY.

1853-1858.

John Yeardley had scarcely returned to England before war was declared with Russia. The confirmation
he received from this lamentable event, that his journey had been made at the opportune time,
filled his heart with gratitude. The work he had been able to do had been small, but he had
the satisfaction of knowing that it had been accomplished at the only juncture in which it
would have been practicable.

The year 1853, he writes, closed with many mercies to a poor unworthy servant. I consider it
a great blessing to have accomplished the visit through Russia and to Constantinople before
the horrible war broke out. What a frightful state are things in at the present moment!--no
access could be had to those countries.

In the Spring of 1854 he spent some time at Bath. He attended, whilst there, a public meeting
appointed by Sarah Squire, in which he had a testimony to offer in the gospel. Hearing afterwards
that a military man who was present had been brought to conviction by the doctrine which had
been declared, J.Y. noted in his Diary the subject on which he had preached.

4 mo. 2.--I recollect, he says, alluding to the awful state of the times in which we live,
and the need of a refuge in God, and the blessedness of the consolations of the Holy Spirit
in a time of trouble. That the Spirit of God was the first agent in the work of man's salvation,
bringing to the Saviour who died for sinners: the Father drawing to the Son, the Son perfecting
the work, and presenting each member of the living church without spot or wrinkle to the Father.
Blessed unity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit! The Father creating, the Son redeeming, the
Holy Spirit sanctifying.

In making a brief note of the Yearly Meeting this year, John Yeardley takes occasion to record
his sentiments on a subject which then, as now, strongly engaged the attention of the Society.

The Yearly Meeting has been a precious time; it has strengthened the bond of love and unity.
There is, under all discouragements, a love to the Society manifested in the young people of
both sexes. It is true there is a great want of bearing of the cross, and many are seeking
for excuses to persuade themselves that many of those things that have long distinguished our
Society are now no longer of use. But I still think there is more religion in many of our young
members than their outward appearance would authorize us to believe. I love to cleave to the
good, and to hold out a helping hand to encourage the tender budding of grace, and for the
good to overcome the evil. I want them to be brought to conviction, and to be told that they
are not required to wear plain clothes, and to use plain speech, because our Friends have done
so, but because Christianity leads into simplicity, and the language of Scripture is that of
truthfulness, and to follow the changing fashions of the world is too low for the notice of
the Christian whose heart is placed on heavenly things, and whose time is too precious to be
spent on trifles. There is no peace to the regenerated heart equal to a devotedness of life
in promoting the extension of the Saviour's kingdom upon earth.

He soon after alludes to the Memoir of Joseph John Gurney, then just published, and to the
sharp stimulus which he received from its perusal--a stimulus which minds fixed upon improvement
always receive from the vivid representation of time and talents diligently employed.

6 mo. 16.--Many of my solitary moments are cheered, and I am greatly edified, in reading J.J.
Gurney's Memoirs. It is a real privilege to be introduced into the daily walk of the life of
a Christian man with such an enlightened and enlarged mind, whose expansive heart is filled
with love for the whole human race. Strengthened by faith, and filled with the unction of the
Spirit, his life was devoted to doing good to the family of man, laboring for the conversion
of sinners, and comforting believers.

The diligence of J.J. Gurney in study, &c., has stimulated me to renew the reading of the Greek
New Testament, but I sink into the dust when I see what he accomplished in comparison of my
own insignificance. It is, however, a comfort to know that I have a merciful Lord, who will
not require of me the exercise of gifts that I have not received. O that I may he more faithful
in the employment of the capacity which has been entrusted to me, for the good of souls and
the honor of my Lord!

The reflections which follow add another to the numberless testimonies of the saints' experience,
that the Christian life is a continual warfare.

I am sensible of having lost ground for some time past for want of more diligence in watchfulness
and prayer. I have been deeply sorry for it, and I do hope my compassionate Lord has forgiven
me. As a proof of his forgiveness, I am permitted to enjoy once more the smiles of his countenance,
which cheer my lonely walk. How greatly do I long for more intimate communion with the Beloved
of my soul, the precious Saviour! Lord preserve me in every moment of temptation, and make
me more entirely thine! Grant me more confidence in the immediate action of thy Spirit in the
ministry of the word, that my communications of this nature may be deep and clear, and under
the unction of thy Holy Spirit. Amen!

6 mo. 23.--This morning I have been favored, more than usual, in my endeavor to pour out my
soul before God in prayer, in desiring more purity of heart, more faith; and that it might
please my compassionate Lord to sustain and console me in my solitary lot, and preserve me
faithful to the end of the race. Many relatives and near friends were brought to my remembrance,
whom I endeavored to present to the mercy of a merciful God.

In the same diary is an appropriate notice of Dr. Steinkopf, and a tender tribute to the memory
of Martha Yeardley.

The other evening was spent at J. and M.C.S.'s with Dr. Steinkopf. "The hoary head" of this
aged and experienced Christian is as "a crown of glory," for "it is found in the way of righteousness."
He is full of love, speaking constantly out of a grateful heart of the mercies of his God.
Before parting he read a few verses, exhorted us and supplicated for us.

A little more than three years have fled away since my precious and dearly-beloved M.Y. entered
on a blissful eternity. How do I feel the loss of her sweet, cheerful, and edifying society!
Ever since her blessed spirit fled from earth to heaven, she has never by night or day been
long absent from my thoughts. How often does my soul pant and pray for a preparation of heart
for that blissful state where she now is, near to her precious Saviour, who redeemed her with
his own blood. He enabled her to serve him when on earth, and now she sings his praises in
heaven. What a charm did she impart to my daily life! Our pursuits were always one and the
same; and now what a desert I still have before me,--but it may be very short.

In the Eighth Month, John Yeardley went to Minden on a visit to Ernst Peitsmeyer, whose daughter
Sophie had been for some time his kind and cheerful companion, and who now, with her parents
and other friends, welcomed him again to Germany. Whilst at Minden he derived benefit from
the sulphur baths of the Klause, not far from the town.

The bath, he says, is one hour's gentle exercise on the saddle. The farm where the spring is
stands quite alone in the midst of a wood, and the way to it is delightful,--much suited to
my taste. Sophie rides sometimes with me: it cheers me to have her trotting by my side.

The handful of inquiring persons at Obernkirchen, whom J.Y. visited on his return from Norway,
continued to claim his sympathy, and one First-day he joined them at their usual place of worship.

It was, he writes, a refreshing time in this little meeting. When the little company first
met together they were dragged into the street by the police; but they persevered, and, on
making an appeal to the magistrate at Rinteln, stated their case with so much simplicity that
the government has granted them liberty to meet together undisturbed. How marvellous, the Friends
are protected; and the Baptists, under the same government, are persecuted with increasing
rigor! No interference on their behalf has been of the least use.--(Dairy and Letter.)

In the Fourth Month of 1855 John Yeardley received a certificate "to visit his friends in Yorkshire,
and to hold meetings with persons not in church-fellowship" with Friends.

I arrived at Halifax, he says, in a letter of the 28th of the Fourth Month, on Fifth-day evening,
and attended the Monthly Meeting of Brighouse on the 20th. It looked formidable to me in prospect
on the first entering into harness; but I hope the meeting proved a good introduction, and
I saw a good specimen of a large, harmonious, and well-conducted Monthly Meeting. There might
be near 250 members present.

When he had completed the service, he took a week of repose at Harrowgate, where he briefly
reviews his journey.

5 mo. 29.--In passing along through my native county, I found many countenances missing which
were very familiar to me years ago, and who are now gone to their rest. But I was comforted
to find in many places a race of young people springing up who bore the marks of being plants
of my Heavenly Father's right-hand planting, and who gave hopes of becoming useful in his Church.
It is with a grateful heart that I record the mercy of my Lord, in that he has granted me strength
in a remarkable manner to do what he put in my heart to do, from place to place. Blessed be
his name!

After having finished the service in Yorkshire, I have had a week's tarriance at Harrowgate.
The rest and quiet have proved beneficial to my health, and very precious have been the seasons
of sweet communion I have been permitted to hold with my God in this retirement.

This summer he repeated his visit to Minden, and hired a lodging at the Klause. A reflection
in one of the letters which he wrote from this retreat affords a pleasing glimpse of his mind:--

I sometimes think that a large portion of comfort and joy are allowed to those who really love
the Lord; and how chastened are the pleasures of the humble Christian! They abide with us long
after the causes of them are passed away; and the more our permitted pleasures are enjoyed
under a grateful sense of the goodness of the bountiful Giver, the longer they may be permitted
to us.

In the Ninth Month, he attended the Two-months' Meeting at Pyrmont. It was not without emotion
that he visited once more the place which had been so familiar to him in earlier days. The
hopes he had then conceived, and which, as we have seen, he had so fondly cherished, with regard
to the Society of Friends in that part, had been disappointed; the little company had dwindled
in numbers and declined in religious influence; and when he took leave of Pyrmont for the last
time, it was with a sorrowful heart.

From Minden, accompanied by Sophie Peitsmeyer, he went southwards, and took up his abode at
the little town of Neuveville, on the Lake of Bienne, in Switzerland.

I spent, he says, two or three days at Neufchatel, and visited many of my old friends in the
place and neighborhood; but it was affecting to find how many of those I had known years ago
were no longer on this earth. Madame Pétavel was as warm-hearted as ever; the professor, her
husband, is ripening for heaven.

John Yeardley had gone to Neuveville with the intention of passing the winter in Switzerland.
After remaining a month, however, he returned to England; and this change of mind was the result
of a remarkable circumstance. He became silent and reserved, with the air and manners of one
who is not at peace with himself; until one night, when he was heard to cry out in a loud tone,
as though speaking to some one. The next morning at breakfast he appeared subdued and full
of tenderness; and on his young friend inquiring what had made him cry out in the night, he
told her that he must return home, for there was more work for him to do. He said that a prospect
of service in the gospel had latterly opened before him, and that as he had greatly desired
to remain in Switzerland, he had striven against the sense of duty and refused to yield; but
that during the night he had had a vision, in which he heard the command repeated to return
home and enter again upon his labor, and that he felt, as he thought, the touch of the heavenly
messenger's hand. This caused him to call out; and when he awoke, he found that willingness
of spirit had taken the place of his former obstinacy. Thus turned from his own purpose, he
set about to accomplish the will of his gracious Master with his usual resolution, and they
made the best of their way back to England. The nature of the service which he saw before him
is touched upon in the following passage from a letter, dated Neuveville, the 14th of the Tenth
Month.

My home duties press heavily upon me.... Very long have I thought about the young men, and
the younger part of our Society; and I have a hope the way will be made for my finding access
to them, in a religious and social point of view. Should it be permitted, the Lord grant that
it may tend to mutual comfort.

John Yeardley returned through Paris. He spent a day or two in that great city, which he never
saw "so quiet and free from soldiers." We extract from his Diary a short note of a conversation
which took place at the table d'hôte of the hotel where he lodged, and which appears to us
to be of an instructive character.

Two men contended respecting the motive by which mankind are influenced to good actions. One
attributed it to reason; the other held that it was virtue which restrains from evil and impels
to good, and maintained that we must do good actions from the love of justice and virtue, and
not from the fear of punishment or the hope of reward. The latter had the advantage over his
antagonist in the argument:--

I had not, says J.Y., taken part in the conversation; but at the close I felt constrained to
tell the Christian that I confessed myself on his side, because he had defended the truth;
only that what he called virtue, I called the action of the spirit of God in the heart of man.
With much animation, he clasped my hand in his, and cried, "That is the very thing,--that is
just what I mean!"

In the year 1856, he engaged in two religious visits at home, both of them in accordance with
the kind of service which had been unfolded to him in the retirement of Neuveville, viz., mingled
religious and social intercourse with his younger fellow-members.

In reading the expression of his feelings in the prospect of the former of these engagements,
it is instructive to remark, that the same sense of entire dependence which had bowed his spirit
when required in early life to make the first offering of this kind, was present with him when
now called upon to go forth in his Master's name for the twentieth time, and when age and experience
had given him reverence among men.

1 mo. 8.--To-morrow is our Monthly Meeting, when I expect to propose to my Friends a visit
to the meetings composing the Quarterly Meetings of Bristol and Somerset, and Gloucester and
Wilts. Every time any fresh exercise turns up for me, it always feels as if it was the first
time of entering into the holy harness. If my friends permit me to proceed, I hope I shall
be helped through it; but it looks formidable.

21st.--Bristol is like a great mountain looking me in the face, and weighing heavily upon my heart.

The following short memoranda of the way in which he was engaged at Bristol are taken from
his letters; the Diary, during his later years, supplies few notes, either of his labors or
his experience:--

3 mo.--I met at Richard Fry's house a large number of young men and women teachers of the First-day
School; forty-eight were present. An opportunity was offered for my receiving and also communicating
information respecting schools and education. What makes the subject more interesting in Bristol,
is the attendance of more than one hundred of the school children at meeting on First-day mornings,
which, I think, has been the practice for about ten years, and their behavior is orderly and good.

31st.--I am somewhat busily employed in this busy city in visiting the young men. I find very
ready access to them, and my engagement has the hearty concurrence of all my friends. I am
abundantly convinced that it would have been a great mistake to have ran away from the place
without making the attempt at the performance of the present service. The usual meetings for
worship have been seasons of divine favor, some of them, I think, extraordinarily so, which
I consider a great mercy in my Heavenly Father, when I consider the weakness of the poor instrument.
It has been announced for me to give a lecture this evening in the large meeting-house, on
my travels in Europe, a sound which almost frightens me. Friends really do not know what a
poor thing I am.

By the kindness of a friend, we have been supplied with a pleasing personal reminiscence of
John Yeardley's visit to Bristol, which will help to represent him as he was in later years.

Bristol, 6 mo. 8, 1859.

Since thou informed me of thy intention to compile a memoir of our late dear friend John Yeardley,
I have endeavored to recall the circumstances of his visit to this city in the spring of the
year 1856.

My impression is, that the most striking feature in his character was his childlike simplicity,
both in word and conduct. This very characteristic, whilst it really increased his influence
for good, especially with the young, rendered it perhaps more difficult to trace, and now to
describe, the precise manner in which it was exercised. I believe that his Christian labors
here were very seasonable and very important, and that he was enabled to perform a service
which scarcely any one else would have been equally qualified to render.

There was in him, so far as my observation went, no approach towards an assumption of spiritual
dignity; nor was there, on the other hand, that which is perhaps a more frequent defect, anything
of feigned humility. His whole character seemed to me perfectly unaffected. To whatever extent,
therefore, his natural disposition may have fitted him for profitable intercourse with the
young, I think that the qualities which I have attempted to describe rendered him peculiarly
acceptable to them. Many times, whilst he was amongst us, he alluded--I believe even in his
public ministry--to his delight in their society, somewhat in this manner: "I love the company
of those who tread the earth with an elastic step." This prominent trait in his character was
a striking illustration of what may be termed the corrective tendency of true religion, by
which in advanced life he was enabled to place himself, under the precious influence of the
love of Christ, in thorough sympathy with those whose circumstances, in many respects, were
so different from, his own.

But my object was to describe John Yeardley's meetings in Bristol. The truth is, however, that
in describing the man, one seems most truly to describe his service. In addition to his family
visits, he met a large company of our members in our meeting-house, and gave an interesting
narrative of his journeys in Southern Russia and Greece. He afterwards invited many of our
young friends, especially those who were engaged as teachers in our First-day Schools, to spend
an evening with him. Meeting at the house of a kind friend, we had an opportunity of hearing
from his own lips some interesting details of his labors, chiefly, I think, in reference to
the schools in Greece. With characteristic simplicity, he made various inquiries respecting
our own First-day Schools, in which he felt a deep interest. The occasion was of a very sociable
and easy character, and well calculated to promote in his young friends the healthy tone of
religious feeling which seemed so peculiarly to belong to himself.

After Martha Yeardley's decease, and as years rolled on, his mind dwelt still more habitually
and more confidingly than ever on the approaching end of the race.

4 mo. 24.--I cannot say my spirits are always high. There is an individuality in the allotment
of each of us which we must seek for grace and aid to endure to the end. The road may be now
and then a little rough, but it cannot be very long, at least to some of us; and when the eye
closes under the last gleam of earthly light, and then opens in the full brightness of eternal
glory, to enjoy the fulness of a Saviour's love, it will be bliss indeed.

Thinking his state of health unequal to the attendance of the Yearly Meeting, he left London
and again, resorted for a while to the baths near Minden, where he passed two months in tranquil
retirement. He had in former visits been deeply interested in the sufferings of a Prussian
soldier who refused conscientiously to bear arms. The late Samuel Gurney wrote to the King
of Prussia, on behalf of the young man, who was in consequence liberated from military service,
but was sentenced to two years' imprisonment. The term was not nearly expired; but John Yeardley,
whilst at Minden, heard that he had been released from prison by immediate command of the King.
J.Y. had "spent a First-day with him within the gloomy walls in Duisburg," and was consequently
the more ready to rejoice in his liberation.

On his return to England, John Yeardley proceeded to Birmingham. His service in this and the
neighboring towns was similar to that which he had had to perform at Bristol. He says:

By day I called on the sick and such as were confined at home. In the evenings I met companies
of young men and women. They were invited to the Friends' houses where tea was first served,
and then a religious occasion of silence and exhortation, with supplication when felt to be
under right pointing. The remainder of the evening was spent in social converse. I am very
favorable to the mixing of social intercourse with gospel labor. All seemed pleased, and I
trust we were mutually edified. I was often requested to give some account of my late journey
and the state of religion in the various countries where I had travelled; and the conversation
often, turned on points connected with our religious principles.

Joseph Sturge, he continues, was from home. At the request of his wife I dined at their house
with twenty-five young culprits, whom J.S. has in his Reformatory at Stoke, near Bromsgrove.
They came in a van with horses to spend the day. They are all such as have been once or twice
in prison, mostly for theft. I addressed them after dinner, and at tea-time I questioned them
as to Jesus Christ our Redeemer, on God, Heaven and Hell, how to gain Heaven and avoid misery.
I left them with a more favorable impression than I otherwise should have had. Severe measures
had failed to improve them, but they seemed susceptible of kind treatment, and some of them
gave hopes of amendment.

9 mo. 21.--Visited the Boys' and Girls' First-day Schools. Breakfasted with thirty teachers
(young men) at the schools. About 370 boys present in two rooms. None are taken under fourteen
years of age. Also a large class of adults. I addressed the two companies: then went to the
girls; heard them read, and addressed them. There are about twenty young women teachers, and
perhaps 270 to 300 girls.

The morning meeting was large. I was much pressed in spirit to speak on the nature of the fall
of man, and on the necessity of having clear views of gospel truth. I was told afterwards that
there was a Unitarian present.

He attended the Quarterly Meeting at Leicester on the 24th, and the two following days met
companies of young persons, who were, he says, "much tendered in spirit." After some similar
service at Stourbridge and Coventry, he returned on the 27th to Stamford Hill. He remarks in
his Diary: "I believe the service of the young Friends in the First-day Schools has been a
blessing to themselves as well as to their pupils."

The next month John Yeardley made a religious visit to Hertfordshire, and had two social-religious
meetings with the younger Friends at Hitchin; after which he remained at home until the beginning
of the Twelfth Month, when he left England for Nismes.

One object in this journey was to revisit the school which had been established by himself
and Martha Yeardley in 1842: another was the renewal of his declining health. Susan Howland
and Lydia Congdon, from the United States, who were then on a visit to Europe, were bound for
the same destination, and John Yeardley gave them his company.

12 mo. 6.--On entering France, he says, we found a sprinkling of snow and frost, but on leaving
Lyons we left all the wintry weather behind, and travelled on under a hot sun, and bright,
cloudless sky, which seemed to impart to us all fresh vigor and spirits. S. Howland remarked,
In such an atmosphere she felt another being.

At Nismes, the party found Eliza P. Gurney, and Robert and Christine Alsop, on their way home
from the valleys of Piedmont. John Yeardley lodged at the school, spent much of his time with
the children, and with the other English and the American Friends gave his aid in some plans
for their recreation.

12 mo. 25.--The evening of this day was a lively and pleasant scene. The girls' countenances
were brightened and their hearts cheered by the presents made to them by the English Friends
present. The "tree" was new to them; it was beautifully lighted with tapers, and bore a variety
of fruit both for mind and body.

1857. 3 mo. 2.--My dear friend ----- proposed my giving the school girls a treat before I left
Nismes. We contrived a visit to the sea, distant from Nismes about twenty miles. We procured
two omnibuses with six horses, and started at 5 o'clock in the morning. Long before the time
appointed, the little maidens were in the entrance-hall with their satchels in their hand,
containing each her dinner; twenty-seven in all. The pleasure on the road was novel and great;
but when they arrived at the sea-shore their delight was complete; with light hearts and quick
heels, running and picking up shells, meeting the waves as they advanced and receded. On our
return we visited the ancient town of Aigues-Mortes, near the sea, famous for having been the
place where the Protestant women were confined and punished even to death. We entered most
of the strong and gloomy cells, and saw the instrument of torture. The tower and fortress are
a perfect model of a feudal castle.

On his return to England, John Yeardley was taken ill with bronchitis, which produced great
bodily weakness, and caused him "many wearisome" nights and days; but, he says, "my Saviour
was near to console and sustain me." He went for change to Bath, and afterwards to Brighton
with Margaret Pope:--

We made, he says, speaking of this visit many calls, and my hospitable hostess had many of
the Friends to tea and dinner visits. Our social readings in the evening were often instructive
in the conversation upon what we read, particularly over Hippolytus, who lived and wrote in
the first half of the second century. The Chevalier Bunsen did good service to the Christian
Church in bringing the life and some of the writings of this good man to light.

On his return home we find him still solicitous, as he had been in former years, for the intellectual
improvement of his young friends.

11 mo.--During my stay at home I have renewed my German class for a few of my young friends.
We have also commenced a soiree for German and French conversation. I love the society of my
young friends, and am always, anxious to promote their learning to speak German and French.

The Diary for 1858, the last year of his life, commences with, a New Year's dedication of himself
afresh to the service of his faithful Creator, and a prayer for a fresh anointing in the exercise
of his ministry.

1858. 1 mo. 4.--How many and various are the thoughts which crowd on the mind on the commencement
of a new year; perhaps none more important than to think I am one year nearer to eternity.
A desire does live in my heart (cherish it, O, my God) to live more to thy glory on earth.
How I long to be favored with strength to do something for the cause of truth and righteousness,
so long as I may be permitted to remain on the Lord's earth. I think with gratitude that he
has blessed me with a little more faith of late in my ministry, and my very soul prays that
in these requirings he may be pleased to put the unction of his Spirit into my heart, and his
words into my mouth, and that under a right pointing, they may go forth with power. Grant me,
Lord, more devotedness of life, and a right and sure preparation for a peaceful death and a
blissful eternity.

For some years before his decease, John Yeardley's thoughts were frequently occupied with the
subject of the Millennium. Like some other good men, he thought he saw in the events which
were taking place, the impending accomplishment of those predictions, whose fulfilment was
to precede the "great and terrible day of the Lord." On one occasion, after mentioning a number
of these "signs of the times," he winds up the enumeration and the thoughts to which it gave
rise, with the following reflection:--

Happy is the Christian who, in this time of conflict, can look beyond the passing events of
time to the Great First Cause, and behold, as with the eye of faith, the providence of his
God watching over all things, waiting to bring good out of evil, and causing all things to
work to the one great point, when he will cause the wrath of man to praise him, and the remainder
of wrath will he restrain. (Isaiah xxvi. 20, 21)

In the Second Month he spent a week at Chelmsford with Susanna Corder. His visit was prefaced
by the following letter:--

Stamford Hill, 1 mo. 13, 1858.

MY DEAR FRIEND,

It would seem to me as if there were only left here and there a link of the chain of my original
connexion on this earth. The best end of this chain is attached to those loved ones in heaven
who are drawing me every day nearer to their happy and blissful abode, through the love of
our glorified Redeemer. It is now many years since thou received her once so dear to me as
a bosom friend, to partake of thy wise counsels, and in her troubles especially to enjoy the
sympathy of thy warm and affectionate heart.

I am now left alone for a short time; my young companion is at Norwich. If thou wert at home,
pretty well in health, and withal not so much occupied as sometimes, it would be a great pleasure
and gratification to me to pay thee a short visit; but, as an absolute condition, I must request
thee to say, in perfect freedom, if it would be quite convenient. I want to ask thee many,
many things.

Thy friend, affectionately and very sincerely,

JOHN YEARDLEY.

After his return home, having also visited Saffron Walden, he writes:--

1 mo. 25.--Just returned from a visit to Essex. I lodged a week at my dear friend S.C.'s, and
was edified and comforted in her company. It has been a promised pleasure of some years' standing.
The morning meeting on First-day, as well as the one on Fourth-day, was a season of spiritual
refreshment, for which I was truly thankful. The Friends testified their unity and comfort:
I called on most of them.

On the Seventh-day, C.M. conveyed me across the country to Saffron Walden. On the way we paid
a sweet visit to the afflicted family of ----. At Walden I was affectionately cared for, and
was much interested in the Friends there, whom I had not seen for eighteen years.

CHAPTER XXI.

LAST JOURNEY AND DEATH, 1858.--CONCLUDING REMARKS.

We are now arrived at the closing scene of John Yeardley's labors. The impression which he
had received, during his visit to Turkey in 1853, of the opening for the work of the Gospel
in the Eastern countries, had never been obliterated; it had rather grown deeper with time,
although his ability to accomplish such an undertaking had proportionately diminished. This
consideration, however, could not satisfy his awakened sympathies, and, according to his apprehension,
no other course remained for him but to prepare for a visit to the missionary stations in Asia
Minor and the countries beyond, in order to deliver to the inquiring inhabitants amongst whom
those stations are planted, the message of Christ's love to their souls with which he believed
himself to be charged. And when he communicated to his friends the apprehension that this journey
was required of him as the last offering of thanksgiving before his day closed, they were satisfied
to "lay their hands upon him" for the work, thinking, perhaps, that the veteran soldier could
not better end his campaign than with his arms in his hands, actively contending for the faith.
That such might not improbably be the issue of the enterprise, John Yeardley himself believed;
but it is doubtful if he correctly estimated the arduous nature of the journey. It would have
been a bold undertaking in the vigor of his days: at his time of life, and with his declining
strength, it was, humanly speaking, impossible that he should accomplish nearly all he had in view.

His Diary unfolds his spiritual exercises and his natural feelings in the prospect before him.

3 mo. 17.--The last two months have been to me an awful time of deep conflict of spirit, arising
out of a prospect of a religious visit to some places in Asiatic Turkey, and parts adjacent.
I do not know when I have had more conflict to arrive at a clear pointing. I prayed earnestly
and waited long for that clear pointing of Divine Wisdom, without which I can never move in
concerns of this importance. In the end, I am thankful to say, the cloud was removed and the
sun stone with brightness, and no longer was my poor tried mind left in doubt as to the line
of religions duty; and before mentioning it to any one, I communicated it to the Monthly Meeting
in the Second Month. Much unity and sympathy were expressed, and the certificate ordered. It
is now signed, and is a sweet document, short and explicit.

I see and deeply feel the perils and sufferings which await me, in venturing on untrodden ground,
as it regards any minister of our Society, and to such a distance, and among, for the most
part, an unbelieving people. But I can and do look forward in calm confidence, trusting, as
I have ever done, in the aid and protecting care of my Heavenly Father, whose cause I desire
to serve, and whose will I wish above all other things to do. My earthly career can never end
better than in the work of my Divine Master; and should it be his will to terminate my life
in the Arab tent, I shall have more consolation there than in an English home under the stinging
sense of a dereliction of my religious duty.

I am giving all my leisure hours to learn something of the Turkish language, for travelling
purposes, and for a little social intercourse. Ever since this concern fastened on my mind,
it has been connected with having the company of my young friend from the South of France,
Jules Paradon.

May the Lord grant me resignation, faith, grace, and strength to do his holy will; and then,
whether it end in life or death, his great name shall be praised. This testimony I record in
gratitude and love to the mercy of my God. Amen.

Before leaving England, he paid a visit to Staines.

4 mo. 20.--I went down to Staines, and spent two weeks with Margaret Pope, which sojourn proved
a strength and comfort to me. This dear friend is a succorer of many, and, I can truly say,
of me in particular. We had several pleasant drives, and made friendly visits to the neighboring
meetings and Friends. I also applied pretty diligently to the Turkish language.

Amply provided, by the kindness of many friends, with whatever could administer to his wants
or ease the roughness of Eastern travel, John Yeardley left his home on the 15th of the Sixth
Month. He arrived at Nismes on the 17th, and was joined there by Jules Paradon. His Diary supplies
some notes of the voyage to Constantinople.

23rd.--Malta. Here we arrived at 4 o'clock this morning, after a favorable passage; thanks
to the Preserver of our lives; great is his mercy and his love. My heart is filled with deep
thoughtfulness, and I am very anxious to procure an interpreter, either at Smyrna or Constantinople.
My faith is weak, but I trust the Lord will provide.

On descending the lower deck adjoining: the large saloon, I found my faithful companion in
calm but very earnest conversation with the commissary of the ship and a passenger of respectability,
the Spanish consul of Smyrna. They had sifted from Jules the object of our journey, and when
they found it connected with a religious mission, they both attacked him earnestly and showed
themselves really opposed to the truth. But my young friend stood his ground well, and maintained
the Christian religion. The opponents were both Romanists. They quieted down before the close,
and treated us respectfully the remainder of the journey; we parted with them at Smyrna. I
am thankful to have in my companion such a defender of the faith.

27th.--We arrived at Smyrna this morning, and in order to meet some of our Christian friends
to whom we had letters of recommendation, we met them after their worship. Edward Van Lennep,
the Dutch consul, and his brother Charles, the Swedish consul, received us with great kindness
and cordiality through the letters from one of our Members of Parliament. It was very sweet
to find these two brothers so imbued with religious feeling; they gave their hearts to help
us in our prospect.

On the 30th John Yeardley and his companion landed at Constantinople; they found the heat and
noise of the city very oppressive.

The people in the streets, says John Yeardley, are numerous beyond all description; thousands,
and tens of thousands, standing, sitting, running, following, or pushing one against the other,
talking and shouting in the ceaseless noise of the Armenian, Turkish, Greek, Syriac, Italian,
French and English languages. The services of my dear Jules are most valuable: he makes his
way with every one through his earnest kindness to serve the good cause.

When passing through the islands, he adds, the prospect was extremely beautiful; but my mind
was always anxious in the prospect of the long journey before us; but the mercy of my God is
great, and deeply humbles me in thankfulness for his goodness.--(Letter of 7 mo. 4.)

Very soon after their arrival, walking several hours in the heat of the day, John Yeardley
had a slight attack of sun-stroke. The effect appeared quickly to pass off, and he was able
to perform such religious duty as opened before him in the city and its immediate neighborhood.

Diary. 7 mo. 4.--We made a call at Bebek: Dr. Hamlin had gone to the city, but Dr. Dwight received
us kindly. These two dear Christian, friends called on us yesterday. This morning we attended
the meeting in the Armenian chapel, and at half-past 1 we had a full company in the same meeting-house.
They received in a free and brotherly disposition what I was favored to express in gospel freedom;
I concluded in supplication. A kind and Christian man interpreted with simplicity into the
Turkish language. The morning service was in the Armenian. We have already had many calls from
these loving Christian friends in our hotel. What a mercy, and how encouraging, to be thus
received in gospel by strangers!

Respecting this meeting Jules Paradon says:--

About thirty-five or forty were present. Our dear friend's communication was short and simple;
it breathed love to all. In fact, what he seemed to have most on his mind in all his public
communications was, to show his hearers how much God loved them in even giving his own Son
for them, and the high privilege we can enjoy in loving him.

They went also to Has-Keui, where J.Y. desired to have a meeting with the girls of the school;
but many had left for the vacation, and he was obliged to give up his intention.

On the 10th they went to Brusa, in Asia Minor, six hours by steam-vessel across the Sea of
Marmora to Moudania, and six on horseback from Moudania to Brusa. The land journey was oppressive.
A narrow path winds through a very rugged country; and there is only one halting-place, a guard
hut, where they took a cup of coffee, the only refreshment the inmates had to offer. John Yeardley
suffered much in this day's journey.

He had two meetings in the Protestant meeting-house at Brusa:--

Both, says Jules Paradon, took place after the usual service, which was expressly made short.
The hearers, to the number of about 120, were impressed and interested to hear and see our
dear friend come from so far to visit them in the love of the gospel. Twelve or fourteen men
came two evenings to see us at our lodgings; and on both occasions our dear friend addressed
them very sweetly. The heat tried him very much, but he felt pleased and happy to be helped
to sympathize with so many simple, kind-hearted people.

At Demirdash (six miles from Brusa), he had a short religious opportunity with a few persons.

On their return to Constantinople, finding that a box of luggage he expected from London, containing
a tent and other equipments, had not arrived, without which he could not pursue his journey
into the interior, he employed the interval in visiting Isnik, (the ancient Nicomedia,) and
Bargheghik, two places in Asia Minor, not far from the coast. Accordingly they started early
the next day, and reached Isnik late in the evening, weary and exhausted, having been able
to procure very little refreshment on the way. They proceeded to Bargheghik the day following;
John Yeardley walking about four miles in the middle of the day, with which he was extremely
fatigued.

He had a meeting, continues Jules Paradon, late in the evening, which proved highly interesting.
About thirty men and one woman attended. Our dear friend encouraged and consoled the weak and
the afflicted. The next day we returned to Isnik, having to bear the heat of the sun from half-past
eight till three in the afternoon. We had a meeting the same afternoon at half-past four, towards
the close of which he felt weak, and seemed to end his address rather abruptly.

The fact was, that paralysis had supervened; and on his return the next day to Constantinople,
his bodily and mental strength were seen to be rapidly diminishing. He still clung, however,
to the desire of accomplishing the object which lay so near his heart, and could not be satisfied
without going to Bebek to consult his missionary friends about his journey into the interior.
Probably they perceived that he was totally unequal to the effort, and advised him to relinquish
it; for on his return to the city he was induced to abandon the thought of proceeding farther,
and to turn his mind towards home. On the 23rd he said, If after what had been done he was
permitted to go home, it would be a satisfaction.[14]

