A little whinny close to him made him look round with a fearful hope. He saw neither pooka
nor fairy, but the long horns of the animal he was in search of.

He snatched joyfully at her chain, forgetting all his anger.  Indeed none knew better than
the goat Patsy's gentleness with all living creatures.  Her mouth was full of grass.  He remembered
his grandfather's speech as he tethered the little goat on the bare hillside above the house.

"My poor girl," he had said, "you've got little enough to ate, but then you've a beautiful view."

"Sure she strayed," said Patsy in extenuation, "because she was hungry, the creature."

So he had not had to leave the brightly lit bog-road for that black tunnel of trees just beyond
which led to old Hercules' tomb, and the well where the woman fell in and the fields where
old Michael Halloran, who had been steward and general overseer to the O'Harts, was reputed
to be seen night after night--hedging and fencing the lands and he years dead.

"You was a good little goat," said Patsy in his great relief.  "Come home now and I'll milk
you: and maybe that cross ould man would let me have a sup o' tay for my supper."

He had pulled the goat down the bank into the dry ditch.  It was a good thing he had stopped
to "bawl," else maybe he'd have missed the goat who had been having her fill of Mrs. McEnroe's
after-grass.  Still he wondered now at his temerity since the bawlin' might have brought them
upon him disturbin' their sleep that way.

He suddenly caught the sound of horses' feet coming along the bog-road towards him.  He stopped
and listened, holding firmly on to the goat. The bog-road was light as day.  Two people were
walking their horses side by side, a dog at their heels.  "It'll be Mr. Terence Comerford,
an' Sir Shawn O'Gara, comin' home together," Patsy said to himself. "What at all would be keepin'
them out till this hour of the night, unless it was to be talkin' to Bridyeen Sweeney?  Quare
ways young gentlemen has that they'd be talkin' to a poor girl an' maybe turnin' her head,
let alone settin' the neighbours to talkin' about her.  God help her."

In this musing, be it said, Patsy was but repeating the talk of his elders, although he was
naturally what is called an old-fashioned child.

He crouched low in the ditch while the horses came on at a walking pace.  The riders were talking,
one in a low voice, so low that Patsy could not make out what he said.  This one was slender
and young.  The other, young also, but big and burly, was riding a horse which apparently did
not like the walking pace.  She--it was a mare--curveted and caracoled in the road, which was
one reason why Patsy could not hear what was being said.  The boy peered out, with fear in
his heart. The knowledge of horses was born in him.  His father had been stud-groom to Mr.
Comerford of Inch.  By and by Patsy meant to escape from his old tyrant and become a stable-boy
at Inch or at Castle Talbot.  Perhaps in time he might come to be stud-groom, though that was
a dizzy height towards which as yet his imagination hardly carried him.

"Mr. Terence has drink taken," said Patsy, in his own mind.  "He's not steady in the saddle.
An', glory be to goodness, it's Spitfire he's ridin'."  Patsy was at home in many stables where
the grooms and stable-helpers condescended to accept his willing aid in running messages or
the like.  "What would the Misthress or Miss Mary say if they was to see him now?  Look well
to him, Sir Shawn, look well to him, or it's killin' himself he'll be!"

This apostrophe was unspoken.  Mr. Terence Comerford had brought Spitfire under control and
she walked more soberly. But instead of stroking them he rubbed their fur the wrong way, and hung
tin kettles to their tails, and tied handkerchiefs over their heads. When Mrs. Chinchilla saw
the Boy she humped her back, so that it looked like a gray mountain,
and said, "Sftt!" three times.

Terence Comerford's laugh came back borne upon a little wind.

"It'll be," said Patsy in his thoughts, "that Sir Shawn'll be biddin' Mr. Terence to have sinse.
A quare thing it is, and he all but promised to Miss Mary that he'd be down at Dowd's every
night since she and the Misthress went to Dublin, talking to poor Bridyeen.  'Tis sorrow the
crathur'll have, no less, if she goes listenin' to Mr. Terence.  'Tis a wonder Sir Shawn wouldn't
be givin' him better advice. Unless it was to be--there's some do be sayin' he's fond of Miss
Mary too."

All gossip of his elders, told round the turf-fire at night when Patsy was supposed to be fast
asleep in the settle bed, instead of "cockin' his ears" for grown people's talk.

He peered out with wide eyes in the direction the riders had taken. His small bullet head and
narrow shoulders threw a shadow on the moonlit road.

"Sir Shawn 'ud have a right to be seein' Mr. Terence home to Inch itself," he thought.  "It
isn't alone ould Hercules an' the river tumblin' over the weir an' the terrible dark road,
but there's ould Halloran's ghost on the long avenue to Inch, and there's the ghost of the
minister's wife by the churchyard.  And Spitfire, that would take fright at a pinkeen much
less a ghost, under him, and Mr. Terence be the way of him none too steady."

Mr. Terence's laughter came back on the wind, and was caught up and repeated by something that
lurked in the Wood of the Echoes, as the people called it, which grew on a spit of solid land
that reached out into the bog.  Those echoes were difficult to explain.  Why should a little
wood of slender trees within a low wall catch and fling back human voices?

The echo repeating that mocking laughter, out there in the bog, was a new element of terror
to Patsy.  He had better be getting away from this queer unlucky place before the riders were
out of hearing.  The little old grandfather, with his blazing eyes of wrath and the stick concealed
somewhere behind his coat-tails, his most familiar aspect to Patsy, was better than this solitude,
with that old Echo across the bog there cackling in that unchancy way.  Soon, very soon, the
lower road, overhung with trees, pitch-black, where one had to pass by old Hercules' tomb,
just above the fall of the river over its weir, would swallow Mr. Terence, while Sir Shawn's
way would wind upwards towards the mountains.  Unless indeed Sir Shawn was to go home to Inch
with Mr. Terence, seeing he was riding Spitfire and so many perils to be passed, and him not
too steady by the look of him.

Patsy trotted along in the wake of the riders, his bare feet making a soft padding noise in
the dust of the road.  His way was Sir Shawn's way.  The wealth of the world would not have
induced Patsy to go down under the black shade of the trees into the assemblage of all the ghosts.

The little goat followed with docility at his heels, uttering now and again a plaintive bleat
of protest at the pace.

Suddenly there came a sound which, filling Patsy's heart with a concrete terror, banished all
the shadowy terrors.  It was the sharp slash of a whip, followed by the sound of a horse in
mad flight.

"It's Spitfire, it's Spitfire!" cried Patsy to the moon and the stars. "She'll kill Mr. Terence.
The world knows she'd never take the whip."

It seemed to him as though there were two horses in the headlong flight, but he could not be
sure.  He stumbled along, sobbing in his haste and calling out inarticulate appeals to Heaven,
to Sir Shawn, to save Mr. Terence, while the clatter of the horses' feet died in the distance.
He even forgot his terror of the dark road which closed about him as he followed on Spitfire's
track.  It might be that Sir Shawn was catching up with the runaway horse, ready to snatch
at the bridle if only he could be in time.

