Is one less a poet because he regards the laws of reality, less religious because he accepts
them, less a Jew because he will live in his own century? Our dreamer will have none of the
Mediæval, is enamoured of the Modern; has lurking admiration of the "over-man" of Nietzsche,
even to be overpassed by the coming Jerusalem Jew; the psychical Eurasian, the link and interpreter
between East and West--nay, between antiquity and the modern spirit; the synthesis of mankind,
saturated with the culture of the nations, and now at last turning home again, laden with the
spiritual spoils of the world--for the world's benefit. He shall found an ideal modern state,
catholic in creed, righteous in law, a centre of conscience--even geographically--in a world
relapsing to Pagan chaos. And its flag shall be a "shield of David," with the Lion of Judah
rampant, and twelve stars for the Tribes. No more of the cringing and the whispering in dark
corners; no surreptitious invasion of Palestine. The Jew shall demand right, not tolerance.
Israel shall walk erect. And he, Israel's spokesman, will not juggle with diplomatic combinations--he
will play cards on table. He has nothing to say to the mob, Christian or Jewish, he will not
intrigue with political underlings. He is no demagogue; he will speak with kings in their palaces,
with prime ministers in their cabinets. There is a touch of the ὑβρισ of Lassalle, of the magnificence
of Manasseh Bueno Barzillai Azevedo Da Costa, King of the question-beggars.

Do you object that the poor will be the only ones to immigrate to Palestine? Why, it is just
those that we want. Prithee, how else shall we make our roads and plant our trees? No mention
now of the Eurasian exemplar, the synthetic "over-man." Perhaps he is only to evolve. Do you
suggest that an inner ennobling of scattered Israel might be the finer goal, the truer antidote
to anti-Semitism? Simple heart, do you not see it is just for our good--not our bad--qualities
that we are persecuted? A jugglery--specious enough for the moment--with the word "good"; forceful
"struggle-for-life" qualities substituted for spiritual, for ethical. And yet to doubt that
the world would--and does--respond sympathetically to the finer elements so abundantly in Israel,
is it not to despair of the world, of humanity? In such a world, what guarantee against the
pillage of the Third Temple? And in such a world were life worth living at all? And, even with
Palestine for ultimate goal, do you counsel delay, a nursing of the Zionist flame, a gradual
education and preparation of the race for a great conscious historic rôle in the world's future,
a forty years' wandering in the wilderness to organize or kill off the miscellaneous rabble--then
will you, dreamer, turn a deaf ear to the cry of millions oppressed to-day? Would you ignore
the appeals of these hundreds of telegrams, of these thousands of petitions with myriads of
signatures, for the sake of some visionary perfection of to-morrow? Nay, nay, the cartoon of
the Congress shall bring itself to pass. Against the picturesque wailers at the ruins of the
Temple wall shall be set the no less picturesque peasants sowing the seed, whose harvest is
at once waving grain and a regenerated Israel. The stains of sordid traffic shall be cleansed
by the dews and the rains. In the Jewish peasant behold the ideal plebeian of the future; a
son of the soil, yet also a son of the spirit. And what fair floriage of art and literature
may not the world gain from this great purified nation, carrying in its bosom the experience
of the ages?

Not all his own ideas, these; some perhaps only half-consciously present to him, so that even
in this very Congress the note of jealousy is heard, the claim of an earlier prophet insisted
on fiercely. For a moment the dignified assembly, becomes a prey to atavism, reproduces the
sordid squabbles of the Kahal. As if every movement was not fed by subterranean fires, heralded
by obscure rumblings, though 'tis only the earthquake or the volcanic jet which leaps into history!

But the President is finely impersonal. Not he, but the Congress. The Bulgarians have a tradition
that the Messiah will be born on August 29. He shares this belief. To-day the Messiah has been
born--the Congress. "In this Congress we procure for the Jewish people an organ which till
now it did not possess, and of which it was so sadly in want. Our cause is too great for the
ambition and wilfulness of a single person. It must be lifted up to something impersonal if
it is to succeed. And our Congress shall be lasting, not only until we are redeemed from the
old state, but still more so afterwards ... serious and lofty, a blessing for the unfortunate,
noxious to none, to the honor of all Jews, and worthy of a past, the glory of which is far
off, but everlasting."

And, as he steps from the tribune, amid the roar of "Hochs," and the thunder of hands and feet
and sticks, and the flutter of handkerchiefs, with men precipitating themselves to kiss his
hand, and others weeping and embracing, be sure that no private ambition possesses him, be
sure that his heart swells only with the presentiment of great events and with uplifting thoughts
of the millions who will thrill to the distant echo of this sublime moment.

What European parliament could glow with such a galaxy of intellect? Enter hurriedly Impatient
Subscriber.

Impatient Subscriber (turning over leaves of address-book). Of course I can't find it! Ah! here it
is! 142086. (Rings bell of telephone, and listens with receivers to his ear.) Now I have forgotten
it! (Puts back receivers on rests, and refers again to book. Telephone
bell rings in answer. He hurries back and calls.) One hundred and
forty-two nought eighty-six.

First Voice (from telephone). One hundred
and forty-two?

Imp. Sub. Yes, and nought eighty-six. That old painter, whose famous Dance of Death drew for centuries the curious to Bâle,
could not picture the Jew save as the gaberdined miser, only dropping his money-bag at Death's
touch. Well, here is another sight for him--could Death, that took him too, bring him back
for a moment--these scholars, thinkers, poets, from all the lands of the Exile, who stand up
in honor of the dead pioneers of Zionism, and, raising their right hands to heaven, cry, "If
I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget its cunning!" Yes, the dream still stirs
at the heart of the mummied race, the fire quenched two thousand years ago sleeps yet in the
ashes. And if our President forgets that the vast bulk of his brethren are unrepresented in
his Congress, that they are content with the civic rights so painfully won, and have quite
other conceptions of their creed's future, who will grudge him this moment of fine rapture?

Or, when at night, in the students' Kommers, with joyful weeping and with brotherly kisses,
sages and gray-beards join in the gaudeamus igitur, who shall deny him grounds for his faith
that juvenes sumus yet, that the carking centuries have had no power over our immortal nation.
"Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale her infinite variety."

The world in which prophecies are uttered cannot be the world in which prophecies are fulfilled.
And yet when--at the wind-up of this memorable meeting--the Rabbi of Bâle, in the black skull-cap
of sanctity, ascending the tribune amid the deafening applause of a catholic Congress, expresses
the fears of the faithful, lest in the new Jewish State the religious Jew be under a ban; and
when the President gravely gives the assurance, amid enthusiasm as frantic, that Judaism has
nothing to fear--Judaism, the one cause and consolation of the ages of isolation and martyrdom--does
no sense of the irony of history intrude upon his exalted mood?

THE PALESTINE PILGRIM

A vast, motley crowd of poor Jews and Jewesses swayed outside the doors of the great Manchester
synagogue, warmed against the winter afternoon by their desperate squeezing and pushing. They
stretched from the broad-pillared portico down the steps and beyond the iron railings, far
into the street. The wooden benches of the sacred building were already packed with a perspiring
multitude, seated indiscriminately, women with men, and even men in the women's gallery, resentfully
conscious--for the first time--of the grating. The hour of the address had already struck,
but the body of police strove in vain to close the doors against the mighty human stream that
pressed on and on, frenzied with the fear of disappointment and the long wait.

A policeman, worming his way in by the caretaker's entrance, bore to the hero of the afternoon
the superintendent's message that unless he delayed his speech till the bulk of the disappointed
could be got inside, a riot could not be staved off. And so the stream continued to force itself
slowly forward, flowing into every nook and gangway, till it stood solid and immovable, heaped
like the waters of the Red Sea. And when at last the doors were bolted, and thousands of swarthy
faces, illumined faintly by clusters of pendent gas-globes, were turned towards the tall pulpit
where the speaker stood, dominant, against the mystic background of the Ark-curtain, it seemed
as if the whole Ghetto of Manchester--the entire population of Strange-ways and Redbank--had
poured itself into this one synagogue in a great tidal wave, moved by one of those strange
celestial influences which have throughout all history disturbed the torpor of the Jewries.

Of these poverty-stricken thousands, sucked hither by the fame of a soldier rumored to represent
a Messianic millionaire bent on the restoration and redemption of Israel, Aaron the Pedlar
was an atom--ugly, wan, and stooping, with pious ear-locks, and a long, fusty coat, little
regarded even by those amid whom he surged and squeezed for hours in patience. Aaron counted
for less than nothing in a world he helped to overcrowd, and of which he perceived very little.
For, although he did not fail to make a profit on his gilded goods, and knew how to wheedle
servants at side-doors, he was far behind his fellows in that misapprehension of the human
hurly-burly which makes your ordinary Russian Jew a political oracle. Aaron's interest in politics
was limited to the wars of the Kings of Israel and the misdeeds of Titus and Antiochus Epiphanes.
To him the modern world was composed of Jews and heathen; and society had two simple sections--the
rich and the poor.

"Don't you enjoy travelling?" one of the former section once asked him affably. "Even if it's
disagreeable in winter you must pass through a good deal of beautiful scenery in summer."

"If I am on business," replied the pedlar, "how can I bother about the beautiful?"

And, flustered though he was by the condescension of the great person, his naïve counter-query
expressed a truth. He lived, indeed, in a strange dream-world, and had no eyes for the real
except in the shape of cheap trinkets. He was happier in the squalid streets of Strange-ways,
where strips of Hebrew patched the windows of cook-shops, and where a synagogue was ever at
hand, than when striding across the purple moors under an open blue sky, or resting with his
pack by the side of purling brooks. Stupid his enemies would have called him, only he was too
unimportant to have enemies, the roughs and the children who mocked his passage being actuated
merely by impersonal malice. To his friends--if the few who were aware of his existence could
be called friends--he was a Schlemihl (a luckless fool).

"A man who earns a pound a week live without a wife!" complained the Shadchan (marriage-broker)
to a group of sympathetic cap-makers.

