And so Ralph the heir found himself to be the owner of it all just at the moment in which he
thought that he had lost all chance of the inheritance as the result of his own folly. When
he walked out of the lawyer's office he was almost wild with amazement. This was the prize
to which he had been taught to look forward through all his boyish days, and all his early
manhood;--but to look forward to it, as a thing that must be very distant, so distant as almost
to be lost in the vagueness of the prospect. Probably his youth would have clean passed from
him, and he would have entered upon the downhill course of what is called middle life before
his inheritance would come to him. He had been unable to wait, and had wasted everything,--nearly
everything; had, at any rate, ruined all his hopes before he was seven-and-twenty; and yet,
now, at seven-and-twenty, it was, as his lawyer assured him, all his own. How nearly had he
lost it all! How nearly had he married the breeches-maker's daughter! How close upon the rocks
he had been. But now all was his own, and he was in truth Newton of Newton, with no embarrassments
of any kind which could impose a feather's weight upon his back.

CHAPTER XXXV.

"SHE'LL ACCEPT YOU, OF COURSE."

We will pass over the solemn sadness of the funeral at Newton and the subsequent reading of
the old Squire's will. As to the latter, the will was as it had been made some six or seven
years ago. The Squire had simply left all that he possessed to his illegitimate son Ralph Newton.
There was no difficulty about the will. Nor was there any difficulty about the estate. The
two lawyers came down to the funeral. Sir Thomas Underwood would have come but that he was
prevented by the state of his arm. A statement showing all that had been done in the matter
was prepared for him, but it was agreed on all sides that the sale had not been made, and that
the legitimate heir must succeed to the property. No one was disposed to dispute the decision.
The Squire's son had never for a moment supposed that he could claim the estate. Nor did Ralph
the heir suppose for a moment that he could surrender it after the explanation which he had
received from the lawyer in London.

The funeral was over, and the will had been read, and at the end of November the three young
men were still living together in the great house at Newton. The heir had gone up to London
once or twice, instigated by the necessity of the now not difficult task of raising a little
ready money. He must at once pay off all his debts. He must especially pay that which he owed
to Mr. Neefit; and he must do so with many expressions of his gratitude,--perhaps with some
expressions of polite regret at the hardness of Polly's heart towards him. But he must do so
certainly without any further entreaty that Polly's heart might be softened. Ah,--with what
marvellous good fortune had he escaped from that pitfall! For how much had he not to be thankful
to some favouring goddess who must surely have watched over him from his birth! From what shipwrecks
had he not escaped! And now he was Squire of Newton, with wealth and all luxuries at command,
hampered with no wife, oppressed by no debts, free from all cares. As he thought of his perfect
freedom in these respects, he remembered his former resolution as to Mary Bonner. That resolution
he would carry out. It would be well for him now to marry a wife, and of all the women he had
ever seen Mary Bonner was certainly the most beautiful. With Newton all his own, with such
a string of horses as he would soon possess, and with such a wife at the head of his table,
whom need he envy, and how many were there who would not envy him?

Throughout November he allowed his horses to remain at the Moonbeam, being somewhat in doubt
whether or no he would return to that fascinating hostelrie. He received one or two most respectful
letters from Mr. Horsball, in which glowing accounts were given of the sport of the season,
and the health of his horses, and offers made of most disinterested services. Rooms should
be ready for him at a moment's notice if he liked at any time to run over for a week's hunting.
It was quite evident that in the eyes of Mr. Horsball Newton of Newton was a great man. And
there came congratulations from Mr. Cox, in which no allusion whatever was made to the Squire's
somewhat uncivil conduct at their last meeting. Mr. Cox trusted that his dearest friend would
come over and have another spell at the Moonbeam before he settled down for life;--and then
hinted in language that was really delicate in the niceness of its expression, that if he,
Cox, were but invited to spend a week or two at Newton Priory before he banished himself for
life to Australia, he would be able to make his way over the briny deep with a light heart
and an uncomplaining tongue. "You know, old fellow, how true I've always been to you," wrote
Cox, in language of the purest friendship. "As true as steel,--to sausages in the morning and
brandy and soda at night," said Ralph to himself as he read this.

He behaved with thorough kindness to his cousin. The three men lived together for a month,
and their intercourse was as pleasant as was possible under the circumstances. Of course there
was no hunting during this month at Newton. Nor indeed did the heir see a hound till December,
although, as the reader is aware, he was not particularly bound to revere his uncle's memory.
He made many overtures to his namesake. He would be only too happy if his cousin,--he always
called the Squire's son his cousin,--would make Newton his home for the next twelvemonth. It
was found that the Squire had left behind him something like forty thousand pounds, so that
the son was by no means to be regarded as a poor man. It was his idea at present that he would
purchase in some pleasant county as much land as he might farm himself, and there set up his
staff for life. "And get about two-and-a-half per cent. for your money," said the heir, who
was beginning to consider himself learned in such matters, and could talk of land as a very
serious thing in the way of a possession.

"What else am I to do?" said the other. "Two-and-a-half per cent. with an occupation is better
than five per cent. with none. I should make out the remainder, too, by farming the land myself.
There is nothing else in the world that I could do."

As for remaining twelve months at Newton, that was of course out of the question. Nevertheless,
when December came he was still living in the house, and had consented to remain there till
Christmas should have passed. He had already heard of a farm in Norfolk. "The worst county
for hunting in England," the heir had said. "Then I must try and live without hunting," said
Ralph who was not the heir. During all this time not a horse was sent to the meet from the
Newton stables. The owner of Newton was contented to see the animals exercised in the park,
and to amuse himself by schooling them over hurdles, and by high jumping at the bar.

During the past month the young Squire had received various letters from Sir Thomas Underwood,
and the other Ralph had received one. With Sir Thomas's caution, advice, and explanations to
his former ward, the story has no immediate concern; but his letter to him who was to have
been Mary Bonner's suitor may concern us more nearly. It was very short, and the reader shall
have it entire.

   Popham Villa, 10th November, 186--.

   MY DEAR MR. NEWTON,--

   I have delayed answering your letter for a day or two
   in order that it may not disturb you till the last
   sad ceremony be over. I do not presume to offer you
   consolation in your great sorrow. Such tenders should only
   be made by the nearest and the dearest. Perhaps you will
   permit me to say that what little I have seen of you and
   what further I have heard of you assure to you my most
   perfect sympathy.

   On that other matter which gave occasion for your two
   letters to me I shall best perhaps discharge my duty by
   telling you that I showed them both to my niece; and that
   she feels, as do I, that they are both honourable to you,
   and of a nature to confer honour upon her. The change
   in your position, which I acknowledge to be most severe,
   undoubtedly releases you, as it would have released
   her,--had she been bound and chose to accept such release.

   Whenever you may be in this neighbourhood we shall be
   happy to see you.

   The state of my arm still prevents me from writing with
   ease.

   Yours very faithfully,

   THOMAS UNDERWOOD.

Newton, when he received this letter, struggled hard to give to it its proper significance,
but he could bring himself to no conclusion respecting it. Sir Thomas had acknowledged that
he was released,--and that Mary Bonner would also have been released had she placed herself
under any obligation; but Sir Thomas did not say a word from which his correspondent might
gather whether in his present circumstances he might still be regarded as an acceptable suitor.
The letter was most civil, most courteous, almost cordial in its expression of sympathy; but
yet it did not contain a word of encouragement. It may be said that the suitor had himself
so written to the lady's uncle, as to place himself out of the way of all further encouragement;--as
to have put it beyond the power of his correspondent to write a word to him that should have
in it any comfort. Certainly he had done so. He had clearly shown in his second letter that
he had abandoned all idea of making the match as to which he had shown so much urgent desire
in his first letter. He had explained that the marriage would now be impossible, and had spoken
of himself as a ruined, broken man, all whose hopes were shipwrecked. Sir Thomas could hardly
have told him in reply that Mary Bonner would still be pleased to see him. And yet Mary Bonner
had almost said so. She had been very silent when the letter was read to her. The news of Mr.
Newton's death had already reached the family at Popham Villa, and had struck them all with
awe. How it might affect the property even Sir Thomas had not absolutely known at first; though
he was not slow to make it understood that in all probability this terrible accident would
be ruinous to the hopes which his niece had been justified in entertaining. At that hour Mary
had spoken not a word;--nor could she be induced to speak respecting it either by Patience
or Clarissa. Even to them she could not bring herself to say that if the man really loved her
he would still come to her and say so. There was a feeling of awe upon her which made her mute,
and stern, and altogether unplastic in the hands of her friends. It seemed even to Patience
that Mary was struck by a stunning sorrow at the ruin which had come upon her lover's prospects.
But it was not so at all. The thought wronged her utterly. What stunned her was this,--that
she could not bring herself to express a passion for a man whom she had seen so seldom, with
whom her conversation had been so slight, from whom personally she had received no overtures
of attachment,--even though he were ruined. She could not bring herself to express such a passion;--but
yet it was there. When Clarissa thought that she might obtain if not a word, at least a tear,
Mary appeared to be dead to all feeling, though crushed by what she had lost. She was thinking
the while whether it might be possible for such a one as her to send to the man and to tell
him that that which had now occurred had of a sudden made him really dear to her. Thoughts
of maiden boldness flitted across her mind, but she could not communicate them even to the
girls who were her friends. Yet in silence and in solitude she resolved that the time should
come in which she would be bold.

Then young Newton's second letter reached the house, and that also had been read to her. "He
is quite right," said Sir Thomas. "Of course it releases both of you."

"There was nothing to release," said Mary, proudly.

"I mean to say that having made such a proposition as was contained in his first letter, he
was bound to explain his altered position."

"I suppose so," said Mary.

"Of course he was. He had made his offer believing that he could make you mistress of Newton
Priory,--and he had made it thinking that he himself could marry in that position. And he would
have been in that position had not this most unforeseen and terrible calamity have occurred."

"I do not see that it makes any difference," said Mary, in a whisper.

"What do you mean, my dear?"

"I hardly know, uncle."

"Try to explain yourself, Mary."

"If I had accepted any man when he was rich, I should not go back when he was poor,--unless
he wanted it." This also she said in a whisper.

"But you had not accepted him."

"No," said Mary, still in a whisper. Sir Thomas, who was perhaps not very good at such things,
did not understand the working of her mind. But had she dared, she would have asked her uncle
to tell Mr. Newton to come and see her. Sir Thomas, having some dim inkling of what perhaps
might be the case, did add a paragraph to his letter in which he notified to his correspondent
that a personal visit would be taken in good part.

By the end of the first week in December things were beginning to settle into shape at the
Priory. The three young men were still living together at the great house, and the tenants
on the estate had been taught to recognise the fact that Ralph, who had ever been the heir,
was in truth the owner. Among the labourers and poorer classes there was no doubt much regret,
and that regret was expressed. The tenants, though they all liked the Squire's son, were not
upon the whole ill-pleased. It was in proper conformity with English habits and English feelings
that the real heir should reign. Among the gentry the young Squire was made as welcome as the
circumstances of the heir would admit. According to their way of thinking, personally popular
as was the other man, it was clearly better that a legitimate descendant of the old family
should be installed at Newton Priory. The old Squire's son rode well to hounds, and was loved
by all; but nothing that all the world could do on his behalf would make him Newton of Newton.
If only he would remain in the neighbourhood and take some place suited to his income, every
house would be open to him. He would be received with no diminution of attachment or respect.
Overtures of this nature were made to him. This house could be had for him, and that farm could
be made comfortable. He might live among them as a general favourite; but he could not under
any circumstances have been,--Newton of Newton. Nothing, however, was clearer to himself than
this;--that as he could not remain in the county as the master of Newton Priory, he would not
remain in the county at all.

As things settled down and took shape he began to feel that even in his present condition he
might possibly make himself acceptable to such a girl as Mary Bonner. In respect of fortune
there could be no reason whatever why he should not offer her his hand. He was in truth a rich
man, whereas she had nothing, By birth he was nobody,--absolutely nobody; but then also would
he have been nobody had all the lands of Newton belonged to him. When he had written that second
letter, waiving all claim to Mary's hand because of the inferiority of his position, he was
suffering from a morbid view which he had taken of his own affairs. He was telling himself
then,--so assuring himself, though he did not in truth believe the assurance,--that he had
lost not only the estate, but also his father's private fortune. At that moment he had been
unstrung, demoralised, and unmanned,--so weak that a feather would have knocked him over. The
blow had been so sudden, the solitude and gloom of the house so depressing, and his sorrow
so crushing, that he was ready to acknowledge that there could be no hope for him in any direction.
He had fed himself upon his own grief, till the idea of any future success in life was almost
unpalatable to him. But things had mended with him now, and he would see whether there might
not yet be joys for him in the world. He would first see whether there might not be that one
great joy which he had promised to himself.

And then there came another blow. The young Squire had resolved that he would not hunt before
Christmas in the Newton country. It was felt by him and by his brother that he should abstain
from doing so out of respect to the memory of his uncle, and he had declared his purpose. Of
course there was neither hunting nor shooting in these days for the other Ralph. But at the
end of a month the young Squire began to feel that the days went rather slowly with him, and
he remembered his stud at the Moonbeam. He consulted Gregory; and the parson, though he would
fain have induced his brother to remain, could not say that there was any real objection to
a trip to the B. and B's. Ralph would go there on the 10th of December, and be back at his
own house before Christmas. When Christmas was over, the other Ralph was to leave Newton,--perhaps
for ever.

The two Ralphs had become excellent friends, and when the one that was to go declared his intention
of going with no intention of returning, the other pressed him warmly to think better of it,
and to look upon the Priory at any rate as a second home. There were reasons why it could not
be so, said the namesake; but in the close confidence of friendship which the giving and the
declining of the offer generated came this further blow. They were standing together leaning
upon a gate, and looking at the exhumation of certain vast roots, as to which the trees once
belonging to them had been made to fall in consequence of the improvements going on at Darvell's
farm. "I don't mind telling you," said Ralph the heir, "that I hope soon to have a mistress here."

"And who is she?"

"That would be mere telling;--would it not?"

"Clarissa Underwood?" asked the unsuspecting Ralph.

There did come some prick of conscience, some qualm, of an injury done, upon the young Squire
as he made his answer. "No; not Clarissa;--though she is the dearest, sweetest girl that ever
lived, and would make a better wife perhaps than the girl I think of."

"And who is the girl you think of?"

"She is to be found in the same house."

"You do not mean the elder sister?" said the unfortunate one. He had known well that his companion
had not alluded to Patience Underwood; but in his agony he had suggested to himself that mode
of escape.

"No; not Patience Underwood. Though, let me tell you, a man might do worse than marry Patience
Underwood. I have always thought it a pity that Patience and Gregory would not make a match
of it. He, however, would fall in love with Clary, and she has too much of the rake in her
to give herself to a parson. I was thinking of Mary Bonner, who, to my mind, is the handsomest
woman I ever saw in my life."

"I think she is," said Ralph, turning away his face.

"She hasn't a farthing, I fancy," continued the happy heir, "but I don't regard that now. A
few months ago I had a mind to marry for money; but it isn't the sort of thing that any man
should do. I have almost made up my mind to ask her. Indeed, when I tell you, I suppose I have
quite made up my mind."

"She'll accept you,--of course."

"I can say nothing about that, you know. A man must take his chance. I can offer her a fine
position, and a girl, I think, should have some regard to money when she marries, though a
man should not. If there's nobody before me I should have a chance, I suppose."

His words were not boastful, but there was a tone of triumph in his voice. And why should he
not triumph? thought the other Ralph. Of course he would triumph. He had everything to recommend
him. And as for himself,--for him, the dispossessed one,--any particle of a claim which he
might have secured by means of that former correspondence had been withdrawn by his own subsequent
words. "I dare say she'll take you," he said, with his face still averted.

Ralph the heir did indeed think that he would be accepted, and he went on to discuss the circumstances
of their future home, almost as though Mary Bonner were already employed in getting together
her wedding garments. His companion said nothing further, and Ralph the heir did not discover
that anything was amiss.

On the following day Ralph the heir went across the country to the Moonbeam in Buckinghamshire.

CHAPTER XXXVI.

NEEFIT MEANS TO STICK TO IT.

There was some business to be done as a matter of course before the young Squire could have
all his affairs properly settled. There were debts to be paid, among which Mr. Neefit's stood
certainly first. It was first in magnitude, and first in obligation; but it gave Ralph no manner
of uneasiness. He had really done his best to get Polly to marry him, and, luckily for him,--by
the direct interposition of some divine Providence, as it now seemed to Ralph,--Polly had twice
refused him. It seemed to him, indeed, that divine Providence looked after him in a special
way, breaking his uncle's neck in the very nick of time, and filling a breeches-maker's daughter's
mind with so sound a sense of the propriety of things, as to induce her to decline the honour
of being a millstone round his neck, when positively the offer was pressed upon her. As things
stood there could be no difficulty with Mr. Neefit. The money would be paid, of course, with
all adjuncts of accruing interest, and Mr. Neefit should go on making breeches for him to the
end of the chapter. And for raising this money he had still a remnant of the old property which
he could sell, so that he need not begin by laying an ounce of encumbrance on his paternal
estates. He was very clear in his mind at this period of his life that there should never be
any such encumbrance in his days. That remnant of property should be sold, and Neefit, Horsball,
and others, should be paid. But it certainly did occur to him in regard to Neefit, that there
had been that between them which made it expedient that the matter should be settled with some
greater courtesy than would be shown by a simple transaction through his man of business. Therefore
he wrote a few lines to Mr. Neefit on the day before he left the Priory,--a few lines which
he thought to be very civil.

   Newton, 9th December, 186--.

   MY DEAR MR. NEEFIT,--

   You have probably heard before this of the accident which
   has happened in my family. My uncle has been killed by
   a fall from his horse, and I have come into my property
   earlier than I expected. As soon as I could begin to
   attend to matters of business, I thought of my debt to
   you, and of all the obligation I owe you. I think the debt
   is £1,000; but whatever it is it can be paid now. The
   money will be ready early in the year, if that will do for
   you,--and I am very much obliged to you. Would you mind
   letting Mr. Carey know how much it is, interest and all.
   He is our family lawyer.

   Remember me very kindly to Miss Polly. I hope she will
   always think of me as a friend. Would you tell Bawwah to
   put three pairs of breeches in hand for me,--leather.

   Yours very truly,

   RALPH NEWTON.

The wrath of Mr. Neefit on receiving this letter at his shop in Conduit Street was almost divine.
He had heard from Polly an account of that last interview at Ramsgate, and Polly had told her
story as truly as she knew how to tell it. But the father had never for a moment allowed himself
to conceive that therefore the thing was at an end, and had instructed Polly that she was not
to look upon it in that light. He regarded his young customer as absolutely bound to him, and
would not acknowledge to himself that such obligation could be annulled by Polly's girlish
folly. And he did believe that young Newton intended to act, as he called it, "on the square."
So believing, he was ready to make almost any sacrifice of himself; but that Newton should
now go back, after having received his hard money, was to him a thing quite out of the question.
He scolded Polly with some violence, and asked whether she wanted to marry such a lout as Moggs.
Polly replied with spirit that she wouldn't marry any man till she found that she could love
him, and that the man loved her. "Ain't he told you as he loves you ever so often?" said Neefit.
"I know what I'm doing of, father," said Polly, "and I'm not going to be drove." Nevertheless
Mr. Neefit had felt certain that if young Newton would still act upon the square, things would
settle themselves rightly. There was the money due, and, as Neefit constantly said to himself,
"money was a thing as was not to be got over."

Then had come upon the tradesman the tidings of the old Squire's death. They were read to him
out of a newspaper by his shopman, Waddle. "I'm blessed if he ain't been and tumbled all at
once into his uncle's shoes," said Waddle. The paragraph in question was one which appeared
in a weekly newspaper some two days after the Squire's death. Neefit, who at the moment was
turning over the pages of his ledger, came down from his desk and stood for about ten minutes
in the middle of his shop, while the Herr ceased from his cutting, and Waddle read the paragraph
over and over again. Neefit stood stock still, with his hands in his breeches pockets, and
his great staring eyes fixed upon vacancy. "I'm blessed if it ain't true," said Waddle, convinced
by the repetition of his own reading. News had previously reached the shop that the Squire
had had a fall. Tidings as to troubles in the hunting-field were quick in reaching Mr. Neefit's
shop;--but there had been no idea that the accident would prove to be fatal. Neefit, when he
went home that night, told his wife and daughter. "That will be the last of young Newton,"
said Mrs. Neefit. "I'm d---- if it will!" said the breeches-maker. Polly maintained a discreet
silence as to the heir, merely remarking that it was very sad for the old gentleman. Polly
at that time was very full of admiration for Moggs,--in regard, that is, to the political character
of her lover. Moggs had lost his election, but was about to petition.

Neefit was never called upon, in the way of his own trade, to make funereal garments. Men,
when they are bereaved of their friends, do not ride in black breeches. But he had all a tailor's
respect for a customer with a dead relation. He felt that it would not become him to make an
application to the young Squire on a subject connected with marriage, till the tombstone over
the old Squire should have been properly adjusted. He was a patient man, and could wait. And
he was a man not good at writing letters. His customer and future son-in-law would turn up
soon; or else, the expectant father-in-law might drop down upon him at the Moonbeam or elsewhere.
As for a final escape, Polly Neefit's father hardly feared that any such attempt would be made.
The young man had acted on the square, and had made his offer in good faith.

Such was Mr. Neefit's state of mind when he received the young Squire's letter. The letter
almost knocked him down. There was a decision about it, a confidence that all was over between
them except the necessary payment of the money, an absence of all doubt as to "Miss Polly,"
which he could not endure. And then that order for more breeches, included in the very same
paragraph with Polly, was most injurious. It must be owned that the letter was a cruel, heart-rending,
bad letter. For an hour or so it nearly broke Mr. Neefit's heart. But he resolved that he was
not going to be done. The young Squire should marry his daughter, or the whole transaction
should be published to the world. He would do such things and say such things that the young
Squire should certainly not have a good time of it. He said not a word to Polly of the letter
that night, but he did speak of the young Squire. "When that young man comes again, Miss Polly,"
he said, "I shall expect you to take him."

"I don't know anything about that, father," said Polly. "He's had his answer, and I'm thinking
he won't ask for another." Upon this the breeches-maker looked at his daughter, but made no
other reply.

During the two or three following days Neefit made some inquiries, and found that his customer
was at the Moonbeam. It was now necessary that he should go to work at once, and, therefore,
with many misgivings, he took Waddle into his confidence. He could not himself write such a
letter as then must be written;--but Waddle was perfect at the writing of letters. Waddle shrugged
his shoulders, and clearly did not believe that Polly would ever get the young Squire. Waddle
indeed went so far as to hint that his master would be lucky in obtaining payment of his money,--but,
nevertheless, he gave his mind to the writing of the letter. The letter was written as follows:--

   Conduit Street, 14th December, 186--.

   DEAR SIR,--

   Yours of the 9th instant has come to hand, and I beg to
   say with compliments how shocked we were to hear of the
   Squire's accident. It was terribly sudden, and we all felt
   it very much; as in the way of our business we very often
   have to.

   As to the money that can stand. Between friends such
   things needn't be mentioned. Any accommodation of that
   kind was and always will be ready when required. As to
   that other matter, a young gentleman like you won't think
   that a young lady is to be taken at her first word. A
   bargain is a bargain, and honourable is honourable, which
   nobody knows as well as you who was always disposed to
   be upon the square. Our Polly hasn't forgotten you,--and
   isn't going.

It should be acknowledged on Mr. Waddle's behalf, that that last assurance was inserted by
the unassisted energy of Mr. Neefit himself.

   We shall expect to see you without delay, here or at
   Hendon, as may best suit; but pray remember that things
   stand just as they was. Touching other matters, as needn't
   be named here, orders will be attended to as usual if
   given separate.

   Yours very truly and obedient,

   THOMAS NEEFIT.

