Transcriber's Note:

"[t]" represents a raised (superscript) "t."

       *       *       *       *       *

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION--BUREAU OF ETHNOLOGY

       *       *       *       *       *

THE RELIGIOUS LIFE OF THE ZUÑI CHILD.

BY

MRS. TILLY E. STEVENSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS.

                                                  Page.

  Brief account of Zuñi mythology................. 539

  Birth customs................................... 545

  Involuntary initiation into the Kōk-kō.......... 547

  Voluntary initiation into the Kōk-kō............ 553

ILLUSTRATIONS.

  PLATE                                           Page.

     XX. Zuñi masks and Kō-yē-mē-shi.............. 545

    XXI. Group of Sä-lä-mō-bī-ya masks............ 548

   XXII. Zuñi sand altar in Kiva of the North..... 550

  XXIII. ōh-hē-i-que, Kiva of the East............ 552

THE RELIGIOUS LIFE OF THE ZUÑI CHILD.

       *       *       *       *       *

BY MRS. TILLY E. STEVENSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

BRIEF ACCOUNT OF ZUÑI MYTHOLOGY.

The Pueblo of Zuñi is situated in Western New Mexico on the Rio Zuñi, a tributary of the Little
Colorado River. The Zuñi have resided in this region for several centuries. The peculiar geologic
and geographic character of the country surrounding them, as well as its aridity, furnishes
ample sources from which a barbarous people would derive legendary and mythologic history.
A brief reference to these features is necessary to understand more fully the religious phases
of Zuñi child life.

Three miles east of the Pueblo of Zuñi is a conspicuously beautiful mesa, of red and white
sandstone, tō-wā-yäl län-ne (corn mountain). Upon this mesa are the remains of the old village
of Zuñi. The Zuñi lived during a long period on this mesa, and it was here that Coronado found
them in the sixteenth century. Tradition tells that they were driven by a great flood from
the site they now occupy, which is in the valley below the mesa, and that they resorted to
the mesa for protection from the rising waters. The waters rose to the very summit of the mesa,
and to appease the aggressive element a human sacrifice was necessary. A youth and a maiden,
son and daughter of two priests, were thrown into this ocean. Two great pinnacles, which have
been carved from the main mesa by weathering influences, are looked upon by the Zuñi as the
actual youth and maiden converted into stone, and are appealed to as "father" and "mother."
Many of the Zuñi legends and superstitions are associated with this mesa, while over its summit
are spread the extensive ruins of the long ago deserted village. There are in many localities,
around its precipitous sides and walls, shrines and groups of sacred objects which are constantly
resorted to by different orders of the tribe. Some of the most interesting of these are the
most inaccessible. When easy of approach they are in such secluded spots that a stranger might
pass without dreaming of the treasures within his reach. On the western side of this mesa are
several especially interesting shrines. About half way up the acclivity on the west side an
overhanging rock forms the base of one of the pinnacles referred to. This rock is literally
honeycombed with holes, from one-half to three-fourths of an inch in diameter. I visited the
spot in the fall of 1884, with Professors E.B. Tylor and H.N. Moseley, of Oxford, England,
and Mr. G.K. Gilbert, of the United States Geological Survey. These gentlemen could not determine
whether the tiny excavations were originally made by human hands or by some other agency. The
Indian's only answer when questioned was, "They be long to the old; they were made by the gods."
Hundreds of these holes contain bits of cotton and wool from garments. In the side of this
rock there are larger spaces, in which miniature vases, filled with sand, are placed. The sand
is ground by rubbing stones from the same rock. The vases of sand, and also the fragments of
wool and cotton, are offerings at the feet of the "mother" rock. Here, too, can be seen a quantity
of firewood heaped as shown in the right-hand corner of the illustration. Each man and woman
deposited a piece, that he or she might always have plenty of wood for heat and light. Some
three hundred feet above is another shrine, directly attached to the "father" rock, and to
the white man difficult of access. Here I found many offerings of plume sticks (Tē līk-tkī-nā-we).

Before entering upon the purely mythologic phases of Zuñi child life I will present a brief
sketch of some of the Zuñi beliefs. There are thirteen secret orders in Zuñi, in many of which
women and children are conspicuous, besides the purely mythologic order of the Kōk-kō. All
boys are initiated into this order, while but few girls enter it. It is optional with a girl;
she must never marry if she joins the Kōk-kō, and she is not requested to enter this order
until she has arrived at such age as to fully understand its grave responsibilities and requirements.

Let us follow the Zuñi tradition of the ancient time, when these people first came to this
world. They reached this world in early morning, and seeing the morning star they rejoiced
and said to the war gods: "We see your father, of whom you have told us." "No," said the gods,
"this is the warrior who comes before our father;" and when the sun arose the people fell upon
the earth and bowed their heads in fear. All their traditions point to the distant land of
their appearance in this world as being in the far northwest; from, there they were accompanied
by āh-ai-ū-ta and Mā-ā-sē-we. These little gods occupy important positions in Zuñi myth and
legend. After long journeying, it was decided that the Priest Doctor (Kā wi-mō sa) should send
his son and his daughter in advance to discover some favorable spot upon which to build a village.
The youth and the maiden finally ascended a peak from, which to have an extended view of the
country. "Rest here, my sister, for you are tired," said the youth, "and I will go alone."
From fatigue, the girl soon sank into a slumber, and when the youth returned, he was impressed
with the surpassing loveliness of his sister. They remained for a time on this mountain, and
at their union they were transformed--the youth into a hideous looking creature, the Kō-yē-mē-shi
(Plate XX); the maiden into a being with snow white hair, the Kō-mō-kĕt-si. The [t]Kō-thlā-ma
(hermaphrodite) is the offspring of this unnatural union. The youth said to his sister, "We
are no longer like our people; we will therefore make this mountain our home. But it is not
well for us to be alone; wait here and I will go and prepare a place for our others." Descending
the mountain, he swept his foot through the sands in the plains below, and immediately a river
flowed and a lake appeared, and in the depths of this lake a group of houses, and in the center
of this group a religious assembly house, or kiva, provided with many windows, through which
those not privileged to enter the kiva might view the dance within. After he performed this
magic deed, he again joined his sister on the mountain, from which they could see their people
approaching. The mountain has since that time borne the name of Kō-kōk-shi--kōk-shi meaning good.

The first of the āh-shi-wi, or Zuñi, to cross this river were the Än-shi-i-que, or Bear gens;
Tō-wā-que, Corn gens; and [t]Ko-ōh-lōk-tā-que, Sand Hill Crane gens. When in the middle of
the river the children of these gentes were transformed into tortoises, frogs, snakes, ducks,
and dragonflies. The children thus transformed, while tightly clinging to their mother's necks,
began to bite and pinch. The mothers, trembling with fear, let them fall into the river. āh-ai-ū-ta
and Mā-ā-sē-we, missing the children, inquired, "Where are the little ones?" The mothers replied,
"We were afraid and dropped them into the water." The war gods then cried out to the remainder
of the people, "Wait, wait until we speak with you," and they told the women to be brave and
cling tightly to the children until they crossed the river. Obeying the gods' commands, they
carried the little ones over, though they were transformed just as the others. Upon reaching
the opposite shore, they were again restored to their natural forms, excepting their hands,
which were duck-webbed. These webs were cut with āh-ai-ū-ta's stone knife and thus restored
to perfect hands.

The mothers whose children fell into the waters were grieved and refused to be comforted. The
Priest Doctor was also grieved, and said, "Alas, where have the little ones gone?" āh-ai-ū-ta
and Mā-ā-sē-we replied, "We will go and learn something of them," and upon descending into
the lake they found the beautiful kiva, in which the children were assembled; but again they
had been changed; they were no longer reptiles, but were of a similar type to the Kō-yē-mē-shi
and Kō-mō-kĕt-si, and since that time they have been worshiped as ancestral gods, bearing the
name of Kōk-kō; but the little war gods knew them, and addressed them as "My children," and
they replied, "Sit down and tell us of our mothers." The āh-shi-wi then journeyed on, led by
āh-ai-ū-ta and Mā-ā-sē-we, to the present site of Zuñi. Many, however, lingered at a spring
some fifteen miles west of Zuñi, and there established the village Tkāp-quē-nā (Hot Spring).
In the passageway are four chambers, where the couple tarried on their way and where at the
present time the two priests of the Kōk-kō rest in their journey to the sacred waters. So credulous
are the people that the priests delude them into the belief that they actually pass through
the mountain to the lake.

Having heard of the wonderful cave in this mountain, our little party visited the place, prepared
to explore it. Mr. Stevenson and Mr. H.L. Turner entered the fissure in the rock and squeezed
through the crevice for sixteen or eighteen feet to where the rock was so solid that they both
determined no human creature could penetrate farther. They examined the place most carefully
by means of an artificial light. Through a small aperture stones could be thrown to a depth
from which no sound returned, but excepting this solitary opening all was solid, immovable
rock. In this cave many plume sticks were gathered. Near the opening of the cave, or fissure,
is a shrine to the Kōk-kō, which must be very old, and over and around it are hundreds of the
plume sticks and turquoise and shell beads.

I would mention here a little incident illustrative of the superstitious dread these Indians
entertain of violating the priestly commands. We found it very difficult to persuade an old
Zuñi guide, who had visited the sacred salt lake, the mountain of the war gods, and other places
of interest with us (to these he had gone by special permission of the High Priest), to accompany
us to the spirit lake and the mountain of the Kōk-kō. Our persuasive powers were almost exhausted
ere we could induce him to guide us to them, but having consented he was willing to go even
if he should be punished by death. He was a man renowned for bravery, but he was so overcome
by his superstitious fears that his voice sank to a whisper and finally became scarcely audible.
The morning of the day on which we reached this place, the old man, who had been riding by
my side, ahead of the rest of the party, suddenly halted and said in a half-angry voice, "Why
do I go ahead? I am not the chief of this party. Those who belong at the head must go to the
head." And he would not move until Mr. Stevenson and I went in advance. By this change he sought
to transfer the responsibility to us. Finally he rode up to us and said in a whisper, "We will
camp here." The whole expression of the old man's face was that of ghastly terror. I was much
annoyed, for I thought that, at the eleventh hour, his fear had overcome his desire to gratify
us. Just then a Mexican lad on horseback approached; we were all mounted. I asked the lad,
"Is there a lake near by?" He replied, "Yes, a half a mile off." The old Indian said, speaking
in a whisper, "And you have seen it?" "Yes." "And you were not afraid?" "No; why afraid?" "And
you looked into the waters and you did not die!" With a look of bewilderment the youth rode
off. I signaled to the old man to accompany us to the lake. "No, no; I would only die, and
you must not go or you will die." "No," said I, "we will not die if our hearts are good, and
if you will not go it is because your heart is not good and you are afraid."

We found the lake so surrounded by marshes that we could not get within an eighth of a mile
of the waters. One of our party attempted to reach it on foot, but could get very little nearer.
We made a circuit of the lake along the slightly elevated ground and could distinctly see it.

On completing the circle a striking picture met our eyes. Boldly outlined by the setting sun
stood the old man, his hair blown by the evening breeze, for he had bared his head of the usual
kerchief worn around it, and, with his hand holding the sacred meal extended toward the glorious
sunset, he stood repeating a prayer. We halted, and he continued his prayer, wholly unconscious
of our presence; as he turned we surprised him. I extended my hand and said, "Now I am happy,
for you are again brave and strong." "Yes," said he, "my heart is glad. I have looked into
the waters of my departed people. I am alive, but I may die; if I die it is well; my heart
is glad." From that moment the gloom was gone and he was bright and happy. We could not induce
the old man to ascend the mountain of the Kōk-kō with us, as none go there except certain priests;
but the lake is visited by those who are designated by these priests.

Several days were consumed by us in exploring this immediate vicinity. On breaking camp, our
old Indian guide seemed determined to tarry behind. I remained with him. As the party rode
off he took a large quantity of food which he had carefully stored away behind a tree--he having
observed an almost absolute fast in order to make a large offering to the spirits of the departed--and
heaped this food upon the embers of the camp fire, by the side of which he stood for a long
time, supplicating in a most solemn manner the spirits of the departed to receive his offering.

Certain men are selected, who, with bodies nude save the loin skirt and with bare feet, walk
from Zuñi to the lake, a distance of 45 miles, exposed to the scorching rays of the summer
sun, to deposit plume sticks and pray for rain. If the hearts of those sent be pure and good,
the clouds will gather and rain will fall, but if evil be in their hearts no rain will fall
during the journey and they return with parched lips and blistered skin. The Kōk-kō repeat
the prayers for rain with their intercessions to the Yä-tō-tka, the Sun, and by them the plume
sticks are sent to the same great god. So constantly are the lesser gods employed in offering
plumes to the great god that at night the sacred road (the Galaxy) can be seen filled with
feathers, though by day they are invisible. They believe that the soul or essence of the plumes
travels over this road, just as the soul from the body travels from Zuñi to the spirit lake,
and in their offerings of food the food itself is not received by the gods, but the spiritual
essence of the food.

One of the most important characters in Zuñi mythology, the Käk-lō, finding himself alone in
the far Northwest, saw many roads, but could not tell which one led to his people, and he wept
bitterly. The tear marks are still to be seen on the Käk-lō's face. A duck, hearing some one's
cries, appeared and inquired the cause of the trouble. "I wish to go to my people, but the
roads are many, and I do not know the right one." The sagacious duck replied, "I know all roads,
and I will lead you to your people." Having led the Käk-lō to the spirit lake, he said, "Here
is the home of the Kōk-kō; I will guide you to the kiva and open for you the door." After entering
the kiva the Käk-lō viewed all those assembled and said, "Let me see; are all my people here?
No; the Kō-lō-oo-wĭt-si (plumed serpent) is not here; he must come," and two of the Kōk-kō
(the Soot-īke) were dispatched for him. This curious creature is the mythical plumed serpent
whose home is in a hot spring not distant from the village of Tkāp-quē-nā, and at all times
his voice is to be heard in the depths of this boiling water. The mother's heart told her it
was not a child really, and so she said to the daughter; but the daughter insisted that she
would keep the baby for her own. She wrapped it carefully in cotton cloth and went to sleep
with it in her arms. In the morning, the mother, wondering at her daughter's absence, sent
a second daughter to call her. Upon entering the room where the girl had gone to sleep she
was found with a great serpent coiled round and round her body. The parents were summoned,
and they said, "This is some god, my daughter; you must take him back to his waters," and the
maiden followed the serpent to the hot spring, sprinkling him all the while with sacred meal.
Upon reaching the spring the serpent entered it, the maiden following, and she became the wife
of the Kō-lō-oo-wĭt-si.

The Kō-lō-oo-wĭt-si soon appeared with the two Soot-īke who had been dispatched for him. They
did not travel upon the earth, but by the underground waters that pass from the spring to the
spirit lake. Upon the arrival of the Kō-lō-oo-wĭt-si, the Käk-lō issued to this assemblage
his commands, for he is the great father of the Kōk-kō. Those who were to go to the North,
West, South, East, to the Heavens, and to the Earth to procure cereals for the āh-shi-wi he
designated as the Sä-lä-mō-bī-ya. Previous to this time the āh-shi-wi had subsisted on seeds
of a grass. "When the seeds are gathered," he said, addressing the serpent, "you will carry
them with water to the āh-shi-wi and tell them what to do with the seeds. I will go in advance
and prepare them for your coming." "But," said his people, "you are our father; you must not
walk," and the ten Kō-yē-mē-shi accompanied him, carrying him on their backs, relieving each
other when fatigued. The Käk-lō visited the āh-shi-wi nine days in advance of the Sä-lä-mō-bī-ya
and Kō-lō-oo-wĭt-si, instructing the people regarding the Kōk-kō, how they must represent them
in the future and hold their ceremonials, and telling them that the boys must be made members
of the Kōk-kō, and that this particular ceremony must occur but once in four years. He also
gave to the people the history of himself, how the duck had befriended him and led him to the
home of his people.

BIRTH CUSTOMS.

Having now briefly sketched the mythology relating to the ceremonials to be described, I invite
your attention to the main subject of the present paper: the Religious Life of the Zuñi Child.

First we will notice the birth customs.

Zuñi child life may be divided into two parts. One I will call the practical or domestic; the
other, the mythologic or religious. The former is fairly exemplified in the habits, customs,
games, and experiences of our own domestic child life. The other is essentially different;
in it are involved the ceremonials, legends, and myths which surround the Zuñi child from its
birth.

Previous to the birth of a child, if a daughter be desired, the husband and wife proceed together
to the "mother" rock, and at her feet make offerings and prayers, imploring her to intercede
with the great father, the Sun, to give to them a daughter, and that this daughter may grow
to be all that is good in woman; that she may be endowed with the power of weaving beautifully
and may be skilled in the potter's art. Should a son be desired, the couple repair to the shrine
above, and here, at the breast and heart of the "father" rock, prayers and plume sticks are
offered that a son may be given them, and that he may have power to conquer his enemies, and
that he may become distinguished in the Kōk-kō and other orders, and have power over the field
to produce abundant crops. In both cases the sacred meal is sprinkled, and, should the prayer
not be answered, there is no doubt that the heart of one or the other was not earnest when
the prayer was offered.

The Zuñi child is born amid ceremony. At its birth only the maternal grandmother and two female
doctors are present. After the birth of the child, the paternal grandmother enters, bearing
as offerings to the new born babe a large pottery bowl and inside of it a tiny blanket. She
then prepares warm suds of yucca root in the bowl, in which she bathes the infant, at the same
time repeating a prayer of thanks for the life that has been given them and praying for the
future of the child. She then rubs the entire body of the child, except the head, with warm
ashes held in the palm of the hand and moistened with water. This process is repeated every
morning during infancy and the same paste is put upon the face of the child until it is several
years old. I would remark that this paste is seldom noticed upon the older children because
it is put on in the morning and drying soon is brushed off by the child. It is asserted by
the Zuñi that in four days after the birth of a child the first skin is removed by exfoliation
and is supplanted by a new one. After applying the ashes, the paternal grandmother places the
infant in the arms of the maternal grandparent, who performs other offices for the little one
and wraps it in a piece of cotton cloth. The paternal grandmother prepares a bed of warm sand
by the right side of the mother (leaving a cool spot for the child's head); she then receives
the infant and lays it upon its bed, and over it she arranges the little blanket which she
brought; she then places upon the sand and at the right side of the child an ear of white corn;
if the child be a girl, the mother, or a three-plumule, corn is selected; if a boy, the father,
or single ear, corn. The fourth day after the birth the child is again bathed in the yucca
root suds by the same grandmother, who again repeats a long prayer. During the first ten days
of the child's life the paternal grandmother remains in the daughter-in-law's house, looking
after the mother and helping in the preparation of the feast that is to occur. On the morning
of the tenth day the child is taken from its bed of sand, to which it is never to return, and
upon the left arm of the paternal grandmother it is carried for the first time into the presence
of the rising sun. To the breast of the child the grandmother carrying it presses the ear of
corn which lay by its side during the ten days; to her left the mother of the infant walks,
carrying in her left hand the ear of corn which lay by her side. Both women sprinkle a line
of sacred meal, emblematic of the straight road which the child must follow to win the favor
of its gods. Thus the first object which the child is made to behold at the very dawn of its
existence is the sun, the great object of their worship; and long ere the little lips can lisp
a prayer it is repeated for it by the grandmother.

The Zuñi are polytheists; yet, while they have a plurality of gods, many of whom are the spirits
of their ancestors, these gods are but mediums through which to reach their one great father
of all--the Sun.

Returning to the house, the paternal grandmother again bathes the child in yucca suds; then,
for the first time, the little one is put into the cradle. The baby's arms are placed straight
by its sides, and in this position it is so strapped in its cradle that it cannot even move
a hand. These cradles have hood-shaped tops, and over the whole thick coverings are placed,
so that the wonder is the child does not smother. The cradle is usually deposited in some safe
corner, and the baby is left to sleep or amuse itself with its infantine thoughts. The cradle
is sometimes attached to two ropes to form a swing, and when the mother becomes conscious of
the child's awakening she uncovers its head at times and the tiny thing casts its eyes around.
On the tenth morning both parents of the child are bathed in suds of yucca, the whole body
of the mother but only the head of the father. This office is also performed by the paternal
grandmother. The immediate blood relations (female only) then assemble at the infant's home;
that is, all the household of the father's house and those of the mother's house. Each woman
from the father's house brings to the baby a gift of a little blanket. This select gathering
partakes of a feast, which is presided over by the maternal grandmother. At the close of the
feast the infant is carried by the oldest sister of the father to the paternal grandmother's
house, where it is presented to the paternal grandfather, who prays to the Sun (Yä-tō tka)
to send down blessings upon the child.

INVOLUNTARY INITIATION INTO THE KŌK-KŌ.

