WHO WAS SHE?

By Bayard Taylor

From "The Atlantic Monthly" for September, 1874

Come, now, there may as well be an end of this! Every time I meet your eyes squarely, I detect
the question just slipping out of them. If you had spoken it, or even boldly looked it; if
you had shown in your motions the least sign of a fussy or fidgety concern on my account; if
this were not the evening of my birthday, and you the only friend who remembered it; if confession
were not good for the soul, though harder than sin to some people, of whom I am one--well,
if all reasons were not at this instant converged into a focus, and burning me rather violently,
in that region where the seat of emotion is supposed to lie, I should keep my trouble to myself.

Yes, I have fifty times had it on my mind to tell you the whole story. But who can be certain
that his best friend will not smile--or, what is worse, cherish a kind of charitable pity ever
afterward--when the external forms of a very serious kind of passion seem trivial, fantastic,
foolish? And the worst of all is that the heroic part which I imagined I was playing proves
to have been almost the reverse. The only comfort which I can find in my humiliation is that
I am capable of feeling it. There isn't a bit of a paradox in this, as you will see; but I
only mention it, now, to prepare you for, maybe, a little morbid sensitiveness of my moral nerves.

The documents are all in this portfolio under my elbow. I had just read them again completely
through when you were announced. You may examine them as you like afterward: for the present,
fill your glass, take another Cabana, and keep silent until my "ghastly tale" has reached its
most lamentable conclusion.

The beginning of it was at Wampsocket Springs, three years ago last summer. I suppose most
unmarried men who have reached, or passed, the age of thirty--and I was then thirty-three--experience
a milder return of their adolescent warmth, a kind of fainter second spring, since the first
has not fulfilled its promise. Of course, I wasn't clearly conscious of this at the time: who
is? But I had had my youthful passion and my tragic disappointment, as you know: I had looked
far enough into what Thackeray used to call the cryptic mysteries to save me from the Scylla
of dissipation, and yet preserved enough of natural nature to keep me out of the Pharisaic
Charybdis. My devotion to my legal studies had already brought me a mild distinction; the paternal
legacy was a good nest-egg for the incubation of wealth--in short, I was a fair, respectable
"party," desirable to the humbler mammas, and not to be despised by the haughty exclusives.

The fashionable hotel at the Springs holds three hundred, and it was packed. I had meant to
lounge there for a fortnight and then finish my holidays at Long Branch; but eighty, at least,
out of the three hundred were young and moved lightly in muslin. With my years and experience
I felt so safe that to walk, talk, or dance with them became simply a luxury, such as I had
never--at least so freely--possessed before. My name and standing, known to some families,
were agreeably exaggerated to the others, and I enjoyed that supreme satisfaction which a man
always feels when he discovers, or imagines, that he is popular in society. There is a kind
of premonitory apology implied in my saying this, I am aware. You must remember that I am culprit,
and culprit's counsel, at the same time.

You have never been at Wampsocket? Well, the hills sweep around in a crescent, on the northern
side, and four or five radiating glens, descending from them, unite just above the village.
The central one, leading to a waterfall (called "Minne-hehe" by the irreverent young people,
because there is so little of it), is the fashionable drive and promenade; but the second ravine
on the left, steep, crooked, and cumbered with bowlders which have tumbled from somewhere and
lodged in the most extraordinary groupings, became my favorite walk of a morning. There was
a footpath in it, well-trodden at first, but gradually fading out as it became more like a
ladder than a path, and I soon discovered that no other city feet than mine were likely to
scale a certain rough slope which seemed the end of the ravine. With the aid of the tough laurel-stems
I climbed to the top, passed through a cleft as narrow as a doorway, and presently found myself
in a little upper dell, as wild and sweet and strange as one of the pictures that haunts us
on the brink of sleep.

There was a pond--no, rather a bowl--of water in the centre; hardly twenty yards across, yet
the sky in it was so pure and far down that the circle of rocks and summer foliage inclosing
it seemed like a little planetary ring, floating off alone through space. I can't explain the
charm of the spot, nor the selfishness which instantly suggested that I should keep the discovery
to myself. Ten years earlier I should have looked around for some fair spirit to be my "minister,"
but now--

One forenoon--I think it was the third or fourth time I had visited the place--I was startled
to find the dent of a heel in the earth, half-way up the slope. There had been rain during
the night and the earth was still moist and soft. It was the mark of a woman's boot, only to
be distinguished from that of a walking-stick by its semicircular form. A little higher, I
found the outline of a foot, not so small as to awake an ecstasy, but with a suggestion of
lightness, elasticity, and grace. If hands were thrust through holes in a board-fence, and
nothing of the attached bodies seen, I can easily imagine that some would attract and others
repel us: with footprints the impression is weaker, of course, but we cannot escape it. I am
not sure whether I wanted to find the unknown wearer of the boot within my precious personal
solitude: I was afraid I should see her, while passing through the rocky crevice, and yet was
disappointed when I found no one.

But on the fiat, warm rock overhanging the tarn--my special throne--lay some withering wild-flowers
and a book! I looked up and down, right and left: there was not the slightest sign of another
human life than mine. Then I lay down for a quarter of an hour, and listened: there were only
the noises of bird and squirrel, as before. At last, I took up the book, the fiat breadth of
which suggested only sketches. There were, indeed, some tolerable studies of rocks and trees
on the first pages; a few not very striking caricatures, which seemed to have been commenced
as portraits, but recalled no faces I knew; then a number of fragmentary notes, written in
pencil. I found no name, from first to last; only, under the sketches, a monogram so complicated
and laborious that the initials could hardly be discovered unless one already knew them.

The writing was a woman's, but it had surely taken its character from certain features of her
own: it was clear, firm, individual. It had nothing of that air of general debility which usually
marks the manuscript of young ladies, yet its firmness was far removed from the stiff, conventional
slope which all Englishwomen seem to acquire in youth and retain through life, I don't see
how any man in my situation could have helped reading a few lines--if only for the sake of
restoring lost property. But I was drawn on and on, and finished by reading all: thence, since
no further harm could be done, I reread, pondering over certain passages until they stayed
with me. Here they are, as I set them down, that evening, on the back of a legal blank:

     "It makes a great deal of difference whether we wear social
     forms as bracelets or handcuffs."

     "Can we not still be wholly our independent selves, even
     while doing, in the main, as others do? I know two who are
     so; but they are married."

     "The men who admire these bold, dashing young girls treat
     them like weaker copies of themselves. And yet they boast of
     what they call 'experience'!"

     "I wonder if any one felt the exquisite beauty of the noon
     as I did to-day? A faint appreciation of sunsets and storms
     is taught us in youth, and kept alive by novels and
     flirtations; but the broad, imperial splendor of this
     summer noon!--and myself standing alone in it--yes, utterly
     alone!" "The men I seek must exist: where are they? How
     make an acquaintance, when one obsequiously bows himself
     away, as I advance? The fault is surely not all on my side."

There was much more, intimate enough to inspire me with a keen interest in the writer, yet
not sufficiently so to make my perusal a painful indiscretion. I yielded to the impulse of
the moment, took out my pencil, and wrote a dozen lines on one of the blank pages. They ran
something in this wise:

     "IGNOTUS IGNOTÆ!--You have bestowed without intending it,
     and I have taken without your knowledge. Do not regret the
     accident which has enriched another. This concealed idyl of
     the hills was mine, as I supposed, but I acknowledge your
     equal right to it.  Shall we share the possession, or will
     you banish me?"

There was a frank advance, tempered by a proper caution, I fancied, in the words I wrote. It
was evident that she was unmarried, but outside of that certainty there lay a vast range of
possibilities, some of them alarming enough. However, if any nearer acquaintance should arise
out of the incident, the next step must be taken by her. Was I one of the men she sought? I
almost imagined so--certainly hoped so.

I laid the book on the rock, as I had found it, bestowed another keen scrutiny on the lonely
landscape, and then descended the ravine. That evening, I went early to the ladies' parlor,
chatted more than usual with the various damsels whom I knew, and watched with a new interest
those whom I knew not. My mind, involuntarily, had already created a picture of the unknown.
She might be twenty-five, I thought; a reflective habit of mind would hardly be developed before
that age. Tall and stately, of course; distinctly proud in her bearing, and somewhat reserved
in her manners. Why she should have large dark eyes, with long dark lashes, I could not tell;
but so I seemed to see her. Quite forgetting that I was (or had meant to be) Ignotus, I found
myself staring rather significantly at one or the other of the young ladies, in whom I discovered
some slight general resemblance to the imaginary character. My fancies, I must confess, played
strange pranks with me. They had been kept in a coop so many years that now, when I suddenly
turned them loose, their rickety attempts at flight quite bewildered me.

No! there was no use in expecting a sudden discovery. I went to the glen betimes, next morning:
the book was gone and so were the faded flowers, but some of the latter were scattered over
the top of another rock, a few yards from mine. Ha! this means that I am not to withdraw, I
said to myself: she makes room for me! But how to surprise her?--for by this time I was fully
resolved to make her acquaintance, even though she might turn out to be forty, scraggy, and
sandy-haired.

I knew no other way so likely as that of visiting the glen at all times of the day. I even
went so far as to write a line of greeting, with a regret that our visits had not yet coincided,
and laid it under a stone on the top of her rock. The note disappeared, but there was no answer
in its place. Then I suddenly remembered her fondness for the noon hours, at which time she
was "utterly alone." The hotel table d'hôte was at one o'clock: her family, doubtless, dined
later, in their own rooms. Why, this gave me, at least, her place in society! The question
of age, to be sure, remained unsettled; but all else was safe.

The next day I took a late and large breakfast, and sacrificed my dinner. Before noon the guests
had all straggled back to the hotel from glen and grove and lane, so bright and hot was the
sunshine. Indeed, I could hardly have supported the reverberation of heat from the sides of
the ravine but for a fixed belief that I should be successful. While crossing the narrow meadow
upon which it opened, I caught a glimpse of something white among the thickets higher up. A
moment later it had vanished, and I quickened my pace, feeling the beginning of an absurd nervous
excitement in my limbs. At the next turn, there it was again! but only for another moment.
I paused, exulting, and wiped my drenched forehead. "She cannot escape me!" I murmured between
the deep draughts of cooler air I inhaled in the shadow of a rock.

A few hundred steps more brought me to the foot of the steep ascent, where I had counted on
overtaking her. I was too late for that, but the dry, baked soil had surely been crumbled and
dislodged, here and there, by a rapid foot. I followed, in reckless haste, snatching at the
laurel branches right and left, and paying little heed to my footing. About, one-third of the
way up I slipped, fell, caught a bush which snapped at the root, slid, whirled over, and before
I fairly knew what had happened, I was lying doubled up at the bottom of the slope.

I rose, made two steps forward, and then sat down with a groan of pain; my left ankle was badly
sprained, in addition to various minor scratches and bruises. There was a revulsion of feeling,
of course--instant, complete, and hideous. I fairly hated the Unknown. "Fool that I was!" I
exclaimed, in the theatrical manner, dashing the palm of my hand softly against my brow: "lured
to this by the fair traitress! But, no!--not fair: she shows the artfulness of faded, desperate
spinsterhood; she is all compact of enamel, 'liquid bloom of youth' and hair dye!"

There was a fierce comfort in this thought, but it couldn't help me out of the scrape. I dared
not sit still, lest a sunstroke should be added, and there was no resource but to hop or crawl
down the rugged path, in the hope of finding a forked sapling from which I could extemporize
a crutch. With endless pain and trouble I reached a thicket, and was feebly working on a branch
with my pen-knife, when the sound of a heavy footstep surprised me.

A brown harvest-hand, in straw hat and shirtsleeves, presently appeared. He grinned when he
saw me, and the thick snub of his nose would have seemed like a sneer at any other time.

"Are you the gentleman that got hurt?" he asked. "Is it pretty tolerable bad?"

"Who said I was hurt?" I cried, in astonishment.

"One of your town-women from the hotel--I reckon she was. I was binding oats, in the field
over the ridge; but I haven't lost no time in comin' here."

While I was stupidly staring at this announcement, he whipped out a big clasp-knife, and in
a few minutes fashioned me a practicable crutch. Then, taking me by the other arm, he set me
in motion toward the village.

Grateful as I was for the man's help, he aggravated me by his ignorance. When I asked if he
knew the lady, he answered: "It's more'n likely you know her better," But where did she come
from? Down from the hill, he guessed, but it might ha' been up the road. How did she look?
was she old or young? what was the color of her eyes? of her hair? There, now, I was too much
for him. When a woman kept one o' them speckled veils over her face, turned her head away,
and held her parasol between, how were you to know her from Adam? I declare to you, I couldn't
arrive at one positive particular. Even when he affirmed that she was tall, he added, the next
instant: "Now I come to think on it, she stepped mighty quick; so I guess she must ha' been short."

By the time we reached the hotel, I was in a state of fever; opiates and lotions had their
will of me for the rest of the day. I was glad to escape the worry of questions, and the conventional
sympathy expressed in inflections of the voice which are meant to soothe, and only exasperate.
The next morning, as I lay upon my sofa, restful, patient, and properly cheerful, the waiter
entered with a bouquet of wild flowers.

"Who sent them?" I asked.

"I found them outside your door, sir. Maybe there's a card; yes, here's a bit o' paper."

I opened the twisted slip he handed me, and read: "From your dell--and mine." I took the flowers;
among them were two or three rare and beautiful varieties which I had only found in that one
spot. Fool, again! I noiselessly kissed, while pretending to smell them, had them placed on
a stand within reach, and fell into a state of quiet and agreeable contemplation.

Tell me, yourself, whether any male human being is ever too old for sentiment, provided that
it strikes him at the right time and in the right way! What did that bunch of wild flowers
betoken? Knowledge, first; then, sympathy; and finally, encouragement, at least. Of course
she had seen my accident, from above; of course she had sent the harvest laborer to aid me
home. It was quite natural she should imagine some special, romantic interest in the lonely
dell, on my part, and the gift took additional value from her conjecture.

Four days afterward, there was a hop in the large dining-room of the hotel. Early in the morning,
a fresh bouquet had been left at my door. I was tired of my enforced idleness, eager to discover
the fair unknown (she was again fair, to my fancy!), and I determined to go down, believing
that a cane and a crimson velvet slipper on the left foot would provoke a glance of sympathy
from certain eyes, and thus enable me to detect them.

The fact was, the sympathy was much too general and effusive. Everybody, it seemed, came to
me with kindly greetings; seats were vacated at my approach, even fat Mrs. Huxter insisting
on my taking her warm place, at the head of the room. But Bob Leroy--you know him--as gallant
a gentleman as ever lived, put me down at the right point, and kept me there. He only meant
to divert me, yet gave me the only place where I could quietly inspect all the younger ladies,
as dance or supper brought them near.

One of the dances was an old-fashioned cotillon, and one of the figures, the "coquette," brought
every one, in turn, before me. I received a pleasant word or two from those whom I knew, and
a long, kind, silent glance from Miss May Danvers. Where had been my eyes? She was tall, stately,
twenty-five, had large dark eyes, and long dark lashes! Again the changes of the dance brought
her near me; I threw (or strove to throw) unutterable meanings into my eyes, and cast them
upon hers. She seemed startled, looked suddenly away, looked back to me, and--blushed. I knew
her for what is called "a nice girl"--that is, tolerably frank, gently feminine, and not dangerously
intelligent. Was it possible that I had overlooked so much character and intellect?

As the cotillon closed, she was again in my neighborhood, and her partner led her in my direction.
I was rising painfully from my chair, when Bob Leroy pushed me down again, whisked another
seat from somewhere, planted it at my side, and there she was!

She knew who was her neighbor, I plainly saw; but instead of turning toward me, she began to
fan herself in a nervous way and to fidget with the buttons of her gloves. I grew impatient.

"Miss Danvers!" I said, at last.

"Oh!" was all her answer, as she looked at me for a moment.

"Where are your thoughts?" I asked.

Then she turned, with wide, astonished eyes, coloring softly up to the roots of her hair. My
heart gave a sudden leap.

"How can you tell, if I can not?" she asked.

"May I guess?"

She made a slight inclination of the head, saying nothing. I was then quite sure.

"The second ravine to the left of the main drive?"

This time she actually started; her color became deeper, and a leaf of the ivory fan snapped
between her fingers.

"Let there be no more a secret!" I exclaimed. "Your flowers have brought me your messages;
I knew I should find you--"

Full of certainty, I was speaking in a low, impassioned voice. She cut me short by rising from
her seat; I felt that she was both angry and alarmed. Fisher, of Philadelphia, jostling right
and left in his haste, made his way toward her. She fairly snatched his arm, clung to it with
a warmth I had never seen expressed in a ballroom, and began to whisper in his ear. It was
not five minutes before he came to me, alone, with a very stern face, bent down, and said:

"If you have discovered our secret, you will keep silent. You are certainly a gentleman."

I bowed, coldly and savagely. There was a draught from the open window; my ankle became suddenly
weary and painful, and I went to bed. Can you believe that I didn't guess, immediately, what
it all meant? In a vague way, I fancied that I had been premature in my attempt to drop our
mutual incognito, and that Fisher, a rival lover, was jealous of me. This was rather flattering
than otherwise; but when I limped down to the ladies' parlor, the next day, no Miss Danvers
was to be seen. I did not venture to ask for her; it might seem importunate, and a woman of
so much hidden capacity was evidently not to be wooed in the ordinary way.

So another night passed by; and then, with the morning, came a letter which made me feel, at
the same instant, like a fool and a hero. It had been dropped in the Wampsocket post-office,
was legibly addressed to me and delivered with some other letters which had arrived by the
night mail. Here it is; listen:

     "Noto Ignota!--Haste is not a gift of the gods, and you have
     been impatient, with the usual result. I was almost prepared
     for this, and thus am not wholly disappointed. In a day or
     two more you will discover your mistake, which, so far as I
     can learn, has done no particular harm. If you wish to find
     me, there is only one way to seek me; should I tell you
     what it is, I should run the risk of losing you--that is, I
     should preclude the manifestation of a certain quality which
     I hope to find in the man who may--or--, rather, must--be my
     friend. This sounds enigmatical, yet you have read enough of
     my nature, as written in those random notes in my sketch-
     book, to guess, at least, how much I require. Only this let
     me add: mere guessing is useless.

     "Being unknown, I can write freely. If you find me, I shall
     be justified; if not, I shall hardly need to blush, even to
     myself, over a futile experiment.

     "It is possible for me to learn enough of your life,
     henceforth, to direct my relation toward you. This may be
     the end; if so, I shall know it soon. I shall also know
     whether you continue to seek me. Trusting in your honor as a
     man, I must ask you to trust in mine, as a woman."

I did discover my mistake, as the Unknown promised. There had been a secret betrothal between
Fisher and Miss Danvers, and, singularly enough, the momentous question and answer had been
given in the very ravine leading to my upper dell! The two meant to keep the matter to themselves;
but therein, it seems, I thwarted them; there was a little opposition on the part of their
respective families, but all was amicably settled before I left Wampsocket.

The letter made a very deep impression upon me. What was the one way to find her? What could
it be but the triumph that follows ambitious toil--the manifestation of all my best qualities
as a man? Be she old or young, plain or beautiful, I reflected, hers is surely a nature worth
knowing, and its candid intelligence conceals no hazards for me. I have sought her rashly,
blundered, betrayed that I set her lower, in my thoughts, than her actual self: let me now
adopt the opposite course, seek her openly no longer, go back to my tasks, and, following my
own aims vigorously and cheerfully, restore that respect which she seemed to be on the point
of losing. For, consciously or not, she had communicated to me a doubt, implied in the very
expression of her own strength and pride. And up the east another day Shall chase the bitter dark
away, What though our eyes with tears be wet? The sunrise never failed
us yet.

The blush of dawn may yet restore Our light and hope and joys once more. Sad soul, take comfort,
nor forget That sunrise never failed us yet.

--Celia Thaxter.

WHO-OO-

I wonder if you have ever heard Of the queer, little, dismal Whiney-bird, As black as a crow, as
glum as an owl-- A most peculiar kind of a fowl? He is oftenest seen on rainy days, When children
are barred from outdoor plays; When the weather is bright and the
warm sun shines, Then he flies far away to the gloomy pines, Dreary-looking,
indeed, is his old black cloak, And his whiney cry makes the whole
house blue-- "There's nothing to do-oo! there's nothing to do-oo!"

Did you ever meet this doleful bird? He's found where the children are, I've heard, Now, who can
he be? It can't be you. But who is the Whiney-bird? Who-oo? Who-oo?

--Jean Halifax in St. Nicholas.

THE BLUEBIRD.

BY MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT.

The National Association of Audubon Societies Educational Leaflet No. 24.

Who dares write of the Bluebird, thinking to add a fresher tint to
his plumage, a new tone to his melodious voice, or a word of praise
to his gentle life, that is as much a part of our human heritage and
blended with our memories as any other attribute of home?

     
     
     Not I, surely, for I know him too well and each year feel myself
     more spellbound and mute by the memories he awakens. Yet I
     would repeat his brief biography, lest there be any who,
     being absorbed by living inward, have not yet looked outward
     and upward to this poet of the sky and earth and the fullness
     and goodness thereof.
     
     [Sidenote: The Bluebird's Country.]
     
     For the Bluebird was the first of all poets,--even before
     man had blazed a trail in the wilderness or set up the sign
     of his habitation and tamed his thoughts to wear harness and travel
to measure.

And so he came to inherit the earth before man, and this, our country, is all The Bluebird's County,
for at some time of the year he roves about it from the Atlantic to the Pacific and from Mexico
to Nova Scotia, though westward, after he passes the range of the Rocky Mountains, he wears
a different dress and bears other longer names.
[Sidenote: The Bluebird's Travels.]

In spite of the fact that our
eastern Bluebird is a home-body, loving his nesting haunt and returning
to it year after year, he is an adventurous traveler. Ranging all
over the eastern United States at some time in the season, this bird
has its nesting haunts at the very edge of the Gulf States and upward,
as far north as Manitoba and Nova Scotia.

When the breeding season
is over, the birds travel sometimes in family groups and sometimes
in large flocks, moving southward little by little, according to season
and food-supply, some journeying as far as Mexico, others lingering
through the middle and southern states. The Bluebirds that live in
our orchards in summer are very unlikely to be those that we see in
the same place in winter days. Next to the breeding impulse, the migrating
instinct seems to be the strongest factor of bird life. When the life
of the home is over, Nature whispers, "To wing, up and on!" So a few
of the Bluebirds who have nested in Massachusetts may be those who
linger in New Jersey, while those whose breeding haunts were in Nova
Scotia, drift downward to fill their places in Massachusetts. I found her thus
much more attractive than with the dark eyes and lashes--but she did not make her appearance
in the circles which I frequented.

Another year slipped away. As an official personage, my importance increased, but I was careful
not to exaggerate it to myself. Many have wondered (perhaps you among the rest) at my success,
seeing that I possess no remarkable abilities. If I have any secret, it is simply this--doing
faithfully, with all my might, whatever I undertake. Nine-tenths of our politicians become
inflated and careless, after the first few years, and are easily forgotten when they once lose
place.

I am a little surprised now that I had so much patience with the Unknown. I was too important,
at least, to be played with; too mature to be! subjected to a longer test; too earnest, as
I had proved, to be doubted, or thrown aside without a further explanation.

Growing tired, at last, of silent waiting, I bethought me of advertising. A carefully written
"Personal," in which Ignotus informed Ignota of the necessity of his communicating with her,
appeared simultaneously in the "Tribune," "Herald," "World," and "Times." I renewed the advertisement
as the time expired without an answer, and I think it was about the end of the third week before
one came, through the post, as before.

Ah, yes! I had forgotten. See! my advertisement is pasted on the note, as a heading or motto
for the manuscript lines. I don't know why the printed slip should give me a particular feeling
of humiliation as I look at it, but such is the fact. What she wrote is all I need read to you:

     "I could not, at first, be certain that this was meant for
     me. If I were to explain to you why I have not written for
     so long a time, I might give you one of the few clews which
     I insist on keeping in my own hands. In your public
     capacity, you have been ( so far as a woman may judge)
     upright, independent, wholly manly in your relations with
     other men I learn nothing of you that is not honorables
     toward women you are kind, chivalrous, no doubt, overflowing
     with the usual social refinements, but--Here, again, I
     run hard upon the absolute necessity of silence. The way to
     me, if you care to traverse it, is so simple, so very simple!
     Yet, after what I have written, I can not even wave my
     hand in the direction of it, without certain self-contempt.
     When I feel free to tell you, we shall draw apart and remain
     unknown forever.

     "You desire to write? I do not prohibit it. I have
     heretofore made no arrangement for hearing from you, in
     turn, because I could not discover that any advantage would
     accrue from it. But it seems only fair, I confess, and you
     dare not think me capricious. So, three days hence, at six
     o'clock in the evening, a trusty messenger of mine will call
     at your door. If you have anything to give her for me, the
     act of giving it must be the sign of a compact on your part
     that you will allow her to leave immediately, unquestioned
     and unfollowed."

You look puzzled, I see: you don't catch the real drift of her words? Well, that's a melancholy
encouragement. Neither did I, at the time: it was plain that I had disappointed her in some
way, and my intercourse with or manner toward women had something to do with it. In vain I
ran over as much of my later social life as I could recall. There had been no special attention,
nothing to mislead a susceptible heart; on the other side, certainly no rudeness, no want of
"chivalrous" (she used the word!) respect and attention. What, in the name of all the gods,
was the matter?

In spite of all my efforts to grow clearer, I was obliged to write my letter in a rather muddled
state of mind. I had so much to say! sixteen folio pages, I was sure, would only suffice for
an introduction to the case; yet, when the creamy vellum lay before me and the moist pen drew
my fingers toward it, I sat stock dumb for half an hour. I wrote, finally, in a half-desperate
mood, without regard to coherency or logic. Here's a rough draft of a part of the letter, and
a single passage from it will be enough:

     I can conceive of no simpler way to you than the knowledge
     of your name and address. I have drawn airy images of you,
     but they do not become incarnate, and I am not sure that I
     should recognize you in the brief moment of passing. Your
     nature is not of those which are instantly legible. As an
     abstract power, it has wrought in my life and it continually
     moves my heart with desires which are unsatisfactory because
     so vague and ignorant. Let me offer you, personally, my
     gratitude, my earnest friendship: you would laugh if I were
     now to offer more.

Stay! here is another fragment, more reckless in tone:

     "I want to find the woman whom I can love--who can love me.
     But this is a masquerade where the features are hidden, the
     voice disguised, even the hands grotesquely gloved. Come! I
     will venture more than I ever thought was possible to me.
     You shall know my deepest nature as I myself seem to know
     it. Then, give me the commonest chance of learning yours,
     through an intercourse which shall leave both free, should
     we not feel the closing of the inevitable bond!"

After I had written that, the pages filled rapidly. When the appointed hour arrived, a bulky
epistle, in a strong linen envelope, sealed with five wax seals, was waiting on my table. Precisely
at six there was an announcement: the door opened, and a little outside, in the shadow, I saw
an old woman, in a threadbare dress of rusty black.

"Come in!" I said.

"The letter!" answered a husky voice. She stretched out a bony hand, without moving a step.

"It is for a lady--very important business," said I, taking up the letter; "are you sure that
there is no mistake?"

She drew her hand under the shawl, turned without a word, and moved toward the hall door.

"Stop!" I cried: "I beg a thousand pardons! Take it--take it! You are the right messenger!"

She clutched it, and was instantly gone.

Several days passed, and I gradually became so nervous and uneasy that I was on the point of
inserting another "Personal" in the daily papers, when the answer arrived. It was brief and
mysterious; you shall hear the whole of it:

     "I thank you. Your letter is a sacred confidence which I
     pray you never to regret. Your nature is sound and good. You
     ask no more than is reasonable, and I have no real right to
     refuse. In the one respect which I have hinted, I may have
     been unskilful or too narrowly cautious: I must have the
     certainty of this. Therefore, as a generous favor, give me
     six months more! At the end of that time I will write to you
     again. Have patience with these brief lines: another word
     might be a word too much."

You notice the change in her tone? The letter gave me the strongest impression of a new, warm,
almost anxious interest on her part. My fancies, as first at Wampsocket, began to play all
sorts of singular pranks: sometimes she was rich and of an old family, sometimes moderately
poor and obscure, but always the same calm, reposeful face and clear gray eyes. I ceased looking
for her in society, quite sure that I should not find her, and nursed a wild expectation of
suddenly meeting her, face to face, in the most unlikely places and under startling circumstances.
However, the end of it all was patience--patience for six months.

There's not much more to tell; but this last letter is hard for me to read. It came punctually,
to a day. I knew it would, and at the last I began to dread the time, as if a heavy note were
falling due, and I had no funds to meet it. My head was in a whirl when I broke the seal. The
fact in it stared at me blankly, at once, but it was a long time before the words and sentences
became intelligible.

     "The stipulated time has come, and our hidden romance is at
     an end. Had I taken this resolution a year ago, it would
     have saved me many vain hopes, and you, perhaps, a little
     uncertainty. Forgive me, first, if you can, and then hear
     the explanation!

     "You wished for a personal interview: you have had, not
     one, but many. We have met, in society, talked face to
     face, discussed the weather, the opera, toilettes, Queechy,
     Aurora Floyd, Long Branch, and Newport, and exchanged a
     weary amount of fashionable gossip; and you never guessed
     that I was governed by any deeper interest! I have purposely
     uttered ridiculous platitudes, and you were as smilingly
     courteous as if you enjoyed them: I have let fall remarks
     whose hollowness and selfishness could not have escaped you,
     and have waited in vain for a word of sharp, honest, manly
     reproof. Your manner to me was unexceptionable, as it was to
     all other women: but there lies the source of my
     disappointment, of--yes--of my sorrow!

     "You appreciate, I can not doubt, the qualities in woman
     which men value in one another--culture, independence of
     thought, a high and earnest apprehension of life; but you
     know not how to seek them. It is not true that a mature and
     unperverted woman is flattered by receiving only the general
     obsequiousness which most men give to the whole sex. In the
     man who contradicts and strives with her, she discovers a
     truer interest, a nobler respect. The empty-headed, spindle-
     shanked youths who dance admirably, understand something of
     billiards, much less of horses, and still less of
     navigation, soon grow inexpressibly wearisome to us; but the
     men who adopt their social courtesy, never seeking to
     arouse, uplift, instruct us, are a bitter disappointment.

     "What would have been the end, had you really found me?
     Certainly a sincere, satisfying friendship. No mysterious
     magnetic force has drawn you to me or held you near me, nor
     has my experiment inspired me with an interest which can not
     be given up without a personal pang. I am grieved, for the
     sake of all men and all women. Yet, understand me! I mean no
     slightest reproach.  I esteem and honor you for what you
     are.  Farewell!"

There! Nothing could be kinder in tone, nothing more humiliating in substance, I was sore and
offended for a few days; but I soon began to see, and ever more and more clearly, that she
was wholly right. I was sure, also, that any further attempt to correspond with her would be
vain. It all comes of taking society just as we find it, and supposing that conventional courtesy
is the only safe ground on which men and women can meet.

The fact is--there's no use in hiding it from myself (and I see, by your face, that the letter
cuts into your own conscience)--she is a free, courageous, independent character, and--I am
not. But who was she?

