"And from that day forth the Christian churches have been damned and lost. Kept churches. Lackey
churches. Roman, Russian, Anglican; it matters not. My church indeed was twice sold, for it
doubled the sin of Nicaea and gave itself over to Henry and Elizabeth while it shammed a dispute
about the sacraments. No one cared really about transubstantiation any more than the earlier
betrayers cared about consubstantiality; that dispute did but serve to mask the betrayal."

He turned to the listening Angel. "What can you show me of my church that I do not know? Why!
we Anglican bishops get our sees as footmen get a job. For months Victoria, that old German
Frau, delayed me--because of some tittle-tattle.... The things we are! Snape, who afterwards
became Bishop of Burnham, used to waylay the Prince Consort when he was riding in Hyde Park
and give him, he boasts, 'a good loud cheer,' and then he would run very fast across the park
so as to catch him as he came round, and do it again.... It is to that sort of thing we bearers
of the light have sunken....

"I have always despised that poor toady," the bishop went on. "And yet here am I, and God has
called me and shown me the light of his countenance, and for a month I have faltered. That
is the mystery of the human heart, that it can and does sin against the light. What right have
I, who have seen the light--and failed, what right have I--to despise any other human being?
I seem to have been held back by a sort of paralysis.

"Men are so small, so small still, that they cannot keep hold of the vision of God. That is
why I want to see God again.... But if it were not for this strange drug that seems for a little
while to lift my mind above the confusion and personal entanglements of every day, I doubt
if even now I could be here. I have been asleep!"

CHAPTER XIX

At almost the same moment Gaspard stumbled to his feet.

"Asleep--asleep!"
he exclaimed--"Mon Dieu!--the shame of it!--the shame! What pigs are
men! To sleep after food and wine, and to leave a woman alone like
this!... the shame!" I want to know what my chief duty is, to have
it plain, in terms so plain that I can never forget.

"See in this world," he said, turning to the globe, "while Chinese merchants and Turkish troopers,
school-board boys and Norwegian fishermen, half-trained nurses and Boer farmers are full of
the spirit of God, see how the priests of the churches of Nicaea spend their time."

And now it was the bishop whose dark hands ran over the great silver globe, and it was the
Angel who stood over him and listened, as a teacher might stand over a child who is learning
a lesson. The bishop's hand rested for a second on a cardinal who was planning a political
intrigue to produce a reaction in France, then for a moment on a Pomeranian pastor who was
going out to his well-tilled fields with his Sunday sermon, full of fierce hatred of England,
still echoing in his head. Then he paused at a Mollah preaching the Jehad, in doubt whether
he too wasn't a German pastor, and then at an Anglican clergyman still lying abed and thinking
out a great mission of Repentance and Hope that should restore the authority of the established
church--by incoherent missioning--without any definite sin indicated for repentance nor any
clear hope for anything in particular arising out of such activities. The bishop's hand went
seeking to and fro, but nowhere could he find any religious teacher, any religious body rousing
itself to meet the new dawn of faith in the world. Some few men indeed seemed thoughtful, but
within the limitation of their vows. Everywhere it was church and creed and nation and king
and property and partisanship, and nowhere was it the True God that the priests and teachers
were upholding. It was always the common unhampered man through whom the light of God was breaking;
it was always the creed and the organization of the religious professionals that stood in the
way to God....

"God is putting the priests aside," he cried, "and reaching out to common men. The churches
do not serve God. They stand between man and God. They are like great barricades on the way
to God."

The bishop's hand brushed over Archbishop Pontifex, who was just coming down to breakfast in
his palace. This pompous old man was dressed in a purple garment that set off his tall figure
very finely, and he was holding out his episcopal ring for his guests to kiss, that being the
customary morning greeting of Archbishop Pontifex. The thought of that ring-kissing had made
much hard work at lower levels "worth while" to Archbishop Pontifex. And seventy miles away
from him old Likeman breakfasted in bed on Benger's food, and searched his Greek Testament
for tags to put to his letters. And here was the familiar palace at Princhester, and in an
armchair in his bed-room sat Bishop Scrope insensible and motionless, in a trance in which
he was dreaming of the coming of God.

"I see my futility. I see my vanity. But what am I to do?" he said, turning to the darkness
that now wrapped about the Angel again, fold upon fold. "The implications of yesterday bind
me for the morrow. This is my world. This is what I am and what I am in. How can I save myself?
How can I turn from these habits and customs and obligations to the service of the one true
God? When I see myself, then I understand how it is with the others. All we priests and teachers
are men caught in nets. I would serve God. Easily said! But how am I to serve God? How am I
to help and forward His coming, to make myself part of His coming?"

He perceived that he was returning into himself, and that the vision of the sphere and of the
starry spaces was fading into non-existence.

He struggled against this return. He felt that his demand was still unanswered. His wife's
face had suddenly come very close to him, and he realized she intervened between him and that
solution.

What was she doing here?

(9)

The great Angel seemed still to be near at hand, limitless space was all about him, and yet
the bishop perceived that he was now sitting in the arm-chair in his bedroom in the palace
of Princhester. He was both there and not there. It seemed now as if he had two distinct yet
kindred selves, and that the former watched the latter. The latter was now awakening to the
things about him; the former marked his gestures and listened with an entire detachment to
the words he was saying. These words he was saying to Lady Ella: "God is coming to rule the
world, I tell you. We must leave the church."

Close to him sat Lady Ella, watching him with an expression in which dismay and resolution
mingled. Upon the other side of him, upon a little occasional table, was a tray with breakfast
things. He was no longer the watcher now, but the watched.

Lady Ella bent towards him as he spoke. She seemed to struggle with and dismiss his astonishing
statement.

"Edward," she said, "you have been taking a drug." He looked round at his night table to see
the little phial. It had gone. Then he saw that Lady Ella held it very firmly in her hand.

"Dunk came to me in great distress. He said you were insensible and breathing heavily. I came.
I realized. I told him to say nothing to any one, but to fetch me a tray with your breakfast.
I have kept all the other servants away and I have waited here by you.... Dunk I think is safe....
You have been muttering and moving your head from side to side...."

The bishop's mind was confused. He felt as though God must be standing just outside the room.
"I have failed in my duty," he said. "But I am very near to God." He laid his hand on her arm.
"You know, Ella, He is very close to us...."

She looked perplexed.

He sat up in his chair.

"For some months now," he said, "there have been new forces at work in my mind. I have been
invaded by strange doubts and still stranger realizations. This old church of ours is an empty
mask. God is not specially concerned in it."

"Edward!" she cried, "what are you saying?"

"I have been hesitating to tell you. But I see now I must tell you plainly. Our church is a
cast hull. It is like the empty skin of a snake. God has gone out of it."

She rose to her feet. She was so horrified that she staggered backward, pushing her chair behind
her. "But you are mad," she said.

He was astonished at her distress. He stood up also.

"My dear," he said, "I can assure you I am not mad. I should have prepared you, I know...."

She looked at him wild-eyed. Then she glanced at the phial, gripped in her hand.

"Oh!" she exclaimed, and going swiftly to the window emptied out the contents of the little
bottle. He realized what she was doing too late to prevent her.

"Don't waste that!" he cried, and stepping forward caught hold of her wrist. The phial fell
from her white fingers, and crashed upon the rough paved garden path below.

"My dear," he cried, "my dear. You do not understand."

They stood face to face. "It was a tonic," he said. "I have been ill. I need it."

"It is a drug," she answered. "You have been uttering blasphemies."

He dropped her arm and walked half-way across the room. Then he turned and faced her.

"They are not blasphemies," he said. "But I ought not to have surprised you and shocked you
as I have done. I want to tell you of changes that have happened to my mind."

"Now!" she exclaimed, and then: "I will not hear them now. Until you are better. Until these
fumes--"

Her manner changed. "Oh, Edward!" she cried, "why have you done this? Why have you taken things
secretly? I know you have been sleepless, but I have been so ready to help you. I have been
willing--you know I have been willing--for any help. My life is all to be of use to you...."

"Is there any reason," she pleaded, "why you should have hidden things from me?"

He stood remorseful and distressed. "I should have talked to you," he said lamely.

"Edward," she said, laying her hands on his shoulders, "will you do one thing for me? Will
you try to eat a little breakfast? And stay here? I will go down to Mr. Whippham and arrange
whatever is urgent with him. Perhaps if you rest--There is nothing really imperative until
the confirmation in the afternoon.... I do not understand all this. For some time--I have felt
it was going on. But of that we can talk. The thing now is that people should not know, that
nothing should be seen.... Suppose for instance that horrible White Blackbird were to hear
of it.... I implore you. If you rest here--And if I were to send for that young doctor who
attended Miriam."

"I don't want a doctor," said the bishop.

"But you ought to have a doctor."

"I won't have a doctor," said the bishop.

It was with a perplexed but powerless dissent that the externalized perceptions of the bishop
witnessed his agreement with the rest of Lady Ella's proposals so soon as this point about
the doctor was conceded.

(10)

For the rest of that day until his breakdown in the cathedral the sense of being in two places
at the same time haunted the bishop's mind. He stood beside the Angel in the great space amidst
the stars, and at the same time he was back in his ordinary life, he was in his palace at Princhester,
first resting in his bedroom and talking to his wife and presently taking up the routines of
his duties again in his study downstairs.

His chief task was to finish his two addresses for the confirmation services of the day. He
read over his notes, and threw them aside and remained for a time thinking deeply. The Greek
tags at the end of Likeman's letter came into his thoughts; they assumed a quality of peculiar
relevance to this present occasion. He repeated the words: "Epitelesei. Epiphausei."

He took his little Testament to verify them. After some slight trouble he located the two texts.
The first, from Philippians, ran in the old version, "He that hath begun a good work in you
will perform it"; the second was expressed thus: "Christ shall give thee light." He was dissatisfied
with these renderings and resorted to the revised version, which gave "perfect" instead of
"perform," and "shall shine upon you" for "give thee light." He reflected profoundly for a time.

Then suddenly his addresses began to take shape in his mind, and these little points lost any
significance. He began to write rapidly, and as he wrote he felt the Angel stood by his right
hand and read and approved what he was writing. There were moments when his mind seemed to
be working entirely beyond his control. He had a transitory questioning whether this curious
intellectual automatism was not perhaps what people meant by "inspiration."

(11)

The bishop had always been sensitive to the secret fount of pathos that is hidden in the spectacle
of youth. Long years ago when he and Lady Ella had been in Florence he had been moved to tears
by the beauty of the fresh-faced eager Tobit who runs beside the great angel in the picture
of Botticelli. And suddenly and almost as uncontrollably, that feeling returned at the sight
of the young congregation below him, of all these scores of neophytes who were gathered to
make a public acknowledgment of God. The war has invested all youth now with the shadow of
tragedy; before it came many of us were a little envious of youth and a little too assured
of its certainty of happiness. All that has changed. Fear and a certain tender solicitude mingle
in our regard for every child; not a lad we pass in the street but may presently be called
to face such pain and stress and danger as no ancient hero ever knew. The patronage, the insolent
condescension of age, has vanished out of the world. It is dreadful to look upon the young.

He stood surveying the faces of the young people as the rector read the Preface to the confirmation
service. How simple they were, how innocent! Some were a little flushed by the excitement of
the occasion; some a little pallid. But they were all such tender faces, so soft in outline,
so fresh and delicate in texture and colour. They had soft credulous mouths. Some glanced sideways
at one another; some listened with a forced intentness. The expression of one good-looking
boy, sitting in a corner scat, struck the bishop as being curiously defiant. He stood very
erect, he blinked his eyes as though they smarted, his lips were compressed bitterly. And then
it seemed to the bishop that the Angel stood beside him and gave him understanding.

"He is here," the bishop knew, "because he could not avoid coming. He tried to excuse himself.
His mother wept. What could he do? But the church's teaching nowadays fails even to grip the
minds of boys."

The rector came to the end of his Preface: "They will evermore endeavour themselves faithfully
to observe such things as they by their own confession have assented unto."

"Like a smart solicitor pinning them down," said the bishop to himself, and then roused himself,
unrolled the little paper in his hand, leant forward, and straightway began his first address.

Nowadays it is possible to say very unorthodox things indeed in an Anglican pulpit unchallenged.
There remains no alert doctrinal criticism in the church congregations. It was possible, therefore,
for the bishop to say all that follows without either hindrance or disturbance. The only opposition,
indeed, came from within, from a sense of dreamlike incongruity between the place and the occasion
and the things that he found himself delivering.

"All ceremonies," he began, "grow old. All ceremonies are tainted even from the first by things
less worthy than their first intention, and you, my dear sons and daughters, who have gathered
to-day in this worn and ancient building, beneath these monuments to ancient vanities and these
symbols of forgotten or abandoned theories about the mystery of God, will do well to distinguish
in your minds between what is essential and what is superfluous and confusing in this dedication
you make of yourselves to God our Master and King. For that is the real thing you seek to do
today, to give yourselves to God. This is your spiritual coming of age, in which you set aside
your childish dependence upon teachers and upon taught phrases, upon rote and direction, and
stand up to look your Master in the face. You profess a great brotherhood when you do that,
a brotherhood that goes round the earth, that numbers men of every race and nation and country,
that aims to bring God into all the affairs of this world and make him not only the king of
your individual lives but the king--in place of all the upstarts, usurpers, accidents, and
absurdities who bear crowns and sceptres today--of an united mankind." 

"I do not say I am,--that would be too much self-assertion"--she answered--"But I hope I am!
I long to see the world endowed more richly with health and happiness.
See how gloriously the sun has risen!

In what splendour of light and air we are sailing! If we can do as much as this we ought to
be able to do more!"

"We shall do more in time"--he said--"The advance of one step leads to another."

"In time!" echoed Morgana--"What time the human race has already taken to find out the simplest
forces of nature! It is the horrible bulk of blank stupidity that hinders knowledge--the heavy
obstinate bulk that declines to budge an inch out of its own fixity. Nowadays we triumph in our
so-called 'discoveries' of wireless telegraphy and telephony, light-rays and other marvels--but
these powers have always been with us from the beginning of things,--it is we, we only, who
have refused to accept them as facts of the universe. Let us talk no more about it!--Stupidity is
the only thing that moves me to despair!"

She rose from the little table, and called Gaspard to breakfast, while Rivardi went back to the
business of steering. The day was now fully declared, and the great
air-ship soared easily in a realm of ethereal blue--blue above, blue
below--its vast wings moving up and down with perfect rhythm as if
it were a living, sentient creature, revelling in the joys of flight. The bishop leant over the desk before him, and continued in the persuasive
tone of a man who speaks of things too manifest for laboured argument.

"In all ages religion has come from God through broad-minded creative men, and in all ages
it has fallen very quickly into the hands of intense and conservative men. These last--narrow,
fearful, and suspicious--have sought in every age to save the precious gift of religion by
putting it into a prison of formulae and asseverations. Bear that in mind when you are pressed
to definition. It is as if you made a box hermetically sealed to save the treasure of a fresh
breeze from the sea. But they have sought out exact statements and tortuous explanations of
the plain truth of God, they have tried to take down God in writing, to commit him to documents,
to embalm his living faith as though it would otherwise corrupt. So they have lost God and
fallen into endless differences, disputes, violence, and darkness about insignificant things.
They have divided religion between this creed and teacher and that. The corruption of the best
is the worst, said Aristotle; and the great religions of the world, and especially this Christianity
of ours, are the ones most darkened and divided and wasted by the fussings and false exactitudes
of the creed-monger and the sectary. There is no lie so bad as a stale disfigured truth. There
is no heresy so damnable as a narrow orthodoxy. All religious associations carry this danger
of the over-statement that misstates and the over-emphasis that divides and betrays. Beware
of that danger. Do not imagine, because you are gathered in this queerly beautiful old building
today, because I preside here in this odd raiment of an odder compromise, because you see about
you in coloured glass and carven stone the emblems of much vain disputation, that thereby you
cut yourselves off and come apart from the great world of faith, Catholic, Islamic, Brahministic,
Buddhistic, that grows now to a common consciousness of the near Advent of God our King. You
enter that waiting world fraternity now, you do not leave it. This place, this church of ours,
should be to you not a seclusion and a fastness but a door.

"I could quote you a score of instances to establish that this simple universalism was also
the teaching of Christ. But now I will only remind you that it was Mary who went to her lord
simply, who was commended, and not Martha who troubled about many things. Learn from the Mary
of Faith and not from these Marthas of the Creeds. Let us abandon the presumptions of an ignorant
past. The perfection of doctrine is not for finite men. Give yourselves to God. Give yourselves
to God. Not to churches and uses, but to God. To God simply. He is the first word of religion
and the last. He is Alpha; he is Omega. Epitelesei; it is He who will finish the good work begun."

The bishop ended his address in a vivid silence. Then he began his interrogation.

"Do you here, in the presence of God, and of this congregation, renew the solemn promise and
vow that was made in your name at your Baptism; ratifying and confirming the same in your own
persons, and acknowledging yourselves--"

He stopped short. The next words were: "bound to believe and do all those things, which your
Godfathers and Godmothers then undertook for you."

He could not stand those words. He hesitated, and then substituted: "acknowledge yourselves
to be the true servants of the one God, who is the Lord of Mankind?"

For a moment silence hung in the cathedral. Then one voice, a boy's voice, led a ragged response.
"I do."

Then the bishop: "Our help is in the Name of the Lord."

The congregation answered doubtfully, with a glance at its prayer books: "Who hath made heaven
and earth."

The bishop: "Blessed be the name of the Lord."

The congregation said with returning confidence: "Henceforth, world without end."

(12)

Before his second address the bishop had to listen to Veni Creator Spiritus, in its English
form, and it seemed to him the worst of all possible hymns. Its defects became monstrously
exaggerated to his hypersensitive mind. It impressed him in its Englished travesty as a grotesque,
as a veritable Charlie Chaplin among hymns, and in truth it does stick out most awkward feet,
it misses its accusatives, it catches absurdly upon points of abstruse doctrine. The great
Angel stood motionless and ironical at the bishop's elbow while it was being sung. "Your church,"
he seemed to say.

"We must end this sort of thing," whispered the bishop. "We must end this sort of thing--absolutely."
He glanced at the faces of the singers, and it became beyond all other things urgent, that
he should lift them once for all above the sectarian dogmatism of that hymn to a simple vision
of God's light....

He roused himself to the touching business of the laying on of hands. While he did so the prepared
substance of his second address was running through his mind. The following prayer and collects
he read without difficulty, and so came to his second address. His disposition at first was
explanatory.

