I say, “less afraid for the purity of the truth.” For Christians shrink from an experiment
so bold, especially after so large a proportion of amusements has been usurped by the Devil
through their neglect to interfere. The church is shy of a faith in the power of good which
comes eating and drinking; which sits at the table of publicans and sinners. The conviction
grows on me that Christians have too little faith in the gospel. They do not trust it enough
in popular reforms. They realize that evil is a tremendous power, alike to be feared, whether
it wear the armor of Goliath, or sing its sweet seductions in the form of a siren; and their
instinct of preservation extends beyond themselves to the truth itself. They regard truth as
a tender stripling, to be rolled up in mufflers, and suffered to walk out only in charge of
certain staid nurses of theory; and not as a man of war in panoply, and with strength enough
to take care not only of itself, but of them and their trusted theories too. They are afraid
the evil will overwhelm or corrupt the truth; that the leaven, instead of imparting virtue,
will be spoiled by the deadness of the lump. We need have no such fear for it. All the developments
of the age show that the world needs it in closer contact with its evil than it has ever been
yet. It is sometimes urged that in pursuing this course, Christians will bring upon themselves
from the world the charge of inconsistency, and moreover will grieve weak Christian brethren.
But surely this principle may be pushed too far. With the very fullest recognition of the obligation
upon Christians not to let their good be evil spoken of, and not to wrong the weak conscience—concessions
made for the sake of Christian charity are surely not required to extend to all the vagaries
of individual prejudice, nor to the abandonment of principle. And there is a principle involved
in this question of amusements, a principle of far greater importance than many are willing
to admit; and to which, if the Christian thought of this age do not take more pains to define
it and act upon it, the eyes of the church will be most painfully opened by and by. There is
a question here involving not only the enjoyments, but to a great extent the moral welfare
of our youth. The young will have amusements, and the question is whether the devil or the
church shall furnish them. Whether home, or the ball room, and drinking saloon, and gambling
house shall be the more attractive. Whether Christians will resolutely take up good and noble
amusements, and give them to youth purged of their evil,—or whether they shall let them remain
girt with all their allurements, yet more widely separated from good, and gathering yearly
to themselves new elements and associations of evil. Very probably the world, and much of the
church will assail the Christian who, in this view of the subject oversteps the line of received
opinion, with a cry of inconsistency. But remember that the world judges the church out of
its own mouth, independently of the real merits of the case; and requires that it be consistent,
not with their views, but with its own as publicly expressed. Yet sometimes it is better to
be right than even to be consistent; and if the church has with all sincerity, yet with mistaken
zeal, fostered a false sentiment on any subject, do not Christians who discern the error owe
to society the benefit of their clearer light? Have they a right to withhold it for fear society
should turn on them and call them inconsistent? One would think from a sentiment like this
that the gospel process was to be reversed. That not the Christian is to leaven the world,
but the world the Christian. Christian sentiment is not to wait for popular sentiment. It claims
to be in advance of it. It is to Christians and not to the world that the promise is given,
“Ye shall know the truth;” and Christian thought, so far from waiting for the movement of these
ever shifting popular tides, is the luminary which God has set high in the darkness of this
world’s sin to draw the tides in his appointed channels. The practical value of truth like
that of money, consists in its circulation. It is worth nothing hoarded up or used secretly.
If it is ever to be worth anything in correcting false impressions which society may have formed
of Christian teaching, it will be by letting it out into society to speak for itself. Nor am
I begging the question at issue here. Even an error is better outspoken than cherished in secret.
It comes into the field of discussion, and is turned over and examined and exposed, and so
truth is the gainer after all. But I think it will be difficult to prove an error in this case.
The gospel truth is “put the leaven into the lump;” and why the gospel should not be put into
our amusements, even into those which are confessedly abused, I cannot see. The more liable
to abuse they are, the more they need regulating; and the practical workings of this principle
when men have the courage to face prejudice and carry it out, triumphantly vindicate it. The
man who furnishes his son a billiard table in his own house, where he can practice that beautiful
game with his friends without the adjuncts of liquor and rowdyism, does a good deed. He keeps
the youth at home, he keeps his associations under his own eye; he gives him a good, healthy,
intellectual amusement purged of its abuses. The college board that erects a bowling alley
for the students; that says to young men, “rolling ten pins is not evil, but rolling ten pins
in bar rooms, surrounded by drunkards and swearers and indecent pictures is evil, and we therefore
give you the amusement without these associations, and bid you enjoy it, and draw health and
strength from it,”—that college board I say, has promoted something more than muscular Christianity.
It has given the young men a better opinion of religion; has withdrawn them from the influence
of temptations to which they expose themselves only because they cannot find the amusements
freed from these vile associations. It has drawn just so much patronage from the grog shop.
The parents in whose family circle dancing in proper modes and with approved associates and
within reasonable hours is encouraged, are doing just so much to keep their daughters from
the unhealthy hours, the immodest displays, and the indiscriminate associations of the ball
room. They deserve the thanks, not the reprobation of the church. They are the friends, not
the enemies of religion. SVIETLOVIDOFF. Who are you?

IVANITCH. [Comes slowly toward him] It is I, sir, the prompter, Nikita Ivanitch. It is I, master,
it is I!

SVIETLOVIDOFF. [Sinks helplessly onto the stool, breathes heavily and trembles violently] Heavens!
Who are you? It is you . . . you Nikitushka? What . . . what are you doing here?

IVANITCH. I spend my nights here in the dressing-rooms. Only please be good enough not to tell
Alexi Fomitch, sir. I have nowhere else to spend the night; indeed, I haven't.

SVIETLOVIDOFF. Ah! It is you, Nikitushka, is it? Just think, the audience called me out sixteen
times; they brought me three wreathes and lots of other things, too; they were all wild with
enthusiasm, and yet not a soul came when it was all over to wake the poor, drunken old man and
take him home. And I am an old man, Nikitushka! I am sixty-eight years old, and I am ill.
I haven't the heart left to go on.

[Falls on IVANITCH'S neck and weeps] Don't go away, Nikitushka; I
am old and helpless, and I feel it is time for me to die. Oh, it is
dreadful, dreadful!

IVANITCH. [Tenderly and respectfully] Dear master!
it is time for you to go home, sir!

SVIETLOVIDOFF. I won't go home;
I have no home--none! none!--none!

IVANITCH. Oh, dear! Have you forgotten
where you live?

SVIETLOVIDOFF. I won't go there. I won't! I am all
alone there. I have nobody, Nikitushka! No wife--no children. I am
like the wind blowing across the lonely fields. I shall die, and no
one will remember me. That they will
read in words like these the church’s endorsement and license for unlimited indulgence. But
if the world draws unwarranted inferences to suit its own depraved wishes, surely that is no
reason for suppressing the truth, but rather calls for the full and most careful statement
of it. If the world read the gospel wrongly, and wrest it to its own destruction, those who
set forth gospel principles are not responsible, unless, as has too often been the case with
reference to this subject, the trumpet give an uncertain sound. And the world is too ready
to pervert this truth, and does pervert it. Christians, if properly instructed, are so far
from being disqualified to use amusements safely, the best qualified of all others to develop
their highest uses, and to enjoy without abusing them. The world regards only the permission
to enjoy, and ignores the corresponding rule of restraint. In this respect it is like the prince
in the Arabian tale, who mounted the enchanted horse, and set him in motion without having
informed himself as to the means of guiding or stopping him.

For, let me be clearly understood, I do not lay down this general principle without recognizing
the existence of practical limitations to its action, though I assert that the fixing of these
limitations belongs chiefly if not entirely to the individual Christian conscience. I have
said that the tendency of religious teaching with reference to this and kindred subjects has
been to make the idea of safety more prominent than that of development. Yet I do not overlook,
as was implied in the remarks of one who objected to my views, the defensive aspect of the
gospel. I admit both the fact and its urgent necessity I could not do otherwise, knowing that
the heart is deceitful, and remembering the prayer which Christ puts into every man’s mouth,
“Lead us not into temptation.” I am pleading for the restraints as well as for the privileges
of the gospel in the matter of men’s amusements; for more and not less care and watchfulness
to be brought to bear upon their future regulation.

But withal, I am not bound to abandon the general gospel principle of purging amusements by
a closer contact of religion with them, because in certain cases this regulation becomes a
matter of extreme difficulty and delicacy; because I cannot precisely say how the gospel leaven
is to be conveyed into certain forms of amusement. Just as consistently might I have refused
to denounce slavery as a crime against God and humanity because I could not prescribe an effectual
scheme for abolishing it. And that such difficulties do arise in the applications of this principle,
I freely admit.

There, for example, is the theatre. I believe this principle applies to that as well as to
any other amusement. For myself I wish that I could occasionally see Shakespeare interpreted
by the best histrionic talent, with all adjuncts of scenery and costume. To me it would be
a rich pleasure and a source of intellectual improvement. But as the theatre is now conducted
and sustained, I am clearly of the opinion that no Christian ought to frequent it. He cannot
do so without, I think, in the great majority of instances, committing himself to very much
that is indecent and coarse. And just how this difficulty is to be surmounted, how scholarly,
Christian men who love such entertainments and are qualified to profit by them, are to be furnished
with them freed from their abuses, I am not now prepared to say. I think it might be done;
but the theatre, as it now is, is no place for a Christian.

This, however does not, as before observed, in the least invalidate the general principle.
It is merely a question of means. Nor, as was very roundly asserted, does the principle lead
to this conclusion that every Christian man must have his box at theatre or opera. It by no
means follows that such a course would produce the desired effect. It would be just about as
pertinent to argue that because a sewer in a certain street needed cleansing, and because a
proper array of men and buckets and brooms would cleanse it, therefore every man and woman
on the streets, grave doctors of divinity, stately Mr. Dombey, Flora McFlimsey and Edmund Sparkler,
should each shoulder broomstick or bucket, and plunge pell mell into the reeking filth. This
argument proceeds upon the assumption that Christians can purge amusements only by using them
in the forms and with the appliances attendant upon the world’s abuse of them. This is assuming
altogether too much. We must get religion into these things, but there are various ways of
doing it. You cannot sow broadcast in all soils.

I do not know whether I ought notice one other line of reply to these remarks; but as it seems
to be a favorite one, and moreover was adopted by some who I was surprised to see descending
to it, I will add a few words on this.

It may be described as an attempt to invalidate a principle by showing that its application
to persons of widely different times and circumstances involves an absurdity and then from
the absurdity inferring a sin. I do not pretend to give the exact words used, but they were
in this style: “Think of Paul dancing; or Peter playing billiards! Do you think we shall have
checker-boards in heaven?” And much more of the same kind.

Now this is not argument. It is sheer nonsense; and most unworthy trifling over a serious subject.
The reasoning, if it be worthy the name, is simply this; Certain things appear incongruous
with our ideas of the character and work of certain men: therefore these things are sinful.
It is the easiest thing in the world to invent situations of this kind. Such men as Paul and
Peter are associated in our minds with but one set of ideas;—with one great, glorious, solemn
work; and their association with any inferior matter affects us unpleasantly at first. Even
when we think of Paul making tents, there is at first view something that clashes in our mind
with the speech on Mars Hill, and the healing of the cripple at Lystra. But who thinks of disputing
from this the propriety of Paul’s own hands ministering to his necessities? After all, if there
is no sin in rolling ten pins, I know not why Peter should not have participated in that very
excellent and healthful recreation with as much propriety as any of the numerous ministers
of the present day who “roll” with so much zest and assiduity at our fashionable watering places.
Think of Paul dancing! Well, think of him! Think of Paul wearing a blue swallow-tailed coat
with brass buttons! How he would have looked under the shadow of the Acropolis, the winds of
the Ægean gently swaying his cerulean skirts, and the eager faces of Stoic and Epicurean reflected
in the bright buttons! Think of Peter skating; cutting figures of eight, and performing “outer
edge backwards!” Think of John in a white cravat; or of Bartholomew putting up seidlitz powders;
or of Timothy running with a fire-engine! How would they have looked? Therefore hasten ye trim
gentlemen, to doff your guilty blue and brass, and don the toga. Lay aside your skates, boys.
Peter would have looked very strangely skating, therefore it is sinful to skate. Tear off your
white chokers, ye Reverends, and throw away your pestles ye apothecaries, and be like the apostles.
Shall we have checker-boards in heaven? No, brother, I presume not. Neither shall we marry,
nor be given in marriage; but pray don’t condemn us to celibacy on that ground while we remain
upon earth. “Would you play chess on your death-bed?” Probably not, my friend. Neither would
I put on my boots, or do a great many other very innocent things. Death stands out in startling
contrast to all our employments: to business and study, as well as to recreation; and you would
find it vastly inconvenient to act upon the principle that nothing must be done which you would
not do on your death-bed.

But enough of this. I come now to the one practical application of these principles out of
which this whole discussion has grown.

When our Troy Christian Association adopted the practice of introducing games into their rooms,
I gave it my hearty approval. My opinion on this subject has been confirmed by what I have
seen and heard of the results of the experiment. It was based on the principles I have been
advocating in this paper, and on the farther consideration, growing out of these, that we must
take some of the devil’s weapons and sanctify them before we could successfully fight him on
his own ground. As remarked already, prayer-meetings will not draw irreligious young men into
the sphere where we want them. Give them first well lighted and warmed apartments, handsomely
furnished, where they can find music and books and newspapers and games, and you stand some
chance then of drawing them into the prayer-meetings. And indeed the direct religious influence
of these associations, while highly important, is nevertheless subordinate to their work in
bringing young men into contact with the various churches of the community, where the religious
appliances are of course more perfect. The great point is to get them into some position where
the churches can reach them. They will not come to church, many of them, when they first enter
the community. The church has but limited facilities for finding them out in their stores and
boarding-houses and schools; and it may find therefore a powerful auxiliary in these associations,
which bring the stranger youth where it can bring its influences to bear on them. But for this
purpose the place of rendezvous must be made attractive. We must have head-quarters as pleasant
as the devil’s. I hope all of you have read the article in Guthrie’s Sunday Magazine for January,
1866, entitled “The house that beats the public house;” that splendid iron structure in Colne,
Lancashire, built expressly for the irreligious working class. There are fountains, and pictures,
and games, cabinets and books and newspapers. There are quiet reading rooms, there are refreshment
rooms, even smoking rooms. There is a school room, there are musical entertainments on stated
nights, there are religious services on Sabbath evenings. “On Christmas eve, 1863,” says the
writer, “the musicians at one of the public houses piped for some time, but no dancers presented
themselves, till at length the players themselves adjourned to the meeting at the Iron School.
An attempt to open the theatre that winter failed through the same influence. The actors, after
struggling for a week in the face of empty benches, left the place in despair.”

Here is a clear and successful recognition of the truth that religion has not such strong alliance
with the unregenerate heart that she can afford to dispense with all legitimate aids and recommendations.
The firemen have their upper parlor in the engine house furnished richly and tastefully. The
drinking saloons are invested with all the attractions that marble, and glass, and drapery
and pictures can give them. One man who appeared last week before the excise commissioners,
said he had expended ten thousand dollars in fitting up his saloon. He knew it would pay; and
we cannot expect irreligious young men to be drawn away from these by mere religious appliances.
We must employ other attractions. We must make our houses beat the public houses. We must sanctify
new forces for this end. Pictures and cabinets, carpets and draperies, music and games are
not the devil’s any more than they are ours. Young men will have some retreat beside their
comfortless boarding-houses; some society besides their landlord’s family, and it is a match
between the devil and the church which of us shall furnish these. Depend upon it, if the church
do not give them amusement, regulated on a liberal Christian basis, the devil will give them
abundance that is unregulated. God forbid that Christian squeamishness should suffer them to
turn aside to the house whose gates lead to hell, and to habits which shall make mothers curse
the day they gave them birth.

I will give two incidents showing the practical working of this new system in the Troy Association.
A member of my church, walking in the street one evening, saw three young men just before him,
and overheard one say to the others, “Come, let’s go and take a drink.” One of the others replied,
“No, I don’t care to take a drink. Let’s go to the Christian Association Rooms.” “Pshaw!” said
the third, “I don’t want to go there to prayer meeting.” “No, no,” was the response; “they’ve
got a right nice place there, and we can have a good time.” He went on describing the rooms,
and then added: “and they’re for just such fellows as we are.” He gained his point, and they
followed him to the rooms.

Three clubs of young men, or boys rather, were broken up soon after the new rooms were opened.
I do not know their character fully, but have been told that drinking was practiced at their
meetings. They now frequent the rooms of the society, and pay over into its treasury their
club subscriptions. There are many more of such cases. They speak with trumpet tongues as to
the value of this policy. They show that its practical influence is against the groggery and
the gambling saloon, and if it work no other result, that of itself is vindication enough.

And now I leave the subject. I do not shrink from the application of this Bible principle to
our amusements. The other, the separative policy, the keeping of leaven and lump apart, has
been tried, and has failed, utterly failed.

Will it not be well to try another policy? I want for our youth a Christianity that shall not
relax one iota of its obligation to God or to man. That shall not bate one jot from an entire
consecration of heart and life to God; that shall walk closely with God, and feel as deeply
as human weakness can feel, the necessity of watchfulness and of divine care to keep it from
temptation. I challenge any man to draw undue license from the principles I have asserted.
But I want more joy brought out of the world by Christians. I want the gospel carried boldly
into some things from which it has been kept aloof. I want Christian life to be in the spirit
more than in the letter. I do not plead for less but for more conformity to the spirit and
teaching of Christ. Not for a lower but for a higher Christian life; for a wider application
of gospel principles, a more implicit trust in the leavening power of truth; a more practical
belief in the assertion that the weapons of our warfare are mighty through God to the pulling
down of strongholds. I want Christian conscience clothed with principles and not with dogmas.
I want the word of God read and interpreted fairly, and that allowed which it allows. I protest
against its being twisted and perverted into rules for the unnecessary abridgment of Christian
liberty, where it lays down only general principles for the conscience. I want less of the
religion that is

“Dark as a funeral scarf from stem to stern,”

and more of that which is full of child-like trust in the love of God and the power of truth,
and of freedom purged by love from license.

THE TRUE NONCONFORMIST.

              A Communion Sermon, Delivered Sept. 16, 1866,

              In The First Presbyterian Church, Troy, N. Y.

    Rom. xii, 2. Common sense testifies that, in very
many things, every Christian must, more or less, conform to the world.
Many of the world’s customs are not only harmless, but salutary,
beautiful, ennobling, necessary to the very being of society. We need some
test by which to interpret this command.

Let us first endeavor, as a means of discovering it, to clear away a preliminary error, viz.:
the not uncommon idea that difference from the world is a matter of any value or consequence
of itself. A great many persons, lamenting over real or supposed deficiencies of Christians,
make this the staple of their complaint; you cannot distinguish them from the world: and when
urging upon them some duty, or the relinquishment of some practice, enforce it by the argument,
Christians should aim to be distinct from the world.

There is truth in this, but there is also falsehood. Christians, real Christians, will always
be distinct from the world, and the distinction will be very clearly defined. But Christians
should not make it their object to be distinct from the world. They should aim to be Christians,
and let the distinction follow in its natural order and degree. Singularity, in itself, is
no virtue. It is just as likely to be a vice. A man is not necessarily better because he is
unlike the rest of the world. Difference from the world, therefore, is not an end of Christian
discipline, but a result and concomitant of it. This distinction is of the utmost importance.
If distinctiveness is regarded as an object of Christian effort, its value is sacrificed. Its
tendency is to formality; to the substitution of a variety of outward standards of duty for
a single inward regulative principle. To pride and self-righteousness on the ground of singularity.
Such have been its developments, for instance, in certain religious sects who insisted on plainness
of dress as a duty. Undoubtedly the spirit which originally prompted the requisition was good,
Christlike. It was the desire to take from the useless adornment of the person and bestow upon
objects of Christian effort and charity. It was the desire to remove temptations to vanity
and idle display. But in too many cases these things were forgotten. Christians received the
precept in the letter and not in the spirit. They came to insist on plainness of dress as a
mark of a true Christian, and forgot that materials of plain or sad colors might be as costly
and rich as gayer ones. They came to pride themselves on their plainness as a distinction from
the rest of the world. They said bitter and unchristian things against the man who should carry
a gold watch or the woman who should wear a feather or a ribbon. They perverted scripture to
uphold this ridiculous whim, and brought scorn upon themselves and reproach upon the cause
of Christ, because they turned their eyes from the inward, regulative power of the gospel to
one of its natural developments, and looked at that until it grew out of all proportion.

How then are we rightly to apply this command?

The apostle, in giving us an answer, takes up the question at the very point at which most
inquirers do, viz.: at the matter of sacrifice. For this is the way in which it presents itself
to most minds. In order not to be conformed to the world, I must sacrifice much that is of
the world. What, now, may I retain, and what must I relinquish?

And in Paul’s answer, he strikes directly at any such method of putting the question. Non-conformity
to the world involves sacrifice, it is true, but not a sacrifice made in any such spirit as
this—a spirit that ere it gives itself to Christ, sits down and begins to sort its possessions,
pleasures, pursuits, into two piles, saying: “this for God, this for the world: this goes back
to my treasure house, this I throw away.” Not so. It is not, let him cut himself off from this
thing or that thing, but let him deny himself; literally, let him say that self is not, and
that the will of Christ is everything. Holding fast this principle a man cannot greatly err.
The will of Christ and the will of the world are so diametrically opposite, that he cannot
go toward the one without going away from the other. A man has no business to waste time pondering
over the details of his sacrifice for Christ’s sake, tormenting himself with deciding between
what is right and what is wrong; what is worldly and what is heavenly. The will of Christ once
heartily embraced as a rule of life will teach him to decide. Christ received into the heart
will regulate its affinities and repulsions. The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus
shall make the soul free from the law of sin and death, so that it shall hate the things it
once loved, and love those it once despised.

Young people often come to their pastor saying: “If I become a Christian, must I give up such
and such things? Must I discharge such and such duties?” And for myself I reply to them—“I
have no answer to give you. I will not encourage you to come to Christ in this mean, bargain-making
spirit. If your conscience tells you a thing is wrong, as it does in many cases, you have no
need to ask me if Christ will require its relinquishment. You know he will, without any compromise.
But when it comes to any doubtful matter, waive that question. You have nothing whatever to
do with it now. Christ requires of you to be willing to obey him implicitly in all things,
without regard to your own feelings or preferences, your own prosperity or safety, no matter
what duties or sacrifices obedience involves; and I simply ask you are you willing to do this?
If you are not, Christ does not want you. A young man goes to a recruiting office to enlist.
The sergeant examines him, and says: ‘you are just the kind of man I want. Here, put down your
name. Your bounty is so much; your pay will be so much.’ The recruit takes the pen in his hand,
but stops suddenly in the act of writing his name, and says: ‘How far shall I be required to
march daily? What kind of a tent shall I have? Must I do picket duty beyond regular hours?
To what kind of a climate am I to be sent?’ How long do you suppose the officer would keep
patience with such a man? How many of these questions would he pretend to answer, even if he
could? He would simply say to the man: ‘we make no terms with you, sir, beyond your bounty
and pay. If you enlist, you do so with the understanding that a soldier has nothing to do but
obey orders; to serve where, when, and how he may be directed. If you want to know these things,
enlist, and you will find out when you are in service.’ Just so I say to one who begins inquiring
into the details of Christ’s service: If you want to find out, enlist. Commit your life to
Christ’s keeping. Devote yourself to Christ’s service, and ‘if any man wills to do his will,
he shall know of the doctrine.’ An inquirer for salvation, tormenting himself about what he
must do and what relinquish, forgets that he is in no condition to decide such a question.
To decide it he wants just that spiritual insight and those new affinities which faith in Christ
and the consequent renewal of his nature will give him. He wants to see these things from a
stand-point which he has not yet attained. He had far better let them go for the present, and
concentrate his resolution on this one point: ‘I give myself to Jesus without reserve. Whatever
he tells me I may enjoy I will endeavor to enjoy in his love and fear. Whatever he bids me
cast away, though it be a right hand, I will cut it off and cast it from me.’ ” A young man
once came to me saying: “There seems to be but one thing in the way of my entire surrender
to Christ. If I become a Christian, and a member of the church, I don’t see how I can ever
take any public part in the religious meetings. If I could only decide whether God required
this of me, I think my way would be clear.” I said to him, “My brother, you are not called
on to settle that question now. You have no means of deciding it. You had better drop it altogether
for the present. God has promised that if you will commit your ways unto him he will direct
you. Now I believe you sincerely want to do God’s will, and that you are ready, whenever he
shall show it you, to pledge yourself to do your duty. Leave the matter there; and if, at any
time, this duty should be thrust upon you, do it in God’s name and strength.” He soon after
joined the church, and has borne himself since with a fidelity and devotion which speak well
for the thoroughness of the work of grace in him.

Now this is what the apostle means by a living sacrifice. This spirit of consecration infused
into sacrifice fills it with life. The sacrifice becomes “living” only when self dies; when
the man says

“Here Lord, I give myself away: ’Tis all that I can do.”

The other method of securing nonconformity to the world by acting for the mere sake of difference
or according to circumstances, constitutes a dead sacrifice. Such were the sacrifices of the
Pharisees. They thanked God they were not as other men; but the difference was but outward.
To the spectator’s eye they were not conformed to the world. They did not dress like it. Their
prayers were longer and more frequent. They did not eat with publicans and sinners. But these
differences had become the chief end of their religious life. Their development was like arranging
the limbs of a corpse for exhibition. They were not the natural, spontaneous outgrowths of
a living inward principle; and hence the Pharisees have passed into history as the representative
hypocrites of all time.

The essential character of this self-sacrifice will farther appear from a correct understanding
of the phrase reasonable service. On this, two things must be remarked. 1st, that the expression
does not belong to the words “living sacrifice” alone, but to the whole exhortation. This is
all true; but this is not what the text means. It signifies a service whose main spring is
in the thinking, reasoning, spiritual department of man’s nature—a spiritual service rendered
to a God who is a spirit, and who requireth to be worshiped in spirit and in truth. Only thus
will the body be offered alive to God. Only thus will the mind be truly transformed. All the
outward developments of the life will then bear the stamp of a reasoning service. The way of
peace will be chosen from conviction. The will, self-impelled, will set toward God. The conscience
will be alive with a divinely inspired sensitiveness. All the affections and desires, of their
own accord, will stretch their hands towards Christ, and the renewed man will daily realize
that the water which Jesus gives is in him, living water, springing up into everlasting life.

