

LETTER XIV

DEAR FATHER AND MOTHER,

Mrs. Jervis and I have lived very comfortably together for this fortnight past; for my master
was all that time at his Lincolnshire estate, and at his sister's, the Lady Davers. But he
came home yesterday. He had some talk with Mrs. Jervis soon after, and mostly about me. He
said to her, it seems, Well, Mrs. Jervis, I know Pamela has your good word; but do you think
her of any use in the family? She told me she was surprised at the question, but said, That
I was one of the most virtuous and industrious young creatures that ever she knew. Why that
word virtuous, said he, I pray you? Was there any reason to suppose her otherwise? Or has any
body taken it into his head to try her?--I wonder, sir, says she, you ask such a question!
Who dare offer any thing to her in such an orderly and well-governed house as yours, and under
a master of so good a character for virtue and honour? Your servant, Mrs. Jervis, says he,
for your good opinion: but pray, if any body did, do you think Pamela would let you know it?
Why, sir, said she, she is a poor innocent young creature, and I believe has so much confidence
in me, that she would take my advice as soon as she would her mother's. Innocent! again, and
virtuous, I warrant! Well, Mrs. Jervis, you abound with your epithets; but I take her to be
an artful young baggage; and had I a young handsome butler or steward, she'd soon make her
market of one of them, if she thought it worth while to snap at him for a husband. Alack-a-day,
sir, said she, it is early days with Pamela; and she does not yet think of a husband, I dare
say: and your steward and butler are both men in years, and think nothing of the matter. No,
said he, if they were younger, they'd have more wit than to think of such a girl; I'll tell
you my mind of her, Mrs. Jervis: I don't think this same favourite of yours so very artless
a girl as you imagine. I am not to dispute with your honour, said Mrs. Jervis; but I dare say,
if the men will let her alone, she'll never trouble herself about them. Why, Mrs. Jervis, said
he, are there any men that will not let her alone, that you know of? No, indeed, sir, said
she; she keeps herself so much to herself, and yet behaves so prudently, that they all esteem
her, and shew her as great a respect as if she was a gentlewoman born.

Ay, says he, that's her art, that I was speaking of: but, let me tell you, the girl has vanity
and conceit, and pride too, or I am mistaken; and, perhaps, I could give you an instance of
it. Sir, said she, you can see farther than such a poor silly woman as I am; but I never saw
any thing but innocence in her--And virtue too, I'll warrant ye! said he. But suppose I could
give you an instance, where she has talked a little too freely of the kindnesses that have
been shewn her from a certain quarter; and has had the vanity to impute a few kind words, uttered
in mere compassion to her youth and circumstances, into a design upon her, and even dared to
make free with names that she ought never to mention but with reverence and gratitude; what
would you say to that?--Say, sir! said she, I cannot tell what to say. But I hope Pamela incapable
of such ingratitude.

Well, no more of this silly girl, says he; you may only advise her, as you are her friend,
not to give herself too much licence upon the favours she meets with; and if she stays here,
that she will not write the affairs of my family purely for an exercise to her pen, and her
invention. I tell you she is a subtle, artful gipsy, and time will shew it you.

Was ever the like heard, my dear father and mother? It is plain he did not expect to meet with
such a repulse, and mistrusts that I have told Mrs. Jervis, and has my long letter too, that
I intended for you; and so is vexed to the heart. But I can't help it. I had better be thought
artful and subtle, than be so, in his sense; and, as light as he makes of the words virtue
and innocence in me, he would have made a less angry construction, had I less deserved that
he should do so; for then, may be, my crime should have been my virtue with him naughty gentleman
as he is!

I will soon write again; but must now end with saying, that I am, and shall always be, Your
honest DAUGHTER.

LETTER XV

DEAR MOTHER,

I broke off abruptly my last letter; for I feared he was coming; and so it happened. I put
the letter in my bosom, and took up my work, which lay by me; but I had so little of the artful,
as he called it, that I looked as confused as if I had been doing some great harm.

Sit still, Pamela, said he, mind your work, for all me.--You don't tell me I am welcome home,
after my journey to Lincolnshire. It would be hard, sir, said I, if you was not always welcome
to your honour's own house.

I would have gone; but he said, Don't run away, I tell you. I have a word or two to say to
you. Good sirs, how my heart went pit-a-pat! When I was a little kind to you, said he, in the
summer-house, and you carried yourself so foolishly upon it, as if I had intended to do you
great harm, did I not tell you you should take no notice of what passed to any creature? and
yet you have made a common talk of the matter, not considering either my reputation, or your
own.--I made a common talk of it, sir! said I: I have nobody to talk to, hardly.

He interrupted me, and said, Hardly! you little equivocator! what do you mean by hardly? Let
me ask you, have not you told Mrs. Jervis for one? Pray your honour, said I, all in agitation,
let me go down; for it is not for me to hold an argument with your honour. Equivocator, again!
said he, and took my hand, what do you talk of an argument? Is it holding an argument with
me to answer a plain question? Answer me what I asked. O, good sir, said I, let me beg you
will not urge me farther, for fear I forget myself again, and be saucy.

Answer me then, I bid you, says he, Have you not told Mrs. Jervis? It will be saucy in you
if you don't answer me directly to what I ask. Sir, said I, and fain would have pulled my hand
away, perhaps I should be for answering you by another question, and that would not become
me. What is it you would say? replies he; speak out.

Then, sir, said I, why should your honour be so angry I should tell Mrs. Jervis, or any body
else, what passed, if you intended no harm?

Well said, pretty innocent and artless! as Mrs. Jervis calls you, said he; and is it thus you
taunt and retort upon me, insolent as you are! But still I will be answered directly to my
question. Why then, sir, said I, I will not tell a lie for the world: I did tell Mrs. Jervis;
for my heart was almost broken; but I opened not my mouth to any other. Very well, boldface,
said he, and equivocator again! You did not open your mouth to any other; but did not you write
to some other? Why, now, and please your honour, said I, (for I was quite courageous just then,)
you could not have asked me this question, if you had not taken from me my letter to my father
and mother, in which I own I had broken my mind freely to them, and asked their advice, and
poured forth my griefs!

And so I am to be exposed, am I, said he, in my own house, and out of my house, to the whole
world, by such a sauce-box as you? No, good sir, said I, and I hope your honour won't be angry
with me; it is not I that expose you, if I say nothing but the truth. So, taunting again! Assurance
as you are! said he: I will not be thus talked to!

Pray, sir, said I, of whom can a poor girl take advice, if it must not be of her father and
mother, and such a good woman as Mrs. Jervis, who, for her sex-sake, should give it me when
asked? Insolence! said he, and stamped with his foot, am I to be questioned thus by such a
one as you? I fell down on my knees, and said, For Heaven's sake, your honour, pity a poor
creature, that knows nothing of her duty, but how to cherish her virtue and good name: I have
nothing else to trust to: and, though poor and friendless here, yet I have always been taught
to value honesty above my life. Here's ado with your honesty, said he, foolish girl! Is it
not one part of honesty to be dutiful and grateful to your master, do you think? Indeed, sir,
said I, it is impossible I should be ungrateful to your honour, or disobedient, or deserve
the names of bold-face or insolent, which you call me, but when your commands are contrary
to that first duty which shall ever be the principle of my life!

He seemed to be moved, and rose up, and walked into the great chamber two or three turns, leaving
me on my knees; and I threw my apron over my face, and laid my head on a chair, and cried as
if my heart would break, having no power to stir.

At last he came in again, but, alas! with mischief in his heart! and raising me up, he said,
Rise, Pamela, rise; you are your own enemy. Your perverse folly will be your ruin: I tell you
this, that I am very much displeased with the freedoms you have taken with my name to my housekeeper,
as also to your father and mother; and you may as well have real cause to take these freedoms
with me, as to make my name suffer for imaginary ones. And saying so, he offered to take me
on his knee, with some force. O how I was terrified! I said, like as I had read in a book a
night or two before, Angels and saints, and all the host of heaven, defend me! And may I never
survive one moment that fatal one in which I shall forfeit my innocence! Pretty fool! said
he, how will you forfeit your innocence, if you are obliged to yield to a force you cannot
withstand? Be easy, said he; for let the worst happen that can, you will have the merit, and
I the blame; and it will be a good subject for letters to your father and mother, and a tale
into the bargain for Mrs. Jervis.

He by force kissed my neck and lips; and said, Whoever blamed Lucretia? All the shame lay on
the ravisher only and I am content to take all the blame upon me, as I have already borne too
great a share for what I have not deserved.

May I, said I, Lucretia like, justify myself with my death, if I am used barbarously! O my
good girl! said he, tauntingly, you are well read, I see; and we shall make out between us,
before we have done, a pretty story in romance, I warrant ye.

He then put his hand in my bosom, and indignation gave me double strength, and I got loose
from him by a sudden spring, and ran out of the room! and the next chamber being open, I made
shift to get into it, and threw to the door, and it locked after me; but he followed me so
close, he got hold of my gown, and tore a piece off, which hung without the door; for the key
was on the inside.

I just remember I got into the room; for I knew nothing further of the matter till afterwards;
for I fell into a fit with my terror, and there I lay, till he, as I suppose, looking through
the key-hole, spyed me upon the floor, stretched out at length, on my face; and then he called
Mrs. Jervis to me, who, by his assistance, bursting open the door, he went away, seeing me
coming to myself; and bid her say nothing of the matter, if she was wise.

Poor Mrs. Jervis thought it was worse, and cried over me like as if she was my mother; and
I was two hours before I came to myself; and just as I got a little up on my feet, he coming
in, I fainted away again with the terror; and so he withdrew: but he staid in the next room
to let nobody come near us, that his foul proceedings might not be known.

