It was at this time that Columbus made the acquaintance of a man whose character shines like
a jewel amid the dismal scenes that afterwards accompanied the first bursting of the wave of
civilisation on these happy shores.  This was the king of that part of the island, a young
man named Guacanagari. He looked round. It was an alderman, not his master, but Sir John Mundy,
an unpopular, harsh man.
"Wherefore?" demanded Giles.

"Thou shalt know," said the alderman,
seizing his arm to drag him to the Counter prison, but Giles resisted.  There must have been an Intelligence Department in the island, for
the chief seemed to know what would be most likely to attract the Admiral; and with his messengers
he sent out a belt with a large golden mask attached to it.  Unfortunately the natives on board
the Admiral's ship could not understand Guacanagari's messengers, and nearly the whole of the
day was passed in talking before the sense of their message was finally made out by means of
signs.  In the evening some Spaniards were sent ashore to see if they could not get some gold;
but Columbus, who had evidently had some recent experience of their avariciousness, and who
was anxious to keep on good terms with the chiefs of the island, sent his secretary with them
to see that they did nothing unjust or unreasonable.  He was scrupulous to see that the natives
got their bits of glass and beads in exchange for the gold; and it is due to him to remember
that now, as always, he was rigid in regulating his conduct with other men in accordance with
his ideas of justice and honour, however elastic those ideas may seem to have been.  The ruffianly
crew had in their minds only the immediate possession of what they could get from the Indians;
the Admiral had in his mind the whole possession of the islands and the bodies and souls of
its inhabitants.  If you take a piece of gold without giving a glass bead in exchange for it,
it is called stealing; if you take a country and its inhabitants, and steal their peace from
them, and give them blood and servitude in exchange for it, it is called colonisation and Empire-building.
Every one understands the distinction; but so few people see the difference that Columbus of
all men may be excused for his unconsciousness of it.

Indeed Columbus was seeing yellow at this point in his career.  The word "gold" is scattered
throughout every page of his journal; he can understand nothing that the natives say to him
except that there is a great quantity of gold somewhere about.  He is surrounded by natives
pressing presents upon him, protesting their homage, and assuring him (so he thinks) that there
are any amount of gold mines; and no wonder that the yellow light blinds his eyes and confounds
his senses, and that sometimes, even when the sun has gone down and the natives have retired
to their villages and he sits alone in the seclusion of his cabin, the glittering motes still
dance before his eyes and he becomes mad, maudlin, ecstatic .  .  .  .  The light flickers
in the lamp as the ship swings a little on the quiet tide and a night breeze steals through
the cabin door; the sound of voices ashore sounds dimly across the water; the brain of the
Admiral, overfilled with wonders and promises and hopes, sends its message to the trembling
hand that holds the pen, and the incoherent words stream out on the ink.  "May our Lord in
His mercy direct me until I find this gold, I say this Mine, because I have many people here
who say that they know it."

On Christmas Eve a serious misfortune befell Columbus.  What with looking for gold, and trying
to understand the people who talked about it, and looking after his ships, and writing up his
journal, he had had practically no sleep for two days and a night; and at eleven o'clock on
the 24th of December, the night being fine and his ship sailing along the coast with a light
land breeze, he decided to lie down to get some sleep. There were no difficulties in navigation
to be feared, because the ship's boats had been rowed the day before a distance of about ten
miles ahead on the course which they were then steering and had seen that there was open water
all the way.  The wind fell calm; and the man at the helm, having nothing to do, and feeling
sleepy, called a ship's boy to him, gave him the helm, and went off himself to lie down.  This
of course was against all rules; but as the Admiral was in his cabin and there was no one to
tell them otherwise the watch on deck thought it a very good opportunity to rest.  Suddenly
the boy felt the rudder catch upon something, saw the ship swinging, and immediately afterwards
heard the sound of tide ripples.  He cried out; and in a moment Columbus, who was sleeping
the light sleep of an anxious shipmaster, came tumbling up to see what was the matter.  The
current, which flows in that place at a speed of about two knots, had carried the ship on to
a sand bank, but she touched so quietly that it was hardly felt.  Close on the heels of, Columbus
came the master of the ship and the delinquent watch; and the Admiral immediately ordered them
to launch the ship's boat--and lay out an anchor astern so that they could warp her off.  The
wretches lowered the boat, but instead of getting the anchor on board rowed off in the direction
of the Nina, which was lying a mile and a half to windward. As soon as Columbus saw what they
were doing he ran to the side and, seeing that the tide was failing and that the ship had swung
round across the bank, ordered the remainder of the crew to cut away the mainmast and throw
the deck hamper overboard, in order to lighten the ship.  This took some time; the tide was
falling, and the ship beginning to heel over on her beam; and by the time it was done the Admiral
saw that it would be of no use, for the ship's seams had opened and she was filling.

At this point the miserable crew in the ship's boat came back, the loyal people on the Nina
having refused to receive them and sent them back to the assistance of the Admiral.  But it
was now too late to do anything to save the ship; and as he did not know but that she might
break up, Columbus decided to tranship the people to the Nina, who had by this time sent her
own boat.  The whole company boarded the Nina, on which the Admiral beat about miserably till
morning in the vicinity of his doomed ship.  Then he sent Diego de Arana, the brother of Beatriz
and a trusty friend, ashore in a boat to beg the help of the King; and Guacanagari immediately
sent his people with large canoes to unload the wrecked ship, which was done with great efficiency
and despatch, and the whole of her cargo and fittings stored on shore under a guard.  And so
farewell to the Santa Maria, whose bones were thenceforward to bleach upon the shores of Hayti,
or incongruously adorn the dwellings of the natives.  She may have been "a bad sailer and unfit
for discovery"; but no seaman looks without emotion upon the wreck of a ship whose stem has
cut the waters of home, which has carried him safely over thousands of uncharted miles, and
which has for so long been his shelter and sanctuary.

At sunrise the kind-hearted cacique came down to the Nina, where Columbus had taken up his
quarters, and with tears in his eyes begged the Admiral not to grieve at his losses, for that
he, the cacique, would give him everything that he possessed; that he had already given two
large houses to the Spaniards from the Santa Maria who had been obliged to encamp on shore,
and that he would provide more accommodation and help if necessary.  In fact, the day which
had been ushered in so disastrously turned into a very happy one; and before it was over Columbus
had decided that, as he could not take the whole of his company home on the Nina, he would
establish a settlement on shore so that the men who were left behind could collect gold and
store it until more ships could be sent from Spain.  The natives came buzzing round anxious
to barter whatever they had for hawks' bells, which apparently were the most popular of the
toys that had been brought for bartering; "they shouted and showed the pieces of gold, saying
chuq, chuq, for hawks' bells, as they are in a likely state to become crazy for them."  The
cacique was delighted to see that the Admiral was pleased with the gold that was brought to
him, and he cheered him up by telling him that there was any amount in Cibao, which Columbus
of course took for Cipango.  The cacique entertained Columbus to a repast on shore, at which
the monarch wore a shirt and a pair of gloves that Columbus had given him; "and he rejoiced
more over the gloves than anything that had been given him."  Columbus was pleased with his
clean and leisurely method of eating, and with his dainty rubbing of his hands with herbs after
he had eaten.  After the repast Columbus gave a little demonstration of bow-and-arrow shooting
and the firing of lombards and muskets, all of which astonished and impressed the natives.

The afternoon was spent in deciding on a site for the fortress which was to be constructed;
and Columbus had no difficulty in finding volunteers among the crews to remain in the settlement.
He promised to leave with them provisions of bread and wine for a year, a ship's boat, seeds
for sowing crops, and a carpenter, a caulker, a gunner, and a cooper.  Before the day was out
he was already figuring up the profit that would arise out of his misfortune of the day before;
and he decided that it was the act of God which had cast his ship away in order that this settlement
should be founded. But they agreed, and Kit Smallbones with them, that there could be no harm
in going into the open space of Cheapside and playing out a match with bucklers between Giles
and Wat Ball, a draper's prentice who had challenged him.
  After all, if he was greedy
for gold, he had a pious purpose for its employment.

The last days of the year were very busy ones for the members of the expedition.  Assisted
by the natives they were building the fort which, in memory of the day on which it was founded,
Columbus called La Villa-de la Navidad.  The Admiral spent much time with King Guacanagari,
who "loved him so much that it was wonderful," and wished to cover him all over with gold before
he went away, and begged him not to go before it was done.  On December 27th there was some
good news; a caravel had been seen entering a harbour a little further along the coast; and
as this could only mean that the Pinta had returned, Columbus borrowed a canoe from the king,
and despatched a sailor in it to carry news of his whereabouts to the Pinta.  While it was
away Guacanagari collected all the other kings and chiefs who were subject to him, and held
a kind of durbar.  They all wore their crowns; and Guacanagari took off his crown and placed
it on Columbus's head; and the Admiral, not to be outdone, took from his own neck "a collar
of good bloodstones and very beautiful beads of fine colours; which appeared very good in all
parts, and placed it upon the King; and he took off a cloak of fine scarlet cloth which he
had put on that day, and clothed the King with it; and he sent for some coloured buskins which
he made him put on, and placed upon his finger a large silver ring"--all of which gives us
a picturesque glimpse into the contents of the Admiral's wardrobe, and a very agreeable picture
of King Guacanagari, whom we must now figure as clothed, in addition to his shirt and gloves,
in a pair of coloured buskins, a collar of bloodstones, a scarlet cloak and a silver ring.

But the time was running short; the Admiral, hampered as he was by the possession of only one
small ship, had now but one idea, which was to get back to Castile as quickly as possible,
report the result of his discoveries, and come back again with a larger and more efficient
equipment.  Before he departed he had an affectionate leave-taking with King Guacanagari; he
gave him another shirt, and also provided a demonstration of the effect of lombards by having
one loaded, and firing at the old Santa Maria where she lay hove down on the sandbank.  The
shot went clean through her hull and fell into the sea beyond, and produced what might be called
a very strong moral effect, although an unnecessary one, on the natives.  He then set about
the very delicate business of organising the settlement. The curfew rang, but there were special
privileges on May Eve, and the game went on louder than ever.
There was far too much noise for any one to hear the town crier,
who went along jingling his bell, and shouting, "O yes! O yes! O yes!  To these three
he delegated all his powers and authority as Admiral and Viceroy; and then, having collected
the colonists, gave them a solemn address.  First, he reminded them of the goodness of God
to them, and advised them to remain worthy of it by obeying the Divine command in all their
actions.  Second, he ordered them, as a representative of the Sovereigns of Spain, to obey
the captain whom he had appointed for them as they would have obeyed himself.  Third, he urged
them to show respect and reverence towards King Guacanagari and his chiefs, and to the inferior
chiefs, and to avoid annoying them or tormenting them, since they were to remain in a land
that was as yet under native dominion; to "strive and watch by their soft and honest speech
to gain their good-will and keep their friendship and love, so that he should find them as
friendly and favourable and more so when he returned."  Fourth, he commanded them "and begged
them earnestly" to do no injury and use no force against any natives; to take nothing from
them against their will; and especially to be on their guard to avoid injury or violence to
the women, "by which they would cause scandal and set a bad example to the Indians and show
the infamy of the Christians." Fifth, he charged them not to scatter themselves or leave the
place where they then were, but to remain together until he returned.  Sixth, he "animated"
them to suffer their solitude and exile cheerfully and bravely, since they had willingly chosen
it.  The seventh order was, that they should get help from the King to send boat expeditions
in search of the gold mines; and lastly, he promised that he would petition the Sovereigns
to honour them with special favours and rewards.  To this very manly, wise and humane address
the people listened with some emotion, assuring Columbus that they placed their hopes in him,
"begging him earnestly to remember them always, and that as quickly as he could he should give
them the great joy which they anticipated from his coming again."

All of which things being done, the ships [ship--there was only the Nina] loaded and provisioned,
and the Admiral's final directions given, he makes his farewells and weighs anchor at sunrise
on Friday, January 4., 1493.  Among the little crowd on the shore who watch the Nina growing
smaller in the distance are our old friends Allard and William, tired of the crazy confinement
of a ship and anxious for shore adventures.  They are to have their fill of them, as it happens;
adventures that are to bring to the settlers a sudden cloud of blood and darkness, and for
the islanders a brief return to their ancient peace.  But death waits for Allard and William
in the sunshine and silence of Espanola.

CHAPTER III

THE VOYAGE HOME

