What should she do next? How should she conduct herself in her present circumstances? Her heart
prompted her to go off at once to Anton Trendellsohn and tell him everything; but she greatly
feared that Anton would not be glad to see her. She knew that it was not well that a girl should
run after her lover; but yet how was she to live without seeing him? What other comfort had
she? and from whom else could she look for guidance? She declared to herself at last that she,
in her position, would not be stayed by ordinary feelings of maiden reserve. She would tell
him everything, even to the threat on which her aunt had so much depended, and would then ask
him for his counsel. She would describe to him, if words from her could describe them, all
her difficulties, and would promise to be guided by him absolutely in everything. "Everything,"
she would say to him, "I have given up for you. I am yours entirely, body and soul. Do with
me as you will." If he should then tell her that he would not have her, that he did not want
the sacrifice, she would go away from him--and drown herself. But she would not go to him to-day--no,
not to-day; not perhaps to-morrow. It was but a day or two as yet since she had been over at
the Trendellsohns' house, and though on that occasion she had not seen Anton, Anton of course
would know that she had been there. She did not wish him to think that she was hunting him.
She would wait yet two or three days-- till the next Sunday morning perhaps--and then she would
go again to the Jews' quarter. On the Christian Sabbath Anton was always at home, as on that
day business is suspended in Prague both for Christian and Jew.

Then she went back to her father. He was still lying with his face turned to the wall, and
Nina, thinking that he slept, took up her work and sat by his side. But he was awake, and watching.
"Is she gone?" he said, before her needle had been plied a dozen times.

"Aunt Sophie? Yes, father, she has gone."

"I hope she will not come again."

"She says that she will never come again."

"What is the use of her coming here? We are lost and are perishing. We are utterly gone. She
will not help us, and why should she disturb us with her curses?"

"Father, there may be better days for us yet."

"How can there be better days when you are bringing down the Jew upon us? Better days for yourself,
perhaps, if mere eating and drinking will serve you."

"Oh, father!"

"Have you not ruined everything with your Jew lover? Did you not hear how I was treated? What
could I say to your aunt when she stood there and reviled us?"

"Father, I was so grateful to you for saying nothing!"

"But I knew that she was right. A Christian should not marry a Jew. She said it was abominable;
and so it is."

"Father, father, do not speak like that! I thought that you had forgiven me. You said to aunt
Sophie that I was a good daughter. Will you not say the same to me--to me myself?"

"It is not good to love a Jew."

"I do love him, father. How can I help it now? I cannot change my heart."

"I suppose I shall be dead soon," said old Balatka, "and then it will not matter. You will
become one of them, and I shall be forgotten."

"Father, have I ever forgotten you?" said Nina, throwing herself upon him on his bed. "Have
I not always loved you? Have I not been good to you? Oh, father, we have been true to each
other through it all. The Fifth avenue of the place, where the handsomest residences are
located, is Circular street, east of the Park.

Beautiful dwellings may also be found on Lake avenue and Franklin
street.

The streets are thronged with a gay and brilliant multitude, engaged in riding, driving, walking, each
enjoying to the utmost a facinating kind of busy idleness. But by the time the tourist has
glanced at all this he will be thinking of clean napkins, and will be interested to know what may
be afforded in the way of

Accommodations for Man and Beast. The elder
Jew had then expressed his opinion that Josef Balatka should be required to make the demand
as a matter of business, to enforce a legal right; but to this Anton had replied that the old
man in the Kleinseite was not in a condition to act efficiently in the matter himself. It was
to him that the money had been advanced, but to the Zamenoys that it had in truth been paid;
and Anton declared his purpose of going to Karil Zamenoy and himself making his demand. And
then there had been a discussion, almost amounting to a quarrel, between the two Trendellsohns
as to Nina Balatka. Poor Nina need not have added another to her many causes of suffering by
doubting her lover's truth. Anton Trendellsohn, though not given to speak of his love with
that demonstrative vehemence to which Nina had trusted in her attempts to make her friends
understand that she could not be talked out of her engagement, was nevertheless sufficiently
firm in his purpose. He was a man very constant in all his purposes, whom none who knew him
would have supposed likely to jeopardise his worldly interests for the love of a Christian
girl, but who was very little apt to abandon aught to which he had set his hand because the
voices of those around him might be against him. He had thought much of his position as a Jew
before he had spoken of love to the penniless Christian maiden who frequented his father's
house, pleading for her father in his poverty; but the words when spoken meant much, and Nina
need not have feared that he would forget them. He was a man not much given to dalliance, not
requiring from day to day the soft sweetness of a woman's presence to keep his love warm; but
his love could maintain its own heat, without any softness or dalliance. Had it not been so,
such a girl as Nina would hardly have surrendered to him her whole heart as she had done.

"You will fall into trouble about the maiden," the elder Trendellsohn had said.

"True, father; there will be trouble enough. In what that we do is there not trouble?"

"A man in the business of his life must encounter labour and grief and disappointment. He should
take to him a wife to give him ease in these things, not one who will be an increase to his
sorrows."

"That which is done is done."

"My son, this thing is not done."

"She has my plighted word, father. Is not that enough?"

"Nina is a good girl. I will say for her that she is very good. I have wished that you might
have brought to my house as your wife the child of my old friend Baltazar Loth; but if that
may not be, I would have taken Nina willingly by the hand--had she been one of us."

"It may be that God will open her eyes."

"Anton, I would not have her eyes opened by anything so weak as her love for a man. But I have
said that she was good. She will hear reason; and when she shall know that her marriage among
us would bring trouble on us, she will restrain her wishes. Speak to her, Anton, and see if
it be not so."

"Not for all the wealth which all our people own in Bohemia! Father, to do so would be to demand,
not to ask. If she love me, could she refuse such a request were I to ask it?"

"I will speak a word to Nina, my son, and the request shall come from her."

"And if it does, I will never yield to it. For her sake I would not yield, for I know she loves
me. Neither for my own would I yield; for as truly as I worship God, I love her better than
all the world beside. She is to me my cup of water when I am hot and athirst, my morsel of
bread when I am faint with hunger. Her voice is the only music which I love. The touch of her
hand is so fresh that it cools me when I am in fever. The kiss of her lips is so sweet and
balmy that it cures when I shake with an ague fit. To think of her when I am out among men
fighting for my own, is such a joy, that now, methinks now, that I have had it belonging to
me, I could no longer fight were I to lose it. No. father; she shall not be taken from me.
I love her, and I will keep her."

Oh that Nina could have heard him! The game dinners are good, the prices are high, and the fried
potatoes are noted all over the world. They have never been successfully imitated. Are done
up in papers and sold like confectionery. The gayly dressed ladies indulge in beatific expressives
as they feast upon them.

A capital story is told of Moon, the proprietor--indeed, he tells
it "himself." A few months after one of his "seasons" had closed he
chanced to be in Boston, where he hired a horse and buggy to drive
out to Chelsea. As it was, the words fell upon ears which they delighted
not. "Then, my son, you will live to rue the day in which you first saw her," said the elder
Jew. "She will be a bone of contention in your way that will separate you from all your friends.
You will become neither Jew nor Christian, and will be odious alike to both. And she will be
the same."

"Then, father, we will bear our sorrows together."

"Yes; and what happens when sorrows come from such causes? The man learns to hate the woman
who has caused them, and ill-uses her, and feels himself to be a Cain upon the earth, condemned
by all, but by none so much as by himself. Do you think that you have strength to bear the
contempt of all those around you?"

Anton waited a moment or two before he answered, and then spoke very slowly. "If it be necessary
to bear so much, I will at least make the effort. It may be that I shall find the strength."

"Nothing then that your father says to you avails aught?"

"Nothing, father, on that matter. You should have spoken sooner."

"Then you must go your own way. As for me, I must look for another son to bear the burden of
my years." And so they parted.

Anton Trendellsohn understood well the meaning of the old man's threat. He was quite alive
to the fact that his father had expressed his intention to give his wealth and his standing
in trade and the business of his house to some younger Jew, who would be more true than his
own son to the traditional customs of their tribes. There was Ruth Jacobi, his granddaughter--the
only child of the house--who had already reached an age at which she might be betrothed; and
there was Samuel Loth, the son of Baltazar Loth, old Trendellsohn's oldest friend. Anton Trendellsohn
did not doubt who might be the adopted child to be taken to fill his place. It has been already
explained that there was no partnership actually existing between the two Trendellsohns. By
degrees the son had slipt into the father's place, and the business by which the house had
grown rich had for the last five or six years been managed chiefly by him. But the actual results
of the son's industry and the son's thrift were still in the possession of the father. The
old man might no doubt go far towards ruining his son if he were so minded.

Dreams of a high ambition had, from very early years, flitted across the mind of the younger
Trendellsohn till they had nearly formed themselves into a settled purpose. He had heard of
Jews in Vienna, in Paris, and in London, who were as true to their religion as any Jew of Prague,
but who did not live immured in a Jews' quarter, like lepers separate and alone in some loathed
corner of a city otherwise clean. These men went abroad into the world as men, using the wealth
with which their industry had been blessed, openly as the Christians used it. And they lived
among Christians as one man should live with his fellow-men--on equal terms, giving and taking,
honouring and honoured. As yet it was not so with the Jews of Prague, who were still bound
to their old narrow streets, to their dark houses, to their mean modes of living, and who,
worst of all, were still subject to the isolated ignominy of Judaism. In Prague a Jew was still
a Pariah. Anton's father was rich--very rich. Anton hardly knew what was the extent of his
father's wealth, but he did know that it was great. In his father's time, however, no change
could be made. He did not scruple to speak to the old man of these things; but he spoke of
them rather as dreams, or as distant hopes, than as being the basis of any purpose of his own.
His father would merely say that the old house, looking out upon the ancient synagogue, must
last him his time, and that the changes of which Anton spoke must be postponed--not till he
died--but till such time as he should feel it right to give up the things of this world. Anton
Trendellsohn, who knew his father well, had resolved that he would wait patiently for everything
till his father should have gone to his last home, knowing that nothing but death would close
the old man's interest in the work of his life. But he had been content to wait--to wait, to
think, to dream, and only in part to hope. He still communed with himself daily as to that
House of Trendellsohn which might, perhaps, be heard of in cities greater than Prague, and
which might rival in the grandeur of its wealth those mighty commercial names which had drowned
the old shame of the Jew in the new glory of their great doings. To be a Jew in London, they
had told him, was almost better than to be a Christian, provided that he was rich, and knew
the ways of trade--was better for such purposes as were his purposes. Anton Trendellsohn believed
that he would be rich, and was sure that he knew the ways of trade; and therefore he nursed
his ambition, and meditated what his action should be when the days of his freedom should come
to him.

Then Nina Balatka had come across his path. To be a Jew, always a Jew, in all things a Jew,
had been ever a part of his great dream. It was as impossible to him as it would be to his
father to forswear the religion of his people. To go forth and be great in commerce by deserting
his creed would have been nothing to him. His ambition did not desire wealth so much as the
possession of wealth in Jewish hands, without those restrictions upon its enjoyment to which
Jews under his own eye had ever been subjected. It would have delighted him to think that,
by means of his work, there should no longer be a Jews' quarter in Prague, but that all Prague
should be ennobled and civilised and made beautiful by the wealth of Jews. Wealth must be his
means, and therefore he was greedy; but wealth was not his last or only aim, and therefore
his greed did not utterly destroy his heart. Then Nina Balatka had come across his path, and
he was compelled to shape his dreams anew. How could a Jew among Jews hold up his head as such
who had taken to his bosom a Christian wife?

But again he shaped his dreams aright--so far aright that he could still build the castles
of his imagination to his own liking. Nina should be his wife. It might be that she would follow
the creed of her husband, and then all would be well. In those far cities to which he would
go, it would hardly in such case be known that she had been born a Christian; or else he would
show the world around him, both Jews and Christians, how well a Christian and a Jew might live
together. To crush the prejudice which had dealt so hardly with his people--to make a Jew equal
in all things to a Christian--this was his desire; and how could this better be fulfilled than
by his union with a Christian? One thing at least was fixed with him--one thing was fixed,
even though it should mar his dreams. He had taken the Christian girl to be part of himself,
and nothing should separate them. His father had spoken often to him of the danger which he
would incur by marrying a Christian, but had never before uttered any word approaching to a
personal threat. Anton had felt himself to be so completely the mainspring of the business
in which they were both engaged--was so perfectly aware that he was so regarded by all the
commercial men of Prague--that he had hardly regarded the absence of any positive possession
in his father's wealth as detrimental to him. He had been willing that it should be his father's
while his father lived, knowing that any division would be detrimental to them both. He had
never even asked his father for a partnership, taking everything for granted. Even now he could
not quite believe that his father was in earnest. It could hardly be possible that the work
of his own hands should be taken from him because he had chosen a bride for himself! But this
he felt, that should his father persevere in the intention which he had expressed, he would
be upheld in it by every Jew of Prague. "Dark, ignorant, and foolish," Anton said to himself,
speaking of those among whom he lived; "it is their pride to live in disgrace, while all the
honours of the world are open to them if they chose to take them!"

He did not for a moment think of altering his course of action in consequence of what his father
had said to him. Indeed, as regarded the business of the house, it would stand still altogether
were he to alter it. No successor could take up the work when he should leave it. No other
hand could continue the webs which were of his weaving. So he went forth, as the errands of
the day called him, soon after his father's last words were spoken, and went through his work
as though his own interest in it were in no danger.

On that evening nothing was said on the subject between him and his father, and on the next
morning he started immediately after breakfast for the Ross Markt, in order that he might see
Karil Zamenoy, as he had said that he would do. The papers, should he get them, would belong
to his father, and would at once be put into his father's hands. But the feeling that it might
not be for his own personal advantage to place them there did not deter him. His father was
an old man, and old men were given to threaten. He at least would go on with his duty.

It was about eleven o'clock in the day when he entered the open door of the office in the Ross
Markt, and found Ziska and a young clerk sitting opposite to each other at their desks. Anton
took off his hat and bowed to Ziska, whom he knew slightly, and asked the young man if his
father were within.

"My father is here," said Ziska, "but I do not know whether he can see you."

"You will ask him, perhaps," said Trendellsohn.

"Well, he is engaged. There is a lady with him."

"Perhaps he will make an appointment with me, and I will call again. If he will name an hour,
I will come at his own time."

"Cannot you say to me, Herr Trendellsohn, that which you wish to say to him?"

"Not very well."

"You know that I am in partnership with my father."

"He and you are happy to be so placed together. But if your father can spare me five minutes,
I will take it from him as a favour."

Then, with apparent reluctance, Ziska came down from his seat and went into the inner room.
There he remained some time, while Trendellsohn was standing, hat in hand, in the outer office.
If the changes which he hoped to effect among his brethren could be made, a Jew in Prague should,
before long, be asked to sit down as readily as a Christian. But he had not been asked to sit,
and he therefore stood holding his hat in his hand during the ten minutes that Ziska was away.
At last young Zamenoy returned, and, opening the door, signified to the Jew that his father
would see him at once if he would enter. Nothing more had been said about the lady, and there,
when Trendellsohn went into the room, he found the lady, who was no other than Madame Zamenoy
herself. A little family council had been held, and it had been settled among them that the
Jew should be seen and heard.

"So, sir, you are Anton Trendellsohn," began Madame Zamenoy, as soon as Ziska was gone--for
Ziska had been told to go--and the door was shut.

"Yes, madame; I am Anton Trendellsohn. I had not expected the honour of seeing you, but I wish
to say a few words on business to your husband."

"There he is; you can speak to him."

"Anything that I can do, I shall be very happy," said Karil Zamenoy, who had risen from his
chair to prevent the necessity of having to ask the Jew to sit down.

"Herr Zamenoy," began the Jew, "you are, I think, aware that my father has purchased from your
friend and brother-in-law, Josef Balatka, certain houses in the Kleinseite, in one of which
the old man still lives." 

Upon the latter occasion, the dressing becomes a matter of life and death, and explains why
such numbers of those traveling arks known as "Saratoga trunks" are docked at the station every
summer.

Balls are reported in the papers far and near, and the anxiety of some to secure a good report
of their costume is amusing.

Brown's dismay at the bills is somewhat appeased as he reads in the
morning paper, "Miss Brown, of ----, a charming graceful blonde, was
attired in a rich white corded silk, long train, with ruffles of the
same, overdress of pink gros grain, looped en panier, corsage low,
decollette, with satin bows and point lace; hair a la Pompadour, with
curls on white feathers, pearls and diamonds.

She was much admired. Miss Brown is the accomplished daughter of
Mr. Brown, one of the leading citizens of the Metropolis."

The hops are free to all the guests.

An admission of $1 is customary at the balls, and choice refreshments are served. Upon ball nights,
the tasteful iron bridge which connects Congress Hall with its ball-room,
and the grounds of the Grand Union, are illuminated by colored lights,
presenting a fairy-like scene of bewildering beauty.

Upon these occasions a large proportion of the population, both exotic
and native, come forth as upon a festal day.

The Races

Occur the middle of July, and the second week in August, and are under
the charge of the Saratoga Racing Association.

The race-course is about a mile from Congress Spring.

It was laid out in 1866, by C.H. Ballard, an accomplished surveyor,
and is unsurpassed, if equaled, by any race-course in America, not
excepting the famous Fashion course on Long Island.

The swiftest and most noted racers in the Union are brought here,
and many of the most remarkable races known to sportsmen have occurred
on these grounds.

Indian Camp.

A few steps from Congress Spring, directly past the Saratoga Club-House,
leads you to a wicket gate marked "Circular, Railway and, Indian,
Camp." You have heard Madame Zamenoy declare that the deed which you seek is not here.
I cannot say whether it is here or no. I do not say--as you will be pleased to remember. If
it were here it would be in safe keeping for my brother-in-law, and only to him could it be given."

"But will you not say whether it is in your hands? You know well that Josef Balatka is ill,
and cannot attend to such matters."

"And who has made him ill, and what has made him ill?" said Madame Zamenoy. "Ill! of course
he is ill. Is it not enough to make any man ill to be told that his daughter is to marry a Jew?"

"I have not come hither to speak of that," said Trendellsohn.

"But I speak of it; and I tell you this, Anton Trendellsohn--you shall never marry that girl."

"Be it so; but let me at any rate have that which is my own."

"Will you give her up if it is given to you?"

"It is here then?"

"No; it is not here. But will you abandon this mad thought if I tell you where it is?"

"No; certainly not."

"What a fool the man is!" said Madame Zamenoy. "He comes to us for what he calls his property
because he wants to marry the girl, and she is deceiving him all the while. Go to Nina Balatka,
Trendellsohn, and she will tell you who has the document. She will tell you where it is, if
it suits her to do so."

"She has told me, and she knows that it is here."

"She knows nothing of the kind, and she has lied. She has lied in order that she may rob you.
Jew as you are, she will be too many for you. She will rob you, with all her seeming simplicity."

"I trust her as I do my own soul," said Trendellsohn.

"Very well; I tell you that she, and she only, knows where these papers are. For aught I know,
she has them herself. I believe that she has them. Ziska," said Madame Zamenoy, calling aloud--"Ziska,
come hither;" and Ziska entered the room. "Ziska, who has the title-deeds of your uncle's houses
in the Kleinseite?" Ziska hesitated a moment without answering. "You know, if anybody does,"
said his mother; "tell this man, since he is so anxious, who has got them."

"I do not know why I should tell him my cousin's secrets."

"Tell him, I say. It is well that he should know."

"Nina has them, as I believe," said Ziska, still hesitating.

"Nina has them!" said Trendellsohn.

"Yes; Nina Balatka," said Madame Zamenoy. "We tell you, to the best of our knowledge at least.
At any rate, they are not here."

"It is impossible that Nina should have them," said Trendellsohn. "How should she have got them?"

"That is nothing to us," said Madame Zamenoy. "The whole thing is nothing to us. You have heard
all that we can tell you, and you had better go."

"You have heard more than I would have told you myself," said Ziska, "had I been left to my
opinion."

Trendellsohn stood pausing for a moment, and then he turned to the elder Zamenoy. "What do
you say, sir? Is it true that these papers are at the house in the Kleinseite?"

"I say nothing," said Karil Zamenoy. "It seems to me that too much has been said already."

"A great deal too much," said the lady. "I do not know why I should have allowed myself to
be surprised into giving you any information at all. You wish to do us the heaviest injury
that one man can do another, and I do not know why we should speak to you at all. Now you had
better go."

"Yes; you had better go," said Ziska, holding the door open, and looking as though he were
inclined to threaten. Trendellsohn paused for a moment on the threshold, fixing his eyes full
upon those of his rival; but Ziska neither spoke nor made any further gesture, and then the
Jew left the house.

"I would have told him nothing," said the elder Zamenoy when they were left alone.

"My dear, you don't understand; indeed you do not," said his wife. "No stone should be left
unturned to prevent such a horrid marriage as this. There is nothing I would not say--nothing
I would not do."

"But I do not see that you are doing anything."

"Leave this little thing to me, my dear--to me and Ziska. It is impossible that you should
do everything yourself. In such a matter as this, believe me that a woman is best."

"But I hate anything that is really dishonest."

"There shall be no dishonesty--none in the world. You don't suppose that I want to get the
dirty old tumble-down houses. God forbid! But you would not give up everything to a Jew! Oh,
I hate them! I do hate them! Anything is fair against a Jew." If such was Madame Zamenoy's
ordinary doctrine, it may well be understood that she would scruple at using no weapon against
a Jew who was meditating so great an injury against her as this marriage with her niece. After
this little discussion old Zamenoy said no more, and Madame Zamenoy went home to the Windberg-gasse.

Trendellsohn, as he walked homewards, was lost in amazement. He wholly disbelieved the statement
that the document he desired was in Nina's hands, but he thought it possible that it might
be in the house in the Kleinseite. It was, after all, on the cards that old Balatka was deceiving
him. The Jew was by nature suspicious, though he was also generous. He could be noble in his
confidence, and at the same time could become at a moment distrustful. He could give without
grudging, and yet grudge the benefits which came of his giving. Neither he nor his father had
ever positively known in whose custody were the title- deeds which he was so anxious to get
into his own hands. Balatka had said that they must be with the Zamenoys, but even Balatka
had never spoken as of absolute knowledge. Nina, indeed, had declared positively that they
were in the Ross Markt, saying that Ziska had so stated in direct terms; but there might be
a mistake in this. At any rate he would interrogate Nina, and if there were need, would not
spare the old man any questions that could lead to the truth. Trendellsohn, as he thought of
the possibility of such treachery on Balatka's part, felt that, without compunction, he could
be very cruel, even to an old man, under such circumstances as those.

CHAPTER VII

Madame Zamenoy and her son no doubt understood each other's purposes, and there was another
person in the house who understood them--Lotta Luxa, namely; but Karil Zamenoy had been kept
somewhat in the dark. Touching that piece of parchment as to which so much anxiety had been
expressed, he only knew that he had, at his wife's instigation, given it into her hand in order
that she might use it in some way for putting an end to the foul betrothal between Nina and
the Jew. The elder Zamenoy no doubt understood that Anton Trendellsohn was to be bought off
by the document; and he was not unwilling to buy him off so cheaply, knowing as he did that
the houses were in truth the Jew's property; but Madame Zamenoy's scheme was deeper than this.
She did not believe that the Jew was to be bought off at so cheap a price; but she did believe
that it might be possible to create such a feeling in his mind as would make him abandon Nina
out of the workings of his own heart. Ziska and his mother were equally anxious to save Nina
from the Jew, but not exactly with the same motives. He had received a promise, both from his
father and mother, before anything was known of the Jew's love, that Nina should be received
as a daughter-in-law, if she would accept his suit; and this promise was still in force. That
the girl whom he loved should love a Jew distressed and disgusted Ziska; but it did not deter
him from his old purpose. It was shocking, very shocking, that Nina should so disgrace herself;
but she was not on that account less pretty or less charming in her cousin's eyes. Madame Zamenoy,
could she have had her own will, would have rescued Nina from the Jew-- firstly, because Nina
was known all over Prague to be her niece--and, secondly, for the good of Christianity generally;
but the girl herself, when rescued, she would willingly have left to starve in the poverty
of the old house in the Kleinseite, as a punishment for her sin in having listened to a Jew.

"I would have nothing more to say to her," said the mother to her son.

"Nor I either," said Lotta, who was present. Where nature in her subterranean laboratory obtains
all the elements, and how she can manage that from one crevice shall
issue a water whose ingredients shall never materially differ, and
whose temperature shall remain constant throughout the year, while
within a few feet she sends up an equally unvarying, and yet widely
different spring, is indeed a problem, and the oftener one reflects
on subjects of this kind, the oftener is the old fashioned observation
repeated, that "let a man go where he will, Omnipotence is never from
his view."



"So much the more reason for taking her away from him." Then Ziska went forth on a certain
errand, the expediency of which he had discussed with his mother.

"I never thought he'd be so firm about it, ma'am," said Lotta to her mistress.

"If we could get Trendellsohn to turn her off, he would not think much of her afterwards,"
said the mother. "He wouldn't care to take the Jew's leavings."

"But he seems to be so obstinate," said Lotta. "Indeed I did not think there was so much obstinacy
in him."

"Of course he is obstinate while he thinks the other man is to have her," said the mistress;
"but all that will be changed when the girl is alone in the world."

It was a Saturday morning, and Ziska had gone out with a certain fixed object. Much had been
said between him and his mother since Anton Trendellsohn's visit to the office, and it had
been decided that he should now go and see the Jew in his own home. He should see him and speak
him fair, and make him understand if possible that the whole question of the property should
be settled as he wished it--if he would only give up his insane purpose of marrying a Christian
girl. Ziska would endeavour also to fill the Jew's mind with suspicion against Nina. The former
scheme was Ziska's own; the second was that in which Ziska's mother put her chief trust. "If
once he can be made to think that the girl is deceiving him, he will quarrel with her utterly,"
Madame Zamenoy had said.

