CHINA, JAPAN AND THE U. S. A.

                        Present-day Conditions
                           in the Far East
                         and Their Bearing on
                            the Washington
                              Conference

                                 by

                              JOHN DEWEY

                      Professor of Philosophy at
                         Columbia University

                     New Republic Pamphlet No. 1

                           Published by the
                    REPUBLIC PUBLISHING CO., INC.
                     421 West Twenty-first Street
                           New York City
                                 1921

                            Copyright 1921
                     REPUBLIC PUBLISHING CO. INC.

Introductory Note

The articles following are reprinted as they were written in spite of the fact that any picture
of contemporary events is modified by subsequent increase of knowledge and by later events.
In the main, however, the writer would still stand by what was said at the time. A few foot
notes have been inserted where the text is likely to give rise to misapprehensions. The date
of writing has been retained as a guide to the reader.

I

On Two Sides of the Eastern Seas

It is three days' easy journey from Japan to China. It is doubtful whether anywhere in the
world another journey of the same length brings with it such a complete change of political
temper and belief. Certainly it is greater than the alteration perceived in journeying directly
from San Francisco to Shanghai. The difference is not one in customs and modes of life; that
goes without saying. It concerns the ideas, beliefs and alleged information current about one
and the same fact: the status of Japan in the international world and especially its attitude
toward China. One finds everywhere in Japan a feeling of uncertainty, hesitation, even of weakness.
There is a subtle nervous tension in the atmosphere as of a country on the verge of change
but not knowing where the change will take it. Liberalism is in the air, but genuine liberals
are encompassed with all sorts of difficulties especially in combining their liberalism with
the devotion to theocratic robes which the imperialist militarists who rule Japan have so skilfully
thrown about the Throne and the Government. But what one senses in China from the first moment
is the feeling of the all-pervading power of Japan which is working as surely as fate to its
unhesitating conclusion--the domination of Chinese politics and industry by Japan with a view
to its final absorption. It is not my object to analyze the realities of the situation or to
inquire whether the universal feeling in China is a collective hallucination or is grounded
in fact. The phenomenon is worthy of record on its own account. Even if it be merely psychological,
it is a fact which must be reckoned with in both its Chinese and its Japanese aspects. In the
first place, as to the differences in psychological atmosphere. Everybody who knows anything
about Japan knows that it is the land of reserves and reticences. The half-informed American
will tell you that this is put on for the misleading of foreigners. The informed know that
it is an attitude shown to foreigners only because it is deeply engrained in the moral and
social tradition of Japan; and that, if anything, the Japanese are more likely to be communicative--about
many things at least--to a sympathetic foreigner, than to one another. The habit of reserve
is so deeply embedded in all the etiquette, convention and daily ceremony of living, as well
as in the ideals of strength of character, that only the Japanese who have subjected themselves
to foreign influences escape it--and many of them revert. To put it mildly, the Japanese are
not a loquacious people; they have the gift of doing rather than of gab.

When accordingly a Japanese statesman or visiting diplomatist engages in unusually prolonged
and frank discourse setting forth the aims and procedures of Japan, the student of politics
who has been long in the East at once becomes alert, not to say suspicious. A recent illustration
is so extreme that it will doubtless seem fantastic beyond belief. But the student at home
will have to take these seeming fantasies seriously if he wishes to appreciate the present
atmosphere of China. Cables have brought fragmentary reports of some addresses of Baron Goto
in America. Doubtless in the American atmosphere these have the effect of reassuring America
as to any improper ambitions on the part of Japan. In China, they were taken as announcements
that Japan has about completed its plans for the absorption of China, and that the lucubration
preliminary to operations of swallowing are about to begin. The reader is forgiven in advance
any scepticism he feels about both the fact itself and the correctness of my report of the
belief in the alleged fact. His scepticism will not surpass what I should feel in his place.
But the suspicion aroused by such statements as this and the recent interview of Foreign Minister
Uchida and Baron Ishii must be noted as evidences of the universal belief in China that Japan
has one mode of diplomacy for the East and another for the West, and that what is said in the
West must be read in reverse in the East.

China, whatever else it is, is not the land of privacies. It is a proverb that nothing long
remains secret in China. The Chinese talk more easily than they act--especially in politics.
They are adepts in revealing their own shortcomings. They dissect their own weaknesses and
failures with the most extraordinary reasonableness. One of the defects upon which they dwell
is the love of finding substitutes for positive action, of avoiding entering upon a course
of action which might be irrevocable. One almost wonders whether their power of self-criticism
is not itself another of these substitutes. At all events, they are frank to the point of loquacity.
Between the opposite camps there are always communications flowing. Among official enemies
there are "sworn friends." In a land of perpetual compromise, etiquette as well as necessity
demands that the ways for later accommodations be kept open. Consequently things which are
spoken of only under the breath in Japan are shouted from the housetops in China. It would
hardly be good taste in Japan to allude to the report that influential Chinese ministers are
in constant receipt of Japanese funds and these corrupt officials are the agencies by which
political and economic concessions were wrung from China while Europe and America were busy
with the war. But in China nobody even takes the trouble to deny it or even to discuss it.
What is psychologically most impressive is the fact that it is merely taken for granted. When
it is spoken of, it is as one mentions the heat on an unusually hot day.

In speaking of the feeling of weakness current in Japan about Japan itself, one must refer
to the economic situation because of its obvious connection with the international situation.
In the first place, there is the strong impression that Japan is over-extended. Even in normal
times, Japan relies more upon production for foreign markets than is regarded in most countries
as safe policy. And there is the belief that Japan must do so, because only by large foreign
sellings--large in comparison with the purchasing power of a people still having a low standard
of life--can it purchase the raw materials--and even food--it has to have. But during the war,
the dependence of manufacturing and trade at home upon the foreign market was greatly increased.
The domestic increase of wealth, though very great, is still too much in the hands of the few
to affect seriously the internal demand for goods. Item one, which awakens sympathy for Japan
as being in a somewhat precarious situation.

Another item concerns the labor situation. Japan seems to feel itself in a dilemma. If she
passes even reasonably decent factory laws (or rather attempts their enforcement) and regulates
child and women's labor, she will lose that advantage of cheap labor which she now counts on
to offset her many disadvantages. On the other hand, strikes, labor difficulties, agitation
for unions, etc., are constantly increasing, and the tension in the atmosphere is unmistakable.
The rice riots are not often spoken of, but their memory persists, and the fact that they came
very near to assuming a directly political aspect. Is there a race between fulfillment of the
aspirations of the military clans who still hold the reins, and the growth of genuinely democratic
forces which will forever terminate those aspirations? Certainly the defeat of Germany gave
a blow to bureaucratic militarism in Japan which in time will go far. Will it have the time
required to take effect on foreign policy? The hope that it will is a large factor in stimulating
liberal sympathy for a Japan which is beginning to undergo the throes of transition.

As for the direct international situation of Japan, the feeling in Japan is that of the threatening
danger of isolation. Germany is gone; Russia is gone. While those facts simplify matters for
Japan somewhat, there is also the belief that in taking away potential allies, they have weakened
Japan in the general game of balance and counter-balance of power. Particularly does the removal
of imperialistic Russia relieve the threat on India which was such a factor in the willingness
of Great Britain to make the offensive-defensive alliance. The revelation of the militaristic
possibilities of America is another serious factor. Certainly the new triple entente cordiale
of Japan, Italy and France is no adequate substitute for a realignment of international forces
in which a common understanding between Great Britain and America is a dominant factor. This
factor explains, if it does not excuse, some of the querulousness and studied discourtesies
with which the Japanese press for some months treated President Wilson, the United States in
general and its relation to the League of Nations in particular, while it also throws light
on the ardor with which the opportune question of racial discrimination was discussed. (The
Chinese have an unfailing refuge in a sense of humor. It was interesting to note the delight
with which they received the utterance of the Japanese Foreign Minister, after Japanese success
at Paris, that "his attention had recently been called" to various press attacks on America
which he much deprecated). In any case there is no mistaking the air of tension and nervous
overstrain which now attends all discussion of Japanese foreign relations. In all directions,
there are characteristic signs of hesitation, shaking of old beliefs and movement along new
lines. Japan seems to be much in the same mood as that which it experienced in the early eighties
before, toward the close of that decade, it crystallized its institutions through acceptance
of the German constitution, militarism, educational system, and diplomatic methods. So that,
once more, the observer gets the impression that substantially all of Japan's energy, abundant
as that is, must be devoted to her urgent problems of readjustment.

Come to China, and the difference is incredible. It almost seems as if one were living in a
dream; or as if some new Alice had ventured behind an international looking-glass wherein everything
is reversed. That we in America should have little idea of the state of things and the frame
of mind in China is not astonishing--especially in view of the censorship and the distraction
of attention of the last few years. But that Japan and China should be so geographically near,
and yet every fact that concerns them appear in precisely opposite perspective, is an experience
of a life time. Japanese liberalism? Yes, it is heard of, but only in connection with one form
which the longing for the miraculous deus ex machina takes. Perhaps a revolution in Japan may
intervene to save China from the fate which now hangs over her. But there is no suggestion
that anything less than a complete revolution will alter or even retard the course which is
attributed to Japanese diplomacy working hand in hand with Japanese business interests and
militarism. The collapse of Russia and Germany? These things only mean that Japan has in a
few years fallen complete heir to Russian hopes, achievements and possessions in Manchuria
and Outer Mongolia, and has had opportunities in Siberia thrown into her hands which she could
hardly have hoped for in her most optimistic moments. And now Japan has, with the blessing
of the great Powers at Paris, become also the heir of German concessions, intrigues and ambitions,
with added concessions, wrung (or bought) from incompetent and corrupt officials by secret
agreements when the world was busy with war. If all the great Powers are so afraid of Japan
that they give way to her every wish, what is China that she can escape the doom prepared for
her? That is the cry of helplessness going up all over China. And Japanese propagandists take
advantage of the situation, pointing to the action of the Peace Conference as proof that the
Allies care nothing for China, and that China must throw herself into the arms of Japan if
she is to have any protection at all. In short, Japan stands ready as she stood ready in Korea
to guarantee the integrity and independence of China. And the fear that the latter must, in
spite of her animosity toward Japan, accept this fate in order to escape something worse swims
in the sinister air. It is the exact counterpart of the feeling current among the liberals
in Japan that Japan has alienated China permanently when a considerate and slower course might
have united the two countries. At the period to which we have just alluded, the removal of Carlton
House, (for it scarcely deserved the name of Palace,) had been decided on. The walls were dismantled
of their decorative finery, and their demolition commenced; the grounds were, to use a somewhat
grandiloquent phrase, dis-afforested; and the upper end of "the sweet, shady side of Pall Mall"
marked out for public instead of Royal occupation. Thus, within a century has risen and disappeared
from this spot the splendid abode and its appurtenances; for, it was in the year 1732 that Frederic,
Prince of Wales, first purchased the property from the Earl of Burlington; though it was not until
1788 that the erection of Carlton House was commenced for the late
King, then Prince of Wales; so that the existence of the Palace must
be restricted within forty years--a term reminding us of the duration
of a pavilion, rather than of a kingly mansion.

Upon the precise site of the courtyard and part of Carlton House have been erected two mansions,
of splendid character, appropriated to the United Service and Athenaeum Clubs: the first built
from the designs of Mr. Nash, and the latter from those of Mr. Decimus Burton. They front Pall
Mall West, or may be considered to terminate Waterloo Place.

The site of Carlton House Gardens is now occupied by palatial houses, which are disposed in
two ranges, and front St. James's Park. The substructure, containing the kitchens and domestic
offices, forms a terrace about 50 feet wide, adorned with pillars of the Paestum Doric Order, surmounted
with a balustrade. The superstructure consists of three stories, ornamented with Corinthian
columns. The houses at each extremity have elevated attics. Only small portions of these superb
elevations are shown in the Engraving, with the Athenaeum Club House
in the distance.

In the space between the two ranges, it was proposed to erect a fountain,
formed of the eight column's of the portico of Carlton House, (which
was in elaborate imitation of the Temple of Jupiter Stator, at Rome,[1])
to which eight on the same model were to be added.

The balustraded terrace had been continued fronting the Park with
a view to this embellishment.

It however occurred to some guardian of the public weal, that the above space presented an eligible
opportunity for a grand public entrance from Pall Mall into the Park. The idea was mooted in
Parliament; but some difficulties arose, from the leases already granted to the builders of the
houses on the terrace, who had calculated on the exclusive appropriation of the latter. The anxiety
of the public for the improvement at length reached the present King; and it was the first
popular act of his patriotic reign to command a grand triumphal[2] entrance to be formed, with
all possible speed; the difficulties being then easily removed.

The necessary portion of the terrace was accordingly removed, and the magnificent approach formed,
as shown in the Engraving.

While these improvements were in progress, a monumental memorial had been projected by the British
Army to their late commander-in-chief, the Duke of York; an expression of grateful sympathy which
must be recorded to the honour of truly British hearts.

To one who knows the history of foreign aggression in China, especially the technique of conquest
by railway and finance, the irony of promising to keep economic rights while returning sovereignty
lies so on the surface that it is hardly irony. China might as well be offered Kant's Critique
of Pure Reason on a silver platter as be offered sovereignty under such conditions. The latter
is equally metaphysical.

A visit to Shantung and a short residence in its capital city, Tsinan, made the conclusions,
which so far as I know every foreigner in China has arrived at, a living thing. It gave a vivid
picture of the many and intimate ways in which economic and political rights are inextricably
entangled together. It made one realize afresh that only a President who kept himself innocent
of any knowledge of secret treaties during the war, could be naïve enough to believe that the
promise to return complete sovereignty retaining only economic rights is a satisfactory solution.
It threw fresh light upon the contention that at most and at worst Japan had only taken over
German rights, and that since we had acquiesced in the latter's arrogations we had no call
to make a fuss about Japan. It revealed the hollowness of the claim that pro-Chinese propaganda
had wilfully misled Americans into confusing the few hundred square miles around the port of
Tsing-tao with the Province of Shantung with its thirty millions of Chinese population.

As for the comparison of Germany and Japan one might suppose that the objects for which America
nominally entered the war had made, in any case, a difference. But aside from this consideration,
the Germans exclusively employed Chinese in the railway shops and for all the minor positions
on the railway itself. The railway guards (the difference between police and soldiers is nominal
in China) were all Chinese, the Germans merely training them. As soon as Japan invaded Shantung
and took over the railway, Chinese workmen and Chinese military guards were at once dismissed
and Japanese imported to take their places. Tsinan-fu, the inland terminus of the ex-German
railway, is over two hundred miles from Tsing-tao. When the Japanese took over the German railway
business office, they at once built barracks, and today there are several hundred soldiers
still there--where Germany kept none. Since the armistice even, Japan has erected a powerful
military wireless within the grounds of the garrison, against of course the unavailing protest
of Chinese authorities. No foreigner can be found who will state that Germany used her ownership
of port and railway to discriminate against other nations. No Chinese can be found who will
claim that this ownership was used to force the Chinese out of business, or to extend German
economic rights beyond those definitely assigned her by treaty. Common sense should also teach
even the highest paid propagandist in America that there is, from the standpoint of China,
an immense distinction between a national menace located half way around the globe, and one
within two days' sail over an inland sea absolutely controlled by a foreign navy, especially
as the remote nation has no other foothold and the nearby one already dominates additional
territory of enormous strategic and economic value--namely, Manchuria.

These facts bear upon the shadowy distinction between the Tsing-tao and the Shantung claim,
as well as upon the solid distinction between German and Japanese occupancy. If there still
seemed to be a thin wall between Japanese possession of the port of Tsing-tao and usurpation
of Shantung, it was enough to stop off the train in Tsinan-fu to see the wall crumble. For
the Japanese wireless and the barracks of the army of occupation are the first things that
greet your eyes. Within a few hundred feet of the railway that connects Shanghai, via the important
center of Tientsin, with the capital, Peking, you see Japanese soldiers on the nominally Chinese
street, guarding their barracks. Then you learn that if you travel upon the ex-German railway
towards Tsing-tao, you are ordered to show your passport as if you were entering a foreign
country. And as you travel along the road (remembering that you are over two hundred miles
from Tsing-tao) you find Japanese soldiers at every station, and several garrisons and barracks
at important towns on the line. Then you realize that at the shortest possible notice, Japan
could cut all communications between southern China (together with the rich Yangste region)
and the capital, and with the aid of the Southern Manchurian Railway at the north of the capital,
hold the entire coast and descend at its good pleasure upon Peking.

You are then prepared to learn from eye-witnesses that when Japan made its Twenty-one Demands
upon China, machine guns were actually in position at strategic points throughout Shantung,
with trenches dug and sandbags placed. You know that the Japanese liberal spoke the truth,
who told you, after a visit to China and his return to protest against the action of his government,
that the Japanese already had such a military hold upon China that they could control the country
within a week, after a minimum of fighting, if war should arise. You also realize the efficiency
of official control of information and domestic propaganda as you recall that he also told
you that these things were true at the time of his visit, under the Terauchi cabinet, but had
been completely reversed by the present Hara ministry. For I have yet to find a single foreigner
or Chinese who is conscious of any difference of policy, save as the end of the war has forced
the necessity of caution, since other nations can now look China-wards as they could not during
the war.

An American can get an idea of the realities of the present situation if he imagines a foreign
garrison and military wireless in Wilmington, with a railway from that point to a fortified
sea-port controlled by the foreign power, at which the foreign nation can land, without resistance,
troops as fast as they can be transported, and with bases of supply, munitions, food, uniforms,
etc., already located at Wilmington, at the sea-port and several places along the line. Reverse
the directions from south to north, and Wilmington will stand for Tsinan-fu, Shanghai for New
York, Nanking for Philadelphia with Peking standing for the seat of government at Washington,
and Tientsin for Baltimore. Suppose in addition that the Pennsylvania road is the sole means
of communication between Washington and the chief commercial and industrial centers, and you
have the framework of the Shantung picture as it presents itself daily to the inhabitants of
China. Upon second thought, however, the parallel is not quite accurate. You have to add that
the same foreign nation controls also all coast communications from, say, Raleigh southwards,
with railway lines both to the nearby coast and to New Orleans. For (still reversing directions)
this corresponds to the position of Imperial Japan in Manchuria with its railways to Dairen
and through Korea to a port twelve hours sail from a great military center in Japan proper.
These are not remote possibilities nor vague prognostications. They are accomplished facts.

Yet the facts give only the framework of the picture. What is actually going on within Shantung?
One of the demands of the "postponed" group of the Twenty-one Demands was that Japan should
supply military and police advisers to China. They are not so much postponed but that Japan
enforced specific concessions from China during the war by diplomatic threats to reintroduce
their discussion, or so postponed that Japanese advisers are not already installed in the police
headquarters of the city of Tsinan, the capital city of Shantung of three hundred thousand
population where the Provincial Assembly meets and all the Provincial officials reside. Within
recent months the Japanese consul has taken a company of armed soldiers with him when he visited
the Provincial Governor to make certain demands upon him, the visit being punctuated by an
ostentatious surrounding of the Governor's yamen by these troops. Within the past few weeks,
two hundred cavalry came to Tsinan and remained there while Japanese officials demanded of
the Governor drastic measures to suppress the boycott, while it was threatened to send Japanese
troops to police the foreign settlement if the demand was not heeded.

A former consul was indiscreet enough to put into writing that if the Chinese Governor did
not stop the boycott and the students' movement by force if need be, he would take matters
into his own hands. The chief tangible charge he brought against the Chinese as a basis of
his demand for "protection" was that Chinese store-keepers actually refused to accept Japanese
money in payment for goods, not ordinary Japanese money at that, but the military notes with
which, so as to save drain upon the bullion reserves, the army of occupation is paid. And all
this, be it remembered, is more than two hundred miles from Tsing-tao and from eight to twelve
months after the armistice. Today's paper reports a visit of Japanese to the Governor to inform
him that unless he should prevent a private theatrical performance from being given in Tsinan
by the students, they would send their own forces into the settlement to protect themselves.
And the utmost they might need protection from, was that the students were to give some plays
designed to foster the boycott!

Japanese troops overran the Province before they made any serious attempt to capture Tsing-tao.
It is only a slight exaggeration to say that they "took" the Chinese Tsinan before they took
the German Tsing-tao. Propaganda in America has justified this act on the ground that a German
railway to the rear of Japanese forces would have been a menace. As there were no troops but
only legal and diplomatic papers with which to attack the Japanese, it is a fair inference
that the "menace" was located in Versailles rather than in Shantung, and concerned the danger
of Chinese control of their own territory. Chinese have been arrested by Japanese gendarmes
in Tsinan and subjected to a torturing third degree of the kind that Korea has made sickeningly
familiar. The Japanese claim that the injuries were received while the men were resisting arrest.
Considering that there was no more legal ground for arrest than there would be if Japanese
police arrested Americans in New York, almost anybody but the pacifist Chinese certainly would
have resisted. But official hospital reports testify to bayonet wounds and the marks of flogging.
In the interior where the Japanese had been disconcerted by the student propaganda they raided
a High School, seized a school boy at random, and took him to a distant point and kept him
locked up several days. When the Japanese consul at Tsinan was visited by Chinese officials
in protest against these illegal arrests, the consul disclaimed all jurisdiction. The matter,
he said, was wholly in the hands of the military authorities in Tsing-tao. His disclaimer was
emphasized by the fact that some of the kidnapped Chinese were taken to Tsing-tao for "trial."

The matter of economic rights in relation to political domination will be discussed later in
this article. It is no pleasure for one with many warm friends in Japan, who has a great admiration
for the Japanese people as distinct from the ruling military and bureaucratic class, to report
such facts as have been stated. One might almost say, one might positively say from the standpoint
of Japan itself, that the worst thing that can be charged against the policy of Japan in China
for the last six years is its immeasurable stupidity. No nation has ever misjudged the national
psychology of another people as Japan has that of China. The alienation of China is widespread,
deep, bitter. Even the most pessimistic of the Chinese who think that China is to undergo a
complete economic and political domination by Japan do not think it can last, even without
outside intervention, more than half a century.

Today, at the beginning of a new year, (1920) the boycott is much more complete and efficient
than in the most tense days of last summer. Unfortunately, the Japanese policy seems to be
under a truly Greek fate which drives it on. Concessions that would have produced a revulsion
of feeling in favor of Japan a year ago will now merely salve the surface of the wound. What
would have been welcomed even eight months ago would now be received with contempt. There is
but one way in which Japan can now restore herself. It is nothing less than complete withdrawal
from Shantung, with possibly a strictly commercial concession at Tsing-tao and a real, not
a Manchurian, Open Door.

According to the Japanese-owned newspapers published in Tsinan, the Japanese military commander
in Tsing-tao recently made a speech to visiting journalists from Tokyo in which he said: "The
suspicions of China cannot now be allayed merely by repeating that we have no territorial ambitions
in China. We must attain complete economic domination of the Far East. But if Chino-Japanese
relations do not improve, some third party will reap the benefit. Japanese residing in China
incur the hatred of the Chinese. For they regard themselves as the proud citizens of a conquering
country. When the Japanese go into partnership with the Chinese they manage in the greater
number of cases to have the profits accrue to themselves. If friendship between China and Japan
is to depend wholly upon the government it will come to nothing. Diplomatists, soldiers, merchants,
journalists should repent the past. The change must be complete." But it will not be complete
until the Japanese withdraw from Shantung leaving their nationals there upon the footing of
other foreigners in China.

2.

In discussing the return to China by Japan of a metaphysical sovereignty while economic rights
are retained, I shall not repeat the details of German treaty rights as to the railway and
the mines. The reader is assumed to be familiar with those facts. The German seizure was outrageous.
It was a flagrant case of Might making Right. As von Buelow cynically but frankly told the
Reichstag, while Germany did not intend to partition China, she also did not intend to be the
passenger left behind in the station when the train started. Germany had the excuse of prior
European aggressions, and in turn her usurpation was the precedent for further foreign rape.
If judgments are made on a comparative basis, Japan is entitled to all of the white-washing
that can be derived from the provocations of European imperialistic powers, including those
countries that in domestic policy are democratic. And every fairminded person will recognize
that, leaving China out of the reckoning, Japan's proximity to China gives her aggressions
the color of self-defence in a way that cannot be urged in behalf of any European power.

It is possible to look at European aggressions in, say, Africa as incidents of a colonization
movement. But no foreign policy in Asia can shelter itself behind any colonization plea. For
continental Asia is, for practical purposes, India and China, representing two of the oldest
civilizations of the globe and presenting two of its densest populations. If there is any such
thing in truth as a philosophy of history with its own inner and inevitable logic, one may
well shudder to think of what the closing acts of the drama of the intercourse of the West
and East are to be. In any case, and with whatever comfort may be derived from the fact that
the American continents have not taken part in the aggression and hence may act as a mediator
to avert the final tragedy, residence in China forces upon one the realization that Asia is,
after all, a large figure in the future reckoning of history. Asia is really here after all.
It is not simply a symbol in western algebraic balances of trade. And in the future, so to
speak, it is going to be even more here, with its awakened national consciousness of about
half the population of the whole globe.

Let the agreements of France and Great Britain made with Japan during the war stand for the
measure of western consciousness of the reality of only a small part of Asia, a consciousness
generated by the patriotism of Japan backed by its powerful army and navy. The same agreement
measures western unconsciousness of the reality of that part of Asia which lies within the
confines of China. An even better measure of western unconsciousness may be found perhaps in
such a trifling incident as this:--An English friend long resident in Shantung told me of writing
indignantly home concerning the British part in the Shantung settlement. The reply came, complacently
stating that Japanese ships did so much in the war that the Allies could not properly refuse
to recognize Japan's claims. The secret agreements themselves hardly speak as eloquently for
the absence of China from the average western consciousness. In saying that China and Asia
are to be enormously significant figures in future reckonings, the spectre of a military Yellow
Peril is not meant nor even the more credible spectre of an industrial Yellow Peril. But Asia
has come to consciousness, and her consciousness of herself will soon be such a massive and
persistent thing that it will force itself upon the reluctant consciousness of the west, and
lie heavily upon its conscience. And for this fact, China and the western world are indebted
to Japan.

These remarks are more relevant to a consideration of the relationship of economic and political
rights in Shantung than they perhaps seem. For a moment's reflection will call to mind that
all political foreign aggression in China has been carried out for commercial and financial
ends, and usually upon some economic pretext. As to the immediate part played by Japan in bringing
about a consciousness which will from the present time completely change the relations of the
western powers to China, let one little story testify. Some representatives of an English missionary
board were making a tour of inspection through China. They went into an interior town in Shantung.
They were received with extraordinary cordiality by the entire population. Some time afterwards
some of their accompanying friends returned to the village and were received with equally surprising
coldness. It came out upon inquiry that the inhabitants had first been moved by the rumor that
these people were sent by the British government to secure the removal of the Japanese. Later
they were moved by indignation that they had been disappointed.

It takes no forcing to see a symbol in this incident. Part of it stands for the almost incredible
ignorance which has rendered China so impotent nationally speaking. The other part of it stands
for the new spirit which has been aroused even among the common people in remote districts.
Those who fear, or who pretend to fear, a new Boxer movement, or a definite general anti-foreign
movement, are, I think, mistaken. The new consciousness goes much deeper. Foreign policies
that fail to take it into account and that think that relations with China can be conducted
upon the old basis will find this new consciousness obtruding in the most unexpected and perplexing
ways.

One might fairly say, still speaking comparatively, that it is part of the bad luck of Japan
that her proximity to China, and the opportunity the war gave her to outdo the aggressions
of European powers, have made her the first victim of this disconcerting change. Whatever the
motives of the American Senators in completely disassociating the United States from the peace
settlement as regards China, their action is a permanent asset to China, not only in respect
to Japan but with respect to all Chinese foreign relations. Just before our visit to Tsinan,
the Shantung Provincial Assembly had passed a resolution of thanks to the American Senate.
More significant is the fact that they passed another resolution to be cabled to the English
Parliament, calling attention to the action of the American Senate and inviting similar action.
China in general and Shantung in particular feels the reinforcement of an external approval.
With this duplication, its national consciousness has as it were solidified. Japan is simply
the first object to be affected.

The concrete working out of economic rights in Shantung will be illustrated by a single case
which will have to stand as typical. Po-shan is an interior mining village. The mines were
not part of the German booty; they were Chinese owned. The Germans, whatever their ulterior
aims, had made no attempt at dispossessing the Chinese. The mines, however, are at the end
of a branch line of the new Japanese owned railway--owned by the government, not by a private
corporation, and guarded by Japanese soldiers. Of the forty mines, the Japanese have worked
their way, in only four years, into all but four. Different methods are used. The simplest
is, of course, discrimination in the use of the railway for shipping. Downright refusal to
furnish cars while competitors who accepted Japanese partners got them, is one method. Another
more elaborate method is to send but one car when a large number is asked for, and then when
it is too late to use cars, send the whole number asked for or even more, and then charge a
large sum for demurrage in spite of the fact the mine no longer wants them or has cancelled
the order. Redress there is none.

Tsinan has no special foreign concessions. It is, however, a "treaty port" where nationals
of all friendly powers can do business. But Po-shan is not even a treaty port. Legally speaking
no foreigners can lease land or carry on any business there. Yet the Japanese have forced a
settlement as large in area as the entire foreign settlement in the much larger town of Tsinan.
A Chinese refused to lease land where the Japanese wished to relocate their railway station.
Nothing happened to him directly. But merchants could not get shipping space, or receive goods
by rail. Some of them were beaten up by thugs. After a time, they used their influence with
their compatriot to lease his land. Immediately the persecutions ceased. Not all the land has
been secured by threats or coercion; some has been leased directly by Chinese moved by high
prices, in spite of the absence of any legal sanction. In addition, the Japanese have obtained
control of the electric light works and some pottery factories, etc.

Now even admitting that this is typical of the methods by which the Japanese plant themselves,
a natural American reaction would be to say that, after all, the country is built up industrially
by these enterprises, and that though the rights of some individuals may have been violated,
there is nothing to make a national, much less an international fuss about. More or less unconsciously
we translate foreign incidents into terms of our own experience and environment, and thus miss
the entire point. Since America was largely developed by foreign capital to our own economic
benefit and without political encroachments, we lazily suppose some such separation of the
economic and political to be possible in China. But it must be remembered that China is not
an open country. Foreigners can lease land, carry on business, and manufacture only in accord
with express treaty agreements. There are no such agreements in the cases typified by the Po-shan
incident. We may profoundly disagree with the closed economic policy of China, or we may believe
that under existing circumstances it represents the part of prudence for her. That makes no
difference. Given the frequent occurrence of such economic invasions, with the backing of soldiers
of the Imperial Army, with the overt aid of the Imperial Railway, and with the refusal of Imperial
officials to intervene, there is clear evidence of the attitude and intention of the Japanese
government in Shantung.

Because the population of Shantung is directly confronted with an immense amount of just such
evidence, it cannot take seriously the professions of vague diplomatic utterances. What foreign
nation is going to intervene to enforce Chinese rights in such a case as Po-shan? Which one
is going effectively to call the attention of Japan to such evidences of its failure to carry
out its promise? Yet the accumulation of precisely such seemingly petty incidents, and not
any single dramatic great wrong, will secure Japan's economic and political domination of Shantung.
It is for this reason that foreigners resident in Shantung, no matter in what part, say that
they see no sign whatever that Japan is going to get out; that, on the contrary, everything
points to a determination to consolidate her position. How long ago was the Portsmouth treaty
signed, and what were its nominal pledges about evacuation of Manchurian territory?

Not a month will pass without something happening which will give a pretext for delay, and
for making the surrender of Shantung conditional upon this, that and the other thing. Meantime
the penetration of Shantung by means of railway discrimination, railway military guards, continual
nibblings here and there, will be going on. It would make the chapter too long to speak of
the part played by manipulation of finance in achieving this process of attrition of sovereignty.
Two incidents must suffice. During the war, Japanese traders with the connivance of their government
gathered up immense amounts of copper cash from Shantung and shipped it to Japan against the
protests of the Chinese government. What does sovereignty amount to when a country cannot control
even its own currency system? In Manchuria the Japanese have forced the introduction of several
hundred million dollars of paper currency, nominally, of course, based on a gold reserve. These
notes are redeemable, however, only in Japan proper. And there is a law in Japan forbidding
the exportation of gold. And there you are.

Japan itself has recently afforded an object lesson in the actual connection of economic and
political rights in China. It is so beautifully complete a demonstration that it was surely
unconscious. Within the last two weeks, Mr. Obata, the Japanese minister in Peking, has waited
upon the government with a memorandum saying that the Foochow incident was the culminating
result of the boycott; that if the boycott continues, a series of such incidents is to be apprehended,
saying that the situation has become "intolerable" for Japan, and disavowing all responsibility
for further consequences unless the government makes a serious effort to stop the boycott.
Japan then immediately makes certain specific demands. China must stop the circulation of handbills,
the holding of meetings to urge the boycott, the destruction of Japanese goods that have become
Chinese property--none have been destroyed that are Japanese owned. Volumes could not say more
as to the real conception of Japan of the connection between the economic and the political
relations of the two countries. Surely the pale ghost of "Sovereignty" smiled ironically as
he read this official note. President Wilson after having made in the case of Shantung a sharp
and complete separation of economic and political rights, also said that a nation boycotted
is within sight of surrender. Disassociation of words from acts has gone so far in his case
that he will hardly be able to see the meaning of Mr. Obata's communication. The American sense
of humor and fair-play may however be counted upon to get its point.

January, 1920.

III

Hinterlands in China

One of the two Presidents of China--it is unnecessary to specify which--recently stated that
a renewal of the Anglo-Japanese alliance meant a partition of China. In this division, Japan
would take the north and Great Britain the south. Probably the remark was not meant to be taken
literally in the sense of formal conquest or annexation, but rather symbolically with reference
to the tendency of policies and events. Even so, the statement will appear exaggerated or wild
to persons outside of China, who either believe that the Open Door policy is now irrevocably
established or that Japan is the only foreign Power which China has to fear. But a recent visit
to the south revealed that in that section, especially in Canton, the British occupy much the
same position of suspicion and dread which is held by the Japanese in the north.

Upon the negative side, the Japanese menace is negligible in the province of Kwantung, in which
Canton is situated. There are said to be more Americans in Canton than Japanese, and the American
colony is not extensive. Upon the positive side the history of the Cassell collieries contract
is instructive. It illustrates the cause of the popular attitude toward the British, and quite
possibly explains the bitterness in the remark quoted. The contract is noteworthy from whatever
standpoint it is viewed, whether that of time, of the conditions it contains or of the circumstances
which accompany it.

Premising that the contract delivers to a British company a monopoly of the rich coal deposits
of the province for a period of ninety years and--quite incidentally of course--the right to
use all means of transportation, water or rail, wharves and ports now in existence, and also
to "construct, manage, superintend and work other roads, railways waterways as may be deemed
advisable"--which reads like a monopoly of all further transportation facilities of the province--first
take up the time of the making of the contract. It was drawn in April, 1920 and confirmed a
few months later. It was made, of course, with the authorities of the Kwantung province, subject
to confirmation at Peking. During this period, Kwantung province was governed by military carpet-baggers
from the neighboring province of Kwangsei, which was practically alone of the southern provinces
allied with the northern government, then under the control of the Anfu party. It was matter
of common knowledge that the people of Canton and of the province were bitterly hostile to
this outside control and submitted to it only because of military coercion. Civil strife for
the expulsion of the outsiders was already going on, continually gaining headway, and a few
months later the Kwangsei troops were defeated and expelled from the province by the forces
of General Chen, now the civil governor of Kwantung, who received a triumphal ovation upon
his entrance into Canton. At this time the present native government was established, a change
which made possible the return of Sun Yat Sen and his followers from their exile in Shanghai.
It is evident, then, that the collieries contract giving away the natural resources of the
people of the province, was knowingly made by a British company with a government which no
more represented the people of the province than the military government of Germany represented
the people of Belgium during the war.

As to the terms of the contract, the statement that it gave the British company a monopoly
of all the coal mines in the province, was not literally accurate. Verbally, twenty-two districts
are enumerated. But these are the districts along the lines of the only railways in the province
and the only ones soon to be built, including the as yet uncompleted Hankow-Canton railway.
Possibly this fact accounts for the anxiety of the British partners in the Consortium that
the completion of this line be the first undertaking financed by the Consortium. The document
also includes what is perhaps a novelty in legal documents having such a momentous economic
importance, namely, the words "etc." after the districts enumerated by name.

For this concession, the British syndicate agreed to pay the provincial government the sum
of $1,000,000 (silver of course). This million dollars is to bear six per cent interest to
the company, and capital and interest are to be paid back to the company by the provincial
government out of the dividends (if any) it is to receive. The nature of these "dividends"
is set forth in an article which should receive the careful attention of promoters elsewhere
as a model of the possibilities of exploiting contracts. The ten million capital is divided
equally into "A" shares and "B" shares. The "A" shares go unreservedly to the directors of
the company, and three millions of the "B" shares are to be allotted by the directors of the
company at their discretion. The other two million are again divided into equal portions, one
portion representing the sum advanced by the company to the province and to be paid back as
just specified, while the other million--one-tenth of the capitalization--is to be a trust
fund the dividends of which are to go for the "benefit of the poor people of the province"
and for an educational fund for the province. But before any dividends are paid upon the "B"
shares, eight per cent dividends are to be paid upon the "A" shares and a dollar a ton royalty
upon all coal mined. Those having any familiarity with the coal business with its usual royalty
of about ten cents a ton can easily calculate the splendid prospects of the "poor people" and
the schools, prospects which represent the total return to the provinces of a concession of
untold worth. The contract also guarantees to the company the assistance of the provincial
government in expropriating the owners of all coal mines which have been granted to other companies
but not yet worked. These technical details make dry reading, but they throw light upon the
spirit with which the British company undertook its predatory negotiations with a government
renounced by the people it professed to govern. In comparison with the relatively crude methods
of Japan in Shantung, they show the advantages of wide business experience.

As for the circumstances and context which give added menace to the contract, the following
facts are significant. Hong Kong, a British crown colony, lies directly opposite the river
upon which Canton is situated. It is the port of export and import for the vast districts served
by the mines and railways of the province. It is unnecessary to point out the hold upon all
economic development which is given through a monopolistic control of coal. It is hardly too
much to say that the enforcement of the contract would enable British interests in Hong Kong
to control the entire industrial development of the most flourishing of the provinces of China.
It would be a comparatively easy and inexpensive matter to provide the main land with a first
class modern harbor and port near Canton. The design was furnished by Mr. Benjamin Wyatt, the
architect of the superb mansion built for the Duke of York; and, after the execution was somewhat
advanced, it was resolved to set up the tribute in the place it now occupies.

The monument consists of a plain Doric column, surmounted with a colossal statue of the Duke
of York. The pedestal and shaft are of fine granite. The plinth, or base of the pedestal, is 22 feet
square, and the pedestal 18 feet; the circumference of the shaft is 11 feet 6 inches, decreasing
to 10 feet 2 inches at the top; the abacus is 13 feet 6 inches square. The interior of the
column may be ascended by a winding staircase of 169 steps, lit by narrow loop-holes.

From the top stair a doorway opens to the exterior of the abacus, which will be enclosed with
a massive iron railing, so as to form a prospect gallery. The iron-work is not yet completed;
but, as we have enjoyed the view from two sides of the square, we can vouch for its commanding
a fine coup d'oeil of the whole metropolis, and certainly the finest view of its most embellished
quarter. From this spot alone can the magnificence of Regent-street be duly appreciated, and
above all the skill of the architect in effecting the junction of the lines by the classical
introduction of the Quadrant.

That part of the structure which is, strictly speaking, upon the abacus of the column, has
a domed roof, upon which will be placed the colossal statue, executed in bronze, by Mr. Westmacott.
The Duke is represented in a flowing robe, with a sword in his right hand, and in the left,
one of the insignia of the Order of the Garter. The height of the
figure is 13 feet 6 inches.

The total height of the column, exclusive of the statue, is 124 feet. The masonry, (executed
by Mr. Nowell, of Pimlico,) deserves especial notice. Its neatness and finish are truly astonishing,
and the solidity and massiveness of the material appear calculated "for all time."

We should mention that the embellishment about the upper part of the pedestal (as seen in the cut,)
has not yet been placed on the original; nor has the statue yet been raised to the summit of
the column.

[1] The above columns, with those of the handsome Ionic calonnade which screened the Palace
from Pall Mall, are, we believe, the only remains of the building.

[2] The entrance deserves this epithet on more than one account.

* * * * *

MANNERS AND CUSTOMS.

* * * * *

ANCIENT AND MODERN CHRISTMAS.
W.G.C.

Kent.

At Ramsgate they commence their Christmas festivities
by the following ceremony:--A party of the youthful portion of the
community having procured the head of a horse, it is affixed to a
pole, about four feet in length; a string is attached to the lower
jaw, a horse-cloth is tied round the extreme part of the head, beneath
which one of the party is concealed, who, by repeated pulling and
loosening the string, causes the jaw to rise and fall, and thus produces,
by bringing the teeth in contact, a snapping noise, as he moves along;
the rest of the party following in procession, grotesquely habited,
and ringing hand-bells! In this order they proceed from house to house,
singing carols and ringing their bells, and are generally remunerated
for the amusement they occasion by a largess of money, or beer and
cake. This ceremony is called "a hoodening." The figure which we have
described is designated "a hooden," or wooden horse. The ceremony
prevails in many parts of the Isle of Thanet, and may probably be
traced as the relic of some religious ceremony practised in the early
ages by our Saxon ancestors.

Norfolk.

Dalmatia.

    [1] Since the text was written, the newspapers have stated
        that the Peking Government has officially refused to
        validate the agreement.

These considerations not only throw light on some of the difficulties of the functioning of
the Consortium, but they give an indispensable background for judging the actual effect of
the renewal of the Anglo-Japanese alliance. By force of circumstances each government, even
against its own wish, will be compelled to wink at the predatory policies of the other; and
the tendency will be to create a division of spheres of influence between the north and south
in order to avoid more direct conflicts. The English liberals who stand for the renewal of
the alliance on the ground that it will enable England to exercise a check on Japanese policies,
are more naïve than was Mr. Wilson with his belief in the separation of the economic and political
control of Shantung.

It cannot be too often repeated that the real point of friction between the United States and
Japan is not in California but in China. It is silly--unless it is calculated--for English
authorities to keep repeating that under no circumstances does the alliance mean that Great
Britain would support Japan in a war with the United States. The day the alliance is renewed,
the hands of the militarists in Japan will be strengthened and the hands of the liberals--already
weak enough--be still further weakened. In consequence, all the sources of friction in China
between the United States and Japan will be intensified. I do not believe in the predicted
war. But should it come, the first act of Japan--so everyone in China believes--will be to
seize the ports of northern China and its railways in order to make sure of an uninterrupted
supply of food and raw materials. The act would be justified as necessary to national existence.
Great Britain in alliance with Japan would be in no position to protest in anything but the
most perfunctory way. The guarantee of such abstinence would be for Japan the next best thing
to open naval and financial support. Without the guarantee they would not dare the seizure
of Chinese ports. In recent years diplomatists have shown themselves capable of unlimited stupidity.
But it is not possible that the men in the British Foreign Office are not aware of these elementary
facts. If they renew the alliance they knowingly take the responsibility for the consequences.

May 24, 1921.

IV

A Political Upheaval in China

Even in America we have heard of one Chinese revolution, that which thrust the Manchu dynasty
from the throne. The visitor in China gets used to casual references to the second revolution,
that which frustrated Yuan Shi Kai's aspirations to be emperor, and the third, the defeat in
1917 of the abortive attempt to put the Manchu boy emperor back into power. And within the
last few weeks the (September 1920) fourth upheaval has taken place. It may not be dignified
by the name of the fourth revolution, for the head of the state has not been changed by it.
But as a manifestation of the forces that shape Chinese political events, for evil and for
good, perhaps this last disturbance surpasses the last two "revolutions" in significance.

Chinese politics in detail are highly complicated, a mess of personalities and factions whose
oscillations no one can follow who does not know a multitude of personal, family and provincial
histories. But occasionally something happens which simplifies the tangle. Definite outlines
frame themselves out of the swirling criss-cross of strife, intrigue and ambition. So, at present,
the complete collapse of the Anfu clique which owned the central government for two years marks
the end of that union of internal militarism and Japanese foreign influence which was, for
China, the most marked fruit of the war. When China entered the war a "War Participation" army
was formed. It never participated; probably it was never meant to. But its formation threw
power wholly into the hands of the military clique, as against the civilian constitutionalists.
And in return for concessions, secret agreements relating to Manchuria, Shantung, new railways,
etc., Japan supplied money, munitions, instructors for the army and a benevolent supervision
of foreign and domestic politics. The war came to an unexpected and untimely end, but by this
time the offspring of the marriage of the militarism of Yuan Shi Kai and Japanese money and
influence was a lusty youth. Bolshevism was induced to take the place of Germany as a menace
requiring the keeping up of the army, and loans and teachers. Mongolia was persuaded to cut
her strenuous ties with Russia, to renounce her independence and come again under Chinese sovereignty.

The army and its Japanese support and instruction was, accordingly, continued. In place of
the "War Participation" army appeared the "Frontier Defense" army. Marshal Tuan, the head of
the military party, remained the nominal political power behind the presidential chair, and
General Hsu (commonly known as little Hsu, in distinction from old Hsu, the president) was
the energetic manager of the Mongolian adventure which, by a happy coincidence, required a
bank, land development companies and railway schemes, as well as an army. About this military
centre as a nucleus gathered the vultures who fed on the carrion. This flock took the name
of the Anfu Club. It did not control the entire cabinet, but to it belonged the Minister of
Justice, who manipulated the police and the courts, persecuted the students, suppressed liberal
journals and imprisoned inconvenient critics. And the Club owned the ministers of finance and
communications, the two cabinet places that dispense revenues, give out jobs and make loans.
It also regulated the distribution of intelligence by mail and telegraph. The reign of corruption
and despotic inefficiency, tempered only by the student revolt, set in. In two years the Anfu
Club got away with two hundred millions of public funds directly, to say nothing of what was
wasted by incompetency and upon the army. The Allies had set out to get China into the war.
They succeeded in getting Japan into control of Peking and getting China, politically speaking,
into a seemingly hopeless state of corruption and confusion.

The militaristic or Pei-Yang party was, however, divided into two factions, each called after
a province. The Anwhei party gathered about little Hsu and was almost identical with the Anfus.
The Chili faction had been obliged, so far as Peking was concerned, to content itself with
such leavings as the Anfu Club tossed to it. Apparently it was hopelessly weaker than its rival,
although Tuan, who was personally honest and above financial scandal, was supported by both
factions and was the head of both. About three months ago there were a few signs that, while
the Anfu Club had been entrenching itself in Peking, the rival faction had been quietly establishing
itself in the provinces. A league of Eight Tuchuns (military governors of the provinces) came
to the assistance of the president against some unusually strong pressure from the Anfu Club.
In spite of the fact that the military governor of the three Manchurian provinces, Chang Tso
Lin, popularly known as the Emperor of Manchuria, lined up with this league, practically nobody
expected anything except some manoeuvering to get a larger share of the spoils.

But late in June the president invited Chang Tso Lin to Peking. The latter saw Tuan, told him
that he was surrounded by evil advisers, demanded that he cut loose from little Hsu and the
Anfu Club, and declared open war upon little Hsu--the two had long and notoriously been bitter
enemies. Even then people had great difficulty in believing that anything would happen except
another Chinese compromise. The president was known to be sympathetic upon the whole with the
Chili faction, but the president, if not a typical Chinese, is at least typical of a certain
kind of Chinese mandarin, non-resistant, compromising, conciliating, procrastinating, covering
up, evading issues, face-saving. But finally something happened. A mandate was issued dismissing
little Hsu from office, military and civil, dissolving the frontier defense corps as such,
and bringing it under the control of the Ministry of War (usually armies in China belong to
some general or Tuchun, not to the country). For almost forty-eight hours it was thought that
Tuan had consented to sacrifice little Hsu and that the latter would submit at least temporarily.
Then with equally sensational abruptness Tuan brought pressure to bear on the president. The
latter was appointed head of a national defense army, and rewards were issued for the heads
of the chiefs of the Chili faction, nothing, however, being said about Chang Tso Lin, who had
meanwhile returned to Mukden and who still professed allegiance to Tuan. Troops were mobilized;
there was a rush of officials and of the wealthy to the concessions of Tientsin and to the
hotels of the legation quarter.

This sketch is not meant as history, but simply as an indication of the forces at work. Hence
it is enough to say that two weeks after Tuan and little Hsu had intimidated the president
and proclaimed themselves the saviors of the Republic, they were in hiding, their enemies of
the Chili party were in complete control of Peking, and rewards from fifty thousand dollars
down were offered for the arrest of little Hsu, the ex-ministers of justice, finance and communications,
and other leaders of the Anfu Club. The political turnover was as complete as it was sensational.
The seemingly impregnable masters of China were impotent fugitives. The carefully built up
Anfu Club, with its military, financial and foreign support, had crumbled and fallen. No country
at any time has ever seen a political upheaval more sudden and more thoroughgoing. It was not
so much a defeat as a dissolution like that of death, a total disappearance, an evaporation.

Corruption had worked inward, as it has a way of doing. Japanese-bought munitions would not
explode; quartermasters vanished with the funds with which stores were to be bought; troops
went without anything to eat for two or three days; large numbers, including the larger part
of one division, went over to the enemy en masse; those who did not desert had no heart for
fighting and ran away or surrendered on the slightest provocation, saying they were willing
to fight for their country but saw no reason why they should fight for a faction, especially
a faction that had been selling the country to a foreign nation. In the manner of the defeat
of the Anfu clique at the height of its supremacy, rather than in the mere fact of its defeat,
lies the credit side of the Chinese political balance sheet. It is a striking exhibition of
the oldest and best faith of the Chinese--the power of moral considerations. Public opinion,
even that of the coolie on the street, was wholly against the Anfu party. It went down not
so much because of the strength of the other side as because of its own rottenness.

So far the results are to all appearances negative. The most marked is the disappearance of
Japanese prestige. As one of the leading men in the War Office said: "For over a year now the
people have been strongly opposed to the Japanese government on account of Shantung. But now
even the generals do not care for Japan any more." It is hardly logical to take the easy collapse
of the Japanese-supported Anfu party as a proof of the weakness of Japan, but prestige is always
a matter of feeling rather than of logic. Many who were intimidated to the point of hypnotism
by the idea of the irresistible power of Japan are now freely laughing at the inefficiency
of Japanese leadership. It would not be safe to predict that Japan will not come back as a
force to be reckoned with in the internal as well as external politics of China, but it is
safe to say that never again will Japan figure as superman to China. And such a negation is
after all a positive result.

And so in its way is the overthrow of the Anwhei faction of the militarist party. The Chinese
liberals do not feel very optimistic about the immediate outcome. They have mostly given up
the idea that the country can be reformed by political means. They are sceptical about the
possibility of reforming even politics until a new generation comes on the scene. They are
now putting their faith in education and in social changes which will take some years to consummate
themselves visibly. The self-styled southern republican constitutional party has not shown
itself in much better light than the northern militarist party. In fact, its old leader Sun
Yat Sen now cuts one of the most ridiculous figures in China, as shortly before this upheaval
he had definitely aligned himself with Tuan and little Hsu.[2]

    [2] This was written of course several months before Sun Yat
        Sen was reinstated in control of Canton by the successful
        revolt of his local adherents against the southern
        militarists who had usurped power and driven out Sun Yat Sen
        and his followers. But up to the time when I left China, in
        July of this year, it was true that the liberals of northern
        and central China who were bitterly opposed to the Peking
        Government, did not look to the Southern Government with
        much hope. The common attitude was a "plague upon both of
        your houses" and a desire for a new start. The conflict
        between North and South looms much larger in the United
        States than it did in China.

This does not mean, however, that democratic opinion thinks nothing has been gained. The demonstration
of the inherent weakness of corrupt militarism will itself prevent the development of any militarism
as complete as that of the Anfus. As one Chinese gentleman said to me: "When Yuan Shi Kai was
overthrown, the tiger killed the lion. Now a snake has killed the tiger. No matter how vicious
the snake may become, some smaller animal will be able to kill him, and his life will be shorter
than that of either lion or tiger." In short, each successive upheaval brings nearer the day
when civilian supremacy will be established. This result will be achieved partly because of
the repeated demonstrations of the uncongeniality of military despotism to the Chinese spirit,
and partly because with every passing year education will have done its work. Suppressed liberal
papers are coming to life, while over twenty Anfu subsidized newspapers and two subsidized
news agencies have gone out of being. The soldiers, including many officers in the Anwhei army,
clearly show the effects of student propaganda. And it is worth while to note down the name
of one of the leaders on the victorious side, the only one whose troops did any particular
fighting, and that against great odds in numbers. The name is Wu Pei Fu. He at least has not
fought for the Chili faction against the Anwhei faction. He has proclaimed from the first that
he was fighting to rid the country of military control of civil government, and against traitors
who would sell their country to foreigners. He has come out strongly for a new popular assembly,
to form a new constitution and to unite the country. And although Chang Tso Lin has remarked
that Wu Pei Fu as a military subordinate could not be expected to intervene in politics, he
has not as yet found it convenient to oppose the demand for a popular assembly. Meanwhile the
liberals are organizing their forces, hardly expecting to win a victory, but resolved, win
or lose, to take advantage of the opportunity to carry further the education of the Chinese
people in the meaning of democracy.

August, 1920.

V

Divided China

1.

In January 1920 the Peking government issued an edict proclaiming the unification of China.
On May 5th Sun Yat Sen was formally inaugurated in Canton as president of all China. Thus China
has within six months been twice unified, once from the northern standpoint and once from the
southern. Each act of "unification" is in fact a symbol of the division of China, a division
expressing differences of language, temperament, history, and political policy as well as of
geography, persons and factions. This division has been one of the outstanding facts of Chinese
history since the overthrow of the Manchus ten years ago and it has manifested itself in intermittent
civil war. Yet there are two other statements which are equally true, although they flatly
contradict each other and the one just made. One statement is that so far as the people of
China are concerned there is no real division on geographical lines, but only the common division
occurring everywhere between conservatives and progressives. The other is that instead of two
divisions in China, there are at least five, two parties in both the north and south, and another
in the central or Yangtse region,[3] each one of the five splitting up again more or less on
factional and provincial lines. And so far as the future is concerned, probably this last statement
is the most significant of the three. That all three statements are true is what makes Chinese
politics so difficult to understand even in their larger features.

    [3] Since the writing of this and the former chapter there
        are some signs that Wu Pei Fu wants to set up in control of
        the middle districts.

By the good fortune of circumstances we were in Canton when the inauguration occurred. Peking
and Canton are a long way apart in more than distance. There is little exchange of actual news
between the two places; what filters through into either city and gets published consists mostly
of rumors tending to discredit the other city. In Canton, the monarchy is constantly being
restored in Peking; and in Peking, Canton is Bolshevized at least once a week, while every
other week open war breaks out between the adherents of Sun Yat Sen, and General Chen Kwang
Ming, the civil governor of the province. There is nothing to give the impression--even in
circles which accept the Peking government only as an evil necessity--that the pretensions
of Sun Yat Sen represent anything more than the desires of a small and discredited group to
get some slight power for themselves at the expense of national unity. Even in Fukien, the
province next north of Kwantung, one found little but gossip whose effect was to minimize the
importance of the southern government. In foreign circles in the north as well as in liberal
Chinese circles upon the whole, the feeling is general that bad as the de facto Peking government
may be, it represents the cause of national unity, while the southern government represents
a perpetuation of that division of China which makes her weak and which offers the standing
invitation to foreign intrigue and aggression. Only occasionally during the last few months
has some returned traveller timidly advanced the opinion that we had the "wrong dope" on the
south, and that they were really trying "to do something down there."

Consequently there was little preparation on my part for the spectacle afforded in Canton during
the week of May 5th. This was the only demonstration I have seen in China during the last two
years which gave any evidence of being a spontaneous popular movement. New Yorkers are accustomed
to crowds, processions, street decorations and accompanying enthusiasm. I doubt if New York
has ever seen a demonstration which surpassed that of Canton in size, noise, color or spontaneity--in
spite of tropical rains. The country people flocked in in such masses, that, being unable to
find accommodation even in the river boats, they kept up a parade all night. Guilds and localities
which were not able to get a place in the regular procession organized minor ones on their
own account on the day before and after the official demonstration. Making all possible allowance
for the intensity of Cantonese local loyalty and the fact that they might be celebrating a
Cantonese affair rather than a principle, the scene was sufficiently impressive to revise one's
preconceived ideas and to make one try to find out what it is that gives the southern movement
its vitality.

A demonstration may be popular and still be superficial in significance. However one found
foreigners on the ground--at least Americans--saying that in the last few months the men in
power in Canton were the only officials in China who were actually doing something for the
people instead of filling their own pockets and magnifying their personal power. Even the northern
newspapers had not entirely omitted reference to the suppression of licensed gambling. On the
spot one learned that this suppression was not only genuine and thorough, but that it meant
a renunciation of an annual revenue of nearly ten million dollars on the part of a government
whose chief difficulty is financial, and where--apart from motives of personal squeeze--it
would have been easy to argue that at least temporarily the end justified the means in retaining
this source of revenue. English papers throughout China have given much praise to the government
of Hong Kong because it has cut down its opium revenue from eight to four millions annually
with the plan for ultimate extinction. Yet Hong Kong is prosperous, it has not been touched
by civil war, and it only needs revenue for ordinary civil purposes, not as a means of maintaining
its existence in a crisis.

Under the circumstances, the action of the southern government was hardly less than heroic.
This renunciation is the most sensational act of the Canton government, but one soon learns
that it is the accompaniment of a considerable number of constructive administrative undertakings.
Among the most notable are attempts to reform the local magistracies throughout the province,
the establishment of municipal government in Canton--something new in China where local officials
are all centrally appointed and controlled--based upon the American Commission plan, and directed
by graduates of schools of political science in the United States; plans for introducing local
self-government throughout the province; a scheme for introduction of universal primary education
in Canton to be completed in three steps.

These reforms are provincial and local. They are part of a general movement against centralization
and toward local autonomy which is gaining headway all over China, a protest against the appointment
of officials from Peking and the management of local affairs in the interests of factions--and
pocketbooks--whose chief interest in local affairs is what can be extracted in the way of profit.
For the only analogue of provincial government in China at the present time is the carpet bag
government of the south in the days following our civil war. These things explain the restiveness
of the country, including central as well as southern provinces, under Peking domination. But
they do not explain the setting up of a new national, or federal government, with the election
of Mr. Sun Yat Sen as its president. To understand this event it is necessary to go back into
history.

In June, 1917, the parliament in Peking was about to adopt a constitution. The parliament was
controlled by leaders of the old revolutionary party who had been at loggerheads with Yuan
and with the executive generally. The latter accused them of being obstructionists, wasting
time in discussing and theorizing when the country needed action. Japan had changed her tactics
regarding the participation of China in the war, and having got her position established through
the Twenty-one Demands, saw a way of controlling Chinese arsenals and virtually amalgamating
the Chinese armies with her own through supervising China's entrance into the war. The British
and French were pressing desperately for the same end. Parliament was slow to act, and Tang
Shao Yi, Sun Yat Sen and other southern leaders were averse, since they regarded the war as
none of China's business and were upon the whole more anti-British than anti-German--a fact
which partly accounts for the share of British journals in the present press propaganda against
the Canton government. But what brought matters to a head was the fact that the constitution
which was about to be adopted eliminated the military governors or tuchuns of the provinces,
and restored the supremacy of civil authority which had been destroyed by Yuan Shi Kai, in
addition to introducing a policy of decentralization. Coached by members of the so-called progressive
party which claimed to be constitutionalist and which had a factionalist interest in overthrowing
the revolutionaries who controlled the legislative branch if not the executive, the military
governors demanded that the president suspend parliament and dismiss the legislators. This
demand was more than passively supported by all the Allied diplomats in Peking with the honorable
exception of the American legation. The president weakly yielded and issued an edict dispelling
parliament, virtually admitting in the document the illegality of his action. Less than a month
afterwards he was a refugee in the Dutch legation on account of the farce of monarchical restoration
staged by Chang Shun--who at the present time is again coming to the front in the north as
adjutant to the plans of Chang Tso Lin, the present "strong man" of China. Later, elections
were held and a new parliament elected. This parliament has been functioning as the legislature
of China at Peking and elected the president, Hsu Shi Chang, the head of the government recognized
by the foreign Powers--in short it is the Chinese government from an international standpoint,
the Peking government from a domestic standpoint.

The revolutionary members of the old parliament never recognized the legality of their dispersal,
and consequently refused to admit the legal status of the new parliament, called by them the
bogus parliament, and of the president elected by it, especially as the new legislative body
was not elected according to the rules laid down by the constitution. Under the lead of some
of the old members, the old parliament, called by its opponents the defunct parliament, has
led an intermittent existence ever since. Claiming to be the sole authentic constitutional
body of China, it finally elected Dr. Sun president of China and thus prepared the act of the
fifth of May, already reported.

Such is the technical and formal background of the present southern government. Its attack
upon the legality of the Peking government is doubtless technically justified. But for various
reasons its own positive status is open to equally grave doubts. The terms "bogus" and "defunct,"
so freely cast at each other, both seem to an outsider to be justified. It is less necessary
to go into the reasons which appear to invalidate the position of the southern parliament because
of the belated character of its final action. A protest which waits four years to assert itself
in positive action is confronted not with legal technicalities but with accomplished facts.
In my opinion, legality for legality, the southern government has a bare shade the better of
the technical argument. But in the face of a government which has foreign recognition and which
has maintained itself after a fashion for four years, a legal shadow is a precarious political
basis. It is wiser to regard the southern government as a revolutionary government, which in
addition to the prestige of continuing the revolutionary movement of ten years ago has also
a considerable sentimental asset as a protest of constitutionalism against the military usurpations
of the Peking government.

It is an open secret that the southern movement has not received the undivided support of all
the forces present in Canton which are opposed to the northern government. When the Colonel appeared
on the parade-ground, everybody expected that the first thing would be an inquiry about the stolen
money; but that was not the old officer's way. Everything went on just as usual, and the thief
probably chuckled to himself at the idea of getting off so easily. But if so, he chuckled a
little too soon. Just as the parade was over, and the men were about to "dismiss," the Colonel
stepped forward, and shouted, "Halt!"

The men wonderingly obeyed. The Colonel planted himself right in front of the line (carrying a
small bag under his arm, as was now noticed for the first time), and running his eye keenly
over the long ranks of white frocks and dark faces, spoke to them in Hindoostanee:

"Soldiers! I find there are dogs among you who are not 'true to their salt,' and after taking the
money of the Ranee of Inglistan [Queen of England], steal from her officers. But such misdeeds never
go unpunished. Last night" (here the Colonel's tone suddenly became very deep and solemn) "I
had a dream. I dreamed that a black cloud hovered over me, and out of it came a figure--the
figure of Kali."

At the name of this terrible goddess (who holds the same place in
the Brahmin religion as the Evil One in our own) the swarthy faces
turned perfectly livid, and more than one stalwart fellow was seen
to shiver from head to foot.

"'There is a thief among your soldiers,'
she said, 'and I will teach you how to detect him. There is still room for friction however,
especially as to the control of revenues, since at present there are hardly enough funds for
one administration, let alone two.

2.

The members of the new southern government are strikingly different in type from those one
meets elsewhere whether in Peking or the provincial capitals. The latter men are literally
mediaeval when they are not late Roman Empire, though most of them have learned a little modern
patter to hand out to foreigners. The former are educated men, not only in the school sense
and in the sense that they have had some special training for their jobs, but in the sense
that they think the ideas and speak the language current among progressive folk all over the
world. They welcome inquiry and talk freely of their plans, hopes and fears. I had the opportunity
of meeting all the men who are most influential in both the local and federal governments;
these conversations did not take the form of interviews for publication, but I learned that
there are at least three angles from which the total situation is viewed.

Governor Chen has had no foreign education and speaks no English. He is distinctively Chinese
in his training and outlook. He is a man of force, capable of drastic methods, straightforward
intellectually and physically, of unquestioned integrity and of almost Spartan life in a country
where official position is largely prized for the luxuries it makes possible. For example,
practically alone among Chinese provincial officials of the first rank he has no concubines.
Not only this, but he proposed to the provincial assembly a measure to disenfranchise all persons
who have concubines. (The measure failed because it is said its passage would have deprived
the majority of the assemblymen of their votes.) He is by all odds the most impressive of all
the officials whom I have met in China. If I were to select a man likely to become a national
figure of the first order in the future, it would be, unhesitatingly, Governor Chen. He can
give and also command loyalty--a fact which in itself makes him almost unique.

His views in gist are as follows: The problem of problems in China is that of real unification.
Industry and education are held back because of lack of stability of government, and the better
elements in society seclude themselves from all public effort. The question is how this unification
is to be obtained. In the past it has been tried by force used by strong individuals. Yuan
Shi Kai tried and failed; Feng Kuo Chang tried and failed; Tuan Chi Jui tried and failed. That
method must be surrendered. China can be unified only by the people themselves, employing not
force but the methods of normal political evolution. The only way to engage the people in the
task is to decentralize the government. Futile efforts at centralization must be abandoned.
Peking and Canton alike must allow the provinces the maximum of autonomy; the provincial capitals
must give as much authority as possible to the districts, and the districts to the communities.
Officials must be chosen by and from the local districts and everything must be done to encourage
local initiative. Governor Chen's chief ambition is to introduce this system into Kwantung
province. He believes that other provinces will follow as soon as the method has been demonstrated,
and that national unity will then be a pyramid built out of the local blocks.

With extreme self-government in administrative matters, Governor Chen will endeavor to enforce
a policy of centralized economic control. He says in effect that the west has developed economic
anarchy along with political control, with the result of capitalistic domination and class
struggle. He wishes to avert this consequence in China by having government control from the
first of all basic raw materials and all basic industries, mines, transportation, factories
for cement, steel, etc. In this way the provincial authorities hope to secure an equable industrial
development of the province, while at the same time procuring ample revenues without resorting
to heavy taxation. Since almost all the other governors in China are using their power, in
combination with the exploiting capitalists native and foreign, to monopolize the natural resources
of their provinces for private profit, it is not surprising that Governor Chen's views are
felt to be a menace to privilege and that he is advertised all over China as a devout Bolshevist.
His views have special point in view of British efforts to get an economic stranglehold upon
the province--efforts which are dealt with in a prior chapter.

Another type of views lays chief stress upon the internal political condition of China. Its
adherents say in effect: Why make such a fuss about having two governments for China, when,
in point of fact, China is torn into dozens of governments? In the north, war is sure to break
out sooner or later between Chang Tso Lin and his rivals. Each military governor is afraid
of his division generals. The brigade generals intrigue against the division leaders, and even
colonels are doing all they can to further their personal power. The Peking government is a
stuffed sham, taking orders from the military governors of the provinces, living only on account
of jealousies among these generals, and by the grace of foreign diplomatic support. It is actually
bankrupt, and this actual state will soon be formally recognized. The thing for us to do is
to go ahead, maintain in good faith the work of the revolution, give this province the best
possible civil administration; then in the inevitable approaching débâcle, the southern government
will be ready to serve as the nucleus of a genuine reconstruction. Meantime we want, if not
the formal recognition of foreign governments, at least their benevolent neutrality.

Dr. Sun still embodies in himself the spirit of the revolution of 1911. So far as that was
not anti-Manchu it was in essence nationalistic, and only accidentally republican. The day
after the inauguration of Dr. Sun, a memorial was dedicated to the seventy-two patriot heroes
who fell in an abortive attempt in Canton to throw off the Manchu yoke, some six months before
the successful revolt. The monument is the most instructive single lesson which I have seen
in the political history of the revolution. It is composed of seventy-two granite blocks. Upon
each is engraved: Given by the Chinese National League of Jersey City, or Melbourne, or Mexico,
or Liverpool, or Singapore, etc. Chinese nationalism is a product of Chinese migration to foreign
countries; Chinese nationalism on foreign shores financed the revolution, and largely furnished
its leaders and provided its organization. Sun Yat Sen was the incarnation of this nationalism,
which was more concerned with freeing China--and Asia--from all foreign domination than with
particular political problems. And in spite of the movement of events since that day, he remains
essentially at that stage, being closer in spirit to the nationalists of the European irredentist
type than to the spirit of contemporary young China. A convinced republican, he nevertheless
measures events and men in the concrete by what he thinks they will do to promote the independence
of China from foreign control, rather than by what they will do to promote a truly democratic
government. This is the sole explanation that can be given for his unfortunate coquetting a
year ago with the leaders of the now fallen Anfu Club. He allowed himself to be deceived into
thinking that they were ready to turn against the Japanese if he would give them his support;
and his nationalist imagination was inflamed by the grandiose schemes of little Hsu for the
Chinese subjugation of Mongolia.

More openly than others, Dr. Sun admits and justifies the new southern government as representing
a division of China. If, he insists, it had not been for the secession of the south in 1917,
Japan would now be in virtually complete control of all China. A unified China would have meant
a China ready to be swallowed whole by Japan. The secession localized Japanese aggressions,
made it evident that the south would fight rather than be devoured, and gave a breathing spell
in which public opinion in the north rallied against the Twenty-one Demands and against the
military pact with Japan. Thus it saved the independence of China. But, while it checked Japan,
it did not checkmate her. She still expects with the assistance of Chang Tso Lin to make northern
China her vassal. The support which foreign governments in general and the United States in
particular are giving Peking is merely playing into the hands of the Japanese. The independent
south affords the only obstacle which causes Japan to pause in her plan of making northern
China in effect a Japanese province. A more than usually authentic rumor says that upon the
occasion of the visit of the Japanese consul general to the new president (no other foreign
official has made an official visit), the former offered from his government the official recognition
of Dr. Sun as president of all China, if the latter would recognize the Twenty-one Demands
as an accomplished fact. From the Japanese standpoint the offer was a safe one, as this acceptance
of Japanese claims is the one thing impossible to the new government. But meantime the offer
naturally confirms the nationalists of Dr. Sun's type in their belief that the southern split
is the key to maintaining the political independence of China; or, as Dr. Sun puts it, that
a divided China is for the time being the only means to an ultimately independent China.

These views are not given as stating the whole truth of the situation. They are ex parte. But
they are given as setting forth in good faith the conceptions of the leaders of the southern
movement and as requiring serious attention if the situation of China, domestic and international,
is to be understood. Upon my own account, and not simply as expressing the views of others,
I have reached a conclusion quite foreign to my thought before I visited the south. While it
is not possible to attach too much importance to the unity of China as a part of the foreign
policy of the United States, it is possible to attach altogether too much importance to the
Peking government as a symbol of that unity. To borrow and adapt the words of one southern
leader, while the United States can hardly be expected to do other than recognize the Peking
as the de facto government, there is no need to coddle that government and give it face. Such
a course maintains a nominal and formal unity while in fact encouraging the military and corrupt
forces that keep China divided and which make for foreign aggression.

In my opinion as the outcome of two years' observation of the Chinese situation, the real interests
of both China and the United States would be served if, in the first place, the United States
should take the lead in securing from the diplomatic body in Peking the serving of express
notice upon the Peking government that in no case would a restoration of the monarchy be recognized
by the Powers. This may seem in America like an unwarranted intervention in the domestic affairs
of a foreign country. But in fact such intervention is already a fact. The present government
endures only in virtue of the support of foreign Powers. The notice would put an end to one
kind of intrigue, one kind of rumor and suspicion, which is holding industry and education
back and which is keeping China in a state of unrest and instability. It would establish a
period of comparative quiet in which whatever constructive forces exist may come to the front.
The second measure would be more extreme. The diplomacy of the United States should take the
lead in making it clear that unless the promises about the disbanding of the army, and the
introduction of general retrenchment are honestly and immediately carried out, the Powers will
pursue a harsh rather than a benevolent policy toward the Peking government, insisting upon
immediate payment of interest and loans as they fall due and holding up the government to the
strictest meeting of all its obligations. The notification to be effective might well include
a virtual threat of withdrawal of recognition in case the government does not seriously try
to put its profuse promises into execution. It should also include a definite discouragement
of any expenditures designed for military conquest of the south.

Diplomatic recognition of the southern government is out of the question at present. He lives
all over northern North America, and in the United States as far south as Georgia.

About the first of November, flocks of Snowflakes may be seen arriving, the males chanting a very
low and somewhat broken, but very pleasant song. Some call him White Snowbird, and Snow Bunting,
according to locality. The birds breed throughout the Arctic regions of both continents, the National
Museum at Washington possessing nests from the most northern points of Alaska, (Point Barrow),
and from Labrador, as well as from various intermediate localities.

These birds are famous seed eaters, and are rarely found in trees.

They should be looked for on the ground, in the air, for they are constantly seeking new feeding
grounds, in the barn-yard, or about the hay stack, where seeds are plentiful. They also nest on
the ground, building a deep, grassy nest, lined with rabbit fur or feathers, under a projecting
ledge of rock or thick bunch of grass. It seems curious that few persons readily distinguish
them from their sparrow cousins, as they have much more white about them than any other color.
Last November multitudes of them invaded Washington Park, settling on the ground to feed, and flying
up and scurrying away to successive pastures of promise. With their soft musical voices and
gentle manners, they were a pleasing feature of the late Autumn landscape. "Chill November's
surly blast" making "field and forest bare," had no terrors for them, but rather spread before them
a feast of scattered seeds, winnowed by it from nature's ripened abundance.

The Snowflakes disappear with the melting of their namesake, the snow. They are especially numerous
in snowy seasons, when flocks of sometimes a thousand are seen in the old fields and meadows.
It is unusual, though it has been known to breed in the Northern States. In July, 1831, Audubon found
it nesting in the White Mountains, and Dr. J. A. Allen notes a pair
as breeding near Springfield, Mass. The Arctic regions are its nesting
place however, and these birds were probably belated on their return
migration.

The Snowflake and Shorelark are so much alike in habits, that the two species occasionally
associate. Ernest E. Thompson says: "Apparently the Snowflakes get but little to eat, but in
reality they always find enough to keep them in health and spirits, and are as fat as butter balls.
In the mid-winter, in the far north, when the thermometer showed thirty degrees below zero,
and the chill blizzard was blowing on the plains, I have seen this brave little bird gleefully
chasing his fellows, and pouring out, as he flew, his sweet voluble song with as much spirit
as ever Skylark has in the sunniest days of June."

THE SLATE-COLORED JUNCO.

Black snowbird, in most of the United States and in Ontario, where it is a common resident, and
White Bill, are names more often applied to this species of Sparrow than the one of Junco, by which it
is known to ornithologists.

It nests in the mountains of northern Pennsylvania, New York, and New England, and is a resident
throughout the year in northeastern Ohio, and in Michigan. In all probability, the Snowbird does
not breed, even occasionally, anywhere within the limits of the state of Illinois, though individuals
may in very rare instances be found several weeks after others have departed for the north, these
having probably received some injury which prevents their migration. Prof. Forbes refers to
such an instance, which came under his own observation. He saw on a tree in the edge of a wood,
in the southern part of the state, an adult specimen of the Junco,
and only one, which, he says, astonished him. Some who look far into the future anticipate three stages; the first being the completion
of the present secessionist movement; the second the formation of northern and southern confederations
respectively; the third a reunion into a single state.

To go into the detailed evidence for the existence of a definite and lasting movement of this
sort would presume too much on the reader's knowledge of Chinese geography and his acquaintance
with specific recent events. I shall confine myself to quite general features of the situation.
The first feature is the new phase which has been assumed by the long historic antagonism of
the north and the south. Roughly speaking, the revolution which established the republic and
overthrew the Manchus represented a victory for the south. But the transformation during the
last five years of the nominal republic into a corrupt oligarchy of satraps or military governors
or feudal lords has represented a victory for the north. It is a significant fact, symbolically
at least, that the most powerful remaining tuchun or military governor in China--in some respects
the only powerful one who has survived the vicissitudes of the last few years--namely Chang
Tso Lin, is the uncrowned king of the three Manchurian provinces. The so-called civil war of
the north and south is not, however, to be understood as a conflict of republicanism located
in the south and militarism in the north. Such a notion is directly contrary to facts. The
"civil war" till six or eight months ago was mainly a conflict of military governors and factions,
part of that struggle for personal power and wealth which has been going on all over China.

But recently events have taken a different course. In four of the southern provinces, tuchuns
who seemed all powerful have toppled over, and the provinces have proclaimed or tacitly assumed
their independence of both the Peking and the former military Canton governments--the province
in which Canton situated being one of the four. I happened to be in Hunan, the first of the
southerly provinces to get comparative independence, last fall, not long after the overthrow
of the vicious despot who had ruled the province with the aid of northern troops. For a week
a series of meetings were held in Changsha, the capital of the province. The burden of every
speech was "Hunan for the Hunanese." The slogan embodies the spirit of two powers each aiming
at becoming the central authority; it is a conflict of the principle of provincial autonomy,
represented by the politically more mature south, with that of militaristic centralization,
represented by Peking.

As I write, in early September (1921), the immediate issue is obscured by the fight which Wu
Pei Fu is waging with the Hunanese who with nominal independence are in aim and interest allied
with the south. If, as is likely, Wu Pei Fu wins, he may take one of two courses. He may use
his added power to turn against Chang Tso Lin and the northern militarists which will bring
him into virtual alliance with the southerners and establish him as the antagonist of the federal
principle. This is the course which his earlier record would call for. Or he may yield to the
usual official lust for power and money and try once more the Yuan Shi Kai policy of military
centralization with himself as head, after trying out conclusions with Chang Tso Lin as his
rival. This is the course which the past record of military leaders indicates. But even if
Wu Pei Fu follows precedent and goes bad, he will only hasten his own final end. This is not
prophecy. It is only a statement of what has uniformly happened in China just at the moment
a military leader seemed to have complete power in his grasp. In other words, a victory for
Wu Pei Fu may either accelerate or may retard the development of provincial autonomy according
to the course he pursues. It cannot permanently prevent or deflect it.

The basic factor that makes one sure that this trend toward local autonomy is a reality and
not merely one of those meaningless shiftings of power which confuse the observer, is that
it is in accord with Chinese temperament, tradition and circumstance. Feudalism is past and
gone two thousand years ago, and at no period since has China possessed a working centralized
government. The absolute empires which have come and gone in the last two millenniums existed
by virtue of non-interference and a religious aura. The latter can never be restored; and every
episode of the republic demonstrates that China with its vast and diversified territories,
its population of between three hundred and fifty and four hundred million, its multitude of
languages and lack of communications, its enormous local attachments sanctified by the family
system and ancestral worship, cannot be managed from a single and remote centre. China rests
upon a network of local and voluntary associations cemented by custom. This fact has given
it its unparallelled stability and its power to progress even under the disturbed political
conditions of the past ten years. I sometimes think that Americans with their own traditional
contempt for politics and their spontaneous reliance upon self-help and local organization
are the ones who are naturally fitted to understand China's course. The Japanese with their
ingrained reliance upon the state have continually misjudged and misacted. The British understand
better than we do the significance of local self-government; but they are misled by their reverence
for politics so that they cannot readily find or see government when it does not take political
form.

It is not too much to say that one great cause for the overthrow of the Manchus was the fact
that because of the pressure of international relations they attempted to force, especially
in fiscal matters, a centralization upon the provinces wholly foreign to the spirit of the
people. This created hostility where before there had been indifference. China may possibly
not emerge from her troubles a unified nation, any more than a much smaller and less populous
Europe emerged from the break-up of the Holy Roman Empire, a single state. Indeed one often
wonders, not that China is divided, but that she is not much more broken up than she is. But
one thing is certain. Whatever progress China finally succeeds in making will come from a variety
of local centres, not from Peking or Canton. It will be effected by means of associations and
organizations which even though they assume a political form are not primarily political in nature.

Criticisms are passed, especially by foreigners, upon the present trend of events. The criticisms
are more than plausible. It is evident that the present weakness of China is due to her divided
condition. Hence it is natural to argue that the present movement being one of secession and
general disintegration will increase the weakness of the country. It is also evident that many
of China's troubles are due to the absence of any efficient administrative system; it is reasonable
to argue that China cannot get even railways and universal education without a strong and stable
central government. There is no doubt about the facts. It is not surprising that many friends
of China deeply deplore the present tendency while some regard it as the final accomplishment
of the long predicted breakup of China. But remedies for China's ills based upon ignoring history,
psychology and actual conditions are so utopian that it is not worth while to argue whether
or not they are theoretically desirable. The remedy of China's troubles by a strong, centralized
government is on a par with curing disease by the expulsion of a devil. The evil of sectionalism
is real, but since it is real it cannot be dealt with by trying a method which implies its
non-existence. If the devil is really there, he will not be exorcized by a formula. If the
trouble is internal, not due to an external demon, the disease can be cured only by using the
factors of health and vigor which the patient already possesses. And in China while these factors
of recuperation and growth are numerous, they all exist in connection with local organizations
and voluntary associations. The increasing volume of the cry that the "tuchuns must go" comes
from the provincial and local interests which have been insulted and violated by a nominally
centralized but actually chaotic situation. After this negative work is completed, the constructive
rebuilding of China can proceed only by utilizing local interests and abilities. In China the
movement will be the opposite of that which occurred in Japan. It will be from the periphery
to the centre.

Another objection to the present tendency has force especially from the foreign standpoint.
As already stated, the efforts of the Manchu dynasty in its latter days to enhance central
power were due to international pressure. Foreign nations treated Peking as if it were a capital
like London, Paris or Berlin, and in its efforts to meet foreign demands it had to try to become
such a centre. The result was disaster. But foreign nations still want to have a single centre
which may be held responsible. And subconsciously, if not consciously, this desire is responsible
for much of the objection of foreign nationals to the local autonomy movement. They well know
that it is going to take a long time to realize the ideal of federation, and meantime where
and what is to be the agency responsible for diplomatic relations, the enforcing of indemnities
and the securing of concessions?

In one respect the secessionist tendency is dangerous to China herself as well as inconvenient
to the powers. It will readily stimulate the desire and ability of foreign nations to interfere
in China's domestic affairs. There will be many centres at which to carry on intrigues and
from which to get concessions instead of one or two. There is also danger that one foreign
nation may line up with one group of provinces, and another foreign nation with another group,
so that international friction will increase. Even now some Japanese sources and even such
an independent liberal paper as Robert Young's Japan Chronicle are starting or reporting the
rumor that the Cantonese experiment is supported by subsidies supplied by American capitalists
in the hope of economic concessions. The rumor was invented for a sinister purpose. But it
illustrates the sort of situation that may come into existence if there are several political
centres in China and one foreign nation backs one and another nation, another.

The danger is real enough. But it cannot be dealt with by attempting the impossible--namely
checking the movement toward local autonomy, even though disintegration may temporarily accompany
it. The danger only emphasizes the fundamental fact of the whole Chinese situation; that its
essence is time. The evils and troubles of China are real enough, and there is no blinking
the fact that they are largely of her own making, due to corruption, inefficiency and absence
of popular education. But no one who knows the common people doubts that they will win through
if they are given time. And in the concrete this means that they be left politically alone
to work out their own destiny. There will doubtless be proposals at the Pacific Conference
to place China under some kind of international tutelage. This chapter and the events connected
with the tendency which it reports will be cited as showing this need. Some of the schemes
will spring from motives that are hostile to China. Some will be benevolently conceived in
a desire to save China from herself and shorten her period of chaos and confusion. But the
hope of the world's peace, as well as of China's freedom, lies in adhering to a policy of Hands
Off. Give China a chance. Give her time. The danger lies in being in a hurry, in impatience,
possibly in the desire of America to show that we are a power in international affairs and
that we too have a positive foreign policy. And a benevolent policy of supporting China from
without, instead of promoting her aspirations from within, may in the end do China about as
much harm as a policy conceived in malevolence.

July, 1921.

VII

A Parting of the Ways for America

1

The realities of American policy in China and toward China are going to be more seriously tested
in the future than they ever have been in the past. Japanese papers have been full of protests
against any attempt by the Pacific Conference to place Japan on trial. Would that American
journals were full of warnings that America is on trial at the Conference as to the sincerity
and intelligent goodwill behind her amiable professions. The world will not stop with the Pacific
Conference; the latter, however important, will not arrest future developments, and the United
States will continue to be on trial till she has established by her acts a permanent and definite
attitude. For the realities of the situation cannot be exhausted in any formula or in any set
of diplomatic agreements, even if the Conference confounds the fears of pessimists and results
in a harmonious union of the powers in support of China's legitimate aspirations for free political
and economic growth.

The Conference, however, stands as a symbol of the larger situation; and its decisions or lack
of them will be a considerable factor in the determination of subsequent events. Sometimes
one is obliged to fall back on a trite phrase. We are genuinely at a parting of the ways. Even
if we should follow in our old path, there would none the less be a parting of the ways, for
we cannot consistently tread the old path unless we are animated by a much more conscious purpose
and a more general and intelligent knowledge of affairs than have controlled our activities
in the past.

The ideas expressed by an English correspondent about the fear that America is soon to be an
active source of danger in the Far East are not confined to persons on foreign shores. The
prevailing attitude in some circles of American opinion is that called by President Hibben
cynical pessimism. All professed radicals and many liberals believe that if our course has
been better in the past it has been due to geographical accidents combined with indifference
and with our undeveloped economic status. Consequently they believe that since we have now
become what is called a world-power and a nation which exports instead of importing capital,
our course will soon be as bad as that of any of the rest of them. In some quarters this opinion
is clearly an emotional reaction following the disillusionments of Versailles. In others, it
is due to adherence to a formula: nothing in international affairs can come out of capitalism
and America is emphatically a capitalistic country. Whether or not these feelings are correct,
they are not discussable; neither an emotion nor an absolute formula is subject to analysis.

But there are specific elements in the situation which give grounds for apprehension as to
the future. These specific elements are capable of detection and analysis. An adequate realization
of their nature will be a large factor in preventing cynical apprehensions from becoming actual.
This chapter is an attempt at a preliminary listing, inadequate, of course, as any preliminary
examination must be. While an a priori argument based on a fatalistic formula as to how a "capitalistic
nation" must conduct itself does not appeal to me, there are nevertheless concrete facts which
are suggested by that formula. Part of our comparatively better course in China in the past
is due to the fact that we have not had the continuous and close alliance between the State
Department and big banking interests which is found in the case of foreign powers. No honest
well-informed history of developments in China could be written in which the Russian Asiatic
Bank, the Foreign Bank of Belgium, the French Indo-China Bank and Banque Industrielle, the
Yokohama Specie Bank, the Hongkong-Shanghai Bank, etc., did not figure prominently. These banks
work in the closest harmony, not only with railway and construction syndicates and big manufacturing
interests at home, but also with their respective foreign offices. It is hardly too much to
say that legations and banks have been in most important matters the right and left hands of
the same body. American business interests have complained an the past that the American government
does not give to American traders abroad the same support that the nationals of other states
receive. In the past these complaints have centred largely about actual wrongs suffered or
believed to have been suffered by American business undertakings carried on in a foreign country.
With the present expansion of capital and of commerce, the same complaints and demands are
going to be made not with reference to grievances suffered, but with reference to furthering,
to pushing American commercial interests in connection with large banking groups. It would
take a credulous person to deny the influence of big business in domestic politics. As we become
more interested in commerce and banking enterprises what assurance have we that the alliance
will not be transferred to international politics?

It should be noted that the policy of the open door as affirmed by the great powers--and as
frequently violated by them--even if it be henceforth observed in good faith, does not adequately
protect us from this danger. The open door policy is not primarily a policy about China herself
but rather about the policies of foreign powers toward one another with respect to China. It
demands equality of economic opportunity for different nations. Were it enforced, it would
prevent the granting of monopolies to any one nation: there is nothing in it to render impossible
a conjoint exploitation of China by foreign powers, an organized monopoly in which each nation
has its due share with respect to others. Such an organization might conceivably reduce friction
among the great powers, and thereby reduce the danger of future wars--as long as China herself
is impotent to go to war. The agreement might conceivably for a considerable time be of benefit
to China herself. But it is clear that for the United States to become a partner in any such
arrangement would involve a reversal of our historic policy in the Far East. It might be technically
consistent with the open door policy, but it would be a violation of the larger sense in which
the American people has understood and praised that ideal. He is blind who does not see that
there are forces making for such a reversal. And since we are all more or less blind, an opening
of our eyes to the danger is one of the conditions of its not being realized.

One of the forces which is operative is indicated by the phrase that an international agreement
on an economic and financial basis might be of value to China herself. The mere suggestion
that such a thing is possible is abhorrent to many, especially to radicals. There seems to
be something sinister in it. So it is worth explaining how and why it might be so. In the first
place, it would obviously terminate the particularistic grabbing for "leased" territory, concessions
and spheres of influence which has so damaged China. At the present time, the point of this
remark lies in its implied reference to Japan, as at one time it might have applied to Russia.
Fear of Japan's aims in China is not confined to China; the fear is widespread. An international
economic arrangement may therefore be plausibly presented as the easiest and most direct method
of relieving China of the Japanese menace. For Japan to stay out would be to give herself away;
if she came in, it would subject Japanese activities to constant scrutiny and control. There
is no doubt that part of the fear of Japan regarding the Pacific Conference is due to a belief
that some such arrangement is contemplated. The case is easily capable of such presentation
as to make it appeal to Americans who are really friendly to China and who haven't the remotest
interest in her economic exploitation.

The arrangement would, for example, automatically eliminate the Lansing-Ishii agreement with
its embarrassing ambiguous recognition of Japan's special interests in China.

The other factor is domestic. The distraction and civil wars of China are commonplaces. So
is the power exercised by the military governors and generals. The greater one's knowledge,
the more one perceives how intimately the former evil is dependent upon the latter. The financial
plight of the Chinese government, its continual foreign borrowings which threaten bankruptcy
in the near future, depend upon militaristic domination and wild expenditure for unproductive
purposes and squeeze. Without this expense, China would have no great difficulty henceforth
in maintaining a balance in her budget. The retardation of public education whose advancement--especially
in elementary schools--is China's greatest single need is due to the same cause. So is the
growth in official corruption which is rapidly extending into business and private life.

In fact, every one of the obstacles to the progress of China is connected with the rule of
military factions and their struggles with one another for complete mastery. An economic international
agreement among the great powers can be made which would surely reduce and possibly eliminate
the greatest evils of "militarism." Many liberal Chinese say in private that they would be
willing to have a temporary international receivership for government finance, provided they
could be assured of its nature and the exact date and conditions of its termination--a proviso
which they are sensible enough to recognize would be extremely difficult of attainment. American
leadership in forming and executing any such scheme would, they feel, afford the best reassurance
as to its nature and terms. Under such circumstances a plausible case can be made out for proposals
which, under the guise of traditional American friendship for China, would in fact commit us
to a reversal of our historic policy.

There are radicals abroad and at home who think that our entrance into a Consortium already
proves that we have entered upon the road of reversal and who naturally see in the Pacific
Conference the next logical step. I have previously stated my own belief that our State Department
proposed the Consortium primarily for political ends, as a means of checking the policy pursued
by Japan of making unproductive loans to China in return for which she was getting an immediate
grip on China's natural resources and preparing the way for direct administrative and financial
control when the day of reckoning and foreclosure should finally come. I also said that the
Consortium was between two stools, the financial and the political and that up to the present
its chief value had been negative and preventive, and that jealousy or lack of interest by
Japan and Great Britain in any constructive policy on the part of the Consortium was likely
to maintain the same condition. I have seen no reason thus far to change my mind on this point,
nor in regard to the further belief that probably the interests of China in the end will be
best served by the continuation of this deterrent function. But the question is bound to arise:
why continue the Consortium if it isn't doing anything? The pressure of foreign powers interested
in the exploitation of China and of impatient American economic interests may combine to put
an end to the present rather otiose existence led by the Consortium. The two stools between
which the past action of the American government has managed to swing the Consortium may be
united to form a single solid bench. 

"In the summer they are nearly all white, the brown edges having worn away, leaving them pure
black and white. They are very shy and suspicious, and at the least sound you will see them
all whirl aloft braving the blasts of winter like little heroes."
I believe the repeated statements of the American representative that he himself and the interests
he represents would be glad if China proved her ability to finance her own public utilities
without resorting to foreign loans. This belief is confirmed by the first public utterance
of the new American minister to China who in his reference to the Consortium laid emphasis
upon its deterrent function and upon the stimulation it has given to Chinese bankers to finance
public utilities. And it is the merest justice to Mr. Stevens, the American representative,
to say that he represents the conservative investment type of banker, not the "promotion" type,
and that thus far his great concern has been the problem of protecting the buyer of such securities
as are passed on by the banks to the ultimate investor--so much so that he has aroused criticism
from American business interests impatient for speedy action. But there is a larger phase of
the Consortium concerning which I think apprehensions may reasonably be entertained.

Suppose, if merely by way of hypothesis, that the American government is genuinely interested
in China and in making the policy of the open door and Chinese territorial and administrative
integrity a reality, not merely a name, and suppose that it is interested in doing so from
an American self-interest sufficiently enlightened to perceive that the political and economic
advancement of the United States is best furthered by a policy which is identical with China's
ability to develop herself freely and independently: what then would be the wise American course?
In short, it would be to view our existing European interests and issues (due to the war) and
our Far Eastern interests and issues as parts of one and the same problem. If we are actuated
by the motive hypothetically imputed to our government and we fail in its realization, the
chief reason will be that we regard the European question and the Asiatic problem as two different
questions, or because we identify them from the wrong end.

Our present financial interest in Europe is enormous. It involves not merely foreign governmental
loans but a multitude of private advances and commitments. These financial entanglements affect
not merely our industry and commerce but our politics. They involve much more immediately pressing
concerns than to our Asiatic relations, and they involve billions where the latter involve
millions. The danger under such conditions that our Asiatic relations will be sacrificed to
our European is hardly fanciful.

To make this abstract statement concrete, the firm of bankers, J. P. Morgan & Co., which is
most heavily involved in European indebtedness to the United States, is the firm which is the
leading spirit in the Consortium for China. It seems almost inevitable that the Asiatic problem
should look like small potatoes in comparison with the European one, especially as our own
industrial recuperation is so closely connected with European relations, while the Far East
cuts a negligible figure. To my mind the real danger to set out upon selfish exploitation of
China: intelligent self-interest, tradition and the fact that our chief asset in China is our
past freedom from a predatory course, dictate a course of cooperation with China. The danger
is that China will be subordinated and sacrificed because of primary preoccupation with the
high finance and politics of Europe, that she will be lost in the shuffle.

The European aspect of the problem can be made more concrete by reference to Great Britain
in particular. That country suffers from the embarrassment of the Japanese alliance. She has
already made it sufficiently clear that she would like to draw America into the alliance, making
it tripartite, since that would be the easiest way of maintaining good relations with both
Japan and the United States. There is no likelihood that any such step will be consummated.
But British diplomacy is experienced and astute. And by force of circumstances our high finance
has contracted a sort of economic alliance with Great Britain. There is no wish to claim superior
virtue for America or to appeal to the strong current of anti-British sentiment. But the British
foreign office exists and operates apart from the tradition of liberalism which has mainly
actuated English domestic politics. It stands peculiarly for the Empire side of the British
Empire, no matter what party is in the saddle in domestic affairs. Every resource will be employed
to bring about a settlement at the Pacific Conference which, even though it includes some degree
of compromise on the part of Great Britain, will bend the Asiatic policy of the United States
to the British traditions in the Far East, instead of committing Great Britain to combining
with the United States in making a reality of the integrity of China to which both countries
are nominally committed. It does not seem an extreme statement to say that the immediate issues
of the Conference depend upon the way in which our financial commitments in Europe are treated,
either as reasons for our making concessions to European policy or on the other hand as a means
of securing an adherence of the European powers to the traditional American policy.

A publicist in China who is of British origin and a sincere friend of China remarked in private
conversation that if the United States could not secure the adherence of Great Britain to her
Asiatic policy by persuasion (he was deploring the Japanese alliance) she might do so by buying
it--through remission of her national debt to us. It is not necessary to resort to the measure
so baldly suggested. But the remark at least suggests that our involvement in European, especially
British, finance and politics may be treated in either of two ways for either of two results.

2

That the Chinese people generally speaking has a less antagonistic feeling toward the United
States than towards other powers seems to me an undoubted fact. The feeling has been disturbed
at divers times by the treatment of the Chinese upon the Pacific coast, by the exclusion act,
by the turning over of our interest in the building of the Peking-Canton (or Hankow) railway
to a European group, by the Lansing-Ishii agreement, and finally by the part played by President
Wilson in the Versailles decision regarding Shantung. Those disturbances in the main, however,
have made them dubious as to our skill, energy and intelligence rather than as to our good-will.
Americans, taken individually and collectively, are to the Chinese--at least such was my impression--a
rather simple folk, taking the word in its good and its deprecatory sense. In noting the Chinese
reaction to the proposed Pacific Conference, it was interesting to see the combination of an
almost unlimited hope that the United States was to lead in protecting them from further aggressions
and in rectifying existing evils, with a lack of confidence, a fear that the United States
would have something put over on it.

Friendly feeling is of course mainly based upon a negative fact, the fact that the United States
has taken no part in "leasing" territories, establishing spheres and setting up extra-national
post-offices. On the positive side stands the contribution made by Americans to education,
especially medical, and that of girls and women, and to philanthropy and relief. Politically,
there are the early service of Burlinghame, the open door policy of John Hay (though failure
to maintain it in fact while securing signatures to it on paper is a considerable part of the
Chinese belief in our defective energy) and the part played by the United States in moderating
the terms of the settlement of the Boxer outbreak, in addition to a considerable number of
minor helpful acts. China also remembers that we were the only nation to take exception to
the treaties embodying the Twenty-one Demands. While our exception was chiefly made on the
basis of our own interests which these treaties might injuriously affect, a sentiment exists
that the protest was a pledge of assistance to China when the time should be opportune for
raising the whole question. And without doubt the reservation made on May 16, 1915, by our
State Department is a strong card at the forthcoming Conference if the Department wishes to
play it.

From an American standpoint, the open door principle represents one of the only two established
principles of American diplomacy, the other being, of course, the Monroe Doctrine. In connection
with sentimental or idealistic associations which have clustered about it, it constitutes us
in some vague fashion in both the Chinese and American public opinion a sort of guardian or
at least spokesman of the interests of China in relation to foreign powers. Although, as was
pointed out in a former chapter, the open door policy directly concerns other nations in their
relation to China rather than China herself, yet the violation of the policy by other powers
has been so frequent and so much to the detriment of China, that American interest, prestige
and moral sentiment are now implicated in such an enforcement of it as will redound to the
advantage of China.

Citizens of other countries are often irritated by a suggestion of such a relationship between
the United States and China. It presents itself as a proclamation of superior national virtue
under cover of which the United States aims to establish its influence in China at the expense
of other countries. The irritation is exasperated by the fact that the situation as it stands
is an undoubted economic and political asset of the United States in China. We may concede
without argument any contention that the situation is not due to any superior virtue but rather
to contingencies of history and geography--in which respect it is not unlike many things that
pass for virtues with individuals. The contention may be admitted without controversy because
it is not pertinent to the main issue. The question is not so much how the state of affairs
came about as what it now is, how it is to be treated and what consequences are in flow from
it. It is a fact that up to the present an intelligent self-interest of America has coincided
with the interests of a stable, independent and progressive China. It is also a fact that American
traditions and sentiments have gathered about this consideration so that now there is widespread
conviction in the American people of moral obligations of assistance and friendly protection
owed by us to China. Sitting in some quiet, shady spot, if you wait, he will soon show himself as
he darts from the fence post not far away, to return to it time after time with, possibly,
the very insect that has been buzzing about your face and made you
miserable.

His movements are so quick that even the fly cannot elude him.

And to some he is pleasant as a companion. One who loves birds once saw this Flycatcher flying
in a circle and repeating breathlessly his emphatic chebec. "He sang on the wing, and I have
never heard notes which seemed more expressive of happiness."

THE SNOWFLAKE.

Bobbie didn't want to go to school that morning, and he looked very cheerfully out upon the
cloudy sky and falling flakes of snow, pretending to shiver a little when the angry gusts of wind
blew the snow sharply into people's faces.

"I guess it's better for little boys like me to stay at home in such weather as this, mamma," said
he, all the while hoping the snow would soon be deep enough for him to ride down the hill on
his sled.
Before his mamma could reply Bobbie gave a cry of delight which drew
her at once to the window.

As from the snow clouds, on bold and rapid
wing, came whirling down an immense flock of birds, white, streaked
with gray and brown, chirping, calling to one another, the whole flock
settling upon the open places in a field in front of Bobbie's house.

"Oh,
the dear little things," said Bobbie, "they looked like little white
angels dropping out of the clouds."

"Those are our winter neighbors,"
said his mamma, "the Snow Buntings or Snowflakes--they visit us only
in winter, their summer homes being away up North near the Arctic
Circle in the region of perpetual snow."

"Do they build their nests
in trees?" asked Bobbie, who never tired hearing about the birds. It
is well remembered that the effect of the "reorganization" loan of the prior Consortium--in
which the United States was not a partner--was to give Yuan Shi Kai the funds which seated
him and the militarist faction after him, firmly in the governmental saddle. Viewing the matter
from a larger point of view than that of Canton vs. Peking, the most fundamental objection
I heard brought by Chinese against the Consortium was in effect as follows: The republican
revolution in China has still to be wrought out; the beginning of ten years ago has been arrested.
It remains to fight it out. The inevitable effect of increased foreign financial and economic
interest in China, even admitting that its industrial effect was advantageous to China, would
be to create an interest in stabilizing China politically, which in effect would mean to sanctify
the status quo, and prevent the development of a revolution which cannot be accomplished without
internal disorders that would affect foreign investments unfavorably. These considerations
are not mentioned for the sake of throwing light on the Consortium: they are cited as an illustration
of the probability that a too positive and constructive development of our tradition of goodwill
to China would involve us in an interference with Chinese domestic affairs injurious to China's
welfare, to that free and independent development in which we profess such interest.

But how, it will be asked, are we to protect China from foreign depredations, particularly
those of Japan, how are we to change our nominal goodwill into a reality, if we do not enter
much more positive and detailed policies? If there was in existence at the present time any
such thing as a diplomacy of peoples as distinct from a diplomacy of governments, the question
would mean something quite different from what it now means. As things now stand the people
should profoundly distrust the politicians' love for China. It is too frequently the reverse
side of fear and incipient hatred of Japan, colored perhaps by anti-British feeling.

There should be no disguising of the situation. The aggressive activities of other nations
in China, centering but not exhausted at this time in Japan, are not merely sources of trouble
to China but they are potential causes of trouble in our own international relationships. We
are committed by our tradition and by the present actualities of the situation to attempting
something positive for China as respects her international status, to live up to our responsibility
is a most difficult and delicate matter. We have on the one side to avoid getting entangled
in quasi-imperialistic European policies in Asia, whether under the guise of altruism, of putting
ourselves in a position where we can exercise a more effective supervision of their behavior,
or by means of economic expansion. On the other side, we have to avoid drifting into that kind
of covert or avowed antagonism to European and Japanese imperialism which will only increase
friction, encourage a combination especially of Great Britain and Japan---or of France and
Japan--against us, and bring war appreciably nearer.

We need to bear in mind that China will not be saved from outside herself. Even if by a successful
war we should relieve China from Japanese encroachments, from all encroachments, China would
not of necessity be brought nearer her legitimate goal of orderly and prosperous internal development.
Apart from the question of how far war can now settle any fundamental issues without begetting
others as dangerous, China of all countries is the one where settlement by force, especially
by outside force, is least applicable, and most likely to be enormously disserviceable. China
is used to taking time to deal with her problems: she can neither understand not profit by
impatient methods of the western world which are profoundly alien to her genius. Moreover a
civilization which is on a continental scale, which is so old that the rest of us are parvenus
in comparison, which is thick and closely woven, cannot be hurried in its development without
disaster. Transformation from within is its sole way out, and we can best help China by trying
to see to it that she gets the time she needs in order to effect this transformation, whether
or not we like the particular form it assumes at any particular time.

A successful war in behalf of China would leave untouched her problems of education, of factional
and sectional forces, of political immaturity showing itself in present incapacity for organization.
It would affect her industrial growth undoubtedly, but in all human probability for the worse,
increasing the likelihood that she would enter upon an industrialization which would repeat
the worst evils of western industrial life, without the immunities, resistances and remedial
measures which the West has evolved. The imagination cannot conceive a worse crime than fastening
western industrialism upon China before she has developed within herself the meaning of coping
with the forces which it would release. The danger is great enough as it is. War waged in China's
behalf by western powers and western methods would make the danger practically irresistible.
In addition we should gain a permanent interest in China which is likely to be of the most
dangerous character to ourselves. If we were not committed by it to future imperialism, we
should be luckier than we have any right to hope to be. These things are said against a mental
protest to admitting even by implication the prospect of war with Japan, but it seems necessary
to say them.

These remarks are negative and vague as to our future course. They imply a confession of lack
of such wisdom as would enable me to make positive definite proposals. But at least I have
confidence in the wisdom and goodwill of the American and other peoples to deal with the problem,
if they are only called into action. And the first condition of calling wisdom and goodwill
into effective existence is to recognize the seriousness of the problem and the utter futility
of trying to force its solution by impatient and hurried methods. Pro-Japanese apologetics
is dangerous; it obscures the realities of the situation. An irritated anti-Japanism that would
hasten the solution of the Chinese problem merely by attacking Japan is equally fatal to discovering
and applying a proper method.

More specifically and also more generically, proper publicity is the greatest need. If, as
Secretary Hughes has intimated, a settlement of the problems of the Pacific is made a condition
of arriving at an agreement regarding reduction and limitation of armaments, it is likely that
the Conference might better never be held. In eagerness to do something which will pass as
a settlement, either China's--and Siberia's--interests will be sacrificed in some unfair compromise,
or irritation and friction will be increased--and in the end so will armaments. In any literal
sense, it is ridiculous to suppose that the problems of the Pacific can be settled in a few
weeks, or months--or years. Yet the discussion of the problems, in separation from the question
of armament, may be of great use. For it may further that publicity which is a pre-condition
of any genuine settlement. Almost any time after the first of October, little excursion parties
of Juncos may be looked for, and the custom continues all winter
long.

When you become acquainted with him, as you surely will, during his
visit, you will like him more and more for his cheerful habits. But scepticism
about the power of public opinion, if it can be aroused and instructed, to reshape Foreign
Office policies means hopelessness about the future of the world. Let everything possible be
done to reduce armament, if only to secure a naval holiday on the part of the three great naval
powers, and if only for the sake of lessening taxation. Let the Conference on Problems devote
itself to discussing and making known as fully and widely as possible the element and scope
of those problems, and the fears--or should one call them hopes?--of the cynics will be frustrated.
It is not so important that a decision in the American sense of the Yap question be finally
and forever arrived at, as it is that the need of China and the Orient in general for freer
and fuller communications with the rest of the world be made clear--and so on, down or up the
list of agenda. The commercial open door is needed. But the need is greater that the door be
opened to light, to knowledge and understanding. If these forces will not create a public opinion
which will in time secure a lasting and just settlement of other problems, there is no recourse
save despair of civilization. Liberals can do something better than predicting failure and
impugning motives. They can work for the opened door of open diplomacy, of continuous and intelligent
inquiry, of discussion free from propaganda. To shirk this responsibility on the alleged ground
that economic imperialism and organized greed will surely bring the Conference to failure is
supine and snobbish. It is one of the factors that may lead the United States to take the wrong
course in the parting of the ways.

October, 1921.

