Varieties: I somewhat prefer the flavor of Red Russian to the ubiquitous green Siberian, but
Red Russian is very slightly less cold hardy. Westland Winter (TSC) and Konserva (JSS) are
tall European oleracea varieties. Winterbor F1 (JSS, TSC) is also excellent. The dwarf "Scotch"
kales, blue or green, sold by many American seed companies are less vigorous types that don't
produce nearly as many gourmet little leaves. Dwarfs in any species tend to have dwarfed root
systems.

Kohlrabi (Giant)

Spring-sown market kohlrabi are usually harvested before hot weather makes them get woody.
Irrigation is not required if they're given a little extra elbow room. With ordinary varieties,
try thinning to 5 inches apart in rows 2 to 3 feet apart and harvest by thinning alternate
plants. Given this additional growing room, they may not get woody until midsummer. On my irrigated,
intensive bed I always sow some more on August 1, to have tender bulbs in autumn.

Kohlrabi was once grown as European fodder crop; slow-growing farmers, varieties grow huge
like rutabagas. These field types have been crossed with table types to make "giant" table
varieties that really suit dry gardening. What to do with a giant kohlrabi (or any bulb getting
overblown)? Peel, grate finely, add chopped onion, dress with olive oil and black pepper, toss,
and enjoy this old Eastern European mainstay.

Sowing date: Sow giant varieties during April, as late as possible while still getting a foot-tall
plant before really hot weather.

Spacing: Thin to 3 feet apart in rows 4 feet apart.

Irrigation: Not absolutely necessary on deep soil, but if they get one or two thorough fertigations
during summer their size may double.

Varieties: A few American seed companies, including Peace Seeds, have a giant kohlrabi of some
sort or other. The ones I've tested tend to be woody, are crude, and throw many off-types,
a high percentage of weak plants, and/or poorly shaped roots. By the time this book is in print,
Territorial should list a unique Swiss variety called Superschmeltz, which is uniformly huge
and stays tender into the next year.

Leeks

Unwatered spring-sown bulbing onions are impossible. Leek is the only allium I know of that
may grow steadily but slowly through severe drought; the water-short gardener can depend on
leeks for a fall/winter onion supply.

Sowing date: Start a row or several short rows about 12 inches apart on a nursery bed in March
or early April at the latest. Grow thickly, irrigate during May/June, and fertilize well so
the competing seedlings get leggy.

Spacing: By mid-to late June the seedlings should be slightly spindly, pencil-thick, and scallion
size. With a sharp shovel, dig out the nursery row, carefully retaining 5 or 6 inches of soil
below the seedlings. With a strong jet of water, blast away the soil and, while doing this,
gently separate the tangled roots so that as little damage is done as possible. Make sure the
roots don't dry out before transplanting. After separation, I temporarily wrap bundled seedlings
in wet newspaper.

