Zinnias intended for exhibition must be treated in a more generous fashion than plants that
are grown for border decoration, or for the sake of yielding cut flowers. The seed may be raised
in heat as already directed, but the border will need to be prepared with special care and
liberality. Should the soil be heavy, it must be reduced to a friable state during winter.
Before the plants are put in, raise the land into ridges about four or five inches high. Plant
on the top of the ridge, and then an application of soot or lime (not too near to inflict injury)
may be used as a precaution against slugs. In a wet season the plants will stand a better chance
than if put on the flat, and if a scorching summer comes they will be none the worse for it.
As the flowering time approaches mulch the ground with well-decayed manure.

The plants must be carefully staked and tied out. It is not merely necessary to secure the
main stem, but the branches should also be supported, or when weighted with flowers they will
be very liable to give way under a moderate wind. Superfluous branches may be removed, but
not so severely as to start new growth to the detriment of the flowers. Disbudding also will
have to be practised for the highest class of flowers. Only one bloom should be allowed to
develop on each branch at a time, and this must be protected from sun and rain after it is
about half grown.

==SPRING FLOWERS FROM SEEDS==

It is the spring flowers that perhaps give the greatest charm and interest to the English garden.
Commencing with the flowering trees, the Almond, Double Peach, =Prunus Pissardi=, and many
others, we soon have the Daffodils, Wallflowers, and Pansies, making the ground bright and
gay after the long dreary winter. It may promote economy in the production of these brilliant
and charming displays if we offer a few remarks on the employment of spring-flowering plants
which can easily be raised for the purpose from seeds. It will, of course, occur to the reader
that a considerable proportion of the annuals that are usually sown in autumn are particularly
adapted for producing rich and varied displays in spring. A type of this class is found in
the well-known Erysimum, Orange Gem, one of the cheapest, hardiest, and most resplendent plants
of the kind, cheap enough for the humblest amateur to employ freely in his borders and beds,
and at the same time so effective in its colouring as to be adapted for the most complex and
highly finished examples of geometric work. Another striking subject is the Siberian Wallflower
(=Cheiranthus Allionii=), so nearly allied to the Erysimum, Orange Gem, the gorgeous orange
flowers adding a fresh colour to the many new shades given us in recent years by the old English
Wallflower. Among the annuals are several valuable spring flowers--such as, for example, =Nemophila
insignis=, well known for its lovely blue blossoms, and the white variety, =alba=, of the same;
=Saponaria calabrica,= exquisite rosy pink; Silene, rose, dwarf rose, and dwarf white; Virginian
Stock, of which the distinct varieties are remarkably well adapted to form bands and masses
of red, white, and yellow, and also to make a delightful groundwork for enhancing the splendour
of late Tulips; and clumps of Aubrietia, Yellow Alyssum, and other of the more distinctive
plants that are employed in high colouring in first-class geometric gardening. A list of such
plants will at once indicate that there is a field of enterprise for the practitioner of spring
flower gardening; and while cheap and effective materials are thus brought into the service,
there is no interference with the later summer bedding, because, if the annuals are well managed,
they will give their plentiful bloom when the garden is most in need of colour, and may be
cleared off in time to make way for the plants that are generally employed in the summer display
and which are known as ' bedding plants' =par excellence=.

In the management of annuals for an early bloom, it is of great importance to sow them at a
proper time, so that they will be strong enough to perform what is required of them, and yet
not so forward (or 'winter proud') as to suffer from the severity of the weather. In the North
the middle of August is none too early for a general sowing in beds, and in the South the middle
of September is none too late. In some few sheltered spots in the extreme South-West seed may
be got in at the middle of October. As a rule, however, the sowing should be made as late as
those familiar with the soil and climate of the place may deem safe, the main point being to
have the seedlings in a short-jointed condition, close to the ground, in which state they are
least likely to be injured by frosts. We prefer sowing in drills on a rather poor soil well
broken up to a kindly state, and if the weather happens to be dry, the drills should be freely
watered before the seed is sown, and there will be no more watering needed. The after-management
is extremely simple: the plants must be kept clear of weeds, and be slightly thinned out if
much crowded, for a few sturdy specimens are of more value than any number that have run up
weak and wiry through overcrowding.

In sheltered gardens, having dry chalk or sandy soils, the greater part, or perhaps the whole
stock, might be transplanted from the seed-beds to the flower-beds and borders as soon as sufficient
growth has been made; but on heavy soils and in exposed places it will be advisable to delay
the removal until March. This part of the work must be nicely done, the plants being lifted
in clumps and no attempt made to single them, and they must be carefully pressed in and aided
with water, if necessary, to promote a quick 'taking hold' of their new quarters. Those planted
out in October on a dry soil will not only bloom early and gaily, but will be beautiful in
their different tints of green all the winter through.

But we are not restricted to annuals in seeking for spring flowers from seeds. With very few
exceptions, =all= the favourite plants of the spring garden may be grown from seeds at a cost
almost infinitesimal as compared with the raising of named varieties from cuttings and divisions.
Daisies, some of them now almost as large as Asters, are not only suited to the ribbon border,
but make an amazingly brilliant show when the white, pink, and crimson are planted in masses
or in separate beds. Seedlings flower with far greater freedom and produce much larger blooms
than divided plants, and even after the first few weeks, when the later flowers become smaller
and less perfect in form, a brilliant display is maintained till late in the summer if the
beds are not wanted for other things. Pansies, which are still unsurpassed for beds and borders,
are easily raised from seed. What is more interesting than a long row of plants of Perfection
Pansy beside the pathway? every step brings one to a flower of perfect charm, quite different
in marking or colour from any other. The several species and varieties of Arabis, Alyssum,
Aubrietia, Viola, Polyanthus, Iberis, and Forget-me-not also come quite true from seed. The
precision of style and colouring that results from raising these from cuttings is, of course,
admitted; but in forming masses and ribbon lines, minute individual characters are of less
consequence than a good general effect, and this may be insured by raising the plants from
seed in a manner so cheap and expeditious that we feel assured spring bedding would be more
often seen in its proper freshness and fulness were the system we now recommend adopted in
place of the tedious one of multiplication by offsets and cuttings.

Wallflowers cannot be grown in too great numbers in any garden, for either their delightful
perfume or charming colour effect. The striking displays to be seen in some of our public parks
and on seaside fronts have done much to popularise this old favourite flower. Since the first
edition of this book was issued, many new and remarkable colours in Wallflowers have been introduced,
among the last, but by no means least, being the Fire King and Orange Bedder. It is by the
blending of the colours that the most telling effects can be produced. Probably Blood Red,
a very inadequate name, and Cloth of Gold will always be the most favourite combination, and
when planted together one sets off the other to a degree little thought of when these varieties
are grown separately. Purple and the other yellows (Faerie Queene and Monarch) also make a
pleasing bed. Fire King and Orange Bedder should be grown in masses, separately or together,
and when seen in the late afternoon or early evening their vivid and gorgeous colouring is
almost unsurpassed by any other flower. The early-flowering Wallflowers will, in mild winters,
bloom from January till April, or even as early as Christmas.

It should not be forgotten that these biennial and perennial plants require more time to prepare
themselves for flowering than do the annuals. If sown in August they may not bloom at all the
next season, or the bloom may be late and insignificant. But if sown in May and June they have
a long season of growth before winter sets in, and at the turn of spring the plants will be
matured and strongly set for bloom.

The sowing of biennial and perennial plants for a display of spring flowers must be carefully
done. The ground should be moderately rich and quite mellow through being well broken up; in
other words, a good seed-bed must be prepared. If the weather is dry, the drills should be
watered before the seed is sown; and in the event of a drought, the young plants must have
the aid of water to keep them going through the summer. The seed should be sown thinly, and,
as soon as the plants are large enough, they should be thinned out if at all crowded, and the
thinnings can be planted in rows and shaded for a while. As a rule, the whole of the work will
be comprised in sowing, thinning, and weeding. In average seasons they will not require watering,
and in this matter alone will be seen the advantage of raising from seeds instead of cuttings.

Ordinary care, with such plants as we have named, will insure a splendid display of spring
flowers; and they are worth whatever attention may be necessary to promote complete and early
development. It may happen that plants from early sowings will show a few flowers in autumn
if neglected. This is easily prevented, to the great advantage of the plants, by the simple
process of 'stopping' or nipping out the points of the leading shoots to cause the production
of side shoots. If a sturdy growth is thus secured, and the plants are transferred to the flower-beds
in October, the result will justify the labour.

Practical gardeners will not need to be informed that the system we now propose is capable
of many applications and expansions; but it may be suggested to amateurs who lament the dreary
aspect of their beds and borders in the month of May and early part of June, that the plants
we recommend for the formation of masses in the geometric garden are equally well adapted to
form beautiful clumps and sheets on borders, banks, and rockeries, as well as in many instances
to serve as a groundwork to Hyacinths, Tulips, Narcissi, and other splendid hardy spring flowers.

Sweet Peas deserve to be considered separately. These flowers are now so varied and exquisitely
beautiful that they never appear in the garden too early. From autumn sowings not only are
the most forward blooms obtained, but for size and intensity of colour the flowers are unsurpassed
by the later displays from spring sowings.

THE CULTURE OF FLOWERING BULBS

Our popular flowering bulbs are obtained from many lands; they are exceedingly diversified
in character, and they bloom at different periods of the year. Each variety has a value of
its own, and answers to some special requirement in its proper season under glass or in the
open ground. In the darkest winter days we prize the glow of Tulips and Hyacinths for brightening
our homes. And bleak days are not all past when Aconites and Snowdrops sparkle in beds and
borders. The Anemones follow in March, and during the lengthening days of spring there are
sumptuous beds of Hyacinths, Narcissi, and Tulips. When high summer begins to decline we have
stately groups of Gladioli and many beautiful Lilies in the shrubbery borders.

Not least among the merits of Dutch Bulbs is the ease with which they can be forced into flower
at a period of the year when bright blossoms are particularly precious, and they are equally
available for the grandest conservatory or the humblest cottage window. They are attractive
singly in pots or vases, or they can be arranged in splendid banks and groups for the highest
decorative purposes. Another advantage is that bulbs endure treatment which would be fatal
to many other flowers. They can be grown in small pots, or be almost packed together in boxes
or seed-pans; and when near perfection they may be shaken out and have the roots washed for
glasses, ferneries, and small aquaria; or they can be replanted close together in sand, and
covered with green moss. Their hardiness, too, permits of their being grown and successfully
flowered without the least aid from artificial heat. Small beds and borders may be made brilliant
with these flowers, and the number of bulbs that can be planted in a very limited space is
somewhat astonishing to a novice. Unlike many other subjects, bulbs may be rather crowded without
injury to individual specimens.

For the decoration of windows no other flowers can compare with Dutch Bulbs in variety and
brilliancy of colour. Some of them are not particularly long-lived, and this need occasion
no regret, for it affords opportunity of making constant changes in the character and colour
of the miniature exhibition, which may easily be extended over many weeks. And a really beautiful
display is within reach of those who have not a scrap of garden in which to bring an ordinary
plant to perfection. Unused attics and lead flats can, with a little skill and attention in
the case of bulbs, be made to answer the purpose which pits and greenhouses serve for many
of our showy plants. Some of the most attractive flowering plants cannot be successfully grown
in large centres of population, but bulbs will produce handsome blossoms even in smoky towns.

We do not recommend the attempt to grow bulbs in the actual window-boxes. It is seldom entirely
satisfactory. They should be treated in the manner advised under the several varieties in the
following pages, and just as the colours are becoming visible, a selection can be made from
pots or boxes for crowding closely in the ornamental arrangements for the window. When the
first occupants show signs of fading, others can be brought forward to fill their places, and
this process may be repeated until the stock is exhausted. Winter Aconites, Snowdrops, Squills,
and Glory of the Snow furnish the earliest display; these to be followed by Crocuses, Tulips,
Hyacinths, and the many forms of the great Narciss family, until spring is far advanced.

The secret of their accommodating nature lies in the fact that within the Hyacinth or Tulip
every petal of the coming flower is already stored. During the five or six years of its progressive
life the capacities of the bulb have been steadily conserved, and we have but to unfold its
beauty, aiming at short stout growth and intensity of colour. Of course there is an immense
difference in the quality of bulbs, and they necessarily vary according to the character of
the season. The most successful growers cannot insure uniformity in any one variety year after
year, because the seasons are beyond human control. But those who regularly visit the bulb
farms can obtain the finest roots of the year, although it may be necessary to select from
many sources.

Such bulbs as Lilies, Iris, Montbretia, Hyacinthus, and Alstroemeria suffer no deterioration
after the first year's flowering. Indeed, it will be the cultivator's fault if they do not
increase in number and carry finer heads of bloom in succeeding years. As outdoor subjects
some of them are not yet appreciated at their full value. Magnificent as =Lilium auratum= and
=L. lancifolium= must ever be in conservatories, they exhibit their imposing proportions to
greater advantage, and their wealth of perfume is far more acceptable, when grown among handsome
shrubs in the border. Very little attention is needed to bring them up year after year in ever-increasing
loveliness.

==Growing Bulbs in Moss-fibre.==--A most interesting method of growing bulbs is to place them
in bowls and jardinières filled with prepared moss-fibre, and far better results for home decoration
may be obtained in this way than by using ordinary potting soil in vases, &c. For this system
of culture no drainage is necessary, and the bowls and vases which are specially made for the
purpose are not pierced with the usual holes for the escape of water. The receptacles are non-porous
and may be placed on tables and columns, or they can be employed in halls and corridors without
the slightest risk of injury. The fibre is perfectly clean to handle, odourless, and remains
sweet for an indefinite period.

Vases of any kind may be used, provided they are non-porous, but the bulbs to be planted in
them should be of a suitable size. For quite small jardinières, white and purple Crocuses,
Scillas, Snowdrops, and Grape Hyacinths are available, also the smaller varieties of Narcissi.
Larger vases will accommodate Hyacinths, Narcissi, Tulips, &c. It is better not to mix different
kinds of bulbs in one bowl unless simultaneous flowering can be insured. The specially prepared
fibre needs only to be moistened before use. Having selected suitable receptacles for the bulbs
to be grown, place a few pieces of charcoal at the bottom of each bowl. Then cover the charcoal
with one to three inches of moistened fibre according to the depth of the bowl, placing the
bulbs in positions so that their tips reach to within half-inch of the rim. The spaces between
and around the bulbs to be filled with moistened fibre, carefully firmed in by hand. The bulbs
will require practically no attention for the first few weeks and may be stood in a warm, airy
position, but on no account must they be shut up in a close cupboard. If the fibre has been
properly moistened there will be no need to give water until the shoots are an inch or so long,
but the fibre must not be allowed to go dry, or the flower-buds become 'blind.' The surface
of the fibre should always look moist, but if too much water has been given the bowl may be
held carefully on its side so that the surplus water can drain away. As the growth increases
more water will be required and all the light possible must be given to insure sturdy foliage.
This fibre also answers admirably instead of water for Hyacinths grown in glasses, but care
should be taken to fill the glasses as lightly as possible with the compost; if crammed in
tightly the root growth is liable to lift the bulbs out of position.

==ACHIMENES==

Showy stove bulbs remarkable for their beauty. Given a sufficiency of heat, the cultivation
is of the easiest nature, for they grow rapidly and flower freely, if potted in sandy peat,
and kept in a warm greenhouse or the coolest part of a stove, in a somewhat humid atmosphere.
It needs only the simplest management to have these plants in bloom at almost any season of
the year, for the bulbs may be kept dormant for a considerable length of time without injury,
and may be started into growth as required to keep up a long succession of flowers. They are
occasionally well grown in common frames over hot-beds. For suspended baskets Achimenes are
invaluable.

==AGAPANTHUS==

In favoured districts on the South coast this noble plant succeeds admirably if planted out
between September and March in a rich, deep, moist loam, either in full sun or in partial shade.
When grown in pots it requires a strong loamy soil, with plenty of manure, and throughout the
summer the pots should be allowed to stand in pans of water. As the Agapanthus is a gross-feeding
plant, it should be re-potted annually in autumn, and be wintered in a cool pit or frame. In
transferring to new pots a little care must be taken to avoid injuring the mass of fleshy roots.

==ALLIUM==

The =Allium neapolitanum= is the finest white-flowered variety, and is exceedingly valuable
for bouquets and vase decoration. The large umbels of blossoms are of the purest white. It
is one of the earliest spring-flowering bulbs, and, although quite hardy, it comes forward
quickly and easily in a cool house.

==ALSTROEMERIA==

An elegant plant which belongs to the nearly hardy group referred to in the notice of Ixia.
In autumn it may be safely planted out in almost any part of the United Kingdom, provided it
is planted nine inches deep, and can have a sunny position on a dry soil, for damp is more
hurtful to it than frost. As a pot plant it is comparatively useless, but if allowed to remain
several years in a dry border, a large clump of any of the varieties presents a brilliant appearance
when in flower.

==AMARYLLIS==

See remarks under Lilies at page 340.

==ANEMONE==

==Windflower==

Our observations on this flower will be limited to the tuberous varieties; but even with this
restriction, the range of form and colour is exceedingly wide. The Anemone is an accommodating
plant, and can be successfully flowered either in pots or in beds, at the option of the cultivator.

The most natural place for it is near shady woodland walks, where it can be seen to the greatest
advantage. But it is also a splendid subject for masses in the mixed border, or in front of
shrubberies; and alone in beds it makes a brilliant and lasting show. For all the purposes
of garden decoration to which the Crocus, Hyacinth, and Tulip are applied, the Windflower is
equally well adapted. We do not advise planting singly, but the Anemone answers admirably in
lines, groups, or beds, and the colours admit of numberless harmonies and contrasts.

The commoner Anemones need only to be planted about three inches deep, with the eyes upwards,
at any time between September and March, and they will require little or no attention afterwards.
Under trees, instead of planting in a formal pattern, it is worth while to put them in with
some attempt at natural grouping, and not too close together--say from six inches to a foot
apart. In such positions they may be left undisturbed for years; and if the soil happens to
be a good sandy loam, they will thrive and increase. In masses or beds within the garden, however,
a richer effect is wanted, and the distance between the roots should not exceed from four to
six inches.

A choice collection of roots is worth more care, and florists are accustomed to prepare the
beds for their reception with fastidious exactness. The soil, if not considered suitable, is
taken out to the depth of two feet, and is replaced by a rich and specially prepared compost.
Although the individual flowers produced by this method are generally very fine, and the total
effect of the bed is exceedingly beautiful, yet the truth must be confessed that for ordinary
gardening the system is extravagant and unnecessary. As a hobby, it is, of course, justifiable
enough; but Anemones of high quality can be grown by a much simpler mode of procedure. One
deep digging there certainly should be, and a layer of manure at the bottom of each trench
is sound treatment, for it supplies the roots with food and a cool subsoil. Poor land should
also be enriched by incorporating a dressing of decayed manure as the work proceeds. Subsequently
one or two light surface forkings will help to make the bed mellow. A rough plan, showing the
name and position of every root, will be a safer record than labelling in the usual way, and
it also prevents the disfigurement of the bed. There should be a distance of six inches between
the roots; and they may be put in singly by means of the trowel, or in drills drawn three inches
deep. The former method is generally adopted for groups; but to insure regularity in flowering
the planting must be uniform in depth. For beds, drills are more reliable, and they are speedily
made.

The time of planting determines to a considerable extent the date of flowering; and, as the
roots may be put in during autumn, winter, and early spring, it is easy to secure a succession
of Anemones from January until May. But this flower is of so much more value early in the year
than at a later period, when many other subjects brighten the garden, that it is scarcely worth
while to plant so late as March.

The Anemone is well worth growing in pots, both for its foliage and flowers. It does not resent
forcing to the same extent as the Ranunculus; nevertheless, cool treatment is almost essential
to do it full justice. The potting should be done in batches to insure a succession of flowers,
and the first lot may be put in at the end of August, or beginning of September. They should
have the benefit of really good soil; a mixture of leaf-mould and loam, with the addition of
a little powdered charcoal, will suit them exactly. In preparing the pots, place a layer of
light manure above the crocks, which will assist the drainage and benefit the plants. Then
fill with compost to within two inches of the top, and lay in the roots; add soil to a level
with the rim, and press lightly down. The strongest roots should, of course, be selected for
potting, and it will need more than a hasty glance to put them in with the eyes upwards. One
or more roots may be planted in each pot, according to the size of the latter.

The early plantings can be placed in any warm position out of doors, such as under a south
wall; but after the middle of October remove to a cold pit, or on to the greenhouse stage.
Watering is all the attention they will require, and of this there must be no stint, especially
during the blooming period. A high temperature at any stage is needless, and if they are just
kept out of the reach of frost they will take excellent care of themselves.

Anemones are adapted for many decorative purposes; they make capital window plants, and their
sharply cut foliage is very ornamental in the drawing-room or on the dinner-table.

==BABIANA==

Babianas are delicately constituted, but extremely elegant plants when well grown. Though far
from showy, they appeal to the educated eye for appreciation of their blue and purple oculate
flowers. The culture is the same as for the Ixia, and we incline strongly to the practice of
keeping the bulbs at least two seasons in the same pots.

==BEGONIA, TUBEROUS-ROOTED==

Few flowers have a greater claim on the attention of horticulturists than the Tuberous-rooted
Begonia, either for the ease with which it can be grown, or for the many valuable purposes
to which the plant may be applied. It can be flowered at any time from February until October,
and is available for all kinds of indoor decoration, and also for growing in the open ground
during the summer months.

Instead of allowing the plants to be rudely dried off, it is worth a little trouble to reduce
them slowly to the dormant state by gradually withholding water. They should still be retained
in pots, which may be stored under a thick layer of ashes or dry peat in any cellar, frame,
or shed where the thermometer stands pretty uniformly at about 50°. The store should also be
dry, for damp is quite as injurious to these roots as cold. Generally speaking, it may be said
that any store which is safe for Dahlias will also preserve Tuberous-rooted Begonias.

After the winter's rest the bulbs are invariably saucer-shaped, and in the event of their being
watered before growth has commenced, sufficient water will remain in the hollow to destroy
the bulb. This peculiarity makes it dangerous to start the plant before activity is evident.
In January or February, as the bulbs show signs of life, pot them almost on the surface of
a rich loamy soil, and employ the smallest pots possible. Nurse them with a little care in
a warm place for about ten days, and they should then be very gradually hardened. A regular
system of potting on will be necessary until the final size is reached; and at each operation
the plants should be inserted rather deeper than before. If re-potting is deferred too long,
the foliage will turn yellow--a sure sign that the plant is starving. No flowers should be
allowed in the early stages of growth, and this rule is imperative if fine specimens are wanted;
but when the plants are transferred just as the pots are full of roots, there will be little
disposition to bloom prematurely. While growing, the Tuberous Begonia delights in a humid atmosphere,
but this should be avoided after flowering has commenced. When sticks are inserted for tying
out the flowers, the bulbs must not be wounded.

The erect-growing varieties are valuable for low conservatory stages, and they form splendid
groups in corners of drawing-rooms. The drooping kinds are seen to advantage on brackets, shelves,
and in suspended baskets; and the short-jointed plants of the drooping class are specially
adapted for rockeries and beds. They must not be put into the open until the danger of a nipping
east wind is past. The early part of June is generally about the right time.

In the autumn it is usual to lift and pot the plants, although in mild districts, and in a
light soil, they may safely be left out all the winter under the shelter of a heap of ashes
or decayed manure. In beds this plan is scarcely worth adoption, because it leaves the ground
bare for several months; but where Begonias are grown in the reserve border to furnish a supply
of flowers for cutting, it may be a considerable advantage to leave them until the following year.

A word is necessary as to soil. The Begonia is a gross feeder, and to develop its fine qualities
there must be a liberal employment of manure. As a matter of fact, it is scarcely possible
to make the soil too rich for this flower.

==CHIONODOXA==

==Glory of the Snow==

The varied blue tints of the Chionodoxa, its more open blossoms, and larger size, distinguish
this flower from its older and justly prized rival, the Scilla. Indeed, the Chionodoxa is exquisitely
beautiful, and of great value for pot culture, beds, or borders. Five bulbs may be grown in
a 48-sized pot, and in the border not less than half a dozen should be planted in a group.
Employed as a single or double line, it also produces a striking bit of colouring. The bulbs
should be planted in autumn four inches deep, the distance between being not more than three
inches. Any ordinary garden soil will grow this flower, and it is advisable to allow the bulbs
to remain undisturbed for several years, as the effect will be the greater in each succeeding
spring.

==CROCUS==

This brilliant harbinger of spring will thrive in any soil or situation, but to be brought
to the highest possible perfection it should be grown in an open bed or border of deep, rich,
dry sandy loam. The bulbs should be planted during September, October, and November. If kept
out of the ground after the end of the year they will be seriously damaged, and however carefully
planted, will not flower in a satisfactory manner. Plant three inches deep in lines, clumps,
or masses, as taste may suggest, putting the bulbs two inches apart. If convenient, let them
remain undisturbed two or three years, and then take them up and plant again in well-prepared
and liberally manured soil. A bed of mixed Crocuses has a pleasing appearance, but in selecting
bulbs for the geometric garden it is more effective to employ distinct colours, reserving the
yellow for the exterior parts of the design to define its boundaries, and using the blue and
the white in masses and bands within. In districts where sparrows attack the flowers, they
may be deterred from doing mischief by stretching over the beds a few strands of black thread,
which will not interfere with the beauty of the display, and will terrify the sparrows for
a sufficient period to save the flowers.

The named varieties are invaluable for pot and frame culture, and to force for decorative purposes;
for though the individual flowers are short-lived, the finest bulbs yield a long succession
of bloom, and in character Crocuses are quite distinct from all other flowers of the same early
season. When grown in pots and baskets, the bulbs should be placed close together to produce
a striking effect. A light, rich soil is desirable, but they may be flowered in a mixture of
charcoal and moss, or in fibre, or moss alone. When required in quantity for ornamental baskets
and similar receptacles, it is wise to plant them in shallow boxes filled with rotten manure
and leaf-mould, and to lift them out separately, and pack them when in flower in the ornamental
baskets. A perfect display of flowers in precisely the same stage of development can thus be
secured, and successional displays may follow as long as supplies remain in the boxes.

==CROWN IMPERIAL==

==Fritillaria imperialis==

A noble plant which needs a deep, rich, moist soil, and an open situation, to insure the full
degree of stateliness, but it will make a very good figure in any border where it can enjoy
a glimmer of sunshine. There are several distinct varieties, the flowers of which range in
colour from palest yellow to the deepest shade of orange and reddish buff, and there are others
which have variegated leaves. They should be planted in autumn eighteen inches apart, allowing
from four to six inches of soil above the crowns.

==CYCLAMEN==

Although it is advisable to raise Cyclamens from seed every year, occasions arise when it is
necessary to store the bulbs for a second season, and the best method of treating them during
the period of rest must be considered. As the production of seed weakens the corms, preference
should be given to those which have not been subjected to this tax on their energies.

