PASSAGES FROM THE AMERICAN NOTE-BOOKS

OF

NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

VOL. I.

Salem, June 15, 1835.--A walk down to the Juniper. The shore of the coves strewn with bunches
of sea-weed, driven in by recent winds.  Eel-grass, rolled and bundled up, and entangled with
it,--large marine vegetables, of an olive-color, with round, slender, snake-like stalks, four
or five feet long, and nearly two feet broad: these are the herbage of the deep sea.  Shoals
of fishes, at a little distance from the shore, discernible by their fins out of water.  Among
the heaps of sea-weed there were sometimes small pieces of painted wood, bark, and other driftage.
On the shore, with pebbles of granite, there were round or oval pieces of brick, which the
waves had rolled about till they resembled a natural mineral. Huge stones tossed about, in
every variety of confusion, some shagged all over with sea-weed, others only partly covered,
others bare.  The old ten-gun battery, at the outer angle of the Juniper, very verdant, and
besprinkled with white-weed, clover, and buttercups.  The juniper-trees are very aged and decayed
and moss-grown.  The grass about the hospital is rank, being trodden, probably, by nobody but
myself.  There is a representation of a vessel under sail, cut with a penknife, on the corner
of the house.

Returning by the almshouse, I stopped a good while to look at the pigs,--a great herd,--who
seemed to be just finishing their suppers.  They certainly are types of unmitigated sensuality,--some
standing in the trough, in the midst of their own and others' victuals,--some thrusting their
noses deep into the food,--some rubbing their backs against a post,--some huddled together
between sleeping and waking, breathing hard,--all wallowing about; a great boar swaggering
round, and a big sow waddling along with her huge paunch.  Notwithstanding the unspeakable
defilement with which these strange sensualists spice all their food, they seem to have a quick
and delicate sense of smell.  What ridiculous-looking animals!  Swift himself could not have
imagined anything nastier than what they practise by the mere impulse of natural genius.  Yet
the Shakers keep their pigs very clean, and with great advantage.  The legion of devils in
the herd of swine,--what a scene it must have been!

Sunday evening, going by the jail, the setting sun kindled up the windows most cheerfully;
as if there were a bright, comfortable light within its darksome stone wall.

June 18th.--A walk in North Salem in the decline of yesterday afternoon, --beautiful weather,
bright, sunny, with a western or northwestern wind just cool enough, and a slight superfluity
of heat.  The verdure, both of trees and grass, is now in its prime, the leaves elastic, all
life.  The grass-fields are plenteously bestrewn with white-weed, large spaces looking as white
as a sheet of snow, at a distance, yet with an indescribably warmer tinge than snow,--living
white, intermixed with living green.  The hills and hollows beyond the Cold Spring copiously
shaded, principally with oaks of good growth, and some walnut-trees, with the rich sun brightening
in the midst of the open spaces, and mellowing and fading into the shade,--and single trees,
with their cool spot of shade, in the waste of sun: quite a picture of beauty, gently picturesque.
The surface of the land is so varied, with woodland mingled, that the eye cannot reach far
away, except now and then in vistas perhaps across the river, showing houses, or a church and
surrounding village, in Upper Beverly.  In one of the sunny bits of pasture, walled irregularly
in with oak-shade, I saw a gray mare feeding, and, as I drew near, a colt sprang up from amid
the grass,--a very small colt.  He looked me in the face, and I tried to startle him, so as
to make him gallop; but he stretched his long legs, one after another, walked quietly to his
mother, and began to suck,--just wetting his lips, not being very hungry.  Then he rubbed his
head, alternately, with each hind leg.  He was a graceful little beast.

I bathed in the cove, overhung with maples and walnuts, the water cool and thrilling.  At a
distance it sparkled bright and blue in the breeze and sun.  There were jelly-fish swimming
about, and several left to melt away on the shore.  On the shore, sprouting amongst the sand
and gravel, I found samphire, growing somewhat like asparagus.  It is an excellent salad at
this season, salt, yet with an herb-like vivacity, and very tender.  I strolled slowly through
the pastures, watching my long shadow making grave, fantastic gestures in the sun.  It is a
pretty sight to see the sunshine brightening the entrance of a road which shortly becomes deeply
overshadowed by trees on both sides.  At the Cold Spring, three little girls, from six to nine,
were seated on the stones in which the fountain is set, and paddling in the water.  It was
a pretty picture, and would have been prettier, if they had shown bare little legs, instead
of pantalets.  Very large trees overhung them, and the sun was so nearly gone down that a pleasant
gloom made the spot sombre, in contrast with these light and laughing little figures.  On perceiving
me, they rose up, tittering among themselves.  It seemed that, there was a sort of playful
malice in those who first saw me; for they allowed the other to keep on paddling, without warning
her of my approach.  I passed along, and heard them come chattering behind.

June 22d.--I rode to Boston in the afternoon with Mr. Proctor.  It was a coolish day, with
clouds and intermitting sunshine, and a pretty fresh breeze.  We stopped about an hour at the
Maverick House, in the sprouting branch of the city, at East Boston,--a stylish house, with
doors painted in imitation of oak; a large bar; bells ringing; the bar-keeper calls out, when
a bell rings, "Number--"; then a waiter replies, "Number-- answered"; and scampers up stairs.
A ticket is given by the hostler, on taking the horse and chaise, which is returned to the
bar-keeper when the chaise is wanted.  The landlord was fashionably dressed, with the whitest
of linen, neatly plaited, and as courteous as a Lord Chamberlain. Visitors from Boston thronging
the house,--some, standing at the bar, watching the process of preparing tumblers of punch,--others
sitting at the windows of different parlors,--some with faces flushed, puffing cigars.  The
bill of fare for the day was stuck up beside the bar. Opposite this principal hotel there was
another, called "The Mechanics," which seemed to be equally thronged.  I suspect that the company
were about on a par in each; for at the Maverick House, though well dressed, they seemed to
be merely Sunday gentlemen,--mostly young fellows,--clerks in dry-goods stores being the aristocracy
of them.  One, very fashionable in appearance, with a handsome cane, happened to stop by me
and lift up his foot, and I noticed that the sole of his boot (which was exquisitely polished)
was all worn out.  I apprehend that some such minor deficiencies might have been detected in
the general showiness of most of them.  There were girls, too, but not pretty ones, nor, on
the whole, such good imitations of gentility as the young men.  There were as many people as
are usually collected at a muster, or on similar occasions, lounging about, without any apparent
enjoyment; but the observation of this may serve me to make a sketch of the mode of spending
the Sabbath by the majority of unmarried, young, middling-class people, near a great town.
Most of the people had smart canes and bosom-pins.

Crossing the ferry into Boston, we went to the City Tavern, where the bar-room presented a
Sabbath scene of repose,--stage-folk lounging in chairs half asleep, smoking cigars, generally
with clean linen and other niceties of apparel, to mark the day.  The doors and blinds of an
oyster and refreshment shop across the street were closed, but I saw people enter it.  There
were two owls in a back court, visible through a window of the bar-room,--speckled gray, with
dark-blue eyes,--the queerest-looking birds that exist,--so solemn and wise,--dozing away the
day, much like the rest of the people, only that they looked wiser than any others.  Their
hooked beaks looked like hooked noses.  A dull scene this.  A stranger, here and there, poring
over a newspaper.  Many of the stage-folk sitting in chairs on the pavement, in front of the door.

We went to the top of the hill which formed part of Gardiner Greene's estate, and which is
now in the process of levelling, and pretty much taken away, except the highest point, and
a narrow path to ascend to it. It gives an admirable view of the city, being almost as high
as the steeples and the dome of the State House, and overlooking the whole mass of brick buildings
and slated roofs, with glimpses of streets far below. It was really a pity to take it down.
I noticed the stump of a very large elm, recently felled.  No house in the city could have
reared its roof so high as the roots of that tree, if indeed the church-spires did so.

On our drive home we passed through Charlestown.  Stages in abundance were passing the road,
burdened with passengers inside and out; also chaises and barouches, horsemen and footmen.
We are a community of Sabbath-breakers.

August 31st.--A drive to Nahant yesterday afternoon.  Stopped at Rice's, and afterwards walked
down to the steamboat wharf to see the passengers land.  It is strange how few good faces there
are in the world, comparatively to the ugly ones.  Scarcely a single comely one in all this
collection.  Then to the hotel.  Barouches at the doors, and gentlemen and ladies going to
drive, and gentlemen smoking round the piazza.  The bar-keeper had one of Benton's mint-drops
for a bosom-brooch!  It made a very handsome one.  I crossed the beach for home about sunset.
The tide was so far down as just to give me a passage on the hard sand, between the sea and
the loose gravel.  The sea was calm and smooth, with only the surf-waves whitening along the
beach.  Several ladies and gentlemen on horseback were cantering and galloping before and behind
me.

A hint of a story,--some incident which should bring on a general war; and the chief actor
in the incident to have something corresponding to the mischief he had caused.

September 7th--A drive to Ipswich with B------.  At the tavern was an old, fat, country major,
and another old fellow, laughing and playing off jokes on each other,--one tying a ribbon upon
the other's hat.  One had been a trumpeter to the major's troop.  Walking about town, we knocked,
for a whim, at the door of a dark old house, and inquired if Miss Hannah Lord lived there.
A woman of about thirty came to the door, with rather a confused smile, and a disorder about
the bosom of her dress, as if she had been disturbed while nursing her child.  She answered
us with great kindness.

Entering the burial-ground, where some masons were building a tomb, we found a good many old
monuments, and several covered with slabs of red freestone or slate, and with arms sculptured
on the slab, or an inlaid circle of slate.  On one slate gravestone, of the Rev. Nathl. Rogers,
there was a portrait of that worthy, about a third of the size of life, carved in relief, with
his cloak, band, and wig, in excellent preservation, all the buttons of his waistcoat being
cut with great minuteness,--the minister's nose being on a level with his cheeks.  It was an
upright gravestone.  Returning home, I held a colloquy with a young girl about the right road.
She had come out to feed a pig, and was a little suspicious that we were making fun of her,
yet answered us with a shy laugh and good-nature,--the pig all the time squealing for his dinner.

Displayed along the walls, and suspended from the pillars of the original King's Chapel, were
coats-of-arms of the king, the successive governors, and other distinguished men.  In the pulpit
there was an hour-glass on a large and elaborate brass stand.  The organ was surmounted by
a gilt crown in the centre, supported by a gilt mitre on each side.  The governor's pew had
Corinthian pillars, and crimson damask tapestry.  In 1727 it was lined with china, probably tiles.

Saint Augustin, at mass, charged all that were accursed to go out of the church.  "Then a dead
body arose, and went out of the church into the churchyard, with a white cloth on its head,
and stood there till mass was over.  It was a former lord of the manor, whom a curate had cursed
because he refused to pay his tithes.  A justice also commanded the dead curate to arise, and
gave him a rod; and the dead lord, kneeling, received penance thereby."  He then ordered the
lord to go again to his grave, which he did, and fell immediately to ashes.  Saint Augustin
offered to pray for the curate, that he might remain on earth to confirm men in their belief;
but the curate refused, because he was in the place of rest.

A sketch to be given of a modern reformer,--a type of the extreme doctrines on the subject
of slaves, cold water, and other such topics. He goes about the streets haranguing most eloquently,
and is on the point of making many converts, when his labors are suddenly interrupted by the
appearance of the keeper of a mad-house, whence he has escaped.  Much may be made of this idea.

A change from a gay young girl to an old woman; the melancholy events, the effects of which
have clustered around her character, and gradually imbued it with their influence, till she
becomes a lover of sick-chambers, taking pleasure in receiving dying breaths and in laying
out the dead; also having her mind full of funeral reminiscences, and possessing more acquaintances
beneath the burial turf than above it.

A well-concerted train of events to be thrown into confusion by some misplaced circumstance,
unsuspected till the catastrophe, yet exerting its influence from beginning to end.

On the common, at dusk, after a salute from two field-pieces, the smoke lay long and heavily
on the ground, without much spreading beyond the original space over which it had gushed from
the guns.  It was about the height of a man.  The evening clear, but with an autumnal chill.

The world is so sad and solemn, that things meant in jest are liable, by an overpowering influence,
to become dreadful earnest,--gayly dressed fantasies turning to ghostly and black-clad images
of themselves.

A story, the hero of which is to be represented as naturally capable of deep and strong passion,
and looking forward to the time when he shall feel passionate love, which is to be the great
event of his existence. But it so chances that he never falls in love, and although he gives
up the expectation of so doing, and marries calmly, yet it is somewhat sadly, with sentiments
merely of esteem for his bride.  The lady might be one who had loved him early in life, but
whom then, in his expectation of passionate love, he had scorned.

The scene of a story or sketch to be laid within the light of a street-lantern; the time, when
the lamp is near going out; and the catastrophe to be simultaneous with the last flickering gleam.

The peculiar weariness and depression of spirits which is felt after a day wasted in turning
over a magazine or other light miscellany, different from the state of the mind after severe
study; because there has been no excitement, no difficulties to be overcome, but the spirits
have evaporated insensibly.

To represent the process by which sober truth gradually strips off all the beautiful draperies
with which imagination has enveloped a beloved object, till from an angel she turns out to
be a merely ordinary woman. This to be done without caricature, perhaps with a quiet humor
interfused, but the prevailing impression to be a sad one.  The story might consist of the
various alterations in the feelings of the absent lover, caused by successive events that display
the true character of his mistress; and the catastrophe should take place at their meeting,
when he finds himself equally disappointed in her person; or the whole spirit of the thing
may here be reproduced.

Last evening, from the opposite shore of the North River, a view of the town mirrored in the
water, which was as smooth as glass, with no perceptible tide or agitation, except a trifling
swell and reflux on the sand, although the shadow of the moon danced in it.  The picture of
the town perfect in the water,--towers of churches, houses, with here and there a light gleaming
near the shore above, and more faintly glimmering under water,--all perfect, but somewhat more
hazy and indistinct than the reality.  There were many clouds flitting about the sky; and the
picture of each could be traced in the water,--the ghost of what was itself unsubstantial.
The rattling of wheels heard long and far through the town.  Voices of people talking on the
other side of the river, the tones being so distinguishable in all their variations that it
seemed as if what was there said might be understood; but it was not so.

Two persons might be bitter enemies through life, and mutually cause the ruin of one another,
and of all that were dear to them.  Finally, meeting at the funeral of a grandchild, the offspring
of a son and daughter married without their consent,--and who, as well as the child, had been
the victims of their hatred,--they might discover that the supposed ground of the quarrel was
altogether a mistake, and then be wofully reconciled.

Two persons, by mutual agreement, to make their wills in each other's favor, then to wait impatiently
for one another's death, and both to be informed of the desired event at the same time.  Both,
in most joyous sorrow, hasten to be present at the funeral, meet, and find themselves both hoaxed.

The story of a man, cold and hard-hearted, and acknowledging no brotherhood with mankind. 
At his death they might try to dig him a grave, but, at a little space beneath the ground,
strike upon a rock, as if the earth refused to receive the unnatural son into her bosom.  Then
they would put him into an old sepulchre, where the coffins and corpses were all turned to
dust, and so he would be alone.  Then the body would petrify; and he having died in some characteristic
act and expression, he would seem, through endless ages of death, to repel society as in life,
and no one would be buried in that tomb forever.

Cannon transformed to church-bells.

A person, even before middle age, may become musty and faded among the people with whom he
has grown up from childhood; but, by migrating to a new place, he appears fresh with the effect
of youth, which may be communicated from the impressions of others to his own feelings.

In an old house, a mysterious knocking might be beard on the wall, where had formerly been
a doorway, now bricked up.

It might be stated, as the closing circumstance of a tale, that the body of one of the characters
had been petrified, and still existed in that state.

A young man to win the love of a girl, without any serious intentions, and to find that in
that love, which might have been the greatest blessing of his life, he had conjured up a spirit
of mischief which pursued him throughout his whole career,--and this without any revengeful
purposes on the part of the deserted girl.

Two lovers, or other persons, on the most private business, to appoint a meeting in what they
supposed to be a place of the utmost solitude, and to find it thronged with people.

October 17th.--Some of the oaks are now a deep brown red; others are changed to a light green,
which, at a little distance, especially in the sunshine, looks like the green of early spring.
In some trees, different masses of the foliage show each of these hues.  Some of the walnut-trees
have a yet more delicate green.  Others are of a bright sunny yellow.

Mr. ------ was married to Miss ------ last Wednesday.  Yesterday Mr. Brazer, preaching on the
comet, observed that not one, probably, of all who heard him, would witness its reappearance.
Mrs. ------ shed tears. Poor soul! she would be contented to dwell in earthly love to all eternity!

Some treasure or other thing to be buried, and a tree planted directly over the spot, so as
to embrace it with its roots.

A tree, tall and venerable, to be said by tradition to have been the staff of some famous man,
who happened to thrust it into the ground, where it took root.

A fellow without money, having a hundred and seventy miles to go, fastened a chain and padlock
to his legs, and lay down to sleep in a field.  He was apprehended, and carried gratis to a
jail in the town whither he desired to go.

An old volume in a large library,--every one to be afraid to unclasp and open it, because it
was said to be a book of magic.

A ghost seen by moonlight; when the moon was out, it would shine and melt through the airy
substance of the ghost, as through a cloud.

Prideaux, Bishop of Worcester, during the sway of the Parliament, was forced to support himself
and his family by selling his household goods. A friend asked him, "How doth your lordship?"
"Never better in my life," said the Bishop, "only I have too great a stomach; for I have eaten
that little plate which the sequestrators left me.  I have eaten a great library of excellent
books.  I have eaten a great deal of linen, much of my brass, some of my pewter, and now I
am come to eat iron; and what will come next I know not."

A scold and a blockhead,--brimstone and wood,--a good match.

To make one's own reflection in a mirror the subject of a story.

In a dream to wander to some place where may be heard the complaints of all the miserable on earth.

Some common quality or circumstance that should bring together people the most unlike in all
other respects, and make a brotherhood and sisterhood of them,--the rich and the proud finding
themselves in the same category with the mean and the despised.

A person to consider himself as the prime mover of certain remarkable events, but to discover
that his actions have not contributed in the least thereto.  Another person to be the cause,
without suspecting it.

October 25th.--A person or family long desires some particular good.  At last it comes in such
profusion as to be the great pest of their lives.

A man, perhaps with a persuasion that he shall make his fortune by some singular means, and
with an eager longing so to do, while digging or boring for water, to strike upon a salt-spring.

To have one event operate in several places,--as, for example, if a man's head were to be cut
off in one town, men's heads to drop off in several towns.

Follow out the fantasy of a man taking his life by instalments, instead of at one payment,--say
ten years of life alternately with ten years of suspended animation.

Sentiments in a foreign language, which merely convey the sentiment without retaining to the
reader any graces of style or harmony of sound, have somewhat of the charm of thoughts in one's
own mind that have not yet been put into words.  No possible words that we might adapt to them
could realize the unshaped beauty that they appear to possess.  This is the reason that translations
are never satisfactory,--and less so, I should think, to one who cannot than to one who can
pronounce the language.

A person to be writing a tale, and to find that it shapes itself against his intentions; that
the characters act otherwise than he thought; that unforeseen events occur; and a catastrophe
comes which he strives in vain to avert.  It might shadow forth his own fate,--he having made
himself one of the personages.

It is a singular thing, that, at the distance, say, of five feet, the work of the greatest
dunce looks just as well as that of the greatest genius,--that little space being all the distance
between genius and stupidity.

Mrs. Sigourney says, after Coleridge, that "poetry has been its own exceeding great reward."
For the writing, perhaps; but would it be so for the reading?

Four precepts: To break off customs; to shake off spirits ill-disposed; to meditate on youth;
to do nothing against one's genius.

Salem, August 31st, 1836.--A walk, yesterday, down to the shore, near the hospital.  Standing
on the old grassy battery, that forms a semicircle, and looking seaward.  The sun not a great
way above the horizon, yet so far as to give a very golden brightness, when it shone out. 
Clouds in the vicinity of the sun, and nearly all the rest of the sky covered with clouds in
masses, not a gray uniformity of cloud.  A fresh breeze blowing from land seaward.  If it had
been blowing from the sea, it would have raised it in heavy billows, and caused it to dash
high against the rocks. But now its surface was not at all commoved with billows; there was
only roughness enough to take off the gleam, and give it the aspect of iron after cooling.
The clouds above added to the black appearance.  A few sea-birds were flitting over the water,
only visible at moments, when they turned their white bosoms towards me,--as if they were then
first created.  The sunshine had a singular effect.  The clouds would interpose in such a manner
that some objects were shaded from it, while others were strongly illuminated.  Some of the
islands lay in the shade, dark and gloomy, while others were bright and favored spots.  The
white lighthouse was sometimes very cheerfully marked.  There was a schooner about a mile from
the shore, at anchor, laden apparently with lumber.  The sea all about her had the black, iron
aspect which I have described; but the vessel herself was alight.  Hull, masts, and spars were
all gilded, and the rigging was made of golden threads.  A small white streak of foam breaking
around the bows, which were towards the wind.  The shadowiness of the clouds overhead made
the effect of the sunlight strange, where it fell.

September.--The elm-trees have golden branches intermingled with their green already, and so
they had on the first of the month.

To picture the predicament of worldly people, if admitted to paradise.

As the architecture of a country always follows the earliest structures, American architecture
should be a refinement of the log-house.  The Egyptian is so of the cavern and mound; the Chinese,
of the tent; the Gothic, of overarching trees; the Greek, of a cabin.

"Though we speak nonsense, God will pick out the meaning of it,"--an extempore prayer by a
New England divine.

In old times it must have been much less customary than now to drink pure water.  Walker emphatically
mentions, among the sufferings of a clergyman's wife and family in the Great Rebellion, that
they were forced to drink water, with crab-apples stamped in it to relish it.

Mr. Kirby, author of a work on the History, Habits, and Instincts of Animals, questions whether
there may not be an abyss of waters within the globe, communicating with the ocean, and whether
the huge animals of the Saurian tribe--great reptiles, supposed to be exclusively antediluvian,
and now extinct--may not be inhabitants of it.  He quotes a passage from Revelation, where
the creatures under the earth are spoken of as distinct from those of the sea, and speaks of
a Saurian fossil that has been found deep in the subterranean regions.  He thinks, or suggests,
that these may be the dragons of Scripture.

The elephant is not particularly sagacious in the wild state, but becomes so when tamed.  The
fox directly the contrary, and likewise the wolf.

A modern Jewish adage,--"Let a man clothe himself beneath his ability, his children according
to his ability, and his wife above his ability."

It is said of the eagle, that, in however long a flight, he is never seen to clap his wings
to his sides.  He seems to govern his movements by the inclination of his wings and tail to
the wind, as a ship is propelled by the action of the wind on her sails.

In old country-houses in England, instead of glass for windows, they used wicker, or fine strips
of oak disposed checkerwise.  Horn was also used. The windows of princes and great noblemen
were of crystal; those of Studley Castle, Holinshed says, of beryl.  There were seldom chimneys;
and they cooked their meats by a fire made against an iron back in the great hall.  Houses,
often of gentry, were built of a heavy timber frame, filled up with lath and plaster.  People
slept on rough mats or straw pallets, with a round log for a pillow; seldom better beds than
a mattress, with a sack of chaff for a pillow.

October 25th.--A walk yesterday through Dark Lane, and home through the village of Danvers.
Landscape now wholly autumnal.  Saw an elderly man laden with two dry, yellow, rustling bundles
of Indian corn-stalks,--a good personification of Autumn.  Another man hoeing up potatoes.
Rows of white cabbages lay ripening.  Fields of dry Indian corn.  The grass has still considerable
greenness.  Wild rose-bushes devoid of leaves, with their deep, bright red seed-vessels.  Meeting-house
in Danvers seen at a distance, with the sun shining through the windows of its belfry. Barberry-bushes,--the
leaves now of a brown red, still juicy and healthy; very few berries remaining, mostly frost-bitten
and wilted.  All among the yet green grass, dry stalks of weeds.  The down of thistles occasionally
seen flying through the sunny air.

In this dismal chamber FAME was won.  (Salem, Union Street.)

Those who are very difficult in choosing wives seem as if they would take none of Nature's
ready-made works, but want a woman manufactured particularly to their order.

A council of the passengers in a street: called by somebody to decide upon some points important
to him.

Every individual has a place to fill in the world, and is important in some respects, whether
he chooses to be so or not.

A Thanksgiving dinner.  All the miserable on earth are to be invited, --as the drunkard, the
bereaved parent, the ruined merchant, the broken-hearted lover, the poor widow, the old man
and woman who have outlived their generation, the disappointed author, the wounded, sick, and
broken soldier, the diseased person, the infidel, the man with an evil conscience, little orphan
children or children of neglectful parents, shall be admitted to the table, and many others.
The giver of the feast goes out to deliver his invitations.  Some of the guests he meets in
the streets, some he knocks for at the doors of their houses. The description must be rapid.
But who must be the giver of the feast, and what his claims to preside?  A man who has never
found out what he is fit for, who has unsettled aims or objects in life, and whose mind gnaws
him, making him the sufferer of many kinds of misery.  He should meet some pious, old, sorrowful
person, with more outward calamities than any other, and invite him, with a reflection that
piety would make all that miserable company truly thankful.

Merry, in "merry England," does not mean mirthful; but is corrupted from an old Teutonic word
signifying famous or renowned.

In an old London newspaper, 1678, there is an advertisement, among other goods at auction,
of a black girl, about fifteen years old, to be sold.

We sometimes congratulate ourselves at the moment of waking from a troubled dream: it may be
so the moment after death.

The race of mankind to be swept away, leaving all their cities and works. Then another human
pair to be placed in the world, with native intelligence like Adam and Eve, but knowing nothing
of their predecessors or of their own nature and destiny.  They, perhaps, to be described as
working out this knowledge by their sympathy with what they saw, and by their own feelings.

Memorials of the family of Hawthorne in the church of the village of Dundry, Somersetshire,
England.  The church is ancient and small, and has a prodigiously high tower of more modern
date, being erected in the time of Edward IV.  It serves as a landmark for an amazing extent
of country.

A singular fact, that, when man is a brute, he is the most sensual and loathsome of all brutes.

A snake, taken into a man's stomach and nourished there from fifteen years to thirty-five,
tormenting him most horribly.  A type of envy or some other evil passion.

A sketch illustrating the imperfect compensations which time makes for its devastations on
the person,--giving a wreath of laurel while it causes baldness, honors for infirmities, wealth
for a broken constitution,--and at last, when a man has everything that seems desirable, death
seizes him.  To contrast the man who has thus reached the summit of ambition with the ambitious
youth.

Walking along the track of the railroad, I observed a place where the workmen had bored a hole
through the solid rock, in order to blast it; but, striking a spring of water beneath the rock,
it gushed up through the hole.  It looked as if the water were contained within the rock.

A Fancy Ball, in which the prominent American writers should appear, dressed in character.

A lament for life's wasted sunshine.

A new classification of society to be instituted.  Instead of rich and poor, high and low,
they are to be classed,--First, by their sorrows: for instance, whenever there are any, whether
in fair mansion or hovel, who are mourning the loss of relations and friends, and who wear
black, whether the cloth be coarse or superfine, they are to make one class. Secondly, all
who have the same maladies, whether they lie under damask canopies or on straw pallets or in
the wards of hospitals, they are to form one class.  Thirdly, all who are guilty of the same
sins, whether the world knows them or not; whether they languish in prison, looking forward
to the gallows, or walk honored among men, they also form a class.  Then proceed to generalize
and classify the whole world together, as none can claim utter exemption from either sorrow,
sin, or disease; and if they could, yet Death, like a great parent, comes and sweeps them all
through one darksome portal,--all his children.

Fortune to come like a pedler with his goods,--as wreaths of laurel, diamonds, crowns; selling
them, but asking for them the sacrifice of health, of integrity, perhaps of life in the battle-field,
and of the real pleasures of existence.  Who would buy, if the price were to be paid down?

The dying exclamation of the Emperor Augustus, "Has it not been well acted?"  An essay on the
misery of being always under a mask.  A veil may be needful, but never a mask.  Instances of
people who wear masks in all classes of society, and never take them off even in the most familiar
moments, though sometimes they may chance to slip aside.

The various guises under which Ruin makes his approaches to his victims: to the merchant, in
the guise of a merchant offering speculations; to the young heir, a jolly companion; to the
maiden, a sighing, sentimentalist lover.

What were the contents of the burden of Christian in the Pilgrim's Progress?  He must have
been taken for a pedler travelling with his pack.

To think, as the sun goes down, what events have happened in the course of the day,--events
of ordinary occurrence: as, the clocks have struck, the dead have been buried.

Curious to imagine what murmurings and discontent would be excited, if any of the great so-called
calamities of human beings were to be abolished,--as, for instance, death.

Trifles to one are matters of life and death to another.  As, for instance, a farmer desires
a brisk breeze to winnow his grain; and mariners, to blow them out of the reach of pirates.

A recluse, like myself, or a prisoner, to measure time by the progress of sunshine through
his chamber.

Would it not be wiser for people to rejoice at all that they now sorrow for, and vice versa?
To put on bridal garments at funerals, and mourning at weddings?  For their friends to condole
with them when they attained riches and honor, as only so much care added?

If in a village it were a custom to hang a funeral garland or other token of death on a house
where some one had died, and there to let it remain till a death occurred elsewhere, and then
to hang that same garland over the other house, it would have, methinks, a strong effect.

No fountain so small but that Heaven may be imaged in its bosom.

Fame!  Some very humble persons in a town may be said to possess it,--as, the penny-post, the
town-crier, the constable,--and they are known to everybody; while many richer, more intellectual,
worthier persons are unknown by the majority of their fellow-citizens.  Something analogous
in the world at large.

The ideas of people in general are not raised higher than the roofs of the houses.  All their
interests extend over the earth's surface in a layer of that thickness.  The meeting-house
steeple reaches out of their sphere.

Nobody will use other people's experience, nor has any of his own till it is too late to use it.

Two lovers to plan the building of a pleasure-house on a certain spot of ground, but various
seeming accidents prevent it.  Once they find a group of miserable children there; once it
is the scene where crime is plotted; at last the dead body of one of the lovers or of a dear
friend is found there; and, instead of a pleasure-house, they build a marble tomb.  The moral,--that
there is no place on earth fit for the site of a pleasure-house, because there is no spot that
may not have been saddened by human grief, stained by crime, or hallowed by death.  It might
be three friends who plan it, instead of two lovers; and the dearest one dies.

Comfort for childless people.  A married couple with ten children have been the means of bringing
about ten funerals.

A blind man on a dark night carried a torch, in order that people might see him, and not run
against him, and direct him how to avoid dangers.

To picture a child's (one of four or five years old) reminiscences at sunset of a long summer's
day,--his first awakening, his studies, his sports, his little fits of passion, perhaps a whipping,
etc.

The blind man's walk.

To picture a virtuous family, the different members examples of virtuous dispositions in their
way; then introduce a vicious person, and trace out the relations that arise between him and
them, and the manner in which all are affected.

A man to flatter himself with the idea that he would not be guilty of some certain wickedness,---as,
for instance, to yield to the personal temptations of the Devil,--yet to find, ultimately,
that he was at that very time committing that same wickedness.

What would a man do, if he were compelled to live always in the sultry heat of society, and
could never bathe himself in cool solitude?

A girl's lover to be slain and buried in her flower-garden, and the earth levelled over him.
That particular spot, which she happens to plant with some peculiar variety of flowers, produces
them of admirable splendor, beauty, and perfume; and she delights, with an indescribable impulse,
to wear them in her bosom, and scent her chamber with them.  Thus the classic fantasy would
be realized, of dead people transformed to flowers.

Objects seen by a magic-lantern reversed.  A street, or other location, might be presented,
where there would be opportunity to bring forward all objects of worldly interest, and thus
much pleasant satire might be the result.

The Abyssinians, after dressing their hair, sleep with their heads in a forked stick, in order
not to discompose it.

At the battle of Edge Hill, October 23, 1642, Captain John Smith, a soldier of note, Captain
Lieutenant to Lord James Stuart's horse, with only a groom, attacked a Parliament officer,
three cuirassiers, and three arquebusiers, and rescued the royal standard, which they had taken
and were guarding.  Was this the Virginian Smith?

Stephen Gowans supposed that the bodies of Adam and Eve were clothed in robes of light, which
vanished after their sin.

Lord Chancellor Clare, towards the close of his life, went to a village church, where he might
not be known, to partake of the Sacrament.

A missionary to the heathen in a great city, to describe his labors in the manner of a foreign
mission.

In the tenth century, mechanism of organs so clumsy, that one in Westminster Abbey, with four
hundred pipes, required twenty-six bellows and seventy stout men.  First organ ever known in
Europe received by King Pepin, from the Emperor Constantine, in 757.  Water boiling was kept
in a reservoir under the pipes; and, the keys being struck, the valves opened, and steam rushed
through with noise.  The secret of working them thus is now lost.  Then came bellows organs,
first used by Louis le Debonnaire.

After the siege of Antwerp, the children played marbles in the streets with grape and cannon shot.

A shell, in falling, buries itself in the earth, and, when it explodes, a large pit is made
by the earth being blown about in all directions,-- large enough, sometimes, to hold three
or four cart-loads of earth.  The holes are circular.

A French artillery-man being buried in his military cloak on the ramparts, a shell exploded,
and unburied him.

In the Netherlands, to form hedges, young trees are interwoven into a sort of lattice-work;
and, in time, they grow together at the point of junction, so that the fence is all of one piece.

To show the effect of gratified revenge.  As an instance, merely, suppose a woman sues her
lover for breach of promise, and gets the money by instalments, through a long series of years.
At last, when the miserable victim were utterly trodden down, the triumpher would have become
a very devil of evil passions,--they having overgrown his whole nature; so that a far greater
evil would have come upon himself than on his victim.

Anciently, when long-buried bodies were found undecayed in the grave, a species of sanctity
was attributed to them.

Some chimneys of ancient halls used to be swept by having a culverin fired up them.

At Leith, in 1711, a glass bottle was blown of the capacity of two English bushels.

The buff and blue of the Union were adopted by Fox and the Whig party in England.  The Prince
of Wales wore them.

In 1621, a Mr. Copinger left a certain charity, an almshouse, of which four poor persons were
to partake, after the death of his eldest son and his wife.  It was a tenement and yard.  The
parson, head-boroughs, and his five other sons were to appoint the persons.  At the time specified,
however, all but one of his sons were dead; and he was in such poor circumstances that he obtained
the benefit of the charity for himself, as one of the four.

A town clerk arranges the publishments that are given in, according to his own judgment.

To make a story from Robert Raikes seeing dirty children at play, in the streets of London,
and inquiring of a woman about them.  She tells him that on Sundays, when they were not employed,
they were a great deal worse, making the streets like hell; playing at church, etc.  He was
therefore induced to employ women at a shilling to teach them on Sundays, and thus Sunday schools
were established.

To represent the different departments of the United States government by village functionaries.
The War Department by watchmen, the law by constables, the merchants by a variety store, etc.

At the accession of Bloody Mary, a man, coming into a house, sounded three times with his mouth,
as with a trumpet, and then made proclamation to the family.  A bonfire was built, and little
children were made to carry wood to it, that they might remember the circumstance in old age.
Meat and drink were provided at the bonfires.

To describe a boyish combat with snowballs, and the victorious leader to have a statue of snow
erected to him.  A satire on ambition and fame to be made out of this idea.  It might be a
child's story.

Our body to be possessed by two different spirits; so that half of the visage shall express
one mood, and the other half another.

An old English sea-captain desires to have a fast-sailing ship, to keep a good table, and to
sail between the tropics without making land.

A rich man left by will his mansion and estate to a poor couple.  They remove into it, and
find there a darksome servant, whom they are forbidden by will to turn away.  He becomes a
torment to them; and, in the finale, he turns out to be the former master of the estate.

Two persons to be expecting some occurrence, and watching for the two principal actors in it,
and to find that the occurrence is even then passing, and that they themselves are the two actors.

There is evil in every human heart, which may remain latent, perhaps, through the whole of
life; but circumstances may rouse it to activity. To imagine such circumstances.  A woman,
tempted to be false to her husband, apparently through mere whim,--or a young man to feel an
instinctive thirst for blood, and to commit murder.  This appetite may be traced in the popularity
of criminal trials.  The appetite might be observed first in a child, and then traced upwards,
manifesting itself in crimes suited to every stage of life.

The good deeds in an evil life,--the generous, noble, and excellent actions done by people
habitually wicked,--to ask what is to become of them.

A satirical article might be made out of the idea of an imaginary museum, containing such articles
as Aaron's rod, the petticoat of General Harrison, the pistol with which Benton shot Jackson,--and
then a diorama, consisting of political or other scenes, or done in wax-work.  The idea to
be wrought out and extended.  Perhaps it might be the museum of a deceased old man.

An article might be made respecting various kinds of ruin,--ruin as regards property,--ruin
of health,--ruin of habits, as drunkenness and all kinds of debauchery,--ruin of character,
while prosperous in other respects,--ruin of the soul.  Ruin, perhaps, might be personified
as a demon, seizing its victims by various holds.

An article on fire, on smoke.  Diseases of the mind and soul,--even more common than bodily
diseases.

Tarleton, of the Revolution, is said to have been one of the two handsomest men in Europe,--the
Prince of Wales, afterwards George IV., being the other.  Some authorities, however, have represented
him as ungainly in person and rough in manners.  Tarleton was originally bred to the law, but
quitted law for the army early in life.  He was son to a mayor of Liverpool, born in 1754,
of ancient family.  He wrote his own memoirs after returning from America.  Afterwards in Parliament.
Never afterwards distinguished in arms.  Created baronet in 1818, and died childless in 1833.
Thought he was not sufficiently honored among more modern heroes.  Lost part of his right hand
in battle of Guilford Court House.  A man of pleasure in England.

It would be a good idea for a painter to paint a picture of a great actor, representing him
in several different characters of one scene,-- Iago and Othello, for instance.

Maine, July 5th, 1837.--Here I am, settled since night before last with B------, and living
very singularly.  He leads a bachelor's life in his paternal mansion, only a small part of
which is occupied by a family who serve him.  He provides his own breakfast and supper, and
occasionally his dinner; though this is oftener, I believe, taken at the hotel, or an eating-house,
or with some of his relatives.  I am his guest, and my presence makes no alteration in his
way of life.  Our fare, thus far, has consisted of bread, butter, and cheese, crackers, herrings,
boiled eggs, coffee, milk, and claret wine.  He has another inmate, in the person of a queer
little Frenchman, who has his breakfast, tea, and lodging here, and finds his dinner elsewhere.
Monsieur S------ does not appear to be more than twenty-one years old,--a diminutive figure,
with eyes askew, and otherwise of an ungainly physiognomy; he is ill-dressed also, in a coarse
blue coat, thin cotton pantaloons, and unbrushed boots; altogether with as little of French
coxcombry as can well be imagined, though with something of the monkey aspect inseparable from
a little Frenchman.  He is, nevertheless, an intelligent and well-informed man, apparently
of extensive reading in his own language,--a philosopher, B------ tells me, and an infidel.
His insignificant personal appearance stands in the way of his success, and prevents him from
receiving the respect which is really due to his talents and acquirements; wherefore he is
bitterly dissatisfied with the country and its inhabitants, and often expresses his feelings
to B------ (who has gained his confidence to a certain degree) in very strong terms.

Thus here are three characters, each with something out of the common way, living together
somewhat like monks.  B------, our host, combines more high and admirable qualities, of that
sort which make up a gentleman, than any other that I have met with.  Polished, yet natural,
frank, open, and straightforward, yet with a delicate feeling for the sensitiveness of his
companions; of excellent temper and warm heart; well acquainted with the world, with a keen
faculty of observation, which he has had many opportunities of exercising, and never varying
from a code of honor and principle which is really nice and rigid in its way.  There is a sort
of philosophy developing itself in him which will not impossibly cause him to settle down in
this or some other equally singular course of life.  He seems almost to have made up his mind
never to be married, which I wonder at; for he has strong affections, and is fond both of women
and children.

The little Frenchman impresses me very strongly, too,--so lonely as he is here, struggling
against the world, with bitter feelings in his breast, and yet talking with the vivacity and
gayety of his nation; making this his home from darkness to daylight, and enjoying here what
little domestic comfort and confidence there is for him; and then going about all the livelong
day, teaching French to blockheads who sneer at him, and returning at about ten o'clock in
the evening (for I was wrong in saying he supped here,--he eats no supper) to his solitary
room and bed.  Before retiring, he goes to B------'s bedside, and, if he finds him awake, stands
talking French, expressing his dislike of the Americans, "Je hais, je hais les Yankees!"--thus
giving vent to the stifled bitterness of the whole day.  In the morning I hear him getting
up early, at sunrise or before, humming to himself, scuffling about his chamber with his thick
boots, and at last taking his departure for a solitary ramble till breakfast.  Then he comes
in, cheerful and vivacious enough, eats pretty heartily, and is off again, singing French chansons
as he goes down the gravel-walk.  The poor fellow has nobody to sympathize with him but B------,
and thus a singular connection is established between two utterly different characters.

Then here is myself, who am likewise a queer character in my way, and have come to spend a
week or two with my friend of half a lifetime,--the longest space, probably, that we are ever
destined to spend together; for Fate seems preparing changes for both of us.  My circumstances,
at least, cannot long continue as they are and have been; and B------, too, stands between
high prosperity and utter ruin.

I think I should soon become strongly attached to our way of life, so independent and untroubled
by the forms and restrictions of society.  The house is very pleasantly situated,--half a mile
distant from where the town begins to be thickly settled, and on a swell of land, with the
road running at a distance of fifty yards, and a grassy tract and a gravel-walk between.  Beyond
the road rolls the Kennebec, here two or three hundred yards wide.  Putting my head out of
the window, I can see it flowing steadily along straightway between wooded banks; but arriving
nearly opposite the house, there is a large and level sand island in the middle of the stream;
and just below the island the current is further interrupted by the works of the mill-dam,
which is perhaps half finished, yet still in so rude a state that it looks as much like the
ruins of a dam destroyed by the spring freshets as like the foundations of a dam yet to be.
Irishmen and Canadians toil at work on it, and the echoes of their hammering and of the voices
come across the river and up to this window.  Then there is a sound of the wind among the trees
round the house; and, when that is silent, the calm, full, distant voice of the river becomes
audible.  Looking downward thither, I see the rush of the current, and mark the different eddies,
with here and there white specks or streaks of foam; and often a log comes floating on, glistening
in the sun, as it rolls over among the eddies, having voyaged, for aught I know, hundreds of
miles from the wild upper sources of the river, passing down, down, between lines of forest,
and sometimes a rough clearing, till here it floats by cultivated banks, and will soon pass
by the village. Sometimes a long raft of boards comes along, requiring the nicest skill in
navigating it through the narrow passage left by the mill-dam. Chaises and wagons occasionally
go over the road, the riders all giving a passing glance at the dam, or perhaps alighting to
examine it more fully, and at last departing with ominous shakes of the head as to the result
of the enterprise.  My position is so far retired from the river and mill-dam, that, though
the latter is really rather a scene, yet a sort of quiet seems to be diffused over the whole.
Two or three times a day this quiet is broken by the sudden thunder from a quarry, where the
workmen are blasting rocks; and a peal of thunder sounds strangely in such a green, sunny,
and quiet landscape, with the blue sky brightening the river.

I have not seen much of the people.  There have been, however, several incidents which amused
me, though scarcely worth telling.  A passionate tavern-keeper, quick as a flash of gunpowder,
a nervous man, and showing in his demeanor, it seems, a consciousness of his infirmity of temper.
I was a witness of a scuffle of his with a drunken guest.  The tavern-keeper, after they were
separated, raved like a madman, and in a tone of voice having a drolly pathetic or lamentable
sound mingled with its rage, as if he were lifting up his voice to weep.  Then he jumped into
a chaise which was standing by, whipped up the horse, and drove off rapidly, as if to give
his fury vent in that way.

On the morning of the Fourth of July, two printer's apprentice-lads, nearly grown, dressed
in jackets and very tight pantaloons of check, tight as their skins, so that they looked like
harlequins or circus-clowns, yet appeared to think themselves in perfect propriety, with a
very calm and quiet assurance of the admiration of the town.  A common fellow, a carpenter,
who, on the strength of political partisanship, asked B------'s assistance in cutting out great
letters from play-bills in order to print "Martin Van Buren Forever" on a flag; but B------
refused.  B------ seems to be considerably of a favorite with the lower orders, especially
with the Irishmen and French Canadians,--the latter accosting him in the street, and asking
his assistance as an interpreter in making their bargains for work.

I meant to dine at the hotel with B------ to-day; but having returned to the house, leaving
him to do some business in the village, I found myself unwilling to move when the dinner-hour
approached, and therefore dined very well on bread, cheese, and eggs.  Nothing of much interest
takes place.  We live very comfortably in our bachelor establishment on a cold shoulder of
mutton, with ham and smoked beef and boiled eggs; and as to drinkables, we had both claret
and brown sherry on the dinner-table to-day.  Last evening we had along literary and philosophical
conversation with Monsieur S------.  He is rather remarkably well-informed for a man of his
age, and seems to have very just notions on ethics, etc., though damnably perverted as to religion.
It is strange to hear philosophy of any sort from such a boyish figure.  "We philosophers,"
he is fond of saying, to distinguish himself and his brethren from the Christians.  One of
his oddities is, that, while steadfastly maintaining an opinion that he is a very small and
slow eater, and that we, in common with other Yankees, eat immensely and fast, he actually
eats both faster and longer than we do, and devours, as B------avers, more victuals than both
of us together.

Saturday, July 8th.--Yesterday afternoon, a stroll with B------ up a large brook, he fishing
for trout, and I looking on.  The brook runs through a valley, on one side bordered by a high
and precipitous bank; on the other there is an interval, and then the bank rises upward and
upward into a high hill with gorges and ravines separating one summit from another, and here
and there are bare places, where the rain-streams have washed away the grass.  The brook is
bestrewn with stones, some bare, some partially moss-grown, and sometimes so huge as--once
at least--to occupy almost the whole breadth of the current.  Amongst these the stream brawls,
only that this word does not express its good-natured voice, and "murmur" is too quiet.  It
sings along, sometimes smooth, with the pebbles visible beneath, sometimes rushing dark and
swift, eddying and whitening past some rock, or underneath the hither or the farther bank;
and at these places B------ cast his line, and sometimes drew out a trout, small, not more
than five or six inches long.  The farther we went up the brook, the wilder it grew.  The opposite
bank was covered with pines and hemlocks, ascending high upwards, black and solemn.  One knew
that there must be almost a precipice behind, yet we could not see it. At the foot you could
spy, a little way within the darksome shade, the roots and branches of the trees; but soon
all sight was obstructed amidst the trunks.  On the hither side, at first the bank was bare,
then fringed with alder-bushes, bending and dipping into the stream, which, farther on, flowed
through the midst of a forest of maple, beech, and other trees, its course growing wilder and
wilder as we proceeded.  For a considerable distance there was a causeway, built long ago of
logs, to drag lumber upon; it was now decayed and rotten, a red decay, sometimes sunken down
in the midst, here and there a knotty trunk stretching across, apparently sound.  The sun being
now low towards the west, a pleasant gloom and brightness were diffused through the forest,
spots of brightness scattered upon the branches, or thrown down in gold upon the last year's
leaves among the trees.  At last we came to where a dam had been built across the brook many
years ago, and was now gone to ruin, so as to make the spot look more solitary and wilder than
if man had never left vestiges of his toil there.  It was a framework of logs with a covering
of plank sufficient to obstruct the onward flow of the brook; but it found its way past the
side, and came foaming and struggling along among scattered rocks.  Above the dam there was
a broad and deep pool, one side of which was bordered by a precipitous wall of rocks, as smooth
as if hewn out and squared, and piled one upon another, above which rose the forest.  On the
other side there was still a gently shelving bank, and the shore was covered with tall trees,
among which I particularly remarked a stately pine, wholly devoid of bark, rising white in
aged and majestic ruin, thrusting out its barkless arms.  It must have stood there in death
many years, its own ghost.  Above the dam the brook flowed through the forest, a glistening
and babbling water-path, illuminated by the sun, which sent its rays almost straight along
its course.  It was as lovely and wild and peaceful as it could possibly have been a hundred
years ago; and the traces of labors of men long departed added a deeper peace to it.  I bathed
in the pool, and then pursued my way down beside the brook, growing dark with a pleasant gloom,
as the sun sank and the water became more shadowy.  B------ says that there was formerly a
tradition that the Indians used to go up this brook, and return, after a brief absence, with
large masses of lead, which they sold at the trading-stations in Augusta; whence there has
always been an idea that there is a lead-mine hereabouts.  Great toadstools were under the
trees, and some small ones as yellow and almost the size of a half-broiled yolk of an egg.
Strawberries were scattered along the brookside.

Dined at the hotel or Mansion House to-day.  Men were playing checkers in the parlor.  The
Marshal of Maine, a corpulent, jolly fellow, famed for humor.  A passenger left by the stage,
hiring an express onward.  A bottle of champagne was quaffed at the bar.

July 9th.--Went with B------ to pay a visit to the shanties of the Irish and Canadians.  He
says that they sell and exchange these small houses among themselves continually.  They may
be built in three or four days, and are valued at four or five dollars.  When the turf that
is piled against the walls of some of them becomes covered with grass, it makes quite a picturesque
object.  It was almost dusk--just candle-lighting time--when we visited them.  A young Frenchwoman,
with a baby in her arms, came to the door of one of them, smiling, and looking pretty and happy.
Her husband, a dark, black-haired, lively little fellow, caressed the child, laughing and singing
to it; and there was a red-bearded Irishman, who likewise fondled the little brat.  Then we
could hear them within the hut, gabbling merrily, and could see them moving about briskly in
the candlelight, through the window and open door.  An old Irishwoman sat in the door of another
hut, under the influence of an extra dose of rum,--she being an old lady of somewhat dissipated
habits.  She called to B------, and began to talk to him about her resolution not to give up
her house: for it is his design to get her out of it.  She is a true virago, and, though somewhat
restrained by respect for him, she evinced a sturdy design to remain here through the winter,
or at least for a considerable time longer.  He persisting, she took her stand in the doorway
of the hut, and stretched out her fist in a very Amazonian attitude.  "Nobody," quoth she,
"shall drive me out of this house, till my praties are out of the ground."  Then would she
wheedle and laugh and blarney, beginning in a rage, and ending as if she had been in jest.
Meanwhile her husband stood by very quiet, occasionally trying to still her; but it is to be
presumed, that, after our departure, they came to blows, it being a custom with the Irish husbands
and wives to settle their disputes with blows; and it is said the woman often proves the better
man.  The different families also have battles, and occasionally the Irish fight with the Canadians.
The latter, however, are much the more peaceable, never quarrelling among themselves, and seldom
with their neighbors. They are frugal, and often go back to Canada with considerable sums of
money.  B------ has gained much influence both with the Irish and the French,--with the latter,
by dint of speaking to them in their own language.  He is the umpire in their disputes, and
their adviser, and they look up to him as a protector and patron-friend.  I have been struck
to see with what careful integrity and wisdom he manages matters among them, hitherto having
known him only as a free and gay young man.  He appears perfectly to understand their general
character, of which he gives no very flattering description.  In these huts, less than twenty
feet square, he tells me that upwards of twenty people have sometimes been lodged.

A description of a young lady who had formerly been insane, and now felt the approach of a
new fit of madness.  She had been out to ride, had exerted herself much, and had been very
vivacious.  On her return, she sat down in a thoughtful and despondent attitude, looking very
sad, but one of the loveliest objects that ever were seen.  The family spoke to her, but she
made no answer, nor took the least notice; but still sat like a statue in her chair,--a statue
of melancholy and beauty.  At last they led her away to her chamber.

We went to meeting this forenoon.  I saw nothing remarkable, unless a little girl in the next
pew to us, three or four years old, who fell asleep, with her bead in the lap of her maid,
and looked very pretty: a picture of sleeping innocence.

July 11th, Tuesday.--A drive with B------ to Hallowell, yesterday, where we dined, and afterwards
to Gardiner.  The most curious object in this latter place was the elegant new mansion of ------.
It stands on the site of his former dwelling, which was destroyed by fire.

The new building was estimated to cost about thirty thousand dollars; but twice as much has
already been expended, and a great deal more will be required to complete it.  It is certainly
a splendid structure; the material, granite from the vicinity.  At the angles it has small,
circular towers; the portal is lofty and imposing.  Relatively to the general style of domestic
architecture in our country, it well deserves the name of castle or palace.  Its situation,
too, is fine, far retired from the public road, and attainable by a winding carriage-drive;
standing amid fertile fields, and with large trees in the vicinity. There is also a beautiful
view from the mansion, adown the Kennebec.

Beneath some of the large trees we saw the remains of circular seats, whereupon the family
used to sit before the former house was burned down. There was no one now in the vicinity of
the place, save a man and a yoke of oxen; and what he was about, I did not ascertain.  Mr.
------ at present resides in a small dwelling, little more than a cottage, beside the main
road, not far from the gateway which gives access to his palace.

At Gardiner, on the wharf, I witnessed the starting of the steamboat New England for Boston.
There was quite a collection of people, looking on or taking leave of passengers,--the steam
puffing,--stages arriving, full-freighted with ladies and gentlemen.  A man was one moment
too late; but running along the gunwale of a mud-scow, and jumping into a skiff, he was put
on board by a black fellow.  The dark cabin, wherein, descending from the sunshiny deck, it
was difficult to discern the furniture, looking-glasses, and mahogany wainscoting.  I met two
old college acquaintances, O------, who was going to Boston, and B------ with whom we afterwards
drank a glass of wine at the hotel.

B------, Mons. S------, and myself continue to live in the same style as heretofore.  We appear
mutually to be very well pleased with each other. Mons. S------ displays many comical qualities,
and manages to insure us several hearty laughs every morning and evening,--those being the
seasons when we meet.  I am going to take lessons from him in the pronunciation of French.
Of female society I see nothing.  The only petticoat that comes within our premises appertains
to Nancy, the pretty, dark-eyed maid-servant of the man who lives in the other part of the house.

On the road from Hallowell to Augusta we saw little booths, in two places, erected on the roadside,
where boys offered beer, apples, etc., for sale.  We passed an Irishwoman with a child in her
arms, and a heavy bundle, and afterwards an Irishman with a light bundle, sitting by the highway.
They were husband and wife; and B------ says that an Irishman and his wife, on their journeys,
do not usually walk side by side, but that the man gives the woman the heaviest burden to carry,
and walks on lightly ahead!

A thought comes into my mind: Which sort of house excites the most contemptuous feelings in
the beholder,--such a house as Mr.------'s, all circumstances considered, or the board-built
and turf-buttressed hovels of these wild Irish, scattered about as if they had sprung up like
mushrooms, in the dells and gorges, and along the banks of the river? Mushrooms, by the way,
spring up where the roots of an old tree are hidden under the ground.

Thursday, July 13th.--Two small Canadian boys came to our house yesterday, with strawberries
to sell.  It sounds strangely to hear children bargaining in French on the borders of Yankee-land.
Among other languages spoken hereabouts must be reckoned the wild Irish.  Some of the laborers
on the mill-dam can speak nothing else.  The intermixture of foreigners sometimes gives rise
to quarrels between them and the natives. As we were going to the village yesterday afternoon,
we witnessed the beginning of a quarrel between a Canadian and a Yankee,--the latter accusing
the former of striking his oxen.  B------ thrust himself between and parted them; but they
afterwards renewed their fray, and the Canadian, I believe, thrashed the Yankee soundly,--for
which he had to pay twelve dollars.  Yet he was but a little fellow.

Coming to the Mansion House about supper-time, we found somewhat of a concourse of people,
the Governor and Council being in session on the subject of the disputed territory.  The British
have lately imprisoned a man who was sent to take the census; and the Mainiacs are much excited
on the subject.  They wish the Governor to order out the militia at once, and take possession
of the territory with the strong hand.  There was a British army-captain at the Mansion House;
and an idea was thrown out that it would be as well to seize upon him as a hostage.  I would,
for the joke's sake, that it had been done.  Personages at the tavern: the Governor, somewhat
stared after as he walked through the bar-room; Councillors seated about, sitting on benches
near the bar, or on the stoop along the front of the house; the Adjutant-General of the State;
two young Blue-Noses, from Canada or the Provinces; a gentleman "thumbing his hat" for liquor,
or perhaps playing off the trick of the "honest landlord" on some stranger.  The decanters
and wine-bottles on the move, and the beer and soda founts pouring out continual streams, with
a whiz. Stage-drivers, etc., asked to drink with the aristocracy, and mine host treating and
being treated.  Rubicund faces; breaths odorous of brandy-and-water.  Occasionally the pop
of a champagne cork.

Returned home, and took a lesson in French of Mons. S------.  I like him very much, and have
seldom met with a more honest, simple, and apparently so well-principled a man; which good
qualities I impute to his being, by the father's side, of German blood.  He looks more like
a German--or, as he says, like a Swiss--than a Frenchman, having very light hair and a light
complexion, and not a French expression.  He is a vivacious little fellow, and wonderfully
excitable to mirth; and it is truly a sight to see him laugh;--every feature partakes of his
movement, and even his whole body shares in it, as he rises and dances about the room.  He
has great variety of conversation, commensurate with his experiences in life, and sometimes
will talk Spanish, ore rotundo,--sometimes imitate the Catholic priests, chanting Latin songs
for the dead, in deep, gruff, awful tones, producing really a very strong impression,--then
he will break out into a light, French song, perhaps of love, perhaps of war, acting it out,
as if on the stage of a theatre: all this intermingled with continual fun, excited by the incidents
of the passing moment.  He has Frenchified all our names, calling B------ Monsieur Du Pont,
myself M. de L'Aubepine, and himself M. le Berger, and all, Knights of the Round-Table.  And
we live in great harmony and brotherhood, as queer a life as anybody leads, and as queer a
set as may be found anywhere.  In his more serious intervals, he talks philosophy and deism,
and preaches obedience to the law of reason and morality; which law he says (and I believe
him) he has so well observed, that, notwithstanding his residence in dissolute countries, he
has never yet been sinful.  He wishes me, eight or nine weeks hence, to accompany him on foot
to Quebec, and then to Niagara and New York.  I should like it well, if my circumstances and
other considerations would permit.  What pleases much in Mons. S------ is the simple and childlike
enjoyment he finds in trifles, and the joy with which he speaks of going back to his own country,
away from the dull Yankees, who here misunderstand and despise him.  Yet I have never heard
him speak harshly of them.  I rather think that B------ and I will be remembered by him with
more pleasure than anybody else in the country; for we have sympathized with him, and treated
him kindly, and like a gentleman and an equal; and he comes to us at night as to home and friends.

I went down to the river to-day to see B------ fish for salmon with a fly,--a hopeless business;
for he says that only one instance has been known in the United States of salmon being taken
otherwise than with a net.  A few chubs were all the fruit of his piscatory efforts.  But while
looking at the rushing and rippling stream, I saw a great fish, some six feet long and thick
in proportion, suddenly emerge at whole length, turn a somerset, and then vanish again beneath
the water.  It was of a glistening, yellowish brown, with its fins all spread, and looking
very strange and startling, darting out so lifelike from the black water, throwing itself fully
into the bright sunshine, and then lost to sight and to pursuit.  I saw also a long, flat-bottomed
boat go up the river, with a brisk wind, and against a strong stream.  Its sails were of curious
construction: a long mast, with two sails below, one on each side of the boat, and a broader
one surmounting them.  The sails were colored brown, and appeared like leather or skins, but
were really cloth.  At a distance, the vessel looked like, or at least I compared it to, a
monstrous water-insect skimming along the river.  If the sails had been crimson or yellow,
the resemblance would have been much closer.  There was a pretty spacious raised cabin in the
after part of the boat.  It moved along lightly, and disappeared between the woody banks. 
These boats have the two parallel sails attached to the same yard, and some have two sails,
one surmounting the other.  They trade to Waterville and thereabouts,--names, as "Paul Pry,"
on their sails.

Saturday, July 15th.--Went with B------ yesterday to visit several Irish shanties, endeavoring
to find out who had stolen some rails of a fence. At the first door at which we knocked (a
shanty with an earthen mound heaped against the wall, two or three feet thick), the inmates
were not up, though it was past eight o'clock.  At last a middle-aged woman showed herself,
half dressed, and completing her toilet.  Threats were made of tearing down her house; for
she is a lady of very indifferent morals, and sells rum.  Few of these people are connected
with the mill-dam,--or, at least, many are not so, but have intruded themselves into the vacant
huts which were occupied by the mill-dam people last year.  In two or three places hereabouts
there is quite a village of these dwellings, with a clay and board chimney, or oftener an old
barrel, smoked and charred with the fire.  Some of their roofs are covered with sods, and appear
almost subterranean.  One of the little hamlets stands on both sides of a deep dell, wooded
and bush-grown, with a vista, as it were, into the heart of a wood in one direction, and to
the broad, sunny river in the other: there was a little rivulet, crossed by a plank, at the
bottom of the dell.  At two doors we saw very pretty and modest-looking young women,-- one
with a child in her arms.  Indeed, they all have innumerable little children; and they are
invariably in good health, though always dirty of face.  They come to the door while their
mothers are talking with the visitors, standing straight up on their bare legs, with their
little plump bodies protruding, in one hand a small tin saucepan, and in the other an iron
spoon, with unwashed mouths, looking as independent as any child or grown person in the land.
They stare unabashed, but make no answer when spoken to.  "I've no call to your fence, Misser
B------."  It seems strange that a man should have the right, unarmed with any legal instrument,
of tearing down the dwelling-houses of a score of families, and driving the inmates forth without
a shelter.  Yet B------ undoubtedly has this right; and it is not a little striking to see
how quietly these people contemplate the probability of his exercising it,--resolving, indeed,
to burrow in their holes as long as may be, yet caring about as little for an ejectment as
those who could find a tenement anywhere, and less.  Yet the women, amid all the trials of
their situation, appear to have kept up the distinction between virtue and vice; those who
can claim the former will not associate with the latter.  When the women travel with young
children, they carry the baby slung at their backs, and sleeping quietly.  The dresses of the
new-comers are old-fashioned, making them look aged before their time.

Monsieur S------ shaving himself yesterday morning.  He was in excellent spirits, and could
not keep his tongue or body still, more than long enough to make two or three consecutive strokes
at his beard.  Then he would turn, flourishing his razor and grimacing joyously, enacting droll
antics, breaking out into scraps and verses of drinking-songs, "A boire! a boire!"--then laughing
heartily, and crying, "Vive la gaite!" then resuming his task, looking into the glass with
grave face, on which, however, a grin would soon break out anew, and all his pranks would be
repeated with variations.  He turned this foolery to philosophy, by observing that mirth contributed
to goodness of heart, and to make us love our fellow-creatures.  Conversing with him in the
evening, he affirmed, with evident belief in the truth of what he said, that he would have
no objection, except that it would be a very foolish thing, to expose his whole heart, his
whole inner man, to the view of the world. Not that there would not be much evil discovered
there; but, as he was conscious of being in a state of mental and moral improvement, working
out his progress onward, he would not shrink from such a scrutiny.  This talk was introduced
by his mentioning the "Minister's Black Veil," which he said he had seen translated into French,
as an exercise, by a Miss Appleton of Bangor.

Saw by the river-side, late in the afternoon, one of the above-described boats going into the
stream with the water rippling at the prow, from the strength of the current and of the boat's
motion.  By and by comes down a raft, perhaps twenty yards long, guided by two men, one at
each end,--the raft itself of boards sawed at Waterville, and laden with square bundles of
shingles and round bundles of clapboards.  "Friend," says one man, "how is the tide now?"--this
being important to the onward progress. They make fast to a tree, in order to wait for the
tide to rise a little higher.  It would be pleasant enough to float down the Kennebec on one
of these rafts, letting the river conduct you onward at its own pace, leisurely displaying
to you all the wild or ordered beauties along its banks, and perhaps running you aground in
some peculiarly picturesque spot, for your longer enjoyment of it.  Another object, perhaps,
is a solitary man paddling himself down the river in a small canoe, the light, lonely touch
of his paddle in the water making the silence seem deeper. Every few minutes a sturgeon leaps
forth, sometimes behind you, so that you merely hear the splash, and, turning hastily around,
see nothing but the disturbed water.  Sometimes he darts straight on end out of a quiet black
spot on which your eyes happen to be fixed, and, when even his tail is clear of the surface,
he falls down on his side and disappears.

On the river-bank, an Irishwoman washing some clothes, surrounded by her children, whose babbling
sounds pleasantly along the edge of the shore; and she also answers in a sweet, kindly, and
cheerful voice, though an immoral woman, and without the certainty of bread or shelter from
day to day.  An Irishman sitting angling on the brink with an alder pole and a clothes-line.
At frequent intervals, the scene is suddenly broken by a loud report like thunder, rolling
along the banks, echoing and reverberating afar.  It is a blast of rocks.  Along the margin,
sometimes sticks of timber made fast, either separately or several together; stones of some
size, varying the pebbles and sand; a clayey spot, where a shallow brook runs into the river,
not with a deep outlet, but finding its way across the bank in two or three single runlets.
Looking upward into the deep glen whence it issues, you see its shady current. Elsewhere, a
high acclivity, with the beach between it and the river, the ridge broken and caved away, so
that the earth looks fresh and yellow, and is penetrated by the nests of birds.  An old, shining
tree-trunk, half in and half out of the water.  An island of gravel, long and narrow, in the
centre of the river.  Chips, blocks of wood, slabs, and other scraps of lumber, strewed along
the beach; logs drifting down.  The high bank covered with various trees and shrubbery, and,
in one place, two or three Irish shanties.

Thursday, July 20th.--A drive yesterday afternoon to a pond in the vicinity of Augusta, about
nine miles off, to fish for white perch. Remarkables: the steering of the boat through the
crooked, labyrinthine brook, into the open pond,--the man who acted as pilot,--his talking
with B------ about politics, the bank, the iron money of "a king who came to reign, in Greece,
over a city called Sparta,"--his advice to B------ to come amongst the laborers on the mill-dam,
because it stimulated them "to see a man grinning amongst them."  The man took hearty tugs
at a bottle of good Scotch whiskey, and became pretty merry.  The fish caught were the yellow
perch, which are not esteemed for eating; the white perch, a beautiful, silvery, round-backed
fish, which bites eagerly, runs about with the line while being pulled up, makes good sport
for the angler, and an admirable dish; a great chub; and three horned pouts, which swallow
the hook into their lowest entrails.  Several dozen fish were taken in an hour or two, and
then we returned to the shop where we had left our horse and wagon, the pilot very eccentric
behind us.  It was a small, dingy shop, dimly lighted by a single inch of candle, faintly disclosing
various boxes, barrels standing on end, articles hanging from the ceiling; the proprietor at
the counter, whereon appear gin and brandy, respectively contained in a tin pint-measure and
an earthenware jug, with two or three tumblers beside them, out of which nearly all the party
drank; some coming up to the counter frankly, others lingering in the background, waiting to
be pressed, two paying for their own liquor and withdrawing.  B------ treated them twice round.
The pilot, after drinking his brandy, gave a history of our fishing expedition, and how many
and how large fish we caught.  B------ making acquaintances and renewing them, and gaining
great credit for liberality and free-heartedness,--two or three boys looking on and listening
to the talk,--the shopkeeper smiling behind his counter, with the tarnished tin scales beside
him,--the inch of candle burning down almost to extinction. So we got into our wagon, with
the fish, and drove to Robinson's tavern, almost five miles off, where we supped and passed
the night.  In the bar-room was a fat old countryman on a journey, and a quack doctor of the
vicinity, and an Englishman with a peculiar accent.  Seeing B------'s jointed and brass-mounted
fishing-pole, he took it for a theodolite, and supposed that we had been on a surveying expedition.
At supper, which consisted of bread, butter, cheese, cake, doughnuts, and gooseberry-pie, we
were waited upon by a tall, very tall woman, young and maiden-looking, yet with a strongly
outlined and determined face.  Afterwards we found her to be the wife of mine host.  She poured
out our tea, came in when we rang the table-bell to refill our cups, and again retired.  While
at supper, the fat old traveller was ushered through the room into a contiguous bedroom.  My
own chamber, apparently the best in the house, had its walls ornamented with a small, gilt-framed,
foot-square looking-glass, with a hairbrush hanging beneath it; a record of the deaths of the
family written on a black tomb, in an engraving, where a father, mother, and child were represented
in a graveyard, weeping over said tomb; the mourners dressed in black, country-cut clothes;
the engraving executed in Vermont.  There was also a wood engraving of the Declaration of Independence,
with fac-similes of the autographs; a portrait of the Empress Josephine, and another of Spring.
In the two closets of this chamber were mine hostess's cloak, best bonnet, and go-to-meeting
apparel.  There was a good bed, in which I slept tolerably well, and, rising betimes, ate breakfast,
consisting of some of our own fish, and then started for Augusta.  The fat old traveller had
gone off with the harness of our wagon, which the hostler had put on to his horse by mistake.
The tavern-keeper gave us his own harness, and started in pursuit of the old man, who was probably
aware of the exchange, and well satisfied with it. 

I have wronged no man in word or deed, and I have daily worshipped the Lord; minutely performing
all the ceremonies thereto needful."

"Nay," said the lady, "all this thou mightest have done, and more, and yet be in the power of the
Demons. But time passes, for I hear the foot of my husband mounting the stair. There is one chance
of thine escape."

"What is that? O lady of beauty?" said the agonized Rabbi.

"Eat not, drink not, nor take fee or reward while here; and as long as thou canst do thus, the Mazikin
have no power over thee, dead or alive. Have courage, and persevere."

As she ceased from speaking, her husband entered the room, followed by the nurse, who bore all
things requisite for the ministration of the Rabbi. With a heavy heart he performed his duty, and
the child was numbered among the faithful. But when, as usual, at the conclusion of the ceremony,
the wine was handed round to be tasted by the child, the mother, and the Rabbi, he refused it when
it came to him, saying:--

"Spare me, my lord, for I have made a vow that I fast this day; and I will not eat, neither will
I drink."

"Be it as thou pleasest," said the Demon, "I will not that thou shouldst break thy vow;" and he
laughed aloud.

So the poor Rabbi was taken into a chamber, looking into a garden, where he passed the remainder
of the night and the day weeping, and praying to the Lord that he would deliver him from the city of
Demons. But when the twelfth hour came, and the sun was set, the Prince of the Mazikin came
again unto him, and said:--

"Eat now, I pray thee, for the day of thy vow is past;" and he set meat before him.

"Pardon again thy servant, my lord," said Jochonan, "in this thing. I have another vow for this
day also. I pray thee be not angry with thy servant."

"I am not angry," said the Demon, "be it as thou pleasest; I respect
thy vow;" and he laughed louder than before.

So the Rabbi sat another day in his chamber by the garden, weeping and praying. And when the sun had
gone behind the hills, the Prince of the Mazikin again stood before him, and said:--

"Eat now, for thou must be an hungered. It was a sore vow of thine;" and he offered him daintier
meats.

And Jochonan felt a strong desire to eat, but he prayed inwardly to the Lord, and the temptation
passed, and he answered:--

"Excuse thy servant yet a third time, my lord, that I eat not. I have renewed my vow."

"Be it so, then," said the other; "arise, and follow me."

The Demon took a torch in his hand, and led the Rabbi through winding passages of his palace, to
the door of a lofty chamber, which he opened with a key that he took from a niche in the wall. On
entering the room, Jochonan saw that it was of solid silver--floor, ceiling, walls, even to the threshold
and the door-posts. And the curiously carved roof, and borders of the ceiling, shone, in the
torch-light, as if they were the fanciful work of frost. In the midst were heaps of silver
money, piled up in immense urns of the same metal, even over the brim.

"Thou hast done me a serviceable act, Rabbi," said the Demon--"take of these what thou pleasest;
ay, were it the whole."

"I cannot, my lord," said Jochonan. "I was adjured by thee to come hither in the name of God; and
in that name I came, not for fee or for reward."

"Follow me," said the prince of the Mazikin; and Jochonan did so, into an inner chamber.

It was of gold, as the other was of silver. Its golden roof was supported by pillars and pilasters
of gold, resting upon a golden floor. The treasures of the kings of the earth would not purchase
one of the four-and-twenty vessels of golden coins, which were disposed in six rows along the
room. No wonder! for they were filled by the constant labours of the Demons of the mine. The
heart of Jochonan was moved by avarice, when he saw them shining in yellow light, like the autumnal
sun, as they reflected the beams of the torch. But God enabled him to persevere.

"These are thine," said the Demon; "one of the vessels which thou beholdest would make thee richest
of the sons of men--and I give thee them all."

But Jochonan refused again; and the Prince of the Mazikin opened the door of a third chamber,
which was called the Hall of Diamonds. When the Rabbi entered, he screamed aloud, and put his
hands over his eyes; for the lustre of the jewels dazzled him, as if he had looked upon the noon-day
sun. In vases of agate were heaped diamonds beyond enumeration, the smallest of which was larger
than a pigeon's egg. On alabaster tables lay amethysts, topazes, rubies, beryls, and all other
precious stones, wrought by the hands of skilful artists, beyond power of computation. The room was
lighted by a carbuncle, which, from the end of the hall, poured its ever-living light, brighter
than the rays of noontide, but cooler than the gentle radiance of the dewy moon. This was a sore
trial on the Rabbi; but he was strengthened from above, and he refused again.

"Thou knowest me then, I perceive, O Jochonan, son of Ben-David," said the Prince of the Mazikin;
"I am a Demon who would tempt thee to destruction. As thou hast withstood so far, I tempt
thee no more. Thou hast done a service which, though I value it not, is acceptable in the
sight of her whose love is dearer to me than the light of life. Sad has been that love to thee,
my Rebecca! Why should I do that which would make thy cureless grief more grievous? You have
yet another chamber to see," said he to Jochonan, who had closed his eyes, and was praying fervently
to the Lord, beating his breast.

Far different from the other chambers, the one into which the Rabbi was next introduced, was
a mean and paltry apartment, without furniture. On its filthy walls hung innumerable bunches
of rusty keys, of all sizes, disposed without order. Among them, to the astonishment of Jochonan,
hung the keys of his own house, those which he had put to hide when he came on this miserable journey,
and he gazed upon them intently.

"What dost thou see," said the Demon, "that makes thee look so eagerly? Can he who has refused
silver, and gold, and diamonds, be moved by a paltry bunch of rusty iron?"

"They are mine own, my lord," said the Rabbi, "them will I take, if they be offered me."

"Take them, then," said the Demon, putting them into his hand;--"thou may'st depart. But, Rabbi,
open not thy house only, when thou returnest to Cairo, but thy heart also. That thou didst not
open it before, was that which gave me power over thee. It was well that thou didst one act of
charity in coming with me without reward, for it has been thy salvation. Be no more Rabbi Jochonan
the miser."

The Rabbi bowed to the ground, and blessed the Lord for his escape. "But how," said he, "am
I to return, for I know not the way?"

"Close thine eyes," said the Demon. He did so, and in the space of a moment, heard the voice
of the Prince of Mazikin ordering him to open them again. And, behold, when he opened them, he stood
in the centre of his own chamber, in his house at Cairo, with the
keys in his hand.

When he recovered from his surprise, and had offered thanksgivings to God, he opened his house,
and his heart also. He gave alms to the poor, he cheered the heart of the widow, and lightened
the destitution of the orphan. His hospitable board was open to the stranger, and his purse
was at the service of all who needed to share it. His life was a perpetual act of benevolence;
and the blessings showered upon him by all, were returned bountifully upon him by the hand of God.

But
people wondered, and said, "Is not this the man who was called Rabbi Jochonan the miser? What
hath made the change?"

And it became a saying in Cairo. When it came to the ears of the Rabbi, he called his friends
together, and he avowed his former love of gold, and the danger to which it had exposed him;
relating all which has been above told, in the hall of the new palace that he built by the
side of the river, on the left hand, as thou goest down by the course of the great stream.
And wise men, who were scribes, wrote it down from his mouth, for
the memory of mankind, that they might profit thereby.

And a venerable man, with a beard of snow, who had read it in these books, and at whose feet I
sat, that I might learn the wisdom of the old time, told it to me. And I write it in the tongue
of England, the merry and the free, on the tenth day of the month Nisan, in the year, according
to the lesser computation, five hundred ninety and seven, that thou may'st learn good thereof.
If not, the fault be upon thee.

* * * * *

STANZAS

Written on seeing Flags and other Ensigns of War, hanging in a Country Church.

BY ALARIC A. WATTS.

Oh! why amid this hallowed scene. Should signs of mortal feud be found; Why seek with such vain
gauds to wean Our thoughts from holier relics 'round? More fitting emblems here abound Of glory's
bright, unfading wreath;-- Conquests, with purer triumphs crowned;--
Proud victories over Sin and Death!

Of these how many records rise Before my chastened spirit now; Memorials, pointing to the skies,
Of Christian battles fought below. What need of yon stern things to shew That darker deeds have oft
been done?-- Is't not enough for Man to know He lives but through the blood of ONE!

And thou, mild delegate of God, Whose words of balm, and guiding light.

Would lead us, from earth's drear abode, To worlds with bliss for ever bright,-- What have the
spoils of mortal fight To do with themes 'tis thine to teach? Faith's saving grace--each sacred
rite Thou know'st to practice as to preach!

The blessings of the contrite heart, Thy bloodless conquests best proclaim; The tears from sinners'
eyes that start, Are meetest records of thy fame. The glory that may grace thy name From loftier
triumphs sure must spring;-- The grateful thoughts thy worth may claim, Trophies like these can
never bring!

Then, wherefore on this sainted spot, With peace and love, and hope imbued,-- Some vision calm
of bliss to blot, And turn our thoughts on deeds of blood,-- Should signs of battle-fields
intrude:-- Man wants no trophies here of strife; His Oriflamme--Faith unsubdued;-- His Panoply--a
spotless life!

* * * * *

THE BRITISH SAILOR'S SONG.

BY ALLAN CUNNINGHAM.

Away with bayonet and with lance, With corslet, casque and sword; Our island king no war-horse
needs, For on the sea he's lord. His throne's the war-ship's lofty deck, His sceptre is the
mast; His kingdom is the rolling wave, His servant is the blast. His anchor's up, fair Freedom's
flag Proud to the mast he nails; Tyrants and conquerors bow your heads, For there your terror
sails.

I saw fierce Prussia's chargers stand, Her children's sharp swords out;-- Proud Austria's bright
spurs streaming red, When rose the closing shout. But soon the steeds rushed masterless, By
tower and town and wood; For lordly France her fiery youth Poured o'er them like a flood. Go,
hew the gold spurs from your heels, And let your steeds run free; Then come to our unconquered
decks, And learn to reign at sea.

Behold you black and battered hulk That slumbers on the tide, There is no sound from stem to stern,
For peace has plucked her pride. The masts are down, the cannon mute, She shews nor sheet nor
sail; Nor starts forth with the seaward breeze, Nor answers shout nor hail. Her merry men with
all their mirth, Have sought some other shore; And she with all her glory on, Shall rule the sea
no more.

So landsmen speak.--Lo! her top-masts Are quivering in the sky Her sails are spread, her anchor's
raised, There sweeps she gallant by. A thousand warriors fill her decks; Within her painted side
The thunder sleeps--man's might has nought Can match or mar her pride.

In victor glory goes she forth, Her stainless flag flies free, Kings of the earth come and behold
How Britain reigns on sea!

When on your necks the armed foot Of fierce Napoleon trod; And all was his save the wide sea,
Where we triumphant rode: He launched his terror and his strength, Our sea-born pride to tame;
They came--they got the Nelson-touch, And vanished as they came. Go, hang your bridles in your
halls, And set your war-steels free: The world has one unconquer'd king, And he reigns on the
sea!

Mr. Watts, the editor, besides the stanzas we have quoted, has contributed indeed less than
other editors, in similar works, and much less than we could wish, for we are sincere admirers
of his plaintive muse. His preface should be read with due attention, for it is calculated
to set the public right on the fate and merit of numberless works.

* * * * *

THE FORGET ME NOT.

The avant-courier of the "Annuals" is of equal literary merit with its precursors; but not
quite equal in its engravings--The Sisters' Dream, by Davenport, from a drawing by Corbould,
is, however, placidly interesting; the Bridal Morning, by Finden, is also a pleasing scene; and
the Seventh Plague of Egypt, by Le Keux, from a design by Martin, though in miniature, is terrific
and sublime. In the literary department we especially notice the Sun-Dial, a pensive tale,
by Delta, but too long for extract; and the Sky-Lark by the Ettrick Shepherd, soaring with
all the freshness and fancy of that extraordinary genius.

* * * * *

As a relief, we quote the following characteristic sketch by Miss
Mitford:--

A COUNTRY APOTHECARY.

One of the most important personages
in a small country town is the apothecary. He takes rank next after
the rector and the attorney, and before the curate; and could be much
less easily dispensed with than either of those worthies, not merely
as holding "fate and physic" in his hand, but as the general, and
as it were official, associate, adviser, comforter, and friend, of
all ranks and all ages, of high and low, rich and poor, sick and well.
I am no despiser of dignities; but twenty emperors shall be less intensely
missed in their wide dominions, than such a man as my friend John
Hallett in his own small sphere.

The spot which was favoured with
the residence of this excellent person was the small town of Hazelby,
in Dorsetshire; a pretty little place, where every thing seems at
a stand-still. It was originally built in the shape of the letter
T; a long broad market-place (still so called, although the market
be gone) serving for the perpendicular stem, traversed by a straight,
narrow, horizontal street, to answer for the top line. Not one addition
has occurred to interrupt this architectural regularity, since, fifty
years ago, a rich London tradesman built, at the west end of the horizontal
street, a wide-fronted single house, with two low wings, iron palisades
before, and a fish-pond opposite, which still goes by the name of
New Place, and is balanced, at the east end of the street, by an erection
of nearly the same date, a large square dingy mansion enclosed within
high walls, inhabited by three maiden sisters, and called, probably
by way of nickname, the Nunnery. New Place being on the left of the
road, and the Nunnery on the right, the T has now something of the
air of the italic capital T, turned up at one end and down at the
other. The latest improvements are the bow-window in the market-place,
commanding the pavement both ways, which the late brewer, Andrews,
threw out in his snug parlour some twenty years back, and where he
used to sit smoking, with the sash up, in summer afternoons, enjoying
himself, good man; and the great room, at the Swan, originally built
by the speculative publican, Joseph Allwright, for an assembly-room.
That speculation did not answer. The assembly, in spite of canvassing
and patronage, and the active exertions of all the young ladies in
the neighbourhood, dwindled away, and died at the end of two winters:
then it became a club-room for the hunt; but the hunt quarrelled with
Joseph's cookery: then a market-room for the farmers; but the farmers
(it was in the high-price time) quarrelled with Joseph's wine: then
it was converted into the magistrate's room--the bench; but the bench
and the market went away together, and there was an end of justicing:
then Joseph tried the novel attraction (to borrow a theatrical phrase)
of a billiard-table; but, alas! that novelty succeeded as ill as if
it had been theatrical; there were not customers enough to pay the
marker: at last, it has merged finally in that unconscious receptacle
of pleasure and pain, a post-office; although Hazelby has so little
to do with traffic of any sort--even the traffic of correspondence--that
a saucy mail-coach will often carry on its small bag, and as often
forget to call for the London bag in return.

In short, Hazelby is
an insignificant place;--my readers will look for it in vain in the
map of Dorsetshire;--it is omitted, poor dear town!--left out by the
map-maker with as little remorse as a dropped letter!--and it is also
an old-fashioned place. It has not even a cheap shop for female gear.
Every thing in the one store which it boasts, kept by Martha Deane,
linen-draper and haberdasher, is dear and good, as things were wont
to be. You may actually get there thread made of flax, from the gouty,
uneven, clumsy, shiny fabric, ycleped whited-brown, to the delicate
commodity of Lisle, used for darning muslin. I think I was never more
astonished, from the mere force of habit, than when, on asking for
thread, I was presented, instead of the pretty lattice-wound balls,
or snowy reels of cotton, with which that demand is usually answered,
with a whole drawerful of skeins peeping from their blue papers --such
skeins as in my youth a thrifty maiden would draw into the nicely-stitched
compartments of that silken repository, a housewife, or fold into
a congeries of graduated thread-papers, "fine by degrees, and beautifully
less." The very literature of Hazelby is doled out at the pastry cook's,
in a little one-windowed shop kept by Matthew Wise. Tarts occupy one
end of the counter, and reviews the other; whilst the shelves are
parcelled out between books, and dolls, and ginger, bread. It is a
question, by which of his trades poor Matthew gains least; he is so
shabby, so threadbare, and so starved.

Such a town would hardly have
known what to do with a highly informed and educated surgeon, such
as one now generally sees in that most liberal profession. My friend,
John Hallett, suited it exactly. His predecessor, Mr. Simon Saunders,
had been a small, wrinkled, spare old gentleman, with a short cough
and a thin voice, who always seemed as if he needed an apothecary
himself. He wore generally a full suit of drab, a flaxen wig of the
sort called a Bob Jerom, and a very tight muslin stock; a costume
which he had adopted in his younger days in imitation of the most
eminent physician of the next city, and continued to the time of his
death. Perhaps the cough might have been originally an imitation also,
ingrafted on the system by habit. It had a most unsatisfactory sound,
and seemed more like a trick than a real effort of nature. His talk
was civil, prosy, and fidgetty: much addicted to small scandal, and
that kind of news which passes under the denomination of tittle-tattle,
he was sure to tell one half of the town where the other drank tea,
and recollected the blancmanges and jellies on a supper-table, or
described a new gown, with as much science and unction as if he had
been used to make jellies and wear gowns in his own person. Certain
professional peculiarities might have favoured the supposition. His
mode of practice was exactly that popularly attributed to old women.
He delighted in innocent remedies--manna, magnesia, and camphor julep;
never put on a blister in his life; and would sooner, from pure complaisance,
let a patient die, than administer an unpalatable prescription.

So
qualified, to say nothing of his gifts in tea-drinking, cassino, and
quadrille (whist was too many for him), his popularity could not be
questioned. When he expired, all Hazelby mourned. The lamentation
was general. The women of every degree (to borrow a phrase from that
great phrase-monger, Horace Walpole) "cried quarts;" and the procession
to the churchyard--that very churchyard to which he had himself attended
so many of his patients--was now followed by all of them that remained
alive.  The other
I tried to feed, and sometimes, when a morsel of bread was thrust into its open mouth, it would
swallow it.  But it appeared to suffer very much, vociferating loudly when disturbed, and panting,
in a sluggish agony, with eyes closed, or half opened, when let alone.  It distressed me a
good deal; and I felt relieved, though somewhat shocked, when B------ put an end to its misery
by squeezing its head and throwing it out of the window.  They were of a slate-color, and might,
I suppose, have been able to shift for themselves.--The other day a little yellow bird flew
into one of the empty rooms, of which there are half a dozen on the lower floor, and could
not find his way out again, flying at the glass of the windows, instead of at the door, thumping
his head against the panes or against the ceiling.  I drove him into the entry and chased him
from end to end, endeavoring to make him fly through one of the open doors.  He would fly at
the circular light over the door, clinging to the casement, sometimes alighting on one of the
two glass lamps, or on the cords that suspended them, uttering an affrighted and melancholy
cry whenever I came near and flapped my handkerchief, and appearing quite tired and sinking
into despair.  At last he happened to fly low enough to pass through the door, and immediately
vanished into the gladsome sunshine.--Ludicrous situation of a man, drawing his chaise down
a sloping bank, to wash in the river.  The chaise got the better of him, and, rushing downward
as if it were possessed, compelled him to run at full speed, and drove him up to his chin into
the water.  A singular instance, that a chaise may run away with a man without a horse!

Saturday, August 12th.--Left Augusta a week ago this morning for ------. Nothing particular
in our drive across the country.  Fellow-passenger a Boston dry-goods dealer, travelling to
collect bills.  At many of the country shops he would get out, and show his unwelcome visage.
In the tavern, prints from Scripture, varnished and on rollers,--such as the Judgment of Christ;
also a droll set of colored engravings of the story of the Prodigal Son, the figures being
clad in modern costume,--or, at least, that of not more than half a century ago.  The father,
a grave, clerical person, with a white wig and black broadcloth suit; the son, with a cocked
hat and laced clothes, drinking wine out of a glass, and caressing a woman in fashionable dress.
At ------ a nice, comfortable boarding-house tavern, without a bar or any sort of wines or
spirits.  An old lady from Boston, with her three daughters, one of whom was teaching music,
and the other two schoolmistresses.  A frank, free, mirthful daughter of the landlady, about
twenty-four years old, between whom and myself there immediately sprang up a flirtation, which
made us both feel rather melancholy when we parted on Tuesday morning.  Music in the evening,
with a song by a rather pretty, fantastic little mischief of a brunette, about eighteen years
old, who has married within a year, and spent the last summer in a trip to the Springs and
elsewhere.  Her manner of walking is by jerks, with a quiver, as if she were made of calves-feet
jelly.  I talk with everybody: to Mrs. T------ good sense,--to Mary, good sense, with a mixture
of fun,--to Mrs. G------, sentiment, romance, and nonsense.

Walked with ------ to see General Knox's old mansion,--a large, rusty-looking edifice of wood,
with some grandeur in the architecture, standing on the banks of the river, close by the site
of an old burial-ground, and near where an ancient fort had been erected for defence against
the French and Indians.  General Knox once owned a square of thirty miles in this part of the
country, and he wished to settle it with a tenantry, after the fashion of English gentlemen.
He would permit no edifice to be erected within a certain distance of his mansion.  His patent
covered, of course, the whole present town of Waldoborough and divers other flourishing commercial
and country villages, and would have been of incalculable value could it have remained unbroken
to the present time.  But the General lived in grand style, and received throngs of visitors
from foreign parts, and was obliged to part with large tracts of his possessions, till now
there is little left but the ruinous mansion and the ground immediately around it.  His tomb
stands near the house,--a spacious receptacle, an iron door at the end of a turf-covered mound,
and surmounted by an obelisk of marble.  There are inscriptions to the memory of several of
his family; for he had many children, all of whom are now dead, except one daughter, a widow
of fifty, recently married to Hon. John H------.  There is a stone fence round the monument.
On the outside of this are the gravestones, and large, flat tombstones of the ancient burial-ground,--the
tombstones being of red freestone, with vacant spaces, formerly inlaid with slate, on which
were the inscriptions, and perhaps coats-of-arms.  One of these spaces was in the shape of
a heart. The people were very wrathful that the General should have laid out his grounds over
this old burial-place; and he dared never throw down the gravestones, though his wife, a haughty
English lady, often teased him to do so.  But when the old General was dead, Lady Knox (as
they called her) caused them to be prostrated, as they now lie.  She was a woman of violent
passions, and so proud an aristocrat, that, as long as she lived, she would never enter any
house in the town except her own.  When a married daughter was ill, she used to go in her carriage
to the door, and send up to inquire how she did.  The General was personally very popular;
but his wife ruled him.  The house and its vicinity, and the whole tract covered by Knox's
patent, may be taken as an illustration of what must be the result of American schemes of aristocracy.
It is not forty years since this house was built, and Knox was in his glory; but now the house
is all in decay, while within a stone's-throw of it there is a street of smart white edifices
of one and two stories, occupied chiefly by thriving mechanics, which has been laid out where
Knox meant to have forests and parks.  On the banks of the river, where he intended to have
only one wharf for his own West Indian vessels and yacht, there are two wharves, with stores
and a lime kiln.  Little appertains to the mansion except the tomb and the old burial-ground,
and the old fort.

The descendants are all poor, and the inheritance was merely sufficient to make a dissipated
and drunken fellow of the only one of the old General's sons who survived to middle age.  The
man's habits were as bad as possible as long as he had any money; but when quite ruined, he
reformed.  The daughter, the only survivor among Knox's children (herself childless), is a
mild, amiable woman, therein totally differing from her mother.  Knox, when he first visited
his estate, arriving in a vessel, was waited upon by a deputation of the squatters, who had
resolved to resist him to the death.  He received them with genial courtesy, made them dine
with him aboard the vessel, and sent them back to their constituents in great love and admiration
of him.  He used to have a vessel running to Philadelphia, I think, and bringing him all sorts
of delicacies.  His way of raising money was to give a mortgage on his estate of a hundred
thousand dollars at a time, and receive that nominal amount in goods, which he would immediately
sell at auction for perhaps thirty thousand.  He died by a chicken-bone.  Near the house are
the remains of a covered way, by which the French once attempted to gain admittance into the
fort; but the work caved in and buried a good many of them, and the rest gave up the siege.
There was recently an old inhabitant living who remembered when the people used to reside in
the fort.

Owl's Head,--a watering-place, terminating a point of land, six or seven miles from Thomaston.
A long island shuts out the prospect of the sea. Hither coasters and fishing-smacks run in
when a storm is anticipated. Two fat landlords, both young men, with something of a contrast
in their dispositions; one of them being a brisk, lively, active, jesting, fat man; the other
more heavy and inert, making jests sluggishly, if at all. Aboard the steamboat, Professor Stuart
of Andover, sitting on a sofa in the saloon, generally in conversation with some person, resolving
their doubts on one point or another, speaking in a very audible voice; and strangers standing
or sitting around to hear him, as if he were an ancient apostle or philosopher.  He is a bulky
man, with a large, massive face, particularly calm in its expression, and mild enough to be
pleasing.  When not otherwise occupied, he reads, without much notice of what is going on around
him.  He speaks without effort, yet thoughtfully.

We got lost in a fog the morning after leaving Owl's Head.  Fired a brass cannon, rang bell,
blew steam, like a whale snorting.  After one of the reports of the cannon, we heard a horn
blown at no great distance, the sound coming soon after the report.  Doubtful whether it came
from the shore or a vessel.  Continued our ringing and snorting; and by and by something was
seen to mingle with the fog that obscured everything beyond fifty yards from us.  At first
it seemed only like a denser wreath of fog; it darkened still more, till it took the aspect
of sails; then the hull of a small schooner came beating down towards us, the wind laying her
over towards us, so that her gunwale was almost in the water, and we could see the whole of
her sloping deck.

"Schooner ahoy!" say we.  "Halloo!  Have you seen Boston Light this morning?"

"Yes; it bears north-northwest, two miles distant."

"Very much obliged to you," cries our captain.

So the schooner vanishes into the mist behind.  We get up our steam, and soon enter the harbor,
meeting vessels of every rig; and the fog, clearing away, shows a cloudy sky.  Aboard, an old
one-eyed sailor, who had lost one of his feet, and had walked on the stump from Eastport to
Bangor, thereby making a shocking ulcer.

Penobscot Bay is full of islands, close to which the steamboat is continually passing.  Some
are large, with portions of forest and portions of cleared land; some are mere rocks, with
a little green or none, and inhabited by sea-birds, which fly and flap about hoarsely. Their
eggs may be gathered by the bushel, and are good to eat.  Other islands have one house and
barn on them, this sole family being lords and rulers of all the land which the sea girds.
The owner of such an island must have a peculiar sense of property and lordship; he must feel
more like his own master and his own man than other people can.  Other islands, perhaps high,
precipitous, black bluffs, are crowned with a white lighthouse, whence, as evening comes on,
twinkles a star across the melancholy deep,--seen by vessels coming on the coast, seen from
the mainland, seen from island to island.  Darkness descending, and, looking down at the broad
wake left by the wheels of the steamboat, we may see sparkles of sea-fire glittering through
the gloom.

Salem, August 22d.--A walk yesterday afternoon down to the Juniper and Winter Island.  Singular
effect of partial sunshine, the sky being broadly and heavily clouded, and land and sea, in
consequence, being generally overspread with a sombre gloom.  But the sunshine, somehow or
other, found its way between the interstices of the clouds, and illuminated some of the distant
objects very vividly.  The white sails of a ship caught it, and gleamed brilliant as sunny
snow, the hull being scarcely visible, and the sea around dark; other smaller vessels too,
so that they looked like heavenly-winged things, just alighting on a dismal world.  Shifting
their sails, perhaps, or going on another tack, they almost disappear at once in the obscure
distance.  Islands are seen in summer sunshine and green glory; their rocks also sunny and
their beaches white; while other islands, for no apparent reason, are in deep shade, and share
the gloom of the rest of the world.  Sometimes part of an island is illuminated and part dark.
When the sunshine falls on a very distant island, nearer ones being in shade, it seems greatly
to extend the bounds of visible space, and put the horizon to a farther distance. The sea roughly
rushing against the shore, and dashing against the rocks, and grating back over the sands.
A boat a little way from the shore, tossing and swinging at anchor.  Beach birds flitting from
place to place.

The family seat of the Hawthornes is Wigcastle, Wigton, Wiltshire.  The present head of the
family, now residing there, is Hugh Hawthorne. William Hawthorne, who came over in 1635-36,
was a younger brother of the family.

A young man and girl meet together, each in search of a person to be known by some particular
sign.  They watch and wait a great while for that person to pass.  At last some casual circumstance
discloses that each is the one that the other is waiting for.  Moral,--that what we need for
our happiness is often close at hand, if we knew but how to seek for it.

The journal of a human heart for a single day in ordinary circumstances. The lights and shadows
that flit across it; its internal vicissitudes.

Distrust to be thus exemplified:--Various good and desirable things to be presented to a young
man, and offered to his acceptance,--as a friend, a wife, a fortune; but he to refuse them
all, suspecting that it is merely a delusion.  Yet all to be real, and he to be told so, when
too late.

A man tries to be happy in love; he cannot sincerely give his heart, and the affair seems all
a dream.  In domestic life, the same; in politics, a seeming patriot; but still he is sincere,
and all seems like a theatre.

An old man, on a summer day, sits on a hill-top, or on the observatory of his house, and sees
the sun's light pass from one object to another connected with the events of his past life,--as
the school-house, the place where his wife lived in her maidenhood,--its setting beams falling
on the churchyard.

An idle man's pleasures and occupations and thoughts during a day spent by the sea-shore: among
them, that of sitting on the top of a cliff, and throwing stones at his own shadow, far below.

A blind man to set forth on a walk through ways unknown to him, and to trust to the guidance
of anybody who will take the trouble; the different characters who would undertake it: some
mischievous, some well-meaning, but incapable; perhaps one blind man undertakes to lead another.
At last, possibly, he rejects all guidance, and blunders on by himself.

In the cabinet of the Essex Historical Society, old portraits.--Governor Leverett; a dark mustachioed
face, the figure two-thirds length, clothed in a sort of frock-coat, buttoned, and a broad
sword-belt girded round the waist, and fastened with a large steel buckle; the hilt of the
sword steel,--altogether very striking.  Sir William Pepperell, in English regimentals, coat,
waistcoat, and breeches, all of red broadcloth, richly gold-embroidered; he holds a general's
truncheon in his right hand, and extends the left towards the batteries erected against Louisbourg,
in the country near which he is standing.  Endicott, Pyncheon, and others, in scarlet robes,
bands, etc.  Half a dozen or more family portraits of the Olivers, some in plain dresses brown,
crimson, or claret; others with gorgeous gold-embroidered waistcoats, descending almost to
the knees, so as to form the most conspicuous article of dress.  Ladies, with lace ruffles,
the painting of which, in one of the pictures, cost five guineas.  Peter Oliver, who was crazy,
used to fight with these family pictures in the old Mansion House; and the face and breast
of one lady bear cuts and stabs inflicted by him.  Miniatures in oil, with the paint peeling
off, of stern, old, yellow faces.  Oliver Cromwell, apparently an old picture, half length,
or one third, in an oval frame, probably painted for some New England partisan.  Some pictures
that had been partly obliterated by scrubbing with sand.  The dresses, embroidery, laces of
the Oliver family are generally better done than the faces. Governor Leverett's gloves,--the
glove part of coarse leather, but round the wrist a deep, three or four inch border of spangles
and silver embroidery.  Old drinking-glasses, with tall stalks.  A black glass bottle, stamped
with the name of Philip English, with a broad bottom. The baby-linen, etc., of Governor Bradford
of Plymouth County.  Old manuscript sermons, some written in short-hand, others in a hand that
seems learnt from print.

Nothing gives a stronger idea of old worm-eaten aristocracy--of a family being crazy with age,
and of its being time that it was extinct--than these black, dusty, faded, antique-dressed
portraits, such as those of the Oliver family; the identical old white wig of an ancient minister
producing somewhat the impression that his very scalp, or some other portion of his personal
self, would do.

The excruciating agonies which Nature inflicts on men (who break her laws) to be represented
as the work of human tormentors; as the gout, by screwing the toes.  Thus we might find that
worse than the tortures of the Spanish Inquisition are daily suffered without exciting notice.

Suppose a married couple fondly attached to one another, and to think that they lived solely
for one another; then it to be found out that they were divorced, or that they might separate
if they chose.  What would be its effect?

Monday, August 27th.--Went to Boston last Wednesday.  Remarkables:--An author at the American
Stationers' Company, slapping his hand on his manuscript, and crying, "I'm going to publish."--An
excursion aboard a steamboat to Thompson's Island, to visit the Manual Labor School for boys.
Aboard the steamboat several poets and various other authors; a Commodore,--Colton, a small,
dark brown, sickly man, with a good deal of roughness in his address; Mr. Waterston, talking
poetry and philosophy. Examination and exhibition of the boys, little tanned agriculturists.
After examination, a stroll round the island, examining the products, as wheat in sheaves on
the stubble-field; oats, somewhat blighted and spoiled; great pumpkins elsewhere; pastures;
mowing ground;--all cultivated by the boys.  Their residence, a great brick building, painted
green, and standing on the summit of a rising ground, exposed to the winds of the bay.  Vessels
flitting past; great ships, with intricacy of rigging and various sails; schooners, sloops,
with their one or two broad sheets of canvas: going on different tacks, so that the spectator
might think that there was a different wind for each vessel, or that they scudded across the
sea spontaneously, whither their own wills led them. The farm boys remain insulated, looking
at the passing show, within sight of the city, yet having nothing to do with it; beholding
their fellow-creatures skimming by them in winged machines, and steamboats snorting and puffing
through the waves.  Methinks an island would be the most desirable of all landed property,
for it seems like a little world by itself; and the water may answer instead of the atmosphere
that surrounds planets.  The boys swinging, two together, standing up, and almost causing the
ropes and their bodies to stretch out horizontally. On our departure, they ranged themselves
on the rails of the fence, and, being dressed in blue, looked not unlike a flock of pigeons.

On Friday, a visit to the Navy Yard at Charlestown, in company with the Naval Officer of Boston,
and Cilley.  Dined aboard the revenue-cutter Hamilton.  A pretty cabin, finished off with bird's-eye
maple and mahogany; two looking-glasses.  Two officers in blue frocks, with a stripe of lace
on each shoulder.  Dinner, chowder, fried fish, corned beef,--claret, afterwards champagne.
The waiter tells the Captain of the cutter that Captain Percival (Commander of the Navy Yard)
is sitting on the deck of the anchor boy (which lies inside of the cutter), smoking his cigar.
The captain sends him a glass of champagne, and inquires of the waiter what Percival says to
it.  "He said, sir, `What does he send me this damned stuff for?' but drinks, nevertheless."
The Captain characterizes Percival as the roughest old devil that ever was in his manners,
but a kind, good-hearted man at bottom.  By and by comes in the steward.  "Captain Percival
is coming aboard of you, sir."  "Well, ask him to walk down into the cabin"; and shortly down
comes old Captain Percival, a white-haired, thin-visaged, weather-worn old gentleman, in a
blue, Quaker-cut coat, with tarnished lace and brass buttons, a pair of drab pantaloons, and
brown waistcoat.  There was an eccentric expression in his face, which seemed partly wilful,
partly natural.  He has not risen to his present rank in the regular line of the profession;
but entered the navy as a sailing-master, and has all the roughness of that class of officers.
Nevertheless, he knows how to behave and to talk like a gentleman.  Sitting down, and taking
in hand a glass of champagne, he began a lecture on economy, and how well it was that Uncle
Sam had a broad back, being compelled to bear so many burdens as were laid on it,-- alluding
to the table covered with wine-bottles.  Then he spoke of the fitting up of the cabin with
expensive woods,--of the brooch in Captain Scott's bosom.  Then he proceeded to discourse of
politics, taking the opposite side to Cilley, and arguing with much pertinacity.  He seems
to have moulded and shaped himself to his own whims, till a sort of rough affectation has become
thoroughly imbued throughout a kindly nature.  He is full of antique prejudices against the
modern fashions of the younger officers, their mustaches and such fripperies, and prophesies
little better than disgrace in case of another war; owning that the boys would fight for their
country, and die for her, but denying that there are any officers now like Hull and Stuart,
whose exploits, nevertheless, he greatly depreciated, saying that the Boxer and Enterprise
fought the only equal battle which we won during the war; and that, in that action, an officer
had proposed to haul down the stars and stripes, and a common sailor threatened to cut him
to pieces if he should do so.  He spoke of Bainbridge as a sot and a poltroon, who wanted to
run from the Macedonian, pretending to take her for a line-of-battle ship; of Commodore Elliot
as a liar; but praised Commodore Downes in the highest terms.  Percival seems to be the very
pattern of old integrity; taking as much care of Uncle Sam's interests as if all the money
expended were to come out of his own pocket.  This quality was displayed in his resistance
to the demand of a new patent capstan for the revenue-cutter, which, however, Scott is resolved
in such a sailor-like way to get, that he will probably succeed.  Percival spoke to me of how
his business in the yard absorbed him, especially the fitting of the Columbus seventy-four,
of which ship he discoursed with great enthusiasm.  He seems to have no ambition beyond his
present duties, perhaps never had any; at any rate, he now passes his life with a sort of gruff
contentedness, grumbling and growling, yet in good humor enough.  He is conscious of his peculiarities;
for when I asked him whether it would be well to make a naval officer Secretary of the Navy,
he said, "God forbid, for that an old sailor was always full of prejudices and stubborn whim-whams,"
instancing himself; whereto I agreed.  We went round the Navy Yard with Percival and Commodore
Downes, the latter a sailor and a gentleman too, with rather more of the ocean than the drawing-room
about him, but courteous, frank, and good-natured.  We looked at ropewalks, rigging-lofts,
ships in the stocks; and saw the sailors of the station laughing and sporting with great mirth
and cheerfulness, which the Commodore said was much increased at sea.  We returned to the wharf
at Boston in the cutter's boat.  Captain Scott, of the cutter, told me a singular story of
what occurred during the action between the Constitution and Macedonian--he being powder-monkey
aboard the former ship.  A cannon-shot came through the ship's side, and a man's head was struck
off, probably by a splinter, for it was done without bruising the head or body, as clean as
by a razor.  Well, the man was walking pretty briskly at the time of the accident; and Scott
seriously affirmed that he kept walking onward at the same pace, with two jets of blood gushing
from his headless trunk, till, after going about twenty feet without a head, he sunk down at
once, with his legs under him.

[The corroboration of the truth of this, see Lord Bacon, Century IV. of his Sylva Sylvarum,
or Natural History, in Ten Centuries, paragraph 400.]

On Saturday, I called to see E. H------, having previously appointed a meeting for the purpose
of inquiring about our name.  He is an old bachelor, and truly forlorn.  The pride of ancestry
seems to be his great hobby.  He had a good many old papers in his desk at the Custom-House,
which he produced and dissertated upon, and afterwards went with me to his sister's, and showed
me an old book, with a record of the children of the first emigrant (who came over two hundred
years ago), in his own handwriting.  E----'s manners are gentlemanly, and he seems to be very
well informed.  At a little distance, I think, one would take him to be not much over thirty;
but nearer at hand one finds him to look rather venerable,--perhaps fifty or more.  He is nervous,
and his hands shook while he was looking over the papers, as if he had been startled by my
visit; and when we came to the crossings of streets, he darted across, cautioning me, as if
both were in great danger to be run over. Nevertheless, being very quick-tempered, he would
face the Devil if at all irritated.  He gave a most forlorn description of his life; how, when
he came to Salem, there was nobody except Mr. ------ whom he cared about seeing; how his position
prevented him from accepting of civilities, because he had no home where he could return them;
in short, he seemed about as miserable a being as is to be found anywhere,--lonely, and with
sensitiveness to feel his loneliness, and capacities, now withered, to have enjoyed the sweets
of life.  I suppose he is comfortable enough when busied in his duties at the Custom-House;
for when I spoke to him at my entrance, he was too much absorbed to hear me at first.  As we
walked, he kept telling stories of the family, which seemed to have comprised many oddities,
eccentric men and women, recluses and other kinds,--one of old Philip English (a Jersey man,
the name originally L'Anglais), who had been persecuted by John Hawthorne, of witch-time memory,
and a violent quarrel ensued.  When Philip lay on his death-bed, he consented to forgive his
persecutor; "But if I get well," said he, "I'll be damned if I forgive him!"  This Philip left
daughters, one of whom married, I believe, the son of the persecuting John, and thus all the
legitimate blood of English is in our family.  E---- passed from the matters of birth, pedigree,
and ancestral pride to give vent to the most arrant democracy and locofocoism that I ever happened
to hear, saying that nobody ought to possess wealth longer than his own life, and that then
it should return to the people, etc.  He says S. I------ has a great fund of traditions about
the family, which she learned from her mother or grandmother (I forget which), one of them
being a Hawthorne.  The old lady was a very proud woman, and, as E---- says, "proud of being
proud," and so is S. I------.

October 7th.--A walk in Northfields in the afternoon.  Bright sunshine and autumnal warmth,
giving a sensation quite unlike the same degree of warmth in summer.  Oaks,--some brown, some
reddish, some still green; walnuts, yellow,--fallen leaves and acorns lying beneath; the footsteps
crumple them in walking.  In sunny spots beneath the trees, where green grass is overstrewn
by the dry, fallen foliage, as I passed, I disturbed multitudes of grasshoppers basking in
the warm sunshine; and they began to hop, hop, hop, pattering on the dry leaves like big and
heavy drops of a thunder-shower.  They were invisible till they hopped.  Boys gathering walnuts.
Passed an orchard, where two men were gathering the apples.  A wagon, with barrels, stood among
the trees; the men's coats flung on the fence; the apples lay in heaps, and each of the men
was up in a separate tree.  They conversed together in loud voices, which the air caused to
ring still louder, jeering each other, boasting of their own feats in shaking down the apples.
One got into the very top of his tree, and gave a long and mighty shake, and the big apples
came down thump, thump, bushels hitting on the ground at once.  "There! did you ever hear anything
like that?" cried he.  This sunny scene was pretty.  A horse feeding apart, belonging to the
wagon.  The barberry-bushes have some red fruit on them, but they are frost-bitten.  The rose-bushes
have their scarlet hips.

Distant clumps of trees, now that the variegated foliage adorns them, have a phantasmagorian,
an apparition-like appearance.  They seem to be of some kindred to the crimson and gold cloud-islands.
It would not be strange to see phantoms peeping forth from their recesses.  When the sun was
almost below the horizon, his rays, gilding the upper branches of a yellow walnut-tree, had
an airy and beautiful effect,--the gentle contrast between the tint of the yellow in the shade
and its ethereal gold in the fading sunshine.  The woods that crown distant uplands were seen
to great advantage in these last rays, for the sunshine perfectly marked out and distinguished
every shade of color, varnishing them as it were; while the country round, both hill and plain,
being in gloomy shadow, the woods looked the brighter for it.

The tide, being high, had flowed almost into the Cold Spring, so its small current hardly issued
forth from the basin.  As I approached, two little eels, about as long as my finger, and slender
in proportion, wriggled out of the basin.  They had come from the salt water.  An Indian-corn
field, as yet unharvested,--huge, golden pumpkins scattered among the hills of corn,--a noble-looking
fruit.  After the sun was down, the sky was deeply dyed with a broad sweep of gold, high towards
the zenith; not flaming brightly, but of a somewhat dusky gold.  A piece of water, extending
towards the west, between high banks, caught the reflection, and appeared like a sheet of brighter
and more glistening gold than the sky which made it bright.

Dandelions and blue flowers are still growing in sunny places.  Saw in a barn a prodigious
treasure of onions in their silvery coats, exhaling a penetrating perfume.

How exceeding bright looks the sunshine, casually reflected from a looking-glass into a gloomy
region of the chamber, distinctly marking out the figures and colors of the paper-hangings,
which are scarcely seen elsewhere.  It is like the light of mind thrown on an obscure subject.

Man's finest workmanship, the closer you observe it, the more imperfections it shows; as in
a piece of polished steel a microscope will discover a rough surface.  Whereas, what may look
coarse and rough in Nature's workmanship will show an infinitely minute perfection, the closer
you look into it.  The reason of the minute superiority of Nature's work over man's is, that
the former works from the innermost germ, while the latter works merely superficially.

Standing in the cross-road that leads by the Mineral Spring, and looking towards an opposite
shore of the lake, an ascending bank, with a douse border of trees, green, yellow, red, russet,
all bright colors, brightened by the mild brilliancy of the descending sun; it was strange
to recognize the sober old friends of spring and summer in this new dress.  By the by, a pretty
riddle or fable might be made out of the changes in apparel of the familiar trees round a house,
adapted for children.  But in the lake, beneath the aforesaid border of trees,--the water being,
not rippled, but its glassy surface somewhat moved and shaken by the remote agitation of a
breeze that was breathing on the outer lake,--this being in a sort of bay,--in the slightly
agitated mirror, the variegated trees were reflected dreamily and indistinctly; a broad belt
of bright and diversified colors shining in the water beneath. Sometimes the image of a tree
might be almost traced; then nothing but this sweep of broken rainbow.  It was like the recollection
of the real scene in an observer's mind,--a confused radiance.

A whirlwind, whirling the dried leaves round in a circle, not very violently.

To well consider the characters of a family of persons in a certain condition,--in poverty,
for instance,--and endeavor to judge how an altered condition would affect the character of each.

The aromatic odor of peat-smoke in the sunny autumnal air is very pleasant.

Salem, October 14th.--A walk through Beverly to Browne's Hill, and home by the iron-factory.
A bright, cool afternoon.  The trees, in a large part of the space through which I passed,
appeared to be in their fullest glory, bright red, yellow, some of a tender green, appearing
at a distance as if bedecked with new foliage, though this emerald tint was likewise the effect
of frost.  In some places, large tracts of ground were covered as with a scarlet cloth,--the
underbrush being thus colored. The general character of these autumnal colors is not gaudy,
scarcely gay; there is something too deep and rich in it: it is gorgeous and magnificent, but
with a sobriety diffused.  The pastures at the foot of Browne's Hill were plentifully covered
with barberry-bushes, the leaves of which were reddish, and they were hung with a prodigious
quantity of berries.  From the summit of the hill, looking down a tract of woodland at a considerable
distance, so that the interstices between the trees could not be seen, their tops presented
an unbroken level, and seemed somewhat like a richly variegated carpet.  The prospect from
the hill is wide and interesting; but methinks it is pleasanter in the more immediate vicinity
of the hill than miles away.  It is agreeable to look down at the square patches of cornfield,
or of potato-ground, or of cabbages still green, or of beets looking red,--all a man's farm,
in short,--each portion of which he considers separately so important, while you take in the
whole at a glance.  Then to cast your eye over so many different establishments at once, and
rapidly compare thorn,--here a house of gentility, with shady old yellow-leaved elms hanging
around it; there a new little white dwelling; there an old farm-house; to see the barns and
sheds and all the out-houses clustered together; to comprehend the oneness and exclusiveness
and what constitutes the peculiarity of each of so many establishments, and to have in your
mind a multitude of them, each of which is the most important part of the world to those who
live in it,--this really enlarges the mind, and you come down the hill somewhat wiser than
you go up.  Pleasant to look over an orchard far below, and see the trees, each casting its
own shadow; the white spires of meeting-houses; a sheet of water, partly seen among swelling
lands. This Browne's Hill is a long ridge, lying in the midst of a large, level plain; it looks
at a distance somewhat like a whale, with its head and tail under water, but its immense back
protruding, with steep sides, and a gradual curve along its length.  When you have climbed
it on one side, and gaze from the summit at the other, you feel as if you had made a discovery,--the
landscape being quite different on the two sides.  The cellar of the house which formerly crowned
the hill, and used to be named Browne's Folly, still remains, two grass-grown and shallow hollows,
on the highest part of the ridge.  The house consisted of two wings, each perhaps sixty feet
in length, united by a middle part, in which was the entrance-hall, and which looked lengthwise
along the hill.  The foundation of a spacious porch may be traced on either side of the central
portion; some of the stones still remain; but even where they are gone, the line of the porch
is still traceable by the greener verdure.  In the cellar, or rather in the two cellars, grow
one or two barberry-bushes, with frost-bitten fruit; there is also yarrow with its white flower,
and yellow dandelions.  The cellars are still deep enough to shelter a person, all but his
head at least, from the wind on the summit of the hill; but they are all grass-grown.  A line
of trees seems to have been planted along the ridge of the hill.  The edifice must have made
quite a magnificent appearance.

Characteristics during the walk:--Apple-trees with only here and there an apple on the boughs,
among the thinned leaves, the relics of a gathering. In others you observe a rustling, and
see the boughs shaking and hear the apples thumping down, without seeing the person who does
it.  Apples scattered by the wayside, some with pieces bitten out, others entire, which you
pick up and taste, and find them harsh, crabbed cider-apples, though they have a pretty, waxen
appearance.  In sunny spots of woodland, boys in search of nuts, looking picturesque among
the scarlet and golden foliage.  There is something in this sunny autumnal atmosphere that
gives a peculiar effect to laughter and joyous voices,--it makes them infinitely more elastic
and gladsome than at other seasons.  Heaps of dry leaves tossed together by the wind, as if
for a couch and lounging-place for the weary traveller, while the sun is warming it for him.
Golden pumpkins and squashes, heaped in the angle of a house, till they reach the lower windows.
Ox-teams, laden with a rustling load of Indian corn, in the stalk and ear.  When all inlet
of the sea runs far up into the country, you stare to see a large schooner appear amid the
rural landscape; she is unloading a cargo of wood, moist with rain or salt water that has dashed
over it.  Perhaps you hear the sound of an axe in the woodland; occasionally, the report of
a fowling-piece.  The travellers in the early part of the afternoon look warm and comfortable
as if taking a summer drive; but as eve draws nearer, you meet them well wrapped in top-coats
or cloaks, or rough, great surtouts, and red-nosed withal, seeming to take no great comfort,
but pressing homeward.  The characteristic conversation among teamsters and country squires,
where the ascent of a hill causes the chaise to go at the same pace as an ox-team,--perhaps
discussing the qualities of a yoke of oxen.  The cold, blue aspects of sheets of water.  Some
of the country shops with the doors closed; others still open as in summer.  I meet a wood-sawyer,
with his horse and saw on his shoulders, returning from work.  As night draws on, you begin
to see the gleaming of fires on the ceilings in the houses which you pass.  The comfortless
appearance of houses at bleak and bare spots,--you wonder how there can be any enjoyment in
them.  I meet a girl in a chintz gown, with a small shawl on her shoulders, white stockings,
and summer morocco shoes,--it looks observable.  Turkeys, queer, solemn objects, in black attire,
grazing about, and trying to peck the fallen apples, which slip away from their bills.

October 16th.--Spent the whole afternoon in a ramble to the sea-shore, near Phillips's Beach.
A beautiful, warm, sunny afternoon, the very pleasantest day, probably, that there has been
in the whole course of the year.  People at work, harvesting, without their coats.  Cocks,
with their squad of hens, in the grass-fields, hunting grasshoppers, chasing them eagerly with
outspread wings, appearing to take much interest in the sport, apart from the profit.  Other
hens picking up the ears of Indian corn.  Grasshoppers, flies, and flying insects of all sorts
are more abundant in these warm autumnal days than I have seen them at any other time.  Yellow
butterflies flutter about in the sunshine, singly, by pairs, or more, and are wafted on the
gentle gales.  The crickets begin to sing early in the afternoon, and sometimes a locust may
be heard.  In some warm spots, a pleasant buzz of many insects.

Crossed the fields near Brookhouse's villa, and came upon a long beach,-- at least a mile long,
I should think,--terminated by craggy rocks at either end, and backed by a high broken bank,
the grassy summit of which, year by year, is continually breaking away, and precipitated to
the bottom.  At the foot of the bank, in some parts, is a vast number of pebbles and paving-stones,
rolled up thither by the sea long ago.  The beach is of a brown sand, with hardly any pebbles
intermixed upon it. When the tide is part way down, there is a margin of several yards from
the water's edge, along the whole mile length of the beach, which glistens like a mirror, and
reflects objects, and shines bright in the sunshine, the sand being wet to that distance from
the water.  Above this margin the sand is not wet, and grows less and less damp the farther
towards the bank you keep.  In some places your footstep is perfectly implanted, showing the
whole shape, and the square toe, and every nail in the heel of your boot.  Elsewhere, the impression
is imperfect, and even when you stamp, you cannot imprint the whole. As you tread, a dry spot
flashes around your step, and grows moist as you lift your foot again. Pleasant to pass along
this extensive walk, watching the surf-wave;--how sometimes it seems to make a feint of breaking,
but dies away ineffectually, merely kissing the strand; then, after many such abortive efforts,
it gathers itself, and forms a high wall, and rolls onward, heightening and heightening without
foam at the summit of the green line, and at last throws itself fiercely on the beach, with
a loud roar, the spray flying above.  As you walk along, you are preceded by a flock of twenty
or thirty beach birds, which are seeking, I suppose, for food on the margin of the surf, yet
seem to be merely sporting, chasing the sea as it retires, and running up before the impending
wave.  Sometimes they let it bear them off their feet, and float lightly on its breaking summit;
sometimes they flutter and seem to rest on the feathery spray. They are little birds with gray
backs and snow-white breasts; their images may be seen in the wet sand almost or quite as distinctly
as the reality.  Their legs are long.  As you draw near, they take a flight of a score of yards
or more, and then recommence their dalliance with the surf-wave.  You may behold their multitudinous
little tracks all along your way.  Before you reach the end of the beach, you become quite
attached to these little sea-birds, and take much interest in their occupations.  After passing
in one direction, it is pleasant then to retrace your footsteps.  Your tracks being all traceable,
you may recall the whole mood and occupation of your mind during your first passage. Here you
turned somewhat aside to pick up a shell that you saw nearer the water's edge.  Here you examined
a long sea-weed, and trailed its length after you for a considerable distance.  Here the effect
of the wide sea struck you suddenly.  Here you fronted the ocean, looking at a sail, distant
in the sunny blue.  Here you looked at some plant on the bank. Here some vagary of mind seems
to have bewildered you; for your tracks go round and round, and interchange each other without
visible reason.  Here you picked up pebbles and skipped them upon the water.  Here you wrote
names and drew faces with a razor sea-shell in the sand.

After leaving the beach, clambered over crags, all shattered and tossed about everyhow; in
some parts curiously worn and hollowed out, almost into caverns.  The rock, shagged with sea-weed,--in
some places, a thick carpet of sea-weed laid over the pebbles, into which your foot would sink.
Deep tanks among these rocks, which the sea replenishes at high tide, and then leaves the bottom
all covered with various sorts of sea-plants, as if it were some sea-monster's private garden.
I saw a crab in one of them; five-fingers too.  From the edge of the rocks, you may look off
into deep, deep water, even at low tide.  Among the rocks, I found a great bird, whether a
wild-goose, a loon, or an albatross, I scarcely know.  It was in such a position that I almost
fancied it might be asleep, and therefore drew near softly, lest it should take flight; but
it was dead, and stirred not when I touched it.  Sometimes a dead fish was cast up.  A ledge
of rocks, with a beacon upon it, looking like a monument erected to those who have perished
by shipwreck.  The smoked, extempore fireplace, where a party cooked their fish.  About midway
on the beach, a fresh-water brooklet flows towards the sea.  Where it leaves the land, it is
quite a rippling little current; but, in flowing across the sand, it grows shallower and more
shallow, and at last is quite lost, and dies in the effort to carry its little tribute to the main.

An article to be made of telling the stories of the tiles of an old-fashioned chimney-piece
to a child.

A person conscious that he was soon to die, the humor in which he would pay his last visit
to familiar persons and things.

A description of the various classes of hotels and taverns, and the prominent personages in
each.  There should be some story connected with it,--as of a person commencing with boarding
at a great hotel, and gradually, as his means grew less, descending in life, till he got below
ground into a cellar.

A person to be in the possession of something as perfect as mortal man has a right to demand;
he tries to make it better, and ruins it entirely.

A person to spend all his life and splendid talents in trying to achieve something naturally
impossible,--as to make a conquest over Nature.

Meditations about the main gas-pipe of a great city,--if the supply were to be stopped, what
would happen?  How many different scenes it sheds light on?  It might be made emblematical
of something.

December 6th.--A fairy tale about chasing Echo to her hiding-place.  Echo is the voice of a
reflection in a mirror.

A house to be built over a natural spring of inflammable gas, and to be constantly illuminated
therewith.  What moral could be drawn from this? It is carburetted hydrogen gas, and is cooled
from a soft shale or slate, which is sometimes bituminous, and contains more or less carbonate
of lime.  It appears in the vicinity of Lockport and Niagara Falls, and elsewhere in New York.
I believe it indicates coal.  At Fredonia, the whole village is lighted by it.  Elsewhere,
a farm-house was lighted by it, and no other fuel used in the coldest weather.

Gnomes, or other mischievous little fiends, to be represented as burrowing in the hollow teeth
of some person who has subjected himself to their power.  It should be a child's story.  This
should be one of many modes of petty torment.  They should be contrasted with beneficent fairies,
who minister to the pleasures of the good.

A man will undergo great toil and hardship for ends that must be many years distant,--as wealth
or fame,--but none for an end that may be close at hand,--as the joys of heaven.

Insincerity in a man's own heart must make all his enjoyments, all that concerns him, unreal;
so that his whole life must seem like a merely dramatic representation.  And this would be
the case, even though he were surrounded by true-hearted relatives and friends.

A company of men, none of whom have anything worth hoping for on earth, yet who do not look
forward to anything beyond earth!

Sorrow to be personified, and its effect on a family represented by the way in which the members
of the family regard this dark-clad and sad-browed inmate.

A story to show how we are all wronged and wrongers, and avenge one another.

To personify winds of various characters.

A man living a wicked life, in one place, and simultaneously a virtuous and religious one in
another.

An ornament to be worn about the person of a lady,--as a jewelled heart. After many years,
it happens to be broken or unscrewed, and a poisonous odor comes out.

Lieutenant F. W------ of the navy was an inveterate duellist and an unerring shot.  He had
taken offence at Lieutenant F------, and endeavored to draw him into a duel, following him
to the Mediterranean for that purpose, and harassing him intolerably.  At last, both parties
being in Massachusetts, F------ determined to fight, and applied to Lieutenant A------ to be
his second.  A------ examined into the merits of the quarrel, and came to the conclusion that
F------ had not given F. W------ justifiable cause for driving him to a duel, and that he ought
not to be shot.  He instructed F------ in the use of the pistol, and, before the meeting, warned
him, by all means, to get the first fire; for that, if F. W------ fired first, he, F------,
was infallibly a dead man, as his antagonist could shoot to a hair's-breadth.  The parties
met; and F------, firing immediately on the word's being given, shot F. W------ through the
heart.  F. W------, with a most savage expression of countenance, fired, after the bullet had
gone through his heart, and when the blood had entirely left his face, and shot away one of
F------'s side-locks.  His face probably looked as if he were already in the infernal regions;
but afterwards it assumed an angelic calmness and repose.

A company of persons to drink a certain medicinal preparation, which would prove a poison,
or the contrary, according to their different characters.

Many persons, without a consciousness of so doing, to contribute to some one end; as to a beggar's
feast, made up of broken victuals from many tables; or a patch carpet, woven of shreds from
innumerable garments.

Some very famous jewel or other thing, much talked of all over the world. some person to meet
with it, and get possession of it in some unexpected manner, amid homely circumstances.

To poison a person or a party of persons with the sacramental wine.

A cloud in the shape of an old woman kneeling, with arms extended towards the moon.

On being transported to strange scenes, we feel as if all were unreal. This is but the perception
of the true unreality of earthly things, made evident by the want of congruity between ourselves
and them.  By and by we become mutually adapted, and the perception is lost.

An old looking-glass.  Somebody finds out the secret of making all the images that have been
reflected in it pass back again across its surface.

Our Indian races having reared no monuments, like the Greeks, Romans, and Egyptians, when they
have disappeared from the earth their history will appear a fable, and they misty phantoms.

A woman to sympathize with all emotions, but to have none of her own.

A portrait of a person in New England to be recognized as of the same person represented by
a portrait in Old England.  Having distinguished himself there, he had suddenly vanished, and
had never been heard of till he was thus discovered to be identical with a distinguished man
in New England.

Men of cold passions have quick eyes.

A virtuous but giddy girl to attempt to play a trick on a man.  He sees what she is about,
and contrives matters so that she throws herself completely into his power, and is ruined,--all
in jest.

A letter, written a century or more ago, but which has never yet been unsealed.

A partially insane man to believe himself the Provincial Governor or other great official of
Massachusetts.  The scene might be the Province House.

A dreadful secret to be communicated to several people of various characters,--grave or gay,--and
they all to become insane, according to their characters, by the influence of the secret.

Stories to be told of a certain person's appearance in public, of his having been seen in various
situations, and of his making visits in private circles; but finally, on looking for this person,
to come upon his old grave and mossy tombstone.

The influence of a peculiar mind, in close communion with another, to drive the latter to insanity.

To look at a beautiful girl, and picture all the lovers, in different situations, whose hearts
are centred upon her.

May 11th, 1838.--At Boston last week.  Items:--A young man, with a small mustache, dyed brown,
reddish from its original light color.  He walks with an affected gait, his arms crooked outwards,
treading much on his toes.  His conversation is about the theatre, where he has a season ticket,--about
an amateur who lately appeared there, and about actresses, with other theatrical scandal.--In
the smoking-room, two checker and backgammon boards; the landlord a great player, seemingly
a stupid man, but with considerable shrewdness and knowledge of the world.--F------, the comedian,
a stout, heavy-looking Englishman, of grave deportment, with no signs of wit or humor, yet
aiming at both in conversation, in order to support his character.  Very steady and regular
in his life, and parsimonious in his disposition,--worth $ 50,000, made by his profession.--A
clergyman, elderly, with a white neckcloth, very unbecoming, an unworldly manner, unacquaintance
with the customs of the house, and learning them in a childlike way.  A ruffle to his shirt,
crimped.--A gentleman, young, handsome, and sea-flushed, belonging to Oswego, New York, but
just arrived in port from the Mediterranean: he inquires of me about the troubles in Canada,
which were first beginning to make a noise when he left the country,--whether they are all
over.  I tell him all is finished, except the hanging of the prisoners.  Then we talk over
the matter, and I tell him the fates of the principal men,-- some banished to New South Wales,
one hanged, others in prison, others, conspicuous at first, now almost forgotten.--Apartments
of private families in the hotel,--what sort of domesticity there may be in them; eating in
public, with no board of their own.  The gas that lights the rest of the house lights them
also, in the chandelier from the ceiling.-- A shabby-looking man, quiet, with spectacles, at
first wearing an old, coarse brown frock, then appearing in a suit of elderly black, saying
nothing unless spoken to, but talking intelligently when addressed.  He is an editor, and I
suppose printer, of a country paper.  Among the guests, he holds intercourse with gentlemen
of much more respectable appearance than himself, from the same part of the country.--Bill
of fare; wines printed on the back, but nobody calls for a bottle.  Chairs turned down for
expected guests.  Three-pronged steel forks.  Cold supper from nine to eleven P. M.  Great,
round, mahogany table, in the sitting-room, covered with papers.  In the morning, before and
soon after breakfast, gentlemen reading the morning papers, while others wait for their chance,
or try to pick out something from the papers of yesterday or longer ago.  In the forenoon,
the Southern papers are brought in, and thrown damp and folded on the table.  The eagerness
with which those who happen to be in the room start up and make prize of them.  Play-bills,
printed on yellow paper, laid upon the table.  Towards evening comes the Transcript.

June 15th.--The red light which the sunset at this season diffuse; there being showery afternoons,
but the sun setting bright amid clouds, and diffusing its radiance over those that are scattered
in masses all over the sky.  It gives a rich tinge to all objects, even to those of sombre
lines, yet without changing the lines.  The complexions of people are exceedingly enriched
by it; they look warm, and kindled with a mild fire. The whole scenery and personages acquire,
methinks, a passionate character.  A love-scene should be laid on such an evening.  The trees
and the grass have now the brightest possible green, there having been so many showers alternating
with such powerful sunshine.  There are roses and tulips and honeysuckles, with their sweet
perfume; in short, the splendor of a more gorgeous climate than ours might be brought into
the picture.

The situation of a man in the midst of a crowd, yet as completely in the power of another,
life and all, as if they two were in the deepest solitude.

Tremont, Boston, June 16th.--Tremendously hot weather to-day.  Went on board the Cyane to see
Bridge, the purser.  Took boat from the end of Long Wharf; with two boatmen who had just landed
a man.  Row round to the starboard side of the sloop, where we pass up the steps, and are received
by Bridge, who introduces us to one of the lieutenants,--Hazard.  Sailors and midshipmen scattered
about,--the middies having a foul anchor, that is, an anchor with a cable twisted round it,
embroidered on the collars of their jackets.  The officers generally wear blue jackets with
lace on the shoulders, white pantaloons, and cloth caps.  Introduced into the cabin,--a handsome
room, finished with mahogany, comprehending the width of the vessel; a sideboard with liquors,
and above it a looking-glass; behind the cabin, an inner room, in which is seated a lady, waiting
for the captain to come on board; on each side of this inner cabin, a large and convenient
state-room with bed,--the doors opening into the cabin. This cabin is on a level with the quarter-deck,
and is covered by the poop-deck.  Going down below stairs, you come to the ward-room, a pretty
large room, round which are the state-rooms of the lieutenants, the purser, surgeon, etc. 
A stationary table.  The ship's main-mast comes down through the middle of the room, and Bridge's
chair, at dinner, is planted against it.  Wine and brandy produced; and Bridge calls to the
Doctor to drink with him, who answers affirmatively from his state-room, and shortly after
opens the door and makes his appearance.  Other officers emerge from the side of the vessel,
or disappear into it, in the same way.  Forward of the ward-room, adjoining it, and on the
same level, is the midshipmen's room, on the larboard side of the vessel, not partitioned off,
so as to be shut up.  On a shelf a few books; one midshipman politely invites us to walk in;
another sits writing.  Going farther forward, on the same level we come to the crew's department,
part of which is occupied by the cooking-establishment, where all sorts of cooking is going
on for the officers and men.

Through the whole of this space, ward-room and all, there is barely room to stand upright,
without the hat on.  The rules of the quarter-deck (which extends aft from the main-mast) are,
that the midshipmen shall not presume to walk on the starboard side of it, nor the men to come
upon it at all, unless to speak to an officer.  The poop-deck is still more sacred,--the lieutenants
being confined to the larboard side, and the captain alone having a right to the starboard.
A marine was pacing the poop-deck, being the only guard that I saw stationed in the vessel,--the
more stringent regulations being relaxed while she is preparing for sea. While standing on
the quarter-deck, a great piping at the gangway, and the second cutter comes alongside, bringing
the consul and some other gentleman to visit the vessel.  After a while, we are rowed ashore
with them, in the same boat.  Its crew are new hands, and therefore require much instruction
from the cockswain.  We are seated under an awning.  The guns of the Cyane are medium thirty-two
pounders; some of them have percussion locks.

At the Tremont, I had Bridge to dine with me: iced champagne, claret in glass pitchers.  Nothing
very remarkable among the guests.  A wine-merchant, French apparently, though he had arrived
the day before in a bark from Copenhagen: a somewhat corpulent gentleman, without so good manners
as an American would have in the same line of life, but good-natured, sociable, and civil,
complaining of the heat.  He had rings on his fingers of great weight of metal, and one of
them had a seal for letters; brooches at the bosom, three in a row, up and down; also a gold
watch-guard, with a seal appended.  Talks of the comparative price of living, of clothes, etc.,
here and in Europe.  Tells of the prices of wines by the cask and pipe.  Champagne, he says,
is drunk of better quality here than where it grows.--A vendor of patent medicines, Doctor
Jaques, makes acquaintance with me, and shows me his recommendatory letters in favor of himself
and drugs, signed by a long list of people. He prefers, he says, booksellers to druggists as
his agents, and inquired of me about them in this town.  He seems to be an honest man enough,
with an intelligent face, and sensible in his talk, but not a gentleman, wearing a somewhat
shabby brown coat and mixed pantaloons, being ill-shaven, and apparently not well acquainted
with the customs of a fashionable hotel.  A simplicity about him that is likable, though, I
believe, he comes from Philadelphia.--Naval officers, strolling about town, bargaining for
swords and belts, and other military articles; with the tailor, to have naval buttons put on
their shore-going coats, and for their pantaloons, suited to the climate of the Mediterranean.
It is the almost invariable habit of officers, when going ashore or staying on shore, to divest
themselves of all military or naval insignia, and appear as private citizens.  At the Tremont,
young gentlemen with long earlocks,--straw hats, light, or dark-mixed.--The theatre being closed,
the play-bills of many nights ago are posted up against its walls.

July 4th.--A very hot, bright, sunny day; town much thronged; booths on the Common, selling
gingerbread, sugar-plums, and confectionery, spruce beer, lemonade.  Spirits forbidden, but
probably sold stealthily.  On the top of one of the booths a monkey, with a tail two or three
feet long. He is fastened by a cord, which, getting tangled with the flag over the booth, he
takes hold and tries to free it.  He is the object of much attention from the crowd, and played
with by the boys, who toss up gingerbread to him, while he nibbles and throws it down again.
He reciprocates notice, of some kind or other, with all who notice him. There is a sort of
gravity about him.  A boy pulls his long tail, whereat he gives a slight squeak, and for the
future elevates it as much as possible.  Looking at the same booth by and by, I find that the
poor monkey has been obliged to betake himself to the top of one of the wooden joists that
stick up high above.  There are boys, going about with molasses candy, almost melted down in
the sun.  Shows: A mammoth rat; a collection of pirates, murderers, and the like, in wax. 
Constables in considerable number, parading about with their staves, sometimes conversing with
each other, producing an effect by their presence, without having to interfere actively.  One
or two old salts, rather the worse for liquor: in general the people are very temperate.  At
evening the effect of things rather more picturesque; some of the booth-keepers knocking down
the temporary structures, and putting the materials in wagons to carry away; other booths lighted
up, and the lights gleaming through rents in the sail-cloth tops.  The customers are rather
riotous, calling loudly and whimsically for what they want; a young fellow and a girl coming
arm in arm; two girls approaching the booth, and getting into conversation with the folks thereabout.
Perchance a knock-down between two half-sober fellows in the crowd: a knock-down without a
heavy blow, the receiver being scarcely able to keep his footing at any rate. Shoutings and
hallooings, laughter, oaths,--generally a good-natured tumult; and the constables use no severity,
but interfere, if at all, in a friendly sort of way.  I talk with one about the way in which
the day has passed, and he bears testimony to the orderliness of the crowd, but suspects one
booth of selling liquor, and relates one scuffle.  There is a talkative and witty seller of
gingerbread holding forth to the people from his cart, making himself quite a noted character
by his readiness of remark and humor, and disposing of all his wares.  Late in the evening,
during the fire-works, people are consulting how they are to get hone,-- many having long miles
to walk: a father, with wife and children, saying it will be twelve o'clock before they reach
home, the children being already tired to death.  The moon beautifully dark-bright, not giving
so white a light as sometimes.  The girls all look beautiful and fairy-like in it, not exactly
distinct, nor yet dim.  The different characters of female countenances during the day,--mirthful
and mischievous, slyly humorous, stupid, looking genteel generally, but when they speak often
betraying plebeianism by the tones of their voices.  Two girls are very tired, one a pale,
thin, languid-looking creature; the other plump, rosy, rather overburdened with her own little
body.  Gingerbread figures, in the shape of Jim Crow and other popularities.

In the old burial-ground, Charter Street, a slate gravestone, carved round the borders, to
the memory of "Colonel John Hathorne, Esq.," who died in 1717.  This was the witch-judge. 
The stone is sunk deep into the earth, and leans forward, and the grass grows very long around
it; and, on account of the moss, it was rather difficult to make out the date. Other Hathornes
lie buried in a range with him on either side.  In a corner of the burial-ground, close under
Dr. P-----'s garden fence, are the most ancient stones remaining in the graveyard; moss-grown,
deeply sunken.  One to "Dr. John Swinnerton, Physician," in 1688; another to his wife.  There,
too, is the grave of Nathaniel Mather, the younger brother of Cotton, and mentioned in the
Magnalia as a hard student, and of great promise.  "An aged man at nineteen years," saith the
gravestone.  It affected me deeply, when I had cleared away the grass from the half-buried
stone, and read the name.  An apple-tree or two hang over these old graves, and throw down
the blighted fruit on Nathaniel Mather's grave,--he blighted too.  It gives strange ideas,
to think how convenient to Dr. P------'s family this burial-ground is,--the monuments standing
almost within arm's reach of the side windows of the parlor,--and there being a little gate
from the back yard through which we step forth upon those old graves aforesaid.  And the tomb
of the P. family is right in front, and close to the gate.  It is now filled, the last being
the refugee Tory, Colonel P------ and his wife.  M. P------ has trained flowers over this tomb,
on account of her friendly relations with Colonel P------.

It is not, I think, the most ancient families that have tombs,--their ancestry for two or three
generations having been reposited in the earth before such a luxury as a tomb was thought of.
Men who founded families, and grew rich, a century or so ago, were probably the first.

There is a tomb of the Lyndes, with a slab of slate affixed to the brick masonry on one side,
and carved with a coat of arms.

July 10th.--A fishing excursion, last Saturday afternoon, eight or ten miles out in the harbor.
A fine wind out, which died away towards evening, and finally became quite calm.  We cooked
our fish on a rock named "Satan," about forty feet long and twenty broad, irregular in its
shape, and of uneven surface, with pools of water here and there, left by the tide,--dark brown
rock, or whitish; there was the excrement of sea-fowl scattered on it, and a few feathers.
The water was deep around the rock, and swelling up and downward, waving the sea-weed.  We
built two fires, which, as the dusk deepened, cast a red gleam over the rock and the waves,
and made the sea, on the side away from the sunset, look dismal; but by and by up came the
moon, red as a house afire, and, as it rose, it grew silvery bright, and threw a line of silver
across the calm sea.  Beneath the moon and the horizon, the commencement of its track of brightness,
there was a cone of blackness, or of very black blue.  It was after nine before we finished
our supper, which we ate by firelight and moonshine, and then went aboard our decked boat again,--no
safe achievement in our ticklish little dory.  To those remaining in the boat, we had looked
very picturesque around our fires, and on the rock above them,--our statures being apparently
increased to the size of the sons of Anak.  The tide, now coming up, gradually dashed over
the fires we had left, and so the rock again became a desert.  The wind had now entirely died
away, leaving the sea smooth as glass, except a quiet swell, and we could only float along,
as the tide bore us, almost imperceptibly.  It was as beautiful a night as ever shone,--calm,
warm, bright, the moon being at full.  On one side of us was Marblehead lighthouse, on the
other, Baker's Island; and both, by the influence of the moonlight, had a silvery hue, unlike
their ruddy beacon tinge in dark nights.  They threw long reflections across the sea, like
the moon.  There we floated slowly with the tide till about midnight, and then, the tide turning,
we fastened our vessel to a pole, which marked a rock, so as to prevent being carried back
by the reflux.  Some of the passengers turned in below; some stretched themselves on deck;
some walked about, smoking cigars.  I kept the deck all night.  Once there was a little cat's-paw
of a breeze, whereupon we untied ourselves from the pole; but it almost immediately died away,
and we were compelled to make fast again.  At about two o'clock, up rose the morning star,
a round, red, fiery ball, very comparable to the moon at its rising, and, getting upward, it
shone marvellously bright, and threw its long reflection into the sea, like the moon and the
two lighthouses.  It was Venus, and the brightest star I ever beheld; it was in the northeast.
The moon made but a very small circuit in the sky, though it shone all night.  The aurora borealis
shot upwards to the zenith, and between two and three o'clock the first streak of dawn appeared,
stretching far along the edge of the eastern horizon,-- a faint streak of light; then it gradually
broadened and deepened, and became a rich saffron tint, with violet above, and then an ethereal
and transparent blue.  The saffron became intermixed with splendor, kindling and kindling,
Baker's Island lights being in the centre of the brightness, so that they were extinguished
by it, or at least grew invisible.  On the other side of the boat, the Marblehead lighthouse
still threw out its silvery gleam, and the moon shone brightly too; and its light looked very
singularly, mingling with the growing daylight.  It was not like the moonshine, brightening
as the evening twilight deepens; for now it threw its radiance over the landscape, the green
and other tints of which were displayed by the daylight, whereas at-evening all those tints
are obscured.  It looked like a milder sunshine,--a dreamy sunshine,--the sunshine of a world
not quite so real and material as this.  All night we had heard the Marblehead clocks telling
the hour. Anon, up came the sun, without any bustle, but quietly, his antecedent splendors
having gilded the sea for some time before.  It had been cold towards morning, but now grew
warm, and gradually burning hot in the sun. A breeze sprang up, but our first use of it was
to get aground on Coney Island about five o'clock, where we lay till nine or thereabout, and
then floated slowly up to the wharf.  The roar of distant surf, the rolling of porpoises, the
passing of shoals of fish, a steamboat smoking along at a distance, were the scene on my watch.
I fished during the night, and, feeling something on the line, I drew up with great eagerness
and vigor. It was two of those broad-leaved sea-weeds, with stems like snakes, both rooted
on a stone,--all which came up together.  Often these sea-weeds root themselves on muscles.
In the morning, our pilot killed a flounder with the boat-hook, the poor fish thinking himself
secure on the bottom.

Ladurlad, in the Curse of Kehama, on visiting a certain celestial region, the fire in his heart
and brain died away for a season, but was rekindled again on returning to earth.  So may it
be with me in my projected three months' seclusion from old associations.

Punishment of a miser,--to pay the drafts of his heir in his tomb.

July 13th.--A show of wax-figures, consisting almost wholly of murderers and their victims,--Gibbs
and Hansley, the pirates, and the Dutch girl whom Gibbs murdered.  Gibbs and Hansley were admirably
done, as natural as life; and many people who had known Gibbs would not, according to the showman,
be convinced that this wax-figure was not his skin stuffed.  The two pirates were represented
with halters round their necks, just ready to be turned off; and the sheriff stood behind them,
with his watch, waiting for the moment.  The clothes, halter, and Gibbs's hair were authentic.
E. K. Avery and Cornell,--the former a figure in black, leaning on the back of a chair, in
the attitude of a clergyman about to pray; an ugly devil, said to be a good likeness.  Ellen
Jewett and R. P. Robinson, she dressed richly, in extreme fashion, and very pretty; he awkward
and stiff, it being difficult to stuff a figure to look like a gentleman.  The showman seemed
very proud of Ellen Jewett, and spoke of her somewhat as if this wax-figure were a real creation.
Strong and Mrs. Whipple, who together murdered the husband of the latter.  Lastly the Siamese
twins.  The showman is careful to call his exhibition the "Statuary."  He walks to and fro
before the figures, talking of the history of the persons, the moral lessons to be drawn therefrom,
and especially of the excellence of the wax-work.  He has for sale printed histories of the
personages.  He is a friendly, easy-mannered sort of a half-genteel character, whose talk has
been moulded by the persons who most frequent such a show; an air of superiority of information,
a moral instructor, with a great deal of real knowledge of the world.  He invites his departing
guests to call again and bring their friends, desiring to know whether they are pleased; telling
that he had a thousand people on the 4th of July, and that they were all perfectly satisfied.
He talks with the female visitors, remarking on Ellen Jewett's person and dress to them, he
having "spared no expense in dressing her; and all the ladies say that a dress never set better,
and he thinks he never knew a handsomer female."  He goes to and fro, snuffing the candles,
and now and then holding one to the face of a favorite figure.  Ever and anon, hearing steps
upon the staircase, he goes to admit a new visitor.  The visitors,--a half-bumpkin, half country-squire-like
man, who has something of a knowing air, and yet looks and listens with a good deal of simplicity
and faith, smiling between whiles; a mechanic of the town; several decent-looking girls and
women, who eye Ellen herself with more interest than the other figures,--women having much
curiosity about such ladies; a gentlemanly sort of person, who looks somewhat ashamed of himself
for being there, and glances at me knowingly, as if to intimate that he was conscious of being
out of place; a boy or two, and myself, who examine wax faces and faces of flesh with equal
interest.  A political or other satire might be made by describing a show of wax-figures of
the prominent public men; and, by the remarks of the showman and the spectators, their characters
and public standing might be expressed.  And the incident of Judge Tyler as related by E----
might be introduced.

A series of strange, mysterious, dreadful events to occur, wholly destructive of a person's
happiness.  He to impute them to various persons and causes, but ultimately finds that he is
himself the sole agent.  Moral, that our welfare depends on ourselves.

The strange incident in the court of Charles IX. of France: he and five other maskers being
attired in coats of linen covered with pitch and bestuck with flax to represent hairy savages.
They entered the hall dancing, the five being fastened together, and the king in front.  By
accident the five were set on fire with a torch.  Two were burned to death on the spot, two
afterwards died; one fled to the buttery, and jumped into a vessel of water.  It might be represented
as the fate of a squad of dissolute men.

A perception, for a moment, of one's eventual and moral self, as if it were another person,--the
observant faculty being separated, and looking intently at the qualities of the character.
There is a surprise when this happens,--this getting out of one's self,--and then the observer
sees how queer a fellow he is.

July 27th.--Left home [Salem] on the 23d instant.  To Boston by stage, and took the afternoon
cars for Worcester.  A little boy returning from the city, several miles, with a basket of
empty custard-cups, the contents of which he had probably sold at the depot.  Stopped at the
Temperance House.  An old gentleman, Mr. Phillips of Boston, got into conversation with one,
and inquired very freely as to my character, tastes, habits, and circumstances,--a freedom
sanctioned by his age, his kindly and beneficent spirit, and the wisdom of his advice.  It
is strange how little impertinence depends on what is actually said, but rather on the manner
and motives of saying it.  "I want to do you good," said he with warmth, after becoming, apparently,
moved by my communications.  "Well, sir," replied I, "I wish you could, for both our sakes;
for I have no doubt it will be a great satisfaction to you."  He asked the most direct questions
of another young man; for instance, "Are you married?" having before ascertained that point
with regard to myself. He told me by all means to act, in whatever way; observing that he himself
would have no objection to be a servant, if no other mode of action presented itself.

The landlord of the tavern, a decent, active, grave, attentive personage, giving me several
cards of his house to distribute on my departure.  A judge, a stout, hearty country squire,
looking elderly; a hale and rugged man, in a black coat, and thin, light pantaloons.

Started for Northampton at half past nine in the morning.  A respectable sort of man and his
son on their way to Niagara,--grocers, I believe, and calculating how to perform the tour,
subtracting as few days as possible from the shop.  Somewhat inexperienced travellers, and
comparing everything advantageously or otherwise with Boston customs; and considering themselves
a long way from home, while yet short of a hundred miles from it.  Two ladies, rather good-looking.
I rode outside nearly all day, and was very sociable with the driver and another outside passenger.
Towards night, took up an essence-vendor for a short distance.  He was returning home, after
having been out on a tour two or three weeks; and nearly exhausted his stock.  He was not exclusively
an essence-pedler, having a large tin box, which had been filled with dry goods, combs, jewelry,
etc., now mostly sold out.  His essences were of anise-seed, cloves, red-cedar, wormwood, together
with opodeldoc, and an oil for the hair.  These matters are concocted at Ashfield, and the
pedlers are sent about with vast quantities.  Cologne-water is among the essences manufactured,
though the bottles have foreign labels on them. The pedler was good-natured and communicative,
and spoke very frankly about his trade, which he seemed to like better than farming, though
his experience of it is yet brief.  He spoke of the trials of temper to which pedlers are subjected,
but said that it was necessary to be forbearing, because the same road must be travelled again
and again.  The pedlers find satisfaction for all contumelies in making good bargains out of
their customers.  This man was a pedler in quite a small way, making but a narrow circuit,
and carrying no more than an open basket full of essences; but some go out with wagon-loads.
He himself contemplated a trip westward, in which case he would send on quantities of his wares
ahead to different stations.  He seemed to enjoy the intercourse and seeing of the world. 
He pointed out a rough place in the road, where his stock of essences had formerly been broken
by a jolt of the stage.  What a waste of sweet smells on the desert air!  The essence-labels
stated the efficacy of the stuffs for various complaints of children and grown people.  The
driver was an acquaintance of the pedler, and so gave him his drive for nothing, though the
pedler pretended to wish to force some silver into his hand; and afterwards he got down to
water the horses, while the driver was busied with other matters.  This driver was a little,
dark ragamuffin, apparently of irascible temper, speaking with great disapprobation of his
way-bill not being timed accurately, but so as to make it appear as if he were longer upon
the road than he was.  As he spoke, the blood darkened in his cheek, and his eye looked ominous
and angry, as if he were enraged with the person to whom he was speaking; yet he had not real
grit, for he had never said a word of his grievances to those concerned.  "I mean to tell them
of it by and by.  I won't bear it more than three or four times more," said he.

Left Northampton the next morning, between one and two o'clock.  Three other passengers, whose
faces were not visible for some hours; so we went on through unknown space, saying nothing,
glancing forth sometimes to see the gleam of the lanterns on wayside objects.

How very desolate looks a forest when seen in this way,--as if, should you venture one step
within its wild, tangled, many-stemmed, and dark-shadowed verge, you would inevitably be lost
forever.  Sometimes we passed a house, or rumbled through a village, stopping perhaps to arouse
some drowsy postmaster, who appeared at the door in shirt and pantaloons, yawning, received
the mail, returned it again, and was yawning when last seen.  A few words exchanged among the
passengers, as they roused themselves from their half-slumbers, or dreamy, slumber-like abstraction.
Meantime dawn broke, our faces became partially visible, the morning air grew colder, and finally
cloudy day came on.  We found ourselves driving through quite a romantic country, with hills
or mountains on all sides, a stream on one side, bordered by a high, precipitous bank, up which
would have grown pines, only that, losing their footholds, many of them had slipped downward.
The road was not the safest in the world; for often the carriage approached within two or three
feet of a precipice; but the driver, a merry fellow, lolled on his box, with his feet protruding
horizontally, and rattled on at the rate of ten miles an hour.  Breakfast between four and
five,--newly caught trout, salmon, ham, boiled eggs, and other niceties,--truly excellent.
A bunch of pickerel, intended for a tavern-keeper farther on, was carried by the stage-driver.
The drivers carry a "time-watch" enclosed in a small wooden case, with a lock, so that it may
be known in what time they perform their stages.  They are allowed so many hours and minutes
to do their work, and their desire to go as fast as possible, combined with that of keeping
their horses in good order, produces about a right medium.

One of the passengers was a young man who had been in Pennsylvania, keeping a school,--a genteel
enough young man, but not a gentleman.  He took neither supper nor breakfast, excusing himself
from one as being weary with riding all day, and from the other because it was so early. He
attacked me for a subscription for "building up a destitute church," of which he had taken
an agency, and had collected two or three hundred dollars, but wanted as many thousands.  Betimes
in the morning, on the descent of a mountain, we arrived at a house where dwelt the married
sister of the young man, whom he was going to visit.

He alighted, saw his trunk taken off, and then, having perceived his sister at the door, and
turning to bid us farewell, there was a broad smile, even a laugh of pleasure, which did him
more credit with me than anything else; for hitherto there had been a disagreeable scornful
twist upon his face, perhaps, however, merely superficial.  I saw, as the stage drove off,
his comely sister approaching with a lighted-up face to greet him, and one passenger on the
front seat beheld them meet.  "Is it an affectionate greeting?" inquired I.  "Yes," said he,
"I should like to share it"; whereby I concluded that there was a kiss exchanged.

The highest point of our journey was at Windsor, where we could see leagues around over the
mountain, a terribly bare, bleak spot, fit for nothing but sheep, and without shelter of woods.
We rattled downward into a warmer region, beholding as we went the sun shining on portions
of the landscape, miles ahead of us, while we were yet in chillness and gloom.  It is probable
that during a part of the stage the mists around us looked like sky clouds to those in the
lower regions.  Think of driving a stage-coach through the clouds!  Seasonably in the forenoon
we arrived at Pittsfield.

Pittsfield is a large village, quite shut in by mountain walls, generally extending like a
rampart on all sides of it, but with insulated great hills rising here and there in the outline.
The area of the town is level; its houses are handsome, mostly wooden and white; but some are
of brick, painted deep red, the bricks being not of a healthy, natural color.  There are handsome
churches, Gothic and others, and a court-house and an academy; the court-house having a marble
front.  There is a small wall in the centre of the town, and in the centre of the Mall rises
an elm of the loftiest and straightest stem that ever I beheld, without a branch or leaf upon
it till it has soared seventy or perhaps a hundred feet into the air.  The top branches unfortunately
have been shattered somehow or other, so that it does not cast a broad shade; probably they
were broken by their own ponderous foliage.  The central square of Pittsfield presents all
the bustle of a thriving village,--the farmers of the vicinity in light wagons, sulkies, or
on horseback; stages at the door of the Berkshire Hotel, under the stoop of which sit or lounge
the guests, stage-people, and idlers, observing or assisting in the arrivals and departures.
Huge trunks and bandboxes unladed and laded.  The courtesy shown to ladies in aiding them to
alight, in a shower, under umbrellas.  The dull looks of passengers, who have driven all night,
scarcely brightened by the excitement of arriving at a new place.  The stage agent demanding
the names of those who are going on,--some to Lebanon Springs, some to Albany.  The toddy-stick
is still busy at these Berkshire public-houses.  At dinner soup preliminary, in city style. Piccolomini
as Arline; and also had the honor of being selected for the state performance connected with
the marriage of the Princess Royal. The French version, under the name of "La Bohémienne," for
which Balfe added several numbers, besides enlarging it to five acts, was produced at the Théâtre
Lyrique, Paris, in December, 1869, and gained for him the Cross of the Legion of Honor.

The scene of the opera is laid in Austria, and the first act introduces us to the château and grounds
of Count Arnheim, Governor of Presburg, whose retainers are preparing
for the chase.

After a short chorus the Count enters with his little daughter Arline and his nephew Florestein.
The Count sings a short solo ("A Soldier's Life"), and as the choral response by his retainers
and hunters dies away and they leave the scene, Thaddeus, a Polish exile and fugitive, rushes
in excitedly, seeking to escape the Austrian soldiers. His opening number is a very pathetic
song ("'Tis sad to leave your Fatherland"). At the end of the song a troop of gypsies enter, headed by Devilshoof,
singing a blithe chorus ("In the Gypsy's Life you may read"). He hears Thaddeus's story and induces
him to join them. Before the animated strains fairly cease, Florestein and some of the hunters
dash across the grounds in quest of Arline, who has been attacked by a stag. Thaddeus, seizing
a rifle, joins them, and rescues the child by killing the animal. The Count overwhelms him with
gratitude, and urges him to join in the coming festivities. He consents, and at the banquet produces
a commotion by refusing to drink the health of the Emperor. The soldiers are about to rush upon him,
when Devilshoof interferes. The gypsy is arrested for his temerity, and taken into the castle. Thaddeus
departs and the festivities are resumed, but are speedily interrupted again by the escape of
Devilshoof, who takes Arline with him. The finale of the act is very stirring, and contains
one number, a prayer ("Thou who in Might supreme"), which is extremely
effective.

Twelve years elapse between the first and second acts, and during this time Count Arnheim has
received no tidings of Arline, and has given her up as lost forever. The act opens in the gypsy
camp in the suburbs of Presburg. Arline is seen asleep in the tent of the Queen, with Thaddeus
watching her. After a quaint little chorus ("Silence, silence, the Lady Moon") sung by the gypsies,
they depart in quest of plunder, headed by Devilshoof, and soon find their victim in the person
of the foppish and half-drunken Florestein, who is returning from a revel. He is speedily relieved
of his jewelry, among which is a medallion, which is carried off by Devilshoof. As the gypsies
disappear, Arline wakes and relates her dream to Thaddeus in a joyous song ("I dreamed I dwelt
in Marble Halls"), which has become one of the world's favorites. At the close of the ballad
Thaddeus tells her the meaning of the scar upon her arm, and reveals himself as her rescuer, but
does not disclose to her the mystery of her birth. The musical dialogue, with its ensemble,
"The Secret of her Birth," will never lose its charm. Thaddeus declares his love for her just
as the Queen, who is also in love with Thaddeus, enters. Arline also confesses her love for
Thaddeus, and, according to the customs of the tribe, the Queen unites them, at the same time
vowing vengeance against the pair.

The scene now changes to a street in the city. A great fair is in progress, and the gypsies,
as usual, resort to it. Arline enters at their head, joyously singing, to the accompaniment
of the rattling castanets, "Come with the Gypsy Bride;" her companions, blithely tripping along,
responding with the chorus, "In the Gypsy's Life you may read." They disappear down the street
and reappear in the public plaza. Arline, the Queen, Devilshoof, and Thaddeus sing an unaccompanied
quartet ("From the Valleys and Hills"), a number which for grace and flowing harmony deserves
a place in any opera. As they mingle among the people an altercation occurs between Arline and
Florestein, who has attempted to insult her. The Queen recognizes Florestein as the owner of the
medallion, and for her courage in resenting the insult maliciously presents Arline with it.
Shortly afterwards he observes the medallion on Arline's neck, and has her arrested for theft. The
next scene opens in the hall of justice. Count Arnheim enters with a sad countenance, and as
he observes Arline's portrait, gives vent to his sorrow in that well-known melancholy reverie,
"The Heart bowed down," which has become famous the world over. Arline is brought before him
for trial. As it progresses he observes the scar upon her arm and asks its cause. She tells
the story which Thaddeus had told her, and this solves the mystery. The Count recognizes his
daughter, and the act closes with a beautiful ensemble ("Praised be the Will of Heaven").

The
last act opens in the salon of Count Arnheim. Arline is restored to her old position, but her
love for Thaddeus remains. He finds an opportunity to have a meeting with her, through the
cunning of Devilshoof, who accompanies him.

He once more tells his love in that tender and impassioned song, "When other Lips and other Hearts,"
and she promises to be faithful to him. As the sound of approaching steps is heard, Thaddeus
and his companion conceal themselves. A large company enter, and Arline is presented to them.
During the ceremony a closely veiled woman appears, and when questioned discovers herself as the
Gypsy Queen. She reveals the hiding-place of her companions, and Thaddeus is dragged forth and
ordered to leave the house. Arline declares her love for him, and her intention to go with him.
She implores her father to relent. Thaddeus avows his noble descent, and boasts his ancestry
and deeds in battle in that stirring martial song, "When the Fair Land of Poland." The Count
finally yields and gives his daughter to Thaddeus. The Queen, filled with rage and despair,
induces one of the tribe to fire at him as he is embracing Arline; but by a timely movement of Devilshoof
the bullet intended for Thaddeus pierces the breast of the Queen. As the curtain falls, the
old song of the gypsies is heard again as they disappear in the distance with Devilshoof at their
head.

Many of the operas of Balfe, like other ballad operas, have become unfashionable; but it is doubtful
whether "The Bohemian Girl" will ever lose its attraction for those who delight in song-melody,
charming orchestration, and sparkling, animated choruses. It leaped into popularity at a bound,
and its pretty melodies are still as fresh as when they were first sung.

THE ROSE OF CASTILE.

"The Rose of Castile," comic opera in three acts, words by Harris and Falconer, adapted from
Adolphe Adam's "Muletier de Tolède," was first produced at the Lyceum Theatre, London, Oct. 29,
1857, with the following cast:--

ELVIRA Miss LOUISA PYNE. MANUEL W.H. HARRISON. CARMEN Miss SUSAN PYNE. DON PEDRO Mr. WEISS.
DON SALLUST Mr. ST. ALBYN. DON FLORIO Mr. HONEY.

The scene of the opera is laid in Spain. Elvira, the Rose of Castile, Queen of Leon, has just ascended
the throne, and her hand has been demanded by the King of Castile for his brother, Don Sebastian
the Infant. Having learned that the latter is about to enter her dominions disguised as a
muleteer, the better to satisfy his curiosity about her, she adopts the same expedient, and
sets out to intercept him, disguised as a peasant girl, taking with her one of her attendants.

The
first act opens upon a rural scene in front of a posada, where the peasants are dancing and
singing a lively chorus ("List to the gay Castanet"). Elvira and Carmen, her attendant, enter
upon the scene, and are asked to join in the dance, but instead, Elvira delights them with a song,
a vocal scherzo ("Yes, I'll obey you"). The innkeeper is rude to them, but they are protected
from his coarseness by Manuel, the muleteer, who suddenly appears and sings a rollicking song
("I am a simple Muleteer") to the accompaniment of a tambourine and the snappings of his whip.
A dialogue duet follows, in which she accepts his protection and escort. She has already recognized
the Infant, and he has fulfilled the motive of the story by falling in love with her. At this
point the three conspirators, Don Pedro, Don Sallust, and Don Florio, enter, the first of whom
has designs on the throne. They indulge in a buffo trio, which develops into a spirited bacchanal
("Wine, Wine, the Magician thou art!"). Observing Elvira's likeness to the Queen, they persuade
her to personate her Majesty. She consents with feigned reluctance, and after accepting their
escort in place of Manuel's, being sure that he will follow, she sings a quaint rondo ("Oh, were
I the Queen of Spain!"), and the act closes with a concerted number
accompanying their departure.

The second act opens in the throne-room of the palace, and is introduced by a very expressive conspirators'
chorus ("The Queen in the Palace"); after which Don Pedro enters and gives expression to the uncertainty
of his schemes in a ballad ("Though Fortune darkly o'er me frowns")
which reminds one very forcibly of "The Heart bowed down," in "The
Bohemian Girl."

The Queen, who has eluded the surveillance of the conspirators, makes her appearance, surrounded
by her attendants, and sings that exquisite ballad, "The Convent
Cell"

("Of Girlhood's happy Days I dream"), one of the most beautiful songs ever written by any composer,
and certainly Balfe's most popular inspiration. At the close of the ballad Manuel appears, and
is granted an audience, in which he informs her of the meeting with the peasant girl and boy,
and declares his belief that they were the Queen and Carmen. She ridicules the statement, and
a very funny trio buffo ensues ("I'm not the Queen, ha, ha!"). He then informs her of the conspirators'
plot to imprison her, but she thwarts it by inducing a silly and pompous old Duchess to assume
the rôle of Queen for the day, and ride to the palace closely veiled in the royal carriage.
The plot succeeds, and the Duchess is seized and conveyed to a convent. In the next scene there
is another spirited buffo number, in which Don Pedro and Don Florio
are mourning over the loss of their peasant girl, when, greatly to
their relief, she enters again, singing a very quaint and characteristic
scena ("I'm but a simple Peasant Maid"), which rouses the suspicions
of the conspirators.

They are all the more perplexed when the Queen announces herself, and declares her intention
of marrying the muleteer.

The last act opens with a song by Carmen ("Though Love's the greatest Plague in Life"), which falls
far below the excellence of the other songs in the work. It is followed by a buffo duet between
Carmen and Florio, who agree to marry. The Queen and ladies enter, and the former sings a
bravura air ("Oh, joyous, happy Day!"), which was intended by the composer to show Miss Pyne's
vocal ability. At this point a message is brought her from Don Sebastian, announcing his marriage.
Enraged at the discovery that the muleteer is not Don Sebastian, she severely upbraids him,
and he replies in another exquisite ballad ("'Twas Rank and Fame that tempted thee"). At its
close she once more declares she will be true to the muleteer. Don Pedro is delighted at the
apparent success of his scheme, as he believes he can force her to abdicate if she marries a
muleteer, and gives vent to his joy in a martial song ("Hark! hark! methinks I hear"). The last
scene is in the throne-room, where Manuel announces he is king of Castile, and mounts the throne
singing a stirring song closely resembling, in its style, the "Fair Land of Poland," in "The
Bohemian Girl." Elvira expresses her delight in a bravura air ("Oh, no! by Fortune blessed"),
and the curtain falls. The story of the opera is very complicated, and sometimes tiresome;
but the music is well sustained throughout, especially the buffo numbers, while some of the
ballads are among the best ever written by an English composer.

BEETHOVEN.

Ludwig Von Beethoven, the greatest of composers, was born Dec. 17, 1770, at Bonn, Germany, his
father being a court singer in the chapel of the Elector of Cologne. He studied in Vienna with Haydn,
with whom he did not always agree, however, and afterwards with Albrechtsberger. His first symphony
appeared in 1801, his earlier symphonies, in what is called his first period, being written in
the Mozart style. His only opera, "Fidelio," for which he wrote four overtures, was first brought
out in Vienna in 1805; his oratorio, "Christ on the Mount of Olives," in 1812; and his colossal
Ninth Symphony, with its choral setting of Schiller's "Ode to Joy," in 1824. In addition to
his symphonies, his opera, oratorios, and masses, and the immortal group of sonatas for the piano,
which were almost revelations in music, he developed chamber music
to an extent far beyond that reached by his predecessors, Haydn and
Mozart.

His symphonies exhibit surprising power, and a marvellous comprehension of the deeper feelings
in life and the influences of nature, both human and physical. He wrote with the deepest earnestness,
alike in the passion and the calm of his music, and he invested it also with a genial humor
as well as with the highest expression of pathos. His works are epic in character. He was the
great tone-poet of music. His subjects were always lofty and dignified, and to their treatment
he brought not only a profound knowledge of musical technicality, but intense sympathy with the
innermost feelings of human nature, for he was a humanitarian in the broadest sense. By the
common consent of the musical world he stands at the head of all composers, and has always been their
guide and inspiration. He died March 26, 1827, in the midst of a raging thunder storm, one of
his latest utterances being a recognition of the "divine spark" in Schubert's music.
FIDELIO.

"Fidelio, oder die eheliche Liebe" ("Fidelio, or Conjugal
Love"), grand opera in two acts, words by Sonnleithner, translated
freely from Bouilly's "Léonore, ou l'Amour Conjugal," was first produced
at the Theatre An der Wien, Vienna, Nov. 20, 1805, the work at that
time being in three acts. A translation of the original programme
of that performance, with the exception of the usual price of admissions,
is appended:--  "I should not think you could smell carrion in that house," said
a stage agent.  Whereupon the soap-maker dropped his head, with a little snort, as it were,
of wounded feeling; but immediately said that he took all in good part.  There was an old squire
of the village, a lawyer probably, whose demeanor was different,-- with a distance, yet with
a kindliness; for he remembered the times when they met on equal terms.  "You and I," said
the squire, alluding to their respective troubles and sicknesses, "would have died long ago,
if we had not had the courage to live."  The poor devil kept talking to me long after everybody
else had left the stoop, giving vent to much practical philosophy, and just observation on
the ways of men, mingled with rather more assumption of literature and cultivation than belonged
to the present condition of his mind.  Meantime his great dog, a cleanly looking and not ill-bred
dog, being the only decent attribute appertaining to his master,--a well-natured dog, too,
and receiving civilly any demonstration of courtesy from other people, though preserving a
certain distance of deportment,--this great dog grew weary of his master's lengthy talk, and
expressed his impatience to be gone by thrusting himself between his legs, rolling over on
his back, seizing his ragged trousers, or playfully taking his maimed, bare foot into his mouth,--using,
in short, the kindly and humorous freedom of a friend, with a wretch to whom all are free enough,
but none other kind.  His master rebuked him, but with kindness too, and not so that the dog
felt himself bound to desist, though he seemed willing to allow his master all the time that
could possibly be spared.  And at last, having said many times that he must go and shave and
dress himself,--and as his beard had been at least a week growing, it might have seemed almost
a week's work to get rid of it,--he rose from the stoop and went his way,--a forlorn and miserable
thing in the light of the cheerful summer morning.  Yet he seems to keep his spirits up, and
still preserves himself a man among men, asking nothing from them; nor is it clearly perceptible
what right they have to scorn him, though he seems to acquiesce, in a manner, in their doing
so.  And yet he cannot wholly have lost his self-respect; and doubtless there were persons
on the stoop more grovelling than himself.

Another character:--A blacksmith of fifty or upwards, a corpulent figure, big in the paunch
and enormous in the rear; yet there is such an appearance of strength and robustness in his
frame, that his corpulence appears very proper and necessary to him.  A pound of flesh could
not be spared from his abundance, any more than from the leanest man; and he walks about briskly,
without any panting or symptom of labor or pain in his motion.  He has a round, jolly face,
always mirthful and humorous and shrewd, and the air of a man well to do, and well respected,
yet not caring much about the opinions of men, because his independence is sufficient to itself.
Nobody would take him for other than a man of some importance in the community, though his
summer dress is a tow-cloth pair of pantaloons, a shirt not of the cleanest, open at the breast,
and the sleeves rolled up at the elbows, and a straw hat.  There is not such a vast difference
between this costume and that of Lawyer H------ above mentioned, yet never was there a greater
diversity of appearance than between these two men; and a glance at them would be sufficient
to mark the difference.  The blacksmith loves his glass, and comes to the tavern for it, whenever
it seems good to him, not calling for it slyly and shyly, but marching steadily to the bar,
or calling across the room for it to be prepared.  He speaks with great bitterness against
the new license law, and vows if it be not repealed by fair means it shall be by violence,
and that he will be as ready to cock his rifle for such a cause as for any other.  On this
subject his talk is really fierce; but as to all other matters he is good-natured and good-hearted,
fond of joke, and shaking his jolly sides with frequent laughter.  His conversation has much
strong, unlettered sense, imbued with humor, as everybody's talk is in New England.

He takes a queer position sometimes,--queer for his figure particularly, --straddling across
a chair, facing the back, with his arms resting thereon, and his chin on them, for the benefit
of conversing closely with some one.  When he has spent as much time in the bar-room or under
the stoop as he chooses to spare, he gets up at once, and goes off with a brisk, vigorous pace.
He owns a mill, and seems to be prosperous in the world.  I know no man who seems more like
a man, more indescribably human, than this sturdy blacksmith.

There came in the afternoon a respectable man in gray homespun cloth, who arrived in a wagon,
I believe, and began to inquire, after supper, about a certain new kind of mill machinery.
Being referred to the blacksmith, who owned one of these mills, the stranger said that he had
come from Vermont to learn about the matter.  "What may I call your name?" said he to the blacksmith.
"My name is Hodge," replied the latter.  "I believe I have heard of you," said the stranger.
Then they colloquied at much length about the various peculiarities and merits of the new invention.
The stranger continued here two or three days, making his researches, and forming acquaintance
with several millwrights and others.  He was a man evidently of influence in his neighborhood,
and the tone of his conversation was in the style of one accustomed to be heard with deference,
though all in a plain and homely way.  Lawyer H------ took notice of this manner; for the talk
being about the nature of soap, and the evil odor arising from that process, the stranger joined
in.  "There need not be any disagreeable smell in making soap," said he.  "Now we are to receive
a lesson," said H------, and the remark was particularly apropos to the large wisdom of the
stranger's tone and air.

Then he gave an account of the process in his domestic establishment, saying that he threw
away the whole offals of the hog, as not producing any soap, and preserved the skins of the
intestines for sausages.  He seemed to be hospitable, inviting those with whom he did business
to take "a mouthful of dinner" with him, and treating them with liquors; for he was not an
utter temperance man, though moderate in his potations.  I suspect he would turn out a pattern
character of the upper class of New England yeomen, if I had an opportunity of studying him.
Doubtless he had been selectman, representative, and justice, and had filled all but weighty
offices.  He was highly pleased with the new mill contrivance, and expressed his opinion that,
when his neighbors saw the success of his, it would be extensively introduced into that vicinity.

Mem.  The hostlers at taverns call the money given them "pergasus,"-- corrupted from "perquisites."
Otherwise "knock-down money."  Remarkable character:--A travelling surgeon-dentist, who has
taken a room in the North Adams House, and sticks up his advertising bills on the pillars of
the piazza, and all about the town.  He is a tall, slim young man, six feet two, dressed in
a country-made coat of light blue (taken, as he tells me, in exchange for dental operations),
black pantaloons, and clumsy, cowhide hoots.  Self-conceit is very strongly expressed in his
air; and a doctor once told him that he owed his life to that quality; for, by keeping himself
so stiffly upright, he opens his chest, and counteracts a consumptive tendency.  He is not
only a dentist, which trade he follows temporarily, but a licensed preacher of the Baptist
persuasion, and is now on his way to the West to seek a place of settlement in his spiritual
vocation.  Whatever education he possesses, he has acquired by his own exertions since the
age of twenty-one,--he being now twenty-four.  We talk together very freely; and he has given
me an account, among other matters, of all his love-affairs, which are rather curious, as illustrative
of the life of a smart young country fellow in relation to the gentle sex.  Nothing can exceed
the exquisite self-conceit which characterizes these confidences, and which is expressed inimitably
in his face, his upturned nose, and mouth, so as to be truly a caricature; and he seems strangely
to find as much food for his passion in having been jilted once or twice as in his conquests.
It is curious to notice his revengeful feeling against the false ones,-- hidden from himself,
however, under the guise of religious interest, and desire that they may be cured of their follies.

A little boy named Joe, who haunts about the bar-room and the stoop, four years old, in a thin,
short jacket, and full-breeched trousers, and bare feet.  The men tease him, and put quids
of tobacco in his mouth, under pretence of giving him a fig; and he gets curaged, and utters
a peculiar, sharp, spiteful cry, and strikes at them with a stick, to their great mirth.  He
is always in trouble, yet will not keep away.  They despatch him with two or three cents to
buy candy and nuts and raisins.  They set him down in a niche of the door, and tell him to
remain there a day and a half: he sits down very demurely, as if he meant to fulfil his penance;
but a moment after, behold! there is little Joe capering across the street to join two or three
boys who are playing in a wagon.  Take this boy as the germ of a tavern-haunter, a country
roue, to spend a wild and brutal youth, ten years of his prime in the State Prison, and his
old age in the poorhouse.

There are a great many dogs kept in the village, and many of the travellers also have dogs.
Some are almost always playing about; and if a cow or a pig be passing, two or three of them
scamper forth for an attack.  Some of the younger sort chase pigeons, wheeling as they wheel.
If a contest arises between two dogs, a number of others come with huge barking to join the
fray, though I believe that they do not really take any active part in the contest, but swell
the uproar by way of encouraging the combatants.  When a traveller is starting from the door,
his dog often gets in front of the horse, placing his forefeet down,-- looking the horse in
the face, and barking loudly, then, as the horse comes on, running a little farther, and repeating
the process; and this he does in spite of his master's remonstrances, till, the horse being
fairly started, the dog follows on quietly.  One dog, a diminutive little beast, has been taught
to stand on his hind legs, and rub his face with his paw, which he does with an aspect of much
endurance and deprecation. Another springs at people whom his master points out to him, barking
and pretending to bite.  These tricks make much mirth in the bar-room.  All dogs, of whatever
different sizes and dissimilar varieties, acknowledge the common bond of species among themselves,
and the largest one does not disdain to suffer his tail to be smelt of, nor to reciprocate
that courtesy to the smallest.  They appear to take much interest in one another; but there
is always a degree of caution between two strange dogs when they meet.

July 31st.--A visit to what is called "Hudson's Cave," or "Hudson's Falls," the tradition being
that a man by the name of Henry Hudson, many years ago, chasing a deer, the deer fell over
the place, which then first became known to white men.  It is not properly a cave, but a fissure
in a huge ledge of marble, through which a stream has been for ages forcing its way, and has
left marks of its gradually wearing power on the tall crags, having made curious hollows from
the summit down to the level which it has reached at the present day.  The depth of the fissure
in some places is at least fifty or sixty feet, perhaps more, and at several points it nearly
closes over, and often the sight of the sky is hidden by the interposition of masses of the
marble crags.  The fissure is very irregular, so as not to be describable in words, and scarcely
to be painted,--jetting buttresses, moss-grown, impending crags, with tall trees growing on
their verge, nodding over the head of the observer at the bottom of the chasm, and rooted,
as it were, in air.  The part where the water works its way down is very narrow; but the chasm
widens, after the descent, so as to form a spacious chamber between the crags, open to the
sky, and its floor is strewn with fallen fragments of marble, and trees that have been precipitated
long ago, and are heaped with drift-wood, left there by the freshets, when the scanty stream
becomes a considerable waterfall.  One crag, with a narrow ridge, which might be climbed without
much difficulty, protrudes from the middle of the rock, and divides the fall.  The passage
through the cave made by the stream is very crooked, and interrupted, not only by fallen wrecks,
but by deep pools of water, which probably have been forded by few.  As the deepest pool occurs
in the most uneven part of the chasm, where the hollows in the sides of the crag are deepest,
so that each hollow is almost a cave by itself, I determined to wade through it.  There was
an accumulation of soft stuff on the bottom, so that the water did not look more than knee-deep;
but, finding that my feet sunk in it, I took off my trousers, and waded through up to my middle.
Thus I reached the most interesting part of the cave, where the whirlings of the stream had
left the marks of its eddies in the solid marble, all up and down the two sides of the chasm.
The water is now dammed for the construction of two marble saw-mills, else it would have been
impossible to effect the passage; and I presume that, for years after the cave was discovered,
the waters roared and tore their way in a torrent through this part of the chasm. While I was
there, I heard voices, and a small stone tumbled down; and looking up towards the narrow strip
of bright light, and the sunny verdure that peeped over the top,--looking up thither from the
deep, gloomy depth,--I saw two or three men; and, not liking to be to them the most curious
part of the spectacle, I waded back, and put on my clothes. The marble crags are overspread
with a concretion, which makes them look as gray as granite, except where the continual flow
of water keeps them of a snowy whiteness.  If they were so white all over, it would be a splendid
show.  There is a marble-quarry close in the rear, above the cave, and in process of time the
whole of the crags will be quarried into tombstones, doorsteps, fronts of edifices, fireplaces,
etc.  That will be a pity.  On such portions of the walls as are within reach, visitors have
sculptured their initials, or names at full length; and the white letters showing plainly on
the gray surface, they have more obvious effect than such inscriptions generally have.  There
was formerly, I believe, a complete arch of marble, forming a natural bridge over the top of
the cave; but this is no longer so.  At the bottom of the broad chamber of the cave, standing
in its shadow, the effect of the morning sunshine on the dark or bright foliage of the pines
and other trees that cluster on the summits of the crags was particularly beautiful; and it
was strange how such great trees had rooted themselves in solid marble, for so it seemed.

After passing through this romantic and most picturesque spot, the stream goes onward to turn
factories.  Here its voice resounds within the hollow crags; there it goes onward; talking
to itself, with babbling din, of its own wild thoughts and fantasies,--the voice of solitude
and the wilderness,--loud and continual, but which yet does not seem to disturb the thoughtful
wanderer, so that he forgets there is a noise.  It talks along its storm-strewn path; it talks
beneath tall precipices and high banks,--a voice that has been the same for innumerable ages;
and yet, if you listen, you will perceive a continual change and variety in its babble, and
sometimes it seems to swell louder upon the ear than at others,--in the same spot, I mean.
By and by man makes a dam for it, and it pours over it, still making its voice heard, while
it labors.  At one shop for manufacturing the marble, I saw the disk of a sun-dial as large
as the top of a hogshead, intended for Williams College; also a small obelisk, and numerous
gravestones.  The marble is coarse-grained, but of a very brilliant whiteness.  It is rather
a pity that the cave is not formed of some worthless stone.

In the deep valleys of the neighborhood, where the shadows at sunset are thrown from mountain
to mountain, the clouds have a beautiful effect, flitting high over them, bright with heavenly
gold.  It seems as if the soul might rise up from the gloom, and alight upon them and soar
away. Walking along one of the valleys the other evening, while a pretty fresh breeze blew
across it, the clouds that were skimming over my head seemed to conform themselves to the valley's
shape.

At a distance, mountain summits look close together, almost as if forming one mountain, though
in reality a village lies in the depths between them.

A steam-engine in a factory to be supposed to possess a malignant spirit. It catches one man's
arm, and pulls it off; seizes another by the coat-tails, and almost grapples him bodily; catches
a girl by the hair, and scalps her; and finally draws in a man, and crushes him to death.

The one-armed soap-maker, Lawyer H------, wears an iron hook, which serves him instead of a
hand for the purpose of holding on.  They nickname him "Black Hawk."

North Adams still.--The village, viewed from the top of a hill to the westward at sunset, has
a peculiarly happy and peaceful look.  It lies on a level, surrounded by hills, and seems as
if it lay in the hollow of a large hand.  The Union Village may be seen, a manufacturing place,
extending up a gorge of the hills.  It is amusing to see all the distributed property of the
aristocracy and commonalty, the various and conflicting interests of the town, the loves and
hates, compressed into a space which the eye takes in as completely as the arrangement of a
tea-table.  The rush of the streams comes up the hill somewhat like the sound of a city.

The hills about the village appear very high and steep sometimes, when the shadows of the clouds
are thrown blackly upon them, while there is sunshine elsewhere; so that, seen in front, the
effect of their gradual slope is lost.  These hills, surrounding the town on all sides, give
it a snug and insulated air; and, viewed from certain points, it would be difficult to tell
how to get out, without climbing the mountain ridges; but the roads wind away and accomplish
the passage without ascending very high.  Sometimes the notes of a horn or bugle may be heard
sounding afar among these passes of the mountains, announcing the coming of the stage-coach
from Bennington or Troy or Greenfield or Pittsfield.

There are multitudes of sheep among the hills, and they appear very tame and gentle; though
sometimes, like the wicked, they "flee when no man pursueth."  But, climbing a rude, rough,
rocky, stumpy, ferny height yesterday, one or two of them stood and stared at me with great
earnestness.  I passed on quietly, but soon heard an immense baa-ing up the hill, and all the
sheep came galloping and scrambling after me, baa-ing with all their might in innumerable voices,
running in a compact body, expressing the utmost eagerness, as if they sought the greatest
imaginable favor from me; and so they accompanied me down the hillside,-- a most ridiculous
cortege.  Doubtless they had taken it into their heads that I brought them salt.

The aspect of the village is peculiarly beautiful towards sunset, when there are masses of
cloud about the sky,--the remnants of a thunder-storm.  These clouds throw a shade upon large
portions of the rampart of hills, and the hills towards the west are shaded of course; the
clouds also make the shades deeper in the village, and thus the sunshine on the houses and
trees, and along the street, is a bright, rich gold.  The green is deeper in consequence of
the recent rain.

The doctors walk about the village with their saddle-bags on their arms, one always with a
pipe in his mouth.

A little dog, named Snapper, the same who stands on his hind legs, appears to be a roguish
little dog, and the other day he stole one of the servant-girl's shoes, and ran into the street
with it.  Being pursued, he would lift the shoe in his mouth (while it almost dragged on the
ground), and run a little way, then lie down with his paws on it, and wait to be pursued again.

August 11th.--This morning, it being cloudy and boding of rain, the clouds had settled upon
the mountains, both on the summits and ridges, all round the town, so that there seemed to
be no way of gaining access to the rest of the world, unless by climbing above the clouds.
By and by they partially dispersed, giving glimpses of the mountain ramparts through their
obscurity, the separate clouds lying heavily upon the mountain's breast.  In warm mornings,
after rain, the mist breaks forth from the forests on the ascent of the mountains, like smoke,--the
smoke of a volcano; then it soars up, and becomes a cloud in heaven.  But these clouds to-day
were real rain-clouds.  Sometimes, it is said, while laboring up the mountain-side, they suddenly
burst, and pour down their moisture in a cataract, sweeping all before it.

Every new aspect of the mountains, or view from a different position, creates a surprise in
the mind.

Scenes and characters:--A young country fellow, twenty or thereabouts, decently dressed, pained
with the toothache.  A doctor, passing on horseback, with his black leather saddle-bags behind
him, a thin, frosty-haired man.  Being asked to operate, he looks at the tooth, lances the
gum, and the fellow being content to be dealt with on the spot, he seats himself in a chair
on the stoop with great heroism.  The doctor produces a rusty pair of iron forceps; a man holds
the patient's head; the doctor perceives that, it being a difficult tooth to get at, wedged
between the two largest in his jaws, he must pull very hard; and the instrument is introduced.
A turn of the doctor's hand; the patient begins to utter a cry, but the tooth comes out first,
with four prongs. The patient gets up, half amazed, pays the doctor ninepence, pockets the
tooth, and the spectators are in glee and admiration.

There was a fat woman, a stage-passenger to-day,--a wonder how she could possibly get through
the door, which seemed not so wide as she.  When she put her foot on the step, the stage gave
a great lurch, she joking all the while.  A great, coarse, red-faced dame.  Other passengers,--three
or four slender Williamstown students, a young girl, and a man with one leg and two crutches.

One of the most sensible men in this village is a plain, tall, elderly person, who is overseeing
the mending of a road,--humorous, intelligent, with much thought about matters and things;
and while at work he has a sort of dignity in handling the hoe or crow-bar, which shows him
to be the chief.  In the evening he sits under the stoop, silent and observant from under the
brim of his hat; but, occasion calling, he holds an argument about the benefit or otherwise
of manufactories or other things. A simplicity characterizes him more than appertains to most
Yankees.

A man in a pea-green frock-coat, with velvet collar.  Another in a flowered chintz frock-coat.
There is a great diversity of hues in garments.  A doctor, a stout, tall, round-paunched, red-faced,
brutal-looking old fellow, who gets drunk daily.  He sat down on the step of our stoop, looking
surly, and speaking to nobody; then got up and walked homeward, with a morose swagger and a
slight unevenness of gait, attended by a fine Newfoundland dog.

A barouche with driver returned from beyond Greenfield or Troy empty, the passengers being
left at the former place.  The driver stops here for the night, and, while washing, enters
into talk with an old man about the different roads over the mountain.

People washing themselves at a common basin in the bar-room! and using the common hair-brushes!
perhaps with a consciousness of praiseworthy neatness!

A man with a cradle on his shoulder, having been cradling oats.  I attended a child's funeral
yesterday afternoon.  There was an assemblage of people in a plain, homely apartment.  Most
of the men were dressed in their ordinary clothes, and one or two were in shirt-sleeves.  The
coffin was placed in the midst of us, covered with a velvet pall.  A bepaid clergyman prayed
(the audience remaining seated, while he stood up at the head of the coffin), read a passage
of Scripture and commented upon it. While he read and prayed and expounded there was a heavy
thunder-storm rumbling among the surrounding hills, and the lightning flashed fiercely through
the gloomy room; and the preacher alluded to GOD's voice of thunder.

It is the custom in this part of the country--and perhaps extensively in the interior of New
England--to bury the dead first in a charnel-house, or common tomb, where they remain till
decay has so far progressed as to secure them from the resurrectionists.  They are then reburied,
with certain ceremonies, in their own peculiar graves.

O. E. S------, a widower of forty or upwards, with a son of twelve and a pair of infant twins.
He is a sharp, shrewd Yankee, with a Yankee's license of honesty.  He drinks sometimes more
than enough, and is guilty of peccadilloes with the fair sex; yet speaks most affectionately
of his wife, and is a fond and careful father.  He is a tall, thin, hard-featured man, with
a sly expression of almost hidden grave humor, as if there were some deviltry pretty constantly
in his mind,--which is probably the case.  His brother tells me that he was driven almost crazy
by the loss of his wife.  It appears to me that men are more affected by the deaths of their
wives than wives by the deaths of their husbands. Orrin S------ smokes a pipe, as do many of
the guests.

A walk this forenoon up the mountain ridge that walls in the town towards the east.  The road
is cut zigzag, the mountain being generally as steep as the roof of a house; yet the stage
to Greenfield passes over this road two or three times a week.  Graylock rose up behind me,
appearing, with its two summits and a long ridge between, like a huge monster crouching down
slumbering, with its head slightly elevated.  Graylock is properly the name for the highest
elevation.  It appeared to better advantage the higher the point from which I viewed it.  There
were houses scattered here and there up the mountainside, growing poorer as I ascended; the
last that I passed was a mean log-hut, rough, rude, and dilapidated, with the smoke issuing
from a chimney of small stones, plastered with clay; around it a garden of beans, with some
attempt at flowers, and a green creeper running over the side of the cottage.  Above this point
there were various excellent views of mountain scenery, far off and near, and one village lying
below in the hollow vale.

Having climbed so far that the road seemed now to go downward, I retraced my steps.  There
was a wagon descending behind me; and as it followed the zigzag of the road I could hear the
voices of the men high over my head, and sometimes I caught a glimpse of the wagon almost perpendicularly
above me, while I was looking almost perpendicularly down to the log-hut aforementioned.  Trees
were thick on either hand,--oaks, pines, and others; and marble occasionally peeped up in the
road and there was a lime-kiln by the wayside, ready for burning.

Graylock had a cloud on his head this morning, the base of a heavy white cloud.  The distribution
of the sunshine amid mountain scenery is very striking; one does not see exactly why one spot
should be in deep obscurity while others are all bright.  The clouds throw their shadows upon
the hillsides as they move slowly along,--a transitory blackness.

I passed a doctor high up the road in a sulky, with his black leather saddle-bags.

Hudson's Cave is formed by Hudson's Brook.  There is a natural arch of marble still in one
part of it.  The cliffs are partly made verdant with green moss, chiefly gray with oxidation;
on some parts the white of the marble is seen; in interstices grow brake and other shrubs,
so that there is naked sublimity seen through a good deal of clustering beauty.  Above, the
birch, poplars, and pines grow on the utmost verge of the cliffs, which jut far over, so that
they are suspended in air; and whenever the sunshine finds its way into the depths of the chasm,
the branches wave across it.  There is a lightness, however, about their foliage, which greatly
relieves what would otherwise be a gloomy scene.  After the passage of the stream through the
cliffs of marble, the cliffs separate on either side, and leave it to flow onward; intercepting
its passage, however, by fragments of marble, some of them huge ones, which the cliffs have
flung down, thundering into the bed of the stream through numberless ages.  Doubtless some
of these immense fragments had trees growing on them, which have now mouldered away.  Decaying
trunks are heaped in various parts of the gorge.  The pieces of marble that are washed by the
water are of a snow-white, and partially covered with a bright green water-moss, making a beautiful
contrast.

Among the cliffs, strips of earth-beach extend downward, and trees and large shrubs root themselves
in that earth, thus further contrasting the nakedness of the stone with their green foliage.
But the immediate part where the stream forces its winding passage through the rock is stern,
dark, and mysterious.

Along the road, where it runs beneath a steep, there are high ridges, covered with trees,--the
dew of midnight damping the earth, far towards midnoon.  I observed the shadows of water-insects,
as they swam in the pools of a stream.  Looking down a streamlet, I saw a trunk of a tree,
which has been overthrown by the wind, so as to form a bridge, yet sticking up all its branches,
as if it were unwilling to assist anybody over.

Green leaves, following the eddies of the rivulet, were now borne deep under water, and now
emerged.  Great uprooted trees, adhering midway down a precipice of earth, hung with their
tops downward.

There is an old man, selling the meats of butternuts under the stoop of the hotel.  He makes
that his station during a part of the season.  He was dressed in a dark thin coat, ribbed velvet
pantaloons, and a sort of moccasins, or shoes, appended to the legs of woollen stockings. 
He had on a straw hat, and his hair was gray, with a long, thin visage.  His nuts were contained
in a square tin box, having two compartments, one for the nuts, and another for maple sugar,
which he sells in small cakes.  He had three small tin measures for nuts,--one at one cent,
others at two, four, and six cents; and as fast as they were emptied, he filled them again,
and put them on the top of his box.  He smoked a pipe, and talked with one man about whether
it would be worth while to grow young again, and the duty of being contented with old age;
about predestination and freewill and other metaphysics.  I asked him what his sales amounted
to in the course of a day.  He said that butternuts did not sell so well as walnuts, which
are not yet in season; that he might to-day have sold fifty cents' worth of walnuts, never
less than a dollar's worth, often more; and when he went round with a caravan, he had sold
fifteen dollars' worth per day, and once as much as twenty dollars' worth.  This promises to
be an excellent year for walnuts.  Chestnuts have been scarce for two or three years.  He had
one hundred chestnut-trees on his own land, and last year he offered a man twenty-five cents
if he would find him a quart of good chestnuts on them.  A bushel of walnuts would cost about
ten dollars.  He wears a pair of silver-rimmed spectacles.

A drunken fellow sat down by him, and bought a cent's worth of his butternuts, and inquired
what he would sell out to him for.  The old man made an estimate, though evidently in jest,
and then reckoned his box, measures, meats, and what little maple sugar he had, at four dollars.
He had a very quiet manner, and expressed an intention of going to the Commencement at Williamstown
to-morrow.  His name, I believe, is Captain Gavett.

Wednesday, August 15th.--I went to Commencement at Williams College,-- five miles distant.
At the tavern were students with ribbons, pink or blue, fluttering from their buttonholes,
these being the badges of rival societies.  There was a considerable gathering of people, chiefly
arriving in wagons or buggies, some in barouches, and very few in chaises.  The most characteristic
part of the scene was where the pedlers, gingerbread-sellers, etc., were collected, a few hundred
yards from the meeting-house.  There was a pedler there from New York State, who sold his wares
by auction, and I could have stood and listened to him all day long.  Sometimes he would put
up a heterogeny [this is a word made by Mr. Hawthorne, but one that was needed.--S. H.] of
articles in a lot,--as a paper of pins, a lead-pencil, and a shaving-box,--and knock them all
down, perhaps for ninepence.  Bunches of lead-pencils, steel-pens, pound-cakes of shaving-soap,
gilt finger-rings, bracelets, clasps, and other jewelry, cards of pearl buttons, or steel ("there
is some steel about them, gentlemen, for my brother stole 'em, and I bore him out in it"),
bundles of wooden combs, boxes of matches, suspenders, and, in short, everything,--dipping
his hand down into his wares with the promise of a wonderful lot, and producing, perhaps, a
bottle of opodeldoc, and joining it with a lead-pencil,--and when he had sold several things
of the same kind, pretending huge surprise at finding "just one more," if the lads lingered;
saying, "I could not afford to steal them for the price; for the remorse of conscience would
be worth more,"--all the time keeping an eye upon those who bought, calling for the pay, making
change with silver or bills, and deciding on the goodness of banks; and saying to the boys
who climbed upon his cart, "Fall down, roll down, tumble down, only get down"; and uttering
everything in the queer, humorous recitative in which he sold his articles.  Sometimes he would
pretend that a person had bid, either by word or wink, and raised a laugh thus; never losing
his self-possession, nor getting out of humor. When a man asked whether a bill were good: "No!
do you suppose I'd give you good money?"  When he delivered an article, he exclaimed, "You're
the lucky man," setting off his wares with the most extravagant eulogies. The people bought
very freely, and seemed also to enjoy the fun.  One little boy bought a shaving-box, perhaps
meaning to speculate upon it. This character could not possibly he overdrawn; and he was really
excellent, with his allusions to what was passing, intermingled, doubtless, with a good deal
that was studied.  He was a man between thirty and forty, with a face expressive of other ability,
as well as of humor.

A good many people were the better or the worse for liquor.  There was one fellow,--named Randall,
I think,--a round-shouldered, bulky, ill-hung devil, with a pale, sallow skin, black beard,
and a sort of grin upon his face,--a species of laugh, yet not so much mirthful as indicating
a strange mental and moral twist.  He was very riotous in the crowd, elbowing, thrusting, seizing
hold of people; and at last a ring was formed, and a regular wrestling-match commenced between
him and a farmer-looking man.  Randall brandished his legs about in the most ridiculous style,
but proved himself a good wrestler, and finally threw his antagonist.  He got up with the same
grin upon his features,--not a grin of simplicity, but intimating knowingness.  When more depth
or force of expression was required, he could put on the most strangely ludicrous and ugly
aspect (suiting his gesture and attitude to it) that can be imagined.  I should like to see
this fellow when he was perfectly sober.

There were a good many blacks among the crowd.  I suppose they used to emigrate across the
border, while New York was a slave State.  There were enough of them to form a party, though
greatly in the minority; and, a squabble arising, some of the blacks were knocked down, and
otherwise maltreated.  I saw one old negro, a genuine specimen of the slave negro, without
any of the foppery of the race in our part of the State,--an old fellow, with a bag, I suppose
of broken victuals, on his shoulder, and his pockets stuffed out at his hips with the like
provender; full of grimaces and ridiculous antics, laughing laughably, yet without affectation;
then talking with a strange kind of pathos about the whippings he used to get while he was
a slave;--a singular creature, of mere feeling, with some glimmering of sense.  Then there
was another gray old negro, but of a different stamp, politic, sage, cautious, yet with boldness
enough, talking about the rights of his race, yet so as not to provoke his audience; discoursing
of the advantage of living under laws, and the wonders that might ensue, in that very assemblage,
if there were no laws; in the midst of this deep wisdom, turning off the anger of a half-drunken
fellow by a merry retort, a leap in the air, and a negro's laugh.  I was interested--there
being a drunken negro ascending the meeting-house steps, and near him three or four well-dressed
and decent negro wenches--to see the look of scorn and shame and sorrow and painful sympathy
which one of them assumed at this disgrace of her color.

The people here show out their character much more strongly than they do with us; there was
not the quiet, silent, dull decency of our public assemblages, but mirth, anger, eccentricity,--all
manifesting themselves freely.  There were many watermelons for sale, and people burying their
muzzles deep in the juicy flesh of them.  There were cider and beer. Many of the people had
their mouths half opened in a grin, which, more than anything else, I think, indicates a low
stage of refinement.  A low-crowned hat--very low--is common.  They are respectful to gentlemen.

A bat being startled, probably, out of the meeting-house, by the commotion around, flew blindly
about in the sunshine, and alighted on a man's sleeve.  I looked at him,--a droll, winged,
beast-insect, creeping up the man's arm, not over-clean, and scattering dust on the man's coat
from his vampire wings.  The man stared at him, and let the spectators stare for a minute,
and then shook him gently off; and the poor devil took a flight across the green to the meeting-house,
and then, I believe, alighted on somebody else.  Probably he was put to death.  Bats are very
numerous in these parts.

There was a drunken man, annoying people with his senseless talk and impertinences, impelled
to perform eccentricities by an evil spirit in him; and a pale little boy, with a bandaged
leg, whom his father brought out of the tavern and put into a barouche.  Then the boy heedfully
placed shawls and cushions about his leg to support it, his face expressive of pain and care,--not
transitory, but settled pain, of long and forcedly patient, endurance; and this painful look,
perhaps, gave his face more intelligence than it might otherwise have had, though it was naturally
a sensitive face.  Well-dressed ladies were in the meeting-house in silks and cambrics,--the
sunburnt necks in contiguity with the delicate fabrics of the dresses showing the yeomen's
daughters.

Country graduates,--rough, brown-featured, schoolmaster-looking, half-bumpkin, half-scholarly
figures, in black ill-cut broadcloth,--their manners quite spoilt by what little of the gentleman
there was in them.

The landlord of the tavern keeping his eye on a man whom he suspected of an intention to bolt.
[A word meaning in Worcester, I find, "to spring out with speed and suddenness."--S. H.]

The next day after Commencement was bleak and rainy from midnight till midnight, and a good
many guests were added to our table in consequence. Among them were some of the Williamstown
students, gentlemanly young fellows, with a brotherly feeling for each other, a freedom about
money concerns, a half-boyish, half-manly character; and my heart warmed to them.  They took
their departure--two for South Adams and two across the Green Mountains--in the midst of the
rain.  There was one of the graduates with his betrothed, and his brother-in-law and wife,
who stayed during the day,--the graduate the very model of a country schoolmaster in his Sunday
clothes, being his Commencement suit of black broadcloth and pumps.  He is engaged as assistant
teacher of the academy at Shelburne Falls.  There was also the high sheriff of Berkshire, Mr.
Twining, with a bundle of writs under his arm, and some of them peeping out of his pockets.
Also several Trojan men and women, who had been to Commencement.  Likewise a young clergyman,
graduate of Brown College, and student of the Divinity School at Cambridge.  He had come across
the Hoosic, or Green Mountains, about eighteen miles, on foot, from Charlemont, where he is
preaching, and had been to Commencement.  Knowing little of men and matters, and desiring to
know more, he was very free in making acquaintance with people, but could not do it handsomely.
A singular smile broke out upon his face on slight provocation.  He was awkward in his manners,
yet it was not an ungentlemanly awkwardness,-- intelligent as respects book-learning, but much
deficient in worldly tact.  It was pleasant to observe his consciousness of this deficiency,
and how he strove to remedy it by mixing as much as possible with people, and sitting almost
all day in the bar-room to study character.  Sometimes he would endeavor to contribute his
share to the general amusement,--as by growling comically, to provoke and mystify a dog; and
by some bashful and half-apropos observations.

In the afternoon there came a fresh bevy of students onward from Williamstown; but they made
only a transient visit, though it was still raining.  These were a rough-hewn, heavy set of
fellows, from the hills and woods in this neighborhood,--great unpolished bumpkins, who had
grown up farmer-boys, and had little of the literary man, save green spectacles and black broadcloth
(which all of them had not), talking with a broad accent, and laughing clown-like, while sheepishness
overspread all, together with a vanity at being students.  One of the party was six feet seven
inches high, and all his herculean dimensions were in proportion; his features, too, were cast
in a mould suitable to his stature.  This giant was not ill-looking, but of a rattier intelligent
aspect.  His motions were devoid of grace, but yet had a rough freedom, appropriate enough
to such a figure.  These fellows stayed awhile, talked uncouthly about college matters, and
started in the great open wagon which had brought them and their luggage hither.  We had a
fire in the bar-room almost all day,--a great, blazing fire,--and it was pleasant to have this
day of bleak November weather, and cheerful fireside talk, and wet garments smoking in the
fireside heat, still in the summer-time.  Thus the day wore on with a sort of heavy, lazy pleasantness;
and night set in, still stormy.

In the morning it was cloudy, but did not rain, and I went with the little clergyman to Hudson's
Cave.  The stream which they call the North Branch, and into which Hudson's Brook empties,
was much swollen, and tumbled and dashed and whitened over the rocks, and formed real cascades
over the dams, and rushed fast along the side of the cliffs, which had their feet in it.  Its
color was deep brown, owing to the washing of the banks which the rain had poured into it.
Looking back, we could see a cloud on Graylock; but on other parts of Saddle Mountain there
were spots of sunshine, some of most glorious brightness, contrasting with the general gloom
of the sky, and the deep shadow which lay on the earth.

We looked at the spot where the stream makes its entrance into the marble cliff, and it was
(this morning, at least) the most striking view of the cave.  The water dashed down in a misty
cascade, through what looked like the portal of some infernal subterranean structure; and far
within the portal we could see the mist and the falling water; and it looked as if, but for
these obstructions of view, we might have had a deeper insight into a gloomy region.

After our return, the little minister set off for his eighteen miles' journey across the mountain;
and I was occupied the rest of the forenoon with an affair of stealing--a woman of forty or
upwards being accused of stealing a needle-case and other trifles from a factory-girl at a
boarding-house.  She came here to take passage in a stage; but Putnam, a justice of the peace,
examined her and afterwards ordered her to be searched by Laura and Eliza, the chambermaid
and table-waiter.  Hereupon was much fun and some sympathy.  They searched, and found nothing
that they sought, though she gave up a pair of pantalets, which she pretended to have taken
by mistake.  Afterwards, she being in the parlor, I went in; and she immediately began to talk
to me, giving me an account of the affair, speaking with the bitterness of a wronged person,
with a sparkling eye, yet with great fluency and self-possession.  She is a yellow, thin, and
battered old thing, yet rather country-lady-like in aspect and manners.  I heard Eliza telling
another girl about it, under my window; and she seemed to think that the poor woman's reluctance
to be searched arose from the poorness of her wardrobe and of the contents of her bandbox.

At parting, Eliza said to the girl, "What do you think I heard somebody say about you?  That
it was enough to make anybody's eyes start square out of their head to look at such red cheeks
as yours."  Whereupon the girl turned off the compliment with a laugh, and took her leave.

There is an old blind dog, recognizing his friends by the sense of smell. I observe the eager
awkwardness with which he accomplishes the recognition, his carefulness in descending steps,
and generally in his locomotion. She sings another interpolated air, originally written for Louisa
Pyne ("When Doubt the tortured Frame is rending"), and at its close the Count, Don Henrique, and
Don Sebastian enter.

While they are conversing, Rebolledo appears, announced as the Count Fuentes, and a quintet
occurs, very slightly constructed, but full of humor. An usher interrupts it by announcing the Queen
will have a private audience with the Count Fuentes. While awaiting her, the latter, in a monologue,
lets us into the secret that the real crown jewels have been pledged for the national debt,
and that he has been employed to make duplicates of them to be worn on state occasions until
the real ones can be redeemed. The Queen enters, and expresses her satisfaction with the work,
and promotes him to the position of Minister of Secret Police.

On his departure she sings a charming cavatina ("Love, dwell with me"), and at its close Count de Campo
Mayor enters with the decision of the Council that she shall wed the Prince of Spain. She returns
answer that she shall make her own choice. The Count seeks to argue with her, when she threatens
to confiscate his estate for allowing the crown jewels to be stolen, and commands him to arrest
his daughter and nephew for harboring the thieves. Diana suddenly enters, and an amusing trio
ensues, the Queen standing with her back to Diana lest she may be discovered. The latter fails
to recognize her as Catarina, and implores pardon for assisting in her escape. The situation
is still further complicated by the appearance of Don Henrique, who has no difficulty in recognizing
Catarina. Bewildered at her presence in the Queen's apartments, he declares to Diana that he
will seize her and fly to some distant land. His rash resolution, however, is thwarted by his
arrest, on the authority of the Queen, for treason. A martial finale introduces us to the Queen
in state. Don Henrique rushes forward to implore mercy for Catarina. The Queen reveals herself at
last, and announces to her people that she has chosen Don Henrique, who has loved her for herself,
for her husband and their king. And thus closes one of the most sparkling, melodious, and humorous
of Auber's works. What the concerted numbers lack in solidity of construction is compensated
for by their grace and sweetness.

BALFE.

Michael William Balfe was born at Dublin, Ireland, May 15, 1808. Of all the English opera-composers,
his career was the most versatile, as his success, for a time at least, was the most remarkable.
At seven years of age he scored a polacca of his own for a band. In his eighth year he appeared
as a violinist, and in his tenth was composing ballads. At sixteen he was playing in the Drury Lane
orchestra, and about this time began taking lessons in composition. In 1825, aided by the generosity
of a patron, he went to Italy, where for three years he studied singing and counterpoint. In
his twentieth year he met Rossini, who offered him an engagement as first barytone at the
Italian Opera in Paris. He made his début with success in 1828, and at the close of his engagement
returned to Italy, where he appeared again on the stage. About this time (1829-1830) he began
writing Italian operas, and before he left Italy had produced three which met with considerable success.
In 1835 he returned to England; and it was in this year that his
first English opera, the "Siege of Rochelle," was produced.

It was played continuously at Drury Lane for over three months. In 1836 appeared his "Maid of
Artois;" in 1837, "Catharine Grey" and "Joan of Arc;" and in 1838, "Falstaff." During these years
he was still singing in concerts and opera, and in 1840 appeared
as manager of the Lyceum.

His finest works were produced after this date,--"The Bohemian Girl"
in 1843; "The Enchantress" in 1844; "The Rose of Castile," "La Zingara,"
and "Satanella" in 1858, and "The Puritan's Daughter" in 1861.

His last opera was "The Knight of the Leopard," known in Italian as "Il Talismano," which
has also been produced in English as "The Talisman." He married Mlle. Rosen, a German singer,
whom he met in Italy in 1835; and his daughter Victoire, who subsequently married Sir John Crampton,
and afterwards the Duc de Frias, also appeared as a singer in 1856. Balfe died Oct. 20, 1870, upon
his own estate in Hertfordshire. The analysis of his three operas which are best known--"The
Bohemian Girl," "Rose of Castile," and "Puritan's Daughter"--will contain sufficient reference
to his ability as a composer.

THE BOHEMIAN GIRL.
"The Bohemian Girl," grand opera in three acts, words by Bunn, adapted
from St. George's ballet of "The Gypsy," which appeared at the Paris
Grand Opera in 1839,--itself taken from a romance by Cervantes,--was
first produced in London, Nov. 27, 1843, at Drury Lane, with the following
cast:--

ARLINE Miss ROMER.  When we had taken our departure, Orrin remarked, "How faint-hearted these
old fellows are!" and it was a good observation; for it was the farmer's timorous age that
made him doubt the practicability of catching the chickens, and it contrasted well with the
persevering energy of the middle-aged Orrin.  But Orrin inquired, somewhat dolefully, whether
I should suppose that he himself bewailed the advances of age.  It is a grievous point with him.

In the evening there was a strange fellow in the bar-room,--a sort of mock Methodist,--a cattle-drover,
who had stopped here for the night with two cows and a Durham bull.  All his talk turned upon
religion, and he would ever and anon burst out in some strain of scriptural-styled eloquence,
chanted through his nose, like an exhortation at a camp-meeting.  A group of Universalists
and no-religionists sat around him, making him their butt, and holding wild argument with him;
and he strangely mingled humor with his enthusiasm, and enthusiasm with his humor, so that
it was almost impossible to tell whether he were in jest or earnest.  Probably it was neither,
but an eccentricity, an almost monomania, that has grown upon him,--perhaps the result of strong
religious excitement.  And, having been a backslider, he is cursed with a half-frenzied humor.
In the morning he talked in the same strain at breakfast, while quaffing fourteen cups of tea,--Eliza,
all the while, as she supplied him, entreating him not to drink any more.  After breakfast
(it being the Sabbath) he drove his two cows and bull past the stoop, raising his stair, and
running after them with strange, uncouth gestures; and the last word I heard from him was an
exhortation: "Gentlemen, now all of you take your Bibles, and meditate on divine things,"--this
being uttered with raised hands, and a Methodistical tone, intermingled, as was his expression,
with something humorous; so that, to the last, the puzzle was still kept up, whether he was
an enthusiast or a jester.  He wore a suit of coarse brown cloth, cut in rather a Quaker fashion;
and he had a large nose, and his face expressed enthusiasm and honor,--a sort of smile and
twinkle of the eye, with wildness.  He is excellent at a bargain; and if, in the midst of his
ghostly exhortation, the talk were turned on cattle, he eagerly seized the topic and expatiated
on it.

While this fellow was enumerating the Universalists in neighboring towns who had turned from
their errors on their death-beds, some one exclaimed, "John Hodges! why, he isn't dead,--he's
alive and well."  Whereat there was a roar of laughter.  While holding an argument at table,
I heard him mutter to himself at something that his adversary said; and though I could not
distinguish what it was, the tone did more to convince me of some degree of earnestness than
aught beside.  This character might be wrought into a strange portrait of something sad, terrific,
and laughable.

The Sabbath wore away lazily, and therefore wickedly.  The heavy caravan-man inquired for some
book of light reading, and, having obtained an old volume of a literary paper, betook himself
to the seat of his wagon, to read.  At other times he smoked, and talked sensibly enough with
anybody that offered.  He is a man of sense, though not quick, and seems to be a fair man.

When he walks, he puts the thumb of each hand into the armhole of his waistcoat, and moves
along stiffly, with a knock-kneed gait.  His talk was chiefly of hotels, and such matters as
a man, always travelling, without any purpose of observation for mental improvement, would
be interested in.  He spoke of his life as a hard one.

There was a Methodist quarterly meeting here, and a love-feast.

There is a fellow hereabout who refuses to pay six dollars for the coffin in which his wife
was buried.  She died about six months since, and I believe he is already engaged to another.
He is young and rather comely, but has not a straightforward look.

One man plods along, looking always on the ground, without ever lifting his eyes to the mountain
scenery, and forest, and clouds, above and around him.  Another walks the street with a quick,
prying eye, and sharp face,--the most, expressive possible of one on the lookout for gain,--of
the most disagreeable class of Yankees.  There is also a sour-looking, unwholesome boy, the
son of this man, whose voice is querulous and ill-natured, precisely suited to his aspect.
So is his character.

We have another with Indian blood in him, and the straight, black hair,-- something of the
tawny skin and the quick, shining eye of the Indian.  He seems reserved, but is not ill-natured
when spoken to.  There is so much of the white in him, that he gives the impression of belonging
to a civilized race, which causes the more strange sensation on discovering that he has a wild
lineage.

August 22d.--I walked out into what is called the Notch this forenoon, between Saddle Mountain
and another.  There are good farms in this Notch, although the ground is considerably elevated,--this
morning, indeed, above the clouds; for I penetrated through one in reaching the higher region,
although I found sunshine there.  Graylock was hidden in clouds, and the rest of Saddle Mountain
had one partially wreathed about it; but it was withdrawn before long.  It was very beautiful
cloud-scenery.  The clouds lay on the breast of the mountain, dense, white, well-defined, and
some of them were in such close vicinity that it seemed as if I could infold myself in them;
while others, belonging to the same fleet, were floating through the blue sky above.  I had
a view of Williamstown at the distance of a few miles,--two or three, perhaps,--a white village
and steeple in a gradual hollow, with high mountainous swells heaving themselves up, like immense,
subsiding waves, far and wide around it.  On these high mountain-waves rested the white summer
clouds, or they rested as still in the air above; and they were formed in such fantastic shapes
that they gave the strongest possible impression of being confounded or intermixed with the
sky.  It was like a day-dream to look at it; and the students ought to be day-dreamers, all
of them,--when cloud-land is one and the same thing with the substantial earth.  By degrees
all these clouds flitted away, and the sultry summer sun burned on hill and valley. As I was
walking home, an old man came down the mountain-path behind me in a wagon, and gave me a drive
to the village.  Visitors being few in the Notch, the women and girls looked from the windows
after me; the men nodded and greeted me with a look of curiosity; and two little girls whom
I met, bearing tin pails, whispered one another and smiled.

North Adams, August 23d.--The county commissioners held a court; in the bar-room yesterday
afternoon, for the purpose of letting out the making of the new road over the mountain.  The
commissioners sat together in attitudes of some dignity, with one leg laid across another;
and the people, to the number of twenty or thirty, sat round about with their hats on, in their
shirt-sleeves, with but little, yet with some formality.  Several had come from a distance
to bid for the job.  They sat with whips in their hands.  The first bid was three dollars,--then
there was a long silence,--then a bid of two dollars eighty-five cents, and finally it was
knocked down at two eighteen, per rod.  A disposition to bid was evidenced in one man by his
joking on the bid of another.

After supper, as the sun was setting, a man passed by the door with a hand-organ, connected
with which was a row of figures, such as dancers, pirouetting and turning, a lady playing on
a piano, soldiers, a negro wench dancing, and opening and shutting a huge red mouth,--all these
keeping time to the lively or slow tunes of the organ.  The man had a pleasant, but sly, dark
face; he carried his whole establishment on his shoulder, it being fastened to a staff which
he rested on the ground when he performed.  A little crowd of people gathered about him on
the stoop, peeping over each other's heads with huge admiration,--fat Otis Hodge, and the tall
stage-driver, and the little boys, all declaring that it was the masterpiece of sights.  Some
few coppers did the man obtain, as well as much praise.  He had come over the high, solitary
mountain, where for miles there could hardly be a soul to hear his music.

In the evening, a portly old commissioner, a cheerful man enough, was sitting reading the newspaper
in the parlor, holding the candle between the newspaper and his eyes,--its rays glittering
on his silver-bowed spectacles and silvery hair.  A pensive mood of age had come upon him,
and sometimes he heaved a long sigh, while he turned and re-turned the paper, and folded it
for convenient reading.  By and by a gentleman came to see him, and he talked with him cheerfully.

The fat old squire, whom I have mentioned more than once, is an odd figure, with his bluff,
red face,--coarsely red,--set in silver hair,-- his clumsy legs, which he moves in a strange
straddle, using, I believe, a broomstick for a staff.  The breadth of back of these fat men
is truly a wonder.

A decent man, at table the other day, took the only remaining potato out of the dish, on the
end of his knife, and offered his friend half of it!

The mountains look much larger and more majestic sometimes than at others,--partly because
the mind may be variously disposed, so as to comprehend them more or less, and partly that
an imperceptible (or almost so) haze adds a great deal to the effect.  Saddleback often looks
a huge, black mass,--black-green, or black-blue.

The cave makes a fresh impression upon me every time I visit it,--so deep, so irregular, so
gloomy, so stern,--part of its walls the pure white of the marble,--others covered with a gray
decomposition and with spots of moss, and with brake growing where there is a handful of earth.
I stand and look into its depths at various points, and hear the roar of the stream re-echoing
up.  It is like a heart that has been rent asunder by a torrent of passion, which has raged
and foamed, and left its ineffaceable traces; though now there is but a little rill of feeling
at the bottom.

In parts, trees have fallen across the fissure,--trees with large trunks.

I bathed in the stream in this old, secluded spot, which I frequent for that purpose.  To reach
it, I cross one branch of the stream on stones, and then pass to the other side of a little
island, overgrown with trees and underbrush.  Where I bathe, the stream has partially dammed
itself up by sweeping together tree-trunks and slabs and branches, and a thousand things that
have come down its current for years perhaps; so that there is a deep pool, full of eddies
and little whirlpools which would carry me away, did I not take hold of the stem of a small
tree that lies opportunely transversely across the water.  The bottom is uneven, with rocks
of various size, against which it is difficult to keep from stumbling, so rapid is the stream.
Sometimes it bears along branches and strips of bark,--sometimes a green leaf, or perchance
a dry one,-- occasionally overwhelmed by the eddies and borne deep under water, then rushing
atop the waves.

The forest, bordering the stream, produces its effect by a complexity of causes,--the old and
stern trees, with stately trunks and dark foliage,-- as the almost black pines,--the young
trees, with lightsome green foliage,--as sapling oaks, maples and poplars,--then the old, decayed
trunks, that are seen lying here and there, all mouldered, so that the foot would sink into
them.  The sunshine, falling capriciously on a casual branch considerably within the forest
verge, while it leaves nearer trees in shadow, leads the imagination into the depths.  But
it soon becomes bewildered there.  Rocks strewn about, half hidden in the fallen leaves, must
not be overlooked.

August 26th.--A funeral last evening, nearly at sunset,--a coffin of a boy about ten years
old laid on a one-horse wagon among some straw,--two or three barouches and wagons following.
As the funeral passed through the village street, a few men formed a short procession in front
of the coffin, among whom were Orrin S----- and I.  The burial-ground (there are two in the
town) is on the sides and summit of a round hill, which is planted with cypress and other trees,
among which the white marble gravestones show pleasantly.  The grave was dug on the steep slope
of a hill; and the grave-digger was waiting there, and two or three other shirt-sleeved yeomen,
leaning against the trees.

Orrin S------, a wanton and mirth-making middle-aged man, who would not seem to have much domestic
feeling, took a chief part on the occasion, assisting in taking the coffin from the wagon and
in lowering it into the grave.  There being some superfluous earth at the bottom of the grave,
the coffin was drawn up again after being once buried, and the obstacle removed with a hoe;
then it was lowered again for the last time.  While this was going on, the father and mother
stood weeping at the upper end of the grave, at the head of the little procession,--the mother
sobbing with stifled violence, and peeping forth to discover why the coffin was drawn up again.
It being fitted in its place, Orrin S------ strewed some straw upon it,--this being the custom
here, because "the clods on the coffin-lid have an ugly sound."  Then the Baptist minister,
having first whispered to the father, removed his hat, the spectators all doing the same, and
thanked them "in the name of these mourners, for this last act of kindness to them."

In all these rites Orrin S------ bore the chief part with real feeling and sadly decorous demeanor.
After the funeral, I took a walk on the Williamstown road, towards the west.  There had been
a heavy shower in the afternoon, and clouds were brilliant all over the sky, around Graylock
and everywhere else.  Those over the hills of the west were the most splendid in purple and
gold, and, there being a haze, it added immensely to their majesty and dusky magnificence.

This morning I walked a little way along the mountain road, and stood awhile in the shadow
of some oak and chestnut trees,--it being a warm, bright, sunshiny morning.  The shades lay
long from trees and other objects, as at sunset, but how different this cheerful and light
radiance from the mild repose of sunset!  Locusts, crickets, and other insects were making
music.  Cattle were feeding briskly, with morning appetites. The wakeful voices of children
were heard in a neighboring hollow.  The dew damped the road, and formed many-colored drops
in the grass.  In short, the world was not weary with a long, sultry day, but in a fresh, recruited
state, fit to carry it through such a day.

A rough-looking, sunburnt, soiled-skirted, odd, middle-aged little man came to the house a
day or two ago, seeking work.  He had come from Ohio, and was returning to his native place,
somewhere in New England, stopping occasionally to earn money to pay his way.  There was something
rather ludicrous in his physiognomy and aspect.  He was very free to talk with all and sundry.
He made a long eulogy on his dog Tiger, yesterday, insisting on his good moral character, his
not being quarrelsome, his docility, and all other excellent qualities that a huge, strong,
fierce mastiff could have.  Tiger is the bully of the village, and keeps all the other dogs
in awe.  His aspect is very spirited, trotting massively along, with his tail elevated and
his head likewise.  "When he sees a dog that's anything near his size, he's apt to growl a
little,"--Tiger had the marks of a battle on him,--"yet he's a good dog."

Friday, August 31st.--A drive on Tuesday to Shelburne Falls, twenty-two miles or thereabouts
distant.  Started at about eight o'clock in a wagon with Mr. Leach and Mr. Birch.  Our road
lay over the Green Mountains, the long ridge of which was made awful by a dark, heavy, threatening
cloud, apparently rolled and condensed along the whole summit.  As we ascended the zigzag road,
we looked behind, at every opening in the forest, and beheld a wide landscape of mountain-swells
and valleys intermixed, and old Graylock and the whole of Saddleback.  Over the wide scene
there was a general gloom; but there was a continual vicissitude of bright sunshine flitting
over it, now resting for a brief space on portions of the heights, now flooding the valleys
with green brightness, now making out distinctly each dwelling, and the hotels, and then two
small brick churches of the distant village, denoting its prosperity, while all around seemed
under adverse fortunes.  But we, who stood so elevated above mortal things, and saw so wide
and far, could see the sunshine of prosperity departing from one spot and rolling towards another,
so that we could not think it much matter which spot were sunny or gloomy at any one moment.

The top of this Hoosic Mountain is a long ridge, marked on the county map as two thousand one
hundred and sixty feet above the sea; on this summit is a valley, not very deep, but one or
two miles wide, in which is the town of L------.  Here there are respectable farmers, though
it is a rough, and must be a bleak place.  The first house, after reaching the summit, is a
small, homely tavern.  We left our horse in the shed, and, entering the little unpainted bar-room,
we heard a voice, in a strange, outlandish accent, exclaiming "Diorama."  It was an old man,
with a full, gray-bearded countenance, and Mr. Leach exclaimed, "Ah, here's the old Dutchman
again!"  And he answered, "Yes, Captain, here's the old Dutchman,"--though, by the way, he
is a German, and travels the country with this diorama in a wagon, and had recently been at
South Adams, and was now returning from Saratoga Springs.  We looked through the glass orifice
of his machine, while he exhibited a succession of the very worst scratches and daubings that
can be imagined,--worn out, too, and full of cracks and wrinkles, dimmed with tobacco-smoke,
and every other wise dilapidated.  There were none in a later fashion than thirty years since,
except some figures that had been cut from tailors' show-bills.  There were views of cities
and edifices in Europe, of Napoleon's battles and Nelson's sea-fights, in the midst of which
would be seen a gigantic, brown, hairy hand (the Hand of Destiny) pointing at the principal
points of the conflict, while the old Dutchman explained.  He gave a good deal of dramatic
effect to his descriptions, but his accent and intonation cannot be written.  He seemed to
take interest and pride in his exhibition; yet when the utter and ludicrous miserability thereof
made us laugh, he joined in the joke very readily.  When the last picture had been shown, he
caused a country boor, who stood gaping beside the machine, to put his head within it, and
thrust out his tongue.  The head becoming gigantic, a singular effect was produced.

The old Dutchman's exhibition being over, a great dog, apparently an elderly dog, suddenly
made himself the object of notice, evidently in rivalship of the Dutchman.  He had seemed to
be a good-natured, quiet kind of dog, offering his head to be patted by those who were kindly
disposed towards him.  This great, old dog, unexpectedly, and of his own motion, began to run
round after his not very long tail with the utmost eagerness; and, catching hold of it, he
growled furiously at it, and still continued to circle round, growling and snarling with increasing
rage, as if one half of his body were at deadly enmity with the other. Faster and faster went
he, round and roundabout, growing still fiercer, till at last he ceased in a state of utter
exhaustion; but no sooner had his exhibition finished than he became the same mild, quiet,
sensible old dog as before; and no one could have suspected him of such nonsense as getting
enraged with his own tail.  He was first taught this trick by attaching a bell to the end of
his tail; but he now commences entirely of his own accord, and I really believe he feels vain
at the attention he excites.

It was chill and bleak on the mountain-top, and a fire was burning in the bar-room.  The old
Dutchman bestowed on everybody the title of "Captain," perhaps because such a title has a great
chance of suiting an American.

Leaving the tavern, we drove a mile or two farther to the eastern brow of the mountain, whence
we had a view, over the tops of a multitude of heights, into the intersecting valleys down
which we were to plunge,--and beyond them the blue and indistinctive scene extended to the
east and north for at least sixty miles.  Beyond the hills it looked almost as if the blue
ocean might be seen.  Monadnock was visible, like a sapphire cloud against the sky.  Descending,
we by and by got a view of the Deerfield River, which makes a bend in its course from about
north and south to about east and west, coming out from one defile among the mountains, and
flowing through another.  The scenery on the eastern side of the Green Mountains is incomparably
more striking than on the western, where the long swells and ridges have a flatness of effect;
and even Graylock heaves itself so gradually that it does not much strike the beholder.  But
on the eastern part, peaks one or two thousand feet high rush up on either bank of the river
in ranges, thrusting out their shoulders side by side.  They are almost precipitous, clothed
in woods, through which the naked rock pushes itself forth to view.  Sometimes the peak is
bald, while the forest wraps the body of the hill, and the baldness gives it an indescribably
stern effect.  Sometimes the precipice rises with abruptness from the immediate side of the
river; sometimes there is a cultivated valley on either side,--cultivated long, and with all
the smoothness and antique rurality of a farm near cities,--this gentle picture strongly set
off by the wild mountain-frame around it. Often it would seem a wonder how our road was to
continue, the mountains rose so abruptly on either side, and stood, so direct a wall, across
our onward course; while, looking behind, it would be an equal mystery how we had gotten thither,
through the huge base of the mountain, that seemed to have reared itself erect after our passage.
But, passing onward, a narrow defile would give us egress into a scene where new mountains
would still appear to bar us.  Our road was much of it level; but scooped out among mountains.
The river was a brawling stream, shallow, and roughened by rocks; now we drove on a plane with
it; now there was a sheer descent down from the roadside upon it, often unguarded by any kind
of fence, except by the trees that contrived to grow on the headlong interval. Between the
mountains there were gorges, that led the imagination away into new scenes of wildness.  I
have never driven through such romantic scenery, where there was such variety and boldness
of mountain shapes as this; and though it was a broad sunny day, the mountains diversified
the view with sunshine and shadow, and glory and gloom.

In Charlemont (I think), after passing a bridge, we saw a very curious rock on the shore of
the river, about twenty feet from the roadside. Clambering down the bank, we found it a complete
arch, hollowed out of the solid rock, and as high as the arched entrance of an ancient church,
which it might be taken to be, though considerably dilapidated and weather-worn.  The water
flows through it, though the rock afforded standing room, beside the pillars.  It was really
like the archway of an enchanted palace, all of which has vanished except the entrance,--now
only into nothingness and empty space.  We climbed to the top of the arch, in which the traces
of water having eddied are very perceptible. This curiosity occurs in a wild part of the river's
course, and in a solitude of mountains.

Farther down, the river becoming deeper, broader, and more placid, little boats were seen moored
along it, for the convenience of crossing. Sometimes, too, the well-beaten track of wheels
and hoofs passed down to its verge, then vanished, and appeared on the other side, indicating
a ford.  We saw one house, pretty, small, with green blinds, and much quietness in its environments,
on the other side of the river, with a flat-bottomed boat for communication.  It was a pleasant
idea that the world was kept off by the river.

Proceeding onward, we reached Shelburne Falls.  Here the river, in the distance of a few hundred
yards, makes a descent of about a hundred and fifty feet over a prodigious bed of rock.  Formerly
it doubtless flowed unbroken over the rock, merely creating a rapid; and traces of water having
raged over it are visible in portions of the rock that now lie high and dry.  At present the
river roars through a channel which it has worn in the stone, leaping in two or three distinct
falls, and rushing downward, as from flight to flight of a broken and irregular staircase.
The mist rises from the highest of these cataracts, and forms a pleasant object in the sunshine.
The best view, I think, is to stand on the verge of the upper and largest fall, and look down
through the whole rapid descent of the river, as it hurries, foaming, through its rock-worn
path,--the rocks seeming to have been hewn away, as when mortals make a road.  These falls
are the largest in this State, and have a very peculiar character.  It seems as if water had
had more power at some former period than now, to hew and tear its passage through such an
immense ledge of rock as here withstood it.  In this crag, or parts of it, now far beyond the
reach of the water, it has worn what are called pot-holes,--being circular hollows in the rock,
where for ages stones have been whirled round and round by the eddies of the water; so that
the interior of the pot is as circular and as smooth as it could have been made by art.  Often
the mouth of the pot is the narrowest part, the inner space being deeply scooped out.  Water
is contained in most of these pot-holes, sometimes so deep that a man might drown himself therein,
and lie undetected at the bottom.  Some of them are of a convenient size for cooking, which
might be practicable by putting in hot stones.

The tavern at Shelburne Falls was about the worst I ever saw,--there being hardly anything
to eat, at least nothing of the meat kind.  There was a party of students from the Rensselaer
school at Troy, who had spent the night there, a set of rough urchins from sixteen to twenty
years old, accompanied by the wagon-driver, a short, stubbed little fellow, who walked about
with great independence, thrusting his hands into his breeches-pockets, beneath his frock.
The queerness was, such a figure being associated with classic youth.  They were on an excursion
which is yearly made from that school in search of minerals.  They seemed in rather better
moral habits than students used to be, but wild-spirited, rude, and unpolished, somewhat like
German students, which resemblance one or two of them increased by smoking pipes.  In the morning,
my breakfast being set in a corner of the same room with them, I saw their breakfast-table,
with a huge wash-bowl of milk in the centre, and a basin and spoon placed for each guest.

In the bar-room of this tavern were posted up written advertisements, the smoked chimney-piece
being thus made to serve for a newspaper: "I have rye for sale," "I have a fine mare colt,"
etc.  There was one quaintly expressed advertisement of a horse that had strayed or been stolen
from a pasture.

The students, from year to year, have been in search of a particular rock, somewhere on the
mountains in the vicinity of Shelburne Falls, which is supposed to contain some valuable ore;
but they cannot find it. One man in the bar-room observed that it must be enchanted; and spoke
of a tinker, during the Revolutionary War, who met with a somewhat similar instance.  Roaming
along the Hudson River, he came to a precipice which had some bunches of singular appearance
embossed upon it.  He knocked off one of the hunches, and carrying it home, or to a camp, or
wherever he lived, he put it on the fire, and incited it down into clear lead.  He sought for
the spot again and again, but could never find it.

Mr. Leach's brother is a student at Shelburne Falls.  He is about thirty-five years old, and
married; and at this mature age he is studying for the ministry, and will not finish his course
for two or three years. He was bred a farmer, but has sold his farm, and invested the money,
and supports himself and wife by dentistry during his studies.  Many of the academy students
are men grown, and some, they say, well towards forty years old.  Methinks this is characteristic
of American life,--these rough, weather-beaten, hard-handed, farmer-bred students.  In nine
cases out of ten they are incapable of any effectual cultivation; for men of ripe years, if
they have any pith in them, will have long ago got beyond academy or even college instruction.
I suspect nothing better than a very wretched smattering is to be obtained in these country
academies.

Mr. Jerkins, an instructor at Amherst, speaking of the Western mounds, expressed an opinion
that they were of the same nature and origin as some small circular hills which are of very
frequent occurrence here in North Adams.  The burial-ground is on one of them, and there is
another, on the summit of which appears a single tombstone, as if there were something natural
in making these hills the repositories of the dead.  A question of old H------ led to Mr. Jenkins's
dissertation on this subject, to the great contentment of a large circle round the bar-room
fireside on the last rainy day.

A tailor is detected by Mr. Leach, because his coat had not a single wrinkle in it.  I saw
him exhibiting patterns of fashions to Randall, the village tailor.  Mr. Leach has much tact
in finding out the professions of people.  He found out a blacksmith, because his right hand
was much larger than the other.

A man getting subscriptions for a religious and abolition newspaper in New York,--somewhat
elderly and gray-haired, quick in his movements, hasty in his walk, with an eager, earnest
stare through his spectacles, hurrying about with a pocket-book of subscriptions in his hand,--seldom
speaking, and then in brief expressions,--sitting down before the stage comes, to write a list
of subscribers obtained to his employers in New York.  Withal, a city and business air about
him, as of one accustomed to hurry through narrow alleys, and dart across thronged streets,
and speak hastily to one man and another at jostling corners, though now transacting his affairs
in the solitude of mountains.

An old, gray man, seemingly astray and abandoned in this wide world, sitting in the bar-room,
speaking to none, nor addressed by any one.  Not understanding the meaning of the supper-bell
till asked to supper by word of mouth.  However, he called for a glass of brandy.

A pedler, with girls' silk neckerchiefs,--or gauze,--men's silk pocket-handkerchiefs, red bandannas,
and a variety of horn combs, trying to trade with the servant-girls of the house.  One of them,
Laura, attempts to exchange a worked vandyke, which she values at two dollars and a half; Eliza,
being reproached by the pedler, "vows that she buys more of pedlers than any other person in
the house."

A drove of pigs passing at dusk.  They appeared not so much disposed to ramble and go astray
from the line of march as in daylight, but kept together in a pretty compact body.  There was
a general grunting, not violent at all, but low and quiet, as if they were expressing their
sentiments among themselves in a companionable way.  Pigs, on a march, do not subject themselves
to any leader among themselves, but pass on, higgledy-piggledy, without regard to age or sex.

September 1st.--Last evening, during a walk, Graylock and the whole of Saddleback were at first
imbued with a mild, half-sunshiny tinge, then grew almost black,--a huge, dark mass lying on
the back of the earth and encumbering it.  Stretching up from behind the black mountain, over
a third or more of the sky, there was a heavy, sombre blue heap or ledge of clouds, looking
almost as solid as rocks.  The volumes of which it was composed were perceptible, by translucent
lines and fissures; but the mass, as a whole, seemed as solid, bulky, and ponderous in the
cloud-world as the mountain was on earth.  The mountain and cloud together had an indescribably
stern and majestic aspect.  Beneath this heavy cloud, there was a fleet or flock of light,
vapory mists, flitting in middle air; and these were tinted, from the vanished sun, with the
most gorgeous and living purple that can be conceived,--a fringe upon the stern blue.  In the
opposite quarter of the heavens, a rose-light was reflected, whence I know not, which colored
the clouds around the moon, then well above the horizon, so that the nearly round and silver
moon appeared strangely among roseate clouds,--sometimes half obscured by them.

A man with a smart horse, upon which the landlord makes laudatory remarks.  He replies that
he has "a better at home."  Dressed in a brown, bright-buttoned coat, smartly cut.  He immediately
becomes familiar, and begins to talk of the license law, and other similar topics,--making
himself at home, as one who, being much of his time upon the road, finds himself at ease at
any tavern.  He inquired after a stage agent, named Brigham, who formerly resided here, but
now has gone to the West.  He himself was probably a horse-jockey.

An old lady, stopping here over the Sabbath, waiting for to-morrow's stage for Greenfield,
having been deceived by the idea that she could proceed on her journey without delay.  Quiet,
making herself comfortable, taken into the society of the women of the house.

September 3d.--On the slope of Bald Mountain a clearing, set in the frame of the forest on
all sides,--a growth of clover upon it, which, having been mowed once this year, is now appropriated
to pasturage.  Stumps remaining in the ground; one tall, barkless stem of a tree standing upright,
branchless, and with a shattered summit.  One or two other stems lying prostrate and partly
overgrown with bushes and shrubbery, some of them bearing a yellow flower,--a color which Autumn
loves.  The stumps and trunks fire-blackened, yet nothing about them that indicates a recent
clearing, but the roughness of an old clearing, that, being removed from convenient labor,
has none of the polish of the homestead.  The field, with slight undulations, slopes pretty
directly down.  Near the lower verge, a rude sort of barn, or rather haystack roofed over,
and with hay protruding and hanging out.  An ox feeding, and putting up his muzzle to pull
down a mouthful of hay; but seeing me, a stranger, in the upper part of the field, he remains
long gazing, and finally betakes himself to feeding again.  A solitary butterfly flitting to
and fro, blown slightly on its course by a cool September wind,--the coolness of which begins
to be tempered by a bright, glittering sun.  There is dew on the grass.  In front, beyond the
lower spread of forest, Saddle Mountain rises, and the valleys and long, swelling hills sweep
away.  But the impression of this clearing is solitude, as of a forgotten land.

It is customary here to toll the bell at the death of a person, at the hour of his death, whether
A. M. or P. M.  Not, however, I suppose, if it happen in deep night.

"There are three times in a man's life when he is talked about,--when he is born, when he is
married, and when he dies."  "Yes," said Orrin S------, "and only one of the times has he to
pay anything for it out of his own pocket."  (In reference to a claim by the guests of the
bar-room on the man Amasa Richardson for a treat.)

A wood-chopper, travelling the country in search of jobs at chopping. His baggage a bundle,
a handkerchief, and a pair of coarse boots.  His implement an axe, most keenly ground and sharpened,
which I had noticed standing in a corner, and thought it would almost serve as a razor.  I
saw another wood-chopper sitting down on the ascent of Bald Mountain, with his axe on one side
and a jug and provisions on the other, on the way to his day's toil.

The Revolutionary pensioners come out into the sunshine to make oath that they are still above
ground.  One, whom Mr. S------ saluted as "Uncle John," went into the bar-room, walking pretty
stoutly by the aid of a long, oaken staff,--with an old, creased, broken and ashen bell-crowned
hat on his head, and wearing a brown old-fashioned suit of clothes. Pretty portly, fleshy in
the face, and with somewhat of a paunch, cheerful, and his senses, bodily and mental, in no
very bad order, though he is now in his ninetieth year.  "An old man's withered and wilted
apple," quoth Uncle John, "keeps a good while."  Mr. S------ says his grandfather lived to
be a hundred, and that his legs became covered with moss, like the trunk of an old tree. Thus it
was that I came to spend my vacations in that part of the country, so far from all society and comfort,
between the codfish and the moorcocks; and thus it was that now, when I had done with my classes,
I was returning thither with so light a heart that July day.

The Ross, as we call it, is a promontory neither wide nor high, but as rough as God made it to this
day; the deep sea on either hand of it, full of rugged isles and
reefs most perilous to seamen--all overlooked from the eastward by
some very high cliffs and the great peals of Ben Kyaw.

The Mountain of the Mist, they say the words signify in the Gaelic tongue; and it is well named. For
that hill-top, which is more than three thousand feet in height, catches all the clouds that come blowing
from the seaward; and, indeed, I used often to think that it must make them for itself; since
when all heaven was clear to the sea level, there would ever be a streamer on Ben Kyaw. It brought
water, too, and was mossy {5} to the top in consequence. I have seen us sitting in broad sunshine
on the Ross, and the rain falling black like crape upon the mountain. But the wetness of it made
it often appear more beautiful to my eyes; for when the sun struck upon the hill sides, there
were many wet rocks and watercourses that shone like jewels even as far as Aros, fifteen miles
away.
The road that I followed was a cattle-track.  Then he put them into the box again, their
heads emerging and writhing forth, which the showman thrust back again.  He gave a descriptive
and historical account of them, and a fanciful and poetical one also.  A man put his arm and
head into the lion's mouth,--all the spectators looking on so attentively that a breath could
not be heard.  That was impressive,--its effect on a thousand persons,--more so than the thing
itself.

In the evening the caravan people were at the tavern, talking of their troubles in coming over
the mountain,--the overturn of a cage containing two leopards and a hyena.  They are a rough,
ignorant set of men, apparently incapable of taking any particular enjoyment from the life
of variety and adventure which they lead.  There was the man who put his head into the lion's
mouth, and, I suppose, the man about whom the anacondas twined, talking about their suppers,
and blustering for hot meat, and calling for something to drink, without anything of the wild
dignity of men familiar with the nobility of nature.

A character of a desperate young man, who employs high courage and strong faculties in this
sort of dangers, and wastes his talents in wild riot, addressing the audience as a snake-man,--keeping
the ring while the monkey rides the pony,--singing negro and other songs.

The country boors were continually getting within the barriers, and venturing too near the
cages.  The great lion lay with his fore paws extended, and a calm, majestic, but awful countenance.
He looked on the people as if he had seen many such concourses.  The hyena was the most ugly
and dangerous looking beast, full of spite, and on ill terms with all nature, looking a good
deal like a hog with the devil in him, the ridge of hair along his back bristling.  He was
in the cage with a leopard and a panther, and the latter seemed continually on the point of
laying his paw on the hyena, who snarled, and showed his teeth.  It is strange, though, to
see how these wild beasts acknowledge and practise a degree of mutual forbearance, and of obedience
to man, with their wild nature yet in them.  The great white bear seemed in distress from the
heat, moving his head and body in a peculiar, fantastic way, and eagerly drinking water when
given it.  He was thin and lank.

The caravan men were so sleepy, Orrin S------ says, that he could hardly wake them in the morning.
They turned over on their faces to show him.

Coming out of the caravansary, there were the mountains, in the quiet sunset, and many men
drunk, swearing, and fighting.  Shanties with liquor for sale.

The elephant lodged in the barn.

September 5th.--I took a walk of three miles from the village, which brought me into Vermont.
The line runs athwart a bridge,--a rude bridge, which crosses a mountain stream.  The stream
runs deep at the bottom of a gorge, plashing downward, with rapids and pools, and bestrewn
with large rocks, deep and shady, not to be reached by the sun except in its meridian, as well
on account of the depth of the gorge as of the arch of wilderness trees above it.  There was
a stumpy clearing beyond the bridge, where some men were building a house.  I went to them,
and inquired if I were in Massachusetts or Vermont, and asked for some water. Whereupon they
showed great hospitality, and the master-workman went to the spring, and brought delicious
water in a tin basin, and produced another jug containing "new rum, and very good; and rum
does nobody any harm if they make a good use of it," quoth he.  I invited them to call on me
at the hotel, if they should cone to the village within two or three days.  Then I took my
way back through the forest, for this is a by-road, and is, much of its course, a sequestrated
and wild one, with an unseen torrent roaring at an unseen depth, along the roadside.

My walk forth had been an almost continued ascent, and, returning, I had an excellent view
of Graylock and the adjacent mountains, at such a distance that they were all brought into
one group, and comprehended at one view, as belonging to the same company,--all mighty, with
a mightier chief.  As I drew nearer home, they separated, and the unity of effect was lost.
The more distant then disappeared behind the nearer ones, and finally Graylock itself was lost
behind the hill which immediately shuts in the village.  There was a warm, autumnal haze, which,
I think, seemed to throw the mountains farther off, and both to enlarge and soften them.

To imagine the gorges and deep hollows in among the group of mountains,-- their huge shoulders
and protrusions.

"They were just beginning to pitch over the mountains, as I came along," --stage-driver's expression
about the caravan.

A fantastic figure of a village coxcomb, striding through the bar-room, and standing with folded
arms to survey the caravan men.  There is much exaggeration and rattle-brain about this fellow.

A mad girl leaped from the top of a tremendous precipice in Pownall, hundreds of feet high,
if the tale be true, and, being buoyed up by her clothes, came safely to the bottom.

Inquiries about the coming of the caravan, and whether the elephant had got to town, and reports
that he had.

A smart, plump, crimson-faced gentleman, with a travelling-portmanteau of peculiar neatness
and convenience.  He criticises the road over the mountain, having come in the Greenfield stage;
perhaps an engineer.

Bears still inhabit Saddleback and the neighboring mountains and forests. Six were taken in
Pownall last year, and two hundred foxes.  Sometimes they appear on the hills, in close proximity
to this village.

September 7th.--Mr. Leach and I took a walk by moonlight last evening, on the road that leads
over the mountain.  Remote from houses, far up on the hillside, we found a lime-kiln, burning
near the road; and, approaching it, a watcher started from the ground, where he had been lying
at his length.  There are several of these lime-kilns in this vicinity.  They are circular,
built with stones, like a round tower, eighteen or twenty feet high, having a hillock heaped
around in a great portion of their circumference, so that the marble may be brought and thrown
in by cart-loads at the top.  At the bottom there is a doorway, large enough to admit a man
in a stooping posture.  Thus an edifice of great solidity is constructed, which will endure
for centuries, unless needless pains are taken to tear it down.  There is one on the hillside,
close to the village, wherein weeds grow at the bottom, and grass and shrubs too are rooted
in the interstices of the stones, and its low doorway has a dungeon-like aspect, and we look
down from the top as into a roofless tower.  It apparently has not been used for many years,
and the lime and weather-stained fragments of marble are scattered about.

But in the one we saw last night a hard-wood fire was burning merrily, beneath the superincumbent
marble,--the kiln being heaped full; and shortly after we came, the man (a dark, black-bearded
figure, in shirt-sleeves) opened the iron door, through the chinks of which the fire was gleaming,
and thrust in huge logs of wood, and stirred the immense coals with a long pole, and showed
us the glowing limestone,--the lower layer of it.  The heat of the fire was powerful, at the
distance of several yards from the open door.  He talked very sensibly with us, being doubtless
glad to have two visitors to vary his solitary night-watch; for it would not do for him to
fall asleep, since the fire should be refreshed as often as every twenty minutes.  We ascended
the hillock to the top of the kiln, and the marble was red-hot, and burning with a bluish,
lambent flame, quivering up, sometimes nearly a yard high, and resembling the flame of anthracite
coal, only, the marble being in large fragments, the flame was higher.  The kiln was perhaps
six or eight feet across.  Four hundred bushels of marble were then in a state of combustion.
The expense of converting this quantity into lime is about fifty dollars, and it sells for
twenty-five cents per bushel at the kiln. We asked the man whether he would run across the
top of the intensely burning kiln, barefooted, for a thousand dollars; and he said he would
for ten.  He told us that the lime had been burning forty-eight hours, and would be finished
in thirty-six more.  He liked the business of watching it better by night than by day; because
the days were often hot, but such a mild and beautiful night as the last was just right.  Here
a poet might make verses with moonlight in them, and a gleam of fierce firelight flickering
through.  It is a shame to use this brilliant, white, almost transparent marble in this way.
A man said of it, the other day, that into some pieces of it, when polished, one could see
a good distance; and he instanced a certain gravestone.

Visited the cave.  A large portion of it, where water trickles and falls, is perfectly white.
The walls present a specimen of how Nature packs the stone, crowding huge masses, as it were,
into chinks and fissures, and here we see it in the perpendicular or horizontal layers, as
Nature laid it.

September 9th.--A walk yesterday forenoon through the Notch, formed between Saddle Mountain
and another adjacent one.  This Notch is otherwise called the Bellowspipe, being a long and
narrow valley, with a steep wall on either side.  The walls are very high, and the fallen timbers
lie strewed adown the precipitous descent.  The valley gradually descends from the narrowest
part of the Notch, and a stream of water flows through the midst of it, which, farther onward
in its course, turns a mill.  The valley is cultivated, there being two or three farm-houses
towards the northern end, and extensive fields of grass beyond, where stand the hay-mows of
last year, with the hay cut away regularly around their bases.  All the more distant portion
of the valley is lonesome in the extreme; and on the hither side of the narrowest part the
land is uncultivated, partly overgrown with forest, partly used as sheep-pastures, for which
purpose it is not nearly so barren as sheep-pastures usually are.  On the right, facing southward,
rises Graylock, all beshagged with forest, and with headlong precipices of rock appearing among
the black pines.  Southward there is a most extensive view of the valley, in which Saddleback
and its companion mountains are crouched,--wide and far,--a broad, misty valley, fenced in
by a mountain wall, and with villages scattered along it, and miles of forest, which appear
but as patches scattered here and there upon the landscape.  The descent from the Notch southward
is much more abrupt than on the other side.  A stream flows down through it; and along much
of its course it has washed away all the earth from a ledge of rock, and then formed a descending
pavement, smooth and regular, which the scanty flow of water scarcely suffices to moisten at
this period, though a heavy rain, probably, would send down a torrent, raging, roaring, and
foaming.  I descended along the course of the stream, and sometimes on the rocky path of it,
and, turning off towards the south village, followed a cattle-path till I came to a cottage.

A horse was standing saddled near the door, but I did not see the rider. I knocked, and an
elderly woman, of very pleasing and intelligent aspect, came at the summons, and gave me directions
how to get to the south village through an orchard and "across lots," which would bring me
into the road near the Quaker meeting-house, with gravestones round it.  While she talked,
a young woman came into the pantry from the kitchen, with a dirty little brat, whose squalls
I had heard all along; the reason of his outcry being that his mother was washing him,--a very
unusual process, if I may judge by his looks.  I asked the old lady for some water, and she
gave me, I think, the most delicious I ever tasted.  These mountaineers ought certainly to
be temperance people; for their mountain springs supply them with a liquor of which the cities
and the low countries can have no conception.  Pure, fresh, almost sparkling, exhilarating,--such
water as Adam and Eve drank.

I passed the south village on a by-road, without entering it, and was taken up by the stage
from Pittsfield a mile or two this side of it. Platt, the driver, a friend of mine, talked
familiarly about many matters, intermixing his talk with remarks on his team and addresses
to the beasts composing it, who were three mares, and a horse on the near wheel,--all bays.
The horse he pronounced "a dreadful nice horse to go; but if he could shirk off the work upon
the others, he would,"--which unfairness Platt corrected by timely strokes of the whip whenever
the horse's traces were not tightened.  One of the mares wished to go faster, hearing another
horse tramp behind her; "and nothing made her so mad," quoth Platt, "as to be held in when
she wanted to go."  The near leader started.  "O the little devil," said he, "how skittish
she is!"  Another stumbled, and Platt bantered her thereupon.  Then he told of foundering through
snow-drifts in winter, and carrying the mail on his back--four miles from Bennington.  And
thus we jogged on, and got to "mine inn" just as the dinner-bell was ringing.

Pig-drover, with two hundred pigs.  They are much more easily driven on rainy days than on
fair ones.  One of his pigs, a large one, particularly troublesome as to running off the road
towards every object, and leading the drove.  Thirteen miles about a day's journey, in the
course of which the drover has to travel about thirty.

They have a dog, who runs to and fro indefatigably, barking at those who straggle on the flanks
of the line of march, then scampering to the other side and barking there, and sometimes having
quite an affair of barking and surly grunting with some refractory pig, who has found something
to munch, and refuses to quit it.  The pigs are fed on corn at their halts. The drove has some
ultimate market, and individuals are peddled out on the march.  Some die.

Merino sheep (which are much raised in Berkshire) are good for hardly anything to eat,--a fair-sized
quarter dwindling down to almost nothing in the process of roasting.

The tavern-keeper in Stockbridge, an elderly bachelor,--a dusty, black-dressed, antiquated
figure, with a white neckcloth setting off a dim, yellow complexion, looking like one of the
old wax-figures of ministers in a corner of the New England Museum.  He did not seem old, but
like a middle-aged man, who had been preserved in some dark and cobwebby corner for a great
while.  He is asthmatic.

In Connecticut, and also sometimes in Berkshire, the villages are situated on the most elevated
ground that can be found, so that they are visible for miles around.  Litchfield is a remarkable
instance, occupying a high plain, without the least shelter from the winds, and with almost
as wide an expanse of view as from a mountain-top.  The streets are very wide,--two or three
hundred feet, at least,--with wide, green margins, and sometimes there is a wide green space
between two road tracks. Nothing can be neater than the churches and houses.  The graveyard
is on the slope, and at the foot of a swell, filled with old and new gravestones, some of red
freestone, some of gray granite, most of them of white marble, and one of cast-iron with an
inscription of raised letters. There was one of the date of about 1776, on which was represented
the third-length, has-relief portrait of a gentleman in a wig and other costume of that day;
and as a framework about this portrait was wreathed a garland of vine-leaves and heavy clusters
of grapes.  The deceased should have been a jolly bottleman; but the epitaph indicated nothing
of the kind.

In a remote part of the graveyard,--remote from the main body of dead people,--I noticed a
humble, mossy stone, on which I traced out "To the memory of Julia Africa, servant of Rev."
somebody.  There were also the half-obliterated traces of other graves, without any monuments,
in the vicinity of this one.  Doubtless the slaves here mingled their dark clay with the earth.

At Litchfield there is a doctor who undertakes to cure deformed people,-- and humpbacked, lame,
and otherwise defective folk go there.  Besides these, there were many ladies and others boarding
there, for the benefit of the air, I suppose.

At Canaan, Connecticut, before the tavern, there is a doorstep, two or three paces large in
each of its dimensions; and on this is inscribed the date when the builder of the house came
to the town,--namely, 1731.  The house was built in 1751.  Then follows the age and death of
the patriarch (at over ninety) and his wife, and the births of, I think, eleven sons and daughters.
It would seem as if they were buried underneath; and many people take that idea.  It is odd
to put a family record in a spot where it is sure to be trampled underfoot.

At Springfield, a blind man, who came in the stage,--elderly,--sitting in the reading-room,
and, as soon as seated, feeling all around him with his cane, so as to find out his locality,
and know where he may spit with safety!  The cautious and scientific air with which he measures
his distances.  Then he sits still and silent a long while,--then inquires the hour,--then
says, "I should like to go to bed."  Nobody of the house being near, he receives no answer,
and repeats impatiently, "I'll go to bed."  One would suppose, that, conscious of his dependent
condition, he would have learned a different sort of manner; but probably he has lived where
he could command attention.

Two travellers, eating bread and cheese of their own in the bar-room at Stockbridge, and drinking
water out of a tumbler borrowed from the landlord.  Eating immensely, and, when satisfied,
putting the relics in their trunk, and rubbing down the table.

Sample ears of various kinds of corn hanging over the looking-glass or in the bars of taverns.
Four ears on a stalk (good ones) are considered a heavy harvest.

A withered, yellow, sodden, dead-alive looking woman,--an opium-eater.  A deaf man, with a
great fancy for conversation, so that his interlocutor is compelled to halloo and bawl over
the rumbling of the coach, amid which he hears best.  The sharp tones of a woman's voice appear
to pierce his dull organs much better than a masculine voice.  The impossibility of saying
anything but commonplace matters to a deaf man, of expressing any delicacy of thought in a
raised tone, of giving utterance to fine feelings in a bawl.  This man's deafness seemed to
have made his mind and feelings uncommonly coarse; for, after the opium-eater had renewed an
old acquaintance with him, almost the first question he asked, in his raised voice, was, "Do
you eat opium now?"

At Hartford, the keeper of a temperance hotel reading a Hebrew Bible in the bar by means of
a lexicon and an English version.

A negro, respectably dressed, and well-mounted on horseback, travelling on his own hook, calling
for oats, and drinking a glass of brandy-and-water at the bar, like any other Christian.  A
young man from Wisconsin said, "I wish I had a thousand such fellows in Alabama."  It made
a strange impression on me,--the negro was really so human!--and to talk of owning a thousand
like him!

Left North Adams September 11th.  Reached home September 24th, 1838.

October 24th.--View from a chamber of the Tremont of the brick edifice, opposite, on the other
side of Beacon Street.  At one of the lower windows, a woman at work; at one above, a lady
hemming a ruff or some such ladylike thing.  She is pretty, young, and married; for a little
boy comes to her knees, and she parts his hair, and caresses him in a motherly way.  A note
on colored paper is brought her; and she reads it, and puts it in her bosom.  At another window,
at some depth within the apartment, a gentleman in a dressing-gown, reading, and rocking in
an easy-chair, etc., etc., etc.  A rainy day, and people passing with umbrellas disconsolately
between the spectator and these various scenes of indoor occupation and comfort.  With this
sketch might be mingled and worked up some story that was going on within the chamber where
the spectator was situated.

All the dead that had ever been drowned in a certain lake to arise.

The history of a small lake from the first, till it was drained.

An autumnal feature,--boys had swept together the fallen leaves from the elms along the street
in one huge pile, and had made a hollow, nest-shaped, in this pile, in which three or four
of them lay curled, like young birds.

A tombstone-maker, whom Miss B----y knew, used to cut cherubs on the top of the tombstones,
and had the art of carving the cherubs' faces in the likeness of the deceased.

A child of Rev. E. P------ was threatened with total blindness.  A week after the father had
been informed of this, the child died; and, in the mean while, his feelings had become so much
the more interested in the child, from its threatened blindness, that it was infinitely harder
to give it up.  Had he not been aware of it till after the child's death, it would probably
have been a consolation.

Singular character of a gentleman (H. H------, Esq.) living in retirement in Boston,--esteemed
a man of nicest honor, and his seclusion attributed to wounded feelings on account of the failure
of his firm in business. Yet it was discovered that this man had been the mover of intrigues
by which men in business had been ruined, and their property absorbed, none knew how or by
whom; love-affairs had been broken off, and much other mischief done; and for years he was
not in the least suspected.  He died suddenly, soon after suspicion fell upon him.  Probably
it was the love of management, of having an influence on affairs, that produced these phenomena.

Character of a man who, in himself and his external circumstances, shall be equally and totally
false: his fortune resting on baseless credit,-- his patriotism assumed,--his domestic affections,
his honor and honesty, all a sham.  His own misery in the midst of it,--it making the whole
universe, heaven and earth alike, all unsubstantial mockery to him.

Dr. Johnson's penance in Uttoxeter Market.  A man who does penance in what might appear to
lookers-on the most glorious and triumphal circumstance of his life.  Each circumstance of
the career of an apparently successful man to be a penance and torture to him on account of
some fundamental error in early life.

A person to catch fire-flies, and try to kindle his household fire with them.  It would be
symbolical of something.

Thanksgiving at the Worcester Lunatic Asylum.  A ball and dance of the inmates in the evening,--a
furious lunatic dancing with the principal's wife.  Thanksgiving in an almshouse might make
a better sketch.

The house on the eastern corner of North and Essex Streets [Salem], supposed to have been built
about 1640, had, say sixty years later, a brick turret erected, wherein one of the ancestors
of the present occupants used to practise alchemy.  He was the operative of a scientific person
in Boston, the director.  There have been other alchemists of old in this town,--one who kept
his fire burning seven weeks, and then lost the elixir by letting it go out.

An ancient wineglass (Miss Ingersol's), long-stalked, with a small, cup-like bowl, round which
is wreathed a branch of grape-vine, with a rich cluster of grapes, and leaves spread out. 
There is also some kind of a bird flying.  The whole is excellently cut or engraved.

In the Duke of Buckingham's comedy "The Chances," Don Frederic says of Don John (they are two
noble Spanish gentlemen), "One bed contains us ever."

A person, while awake and in the business of life, to think highly of another, and place perfect
confidence in him, but to be troubled with dreams in which this seeming friend appears to act
the part of a most deadly enemy.  Finally it is discovered that the dream-character is the
true one.  The explanation would be--the soul's instinctive perception.

Pandora's box for a child's story.

Moonlight is sculpture; sunlight is painting.

"A person to look back on a long life ill-spent, and to picture forth a beautiful life which
he would live, if he could be permitted to begin his life over again.  Finally to discover
that he had only been dreaming of old age,--that he was really young, and could live such a
life as he had pictured."

A newspaper, purporting to be published in a family, and satirizing the political and general
world by advertisements, remarks on domestic affairs,--advertisement of a lady's lost thimble, etc.

L. H------.  She was unwilling to die, because she had no friends to meet her in the other
world.  Her little son F. being very ill, on his recovery she confessed a feeling of disappointment,
having supposed that he would have gone before, and welcomed her into heaven!

H. L. C------ heard from a French Canadian a story of a young couple in Acadie.  On their marriage
day, all the men of the Province were summoned to assemble in the church to hear a proclamation.
When assembled, they were all seized and shipped off to be distributed through New England,--
among them the new bridegroom.  His bride set off in search of him,-- wandered about New England
all her lifetime, and at last, when she was old, she found her bridegroom on his deathbed.
The shock was so great that it killed her likewise.

January 4th, 1839.--When scattered clouds are resting on the bosoms of hills, it seems as if
one might climb into the heavenly region, earth being so intermixed, with sky, and gradually
transformed into it.

A stranger, dying, is buried; and after many years two strangers come in search of his grave,
and open it.

The strange sensation of a person who feels himself an object of deep interest, and close observation,
and various construction of all his actions, by another person.

Letters in the shape of figures of men, etc.  At a distance, the words composed by the letters
are alone distinguishable.  Close at hand, the figures alone are seen, and not distinguished
as letters.  Thus things may have a positive, a relative, and a composite meaning, according
to the point of view.

"Passing along the street, all muddy with puddles, and suddenly seeing the sky reflected in
these puddles in such a way as quite to conceal the foulness of the street."

A young man in search of happiness,--to be personified by a figure whom he expects to meet
in a crowd, and is to be recognized by certain signs. All these signs are given by a figure
in various garbs and actions, but he does not recognize that this is the sought-for person
till too late.

If cities were built by the sound of music, then some edifices would appear to be constructed
by grave, solemn tones,--others to have danced forth to light, fantastic airs.

Familiar spirits, according to Lilly, used to be worn in rings, watches, sword-hilts.  Thumb-rings
were set with jewels of extraordinary size.

A very fanciful person, when dead, to have his burial in a cloud.

"A story there passeth of an Indian king that sent unto Alexander a fair woman, fed with aconite
and other poisons, with this intent complexionally to destroy him!"--Sir T. Browne.

Dialogues of the unborn, like dialogues of the dead,--or between two young children. 

Nora A. Smith

LITTLE GEORGE WASHINGTON. Part I. Nora A. Smith

GREAT GEORGE WASHINGTON. Part II. Nora A. Smith

THE MAPLE-LEAF AND THE VIOLET. Nora A. Smith

MRS. CHINCHILLA. Kate Douglas Wiggin

A STORY OF THE FOREST. Nora A. Smith

PICCOLA. Nora A. Smith

THE CHILD AND THE WORLD. Kate Douglas Wiggin

WHEN I WAS A LITTLE GIRL. Kate Douglas Wiggin

FROEBEL'S BIRTHDAY. Nora A. Smith

INTRODUCTION.

Story-telling, like letter-writing, is going out of fashion. There are no modern Scheherezades,
and the Sultans nowadays have to be amused in a different fashion. But, for that matter, a hundred
poetic pastimes of leisure have fled before the relentless Hurry Demon who governs this prosaic
nineteenth century. The Wandering Minstrel is gone, and the Troubadour, and the Court of Love,
and the King's Fool, and the Round Table, and with them the Story-Teller.

"Come,

tell us a story!" It is the familiar plea of childhood. Unhappy he who has not been assailed
with it again and again.

Thrice miserable she who can be consigned to worse than oblivion by the scathing criticism, "She doesn't
know any stories!" and thrice blessed she who is recognized at a glance as a person likely
to be full to the brim of them.

There are few preliminaries and no formalities when the Person with
a Story is found.

The motherly little sister stands by the side of her chair, two or
three of the smaller fry perch on the arms, and the baby climbs up
into her lap (such a person always has a capacious lap), and folds
his fat hands placidly.

Then there is a deep sigh of blissful expectation and an expressive silence, which means, "Now
we are ready, please; and if you would be kind enough to begin it with 'Once upon a time,' we
should be much obliged; though of course we understand that all the
stories in the world can't commence that way, delightful as it would
be."

The Person with a Story smiles obligingly (at least it is to be hoped that she does), and retires
into a little corner of her brain, to rummage there for something just fitted to the occasion.
That same little corner is densely populated, if she is a lover of
children.

In it are all sorts of heroic dogs, wonderful monkeys, intelligent
cats, naughty kittens; virtues masquerading seductively as fairies,
and vices hiding in imps; birds agreeing and disagreeing in their
little nests, and inevitable small boys in the act of robbing them;
busy bees laying up their winter stores, and idle butterflies disgracefully
neglecting to do the same; and then a troop of lost children, disobedient
children, and lazy, industrious, generous, or heedless ones, waiting
to furnish the thrilling climaxes.

The Story-Teller selects a hero or heroine out of this motley crowd,--all longing to be introduced
to Bright-Eye, Fine-Ear, Kind-Heart, and Sweet-Lips,--and speedily
the drama opens.

Did Rachel ever have such an audience? I trow not. Rachel never had tiny hands snuggling into
hers in "the very best part of the story," nor was she near enough her hearers to mark the thousand
shades of expression that chased each other across their faces,--supposing they had any expression,
which is doubtful. Rachel never saw dimples lurking in the ambush of rosy cheeks, and popping
in and out in such a distracting manner that she felt like punctuating her discourse with kisses!
Her dull, conventional, grown-up hearers bent a little forward in their seats, perhaps, and compelled
by her magic power laughed and cried in the right places; but their
eyes never shone with that starry lustre that we see in the eyes of
happy children,--a lustre that is dimmed, alas, in after years.

Their eyes still see visions, but the "shadows of the prison house" have fallen about us, and
the things which we have seen we "now can see no more!"

If you chance to be the Person with a Story, you sit like a queen on her throne surrounded by
her loyal subjects; or like an unworthy sun with a group of flowers turning their faces towards
you. Inspired by breathless attention, you try ardently to do your very best. It seems to you
that you could never endure a total failure, and you hardly see how
you could bear, with any sort of equanimity, even the vacant gaze
or restless movement that would bespeak a vagrant interest. If you
are a novice, perhaps the frightful idea crosses your mind, "What
if one of these children should slip out of the room?" Or, still more
tragic possibility, suppose they should look you in the eye and remark
with the terrible candor of infancy, "We do not like this story!"
But no; you are more fortunate. The tale is told, and you are greeted
with sighs of satisfaction and with the instantaneous request, "Tell
it again!" That is the encore of the Story-Teller,--"Tell it again!
No, not another story; the same one over again, please!" for "what
novelty is worth that sweet monotony where everything is known, and
loved because it is known?" No royal accolade could be received with
greater gratitude.  Late in the afternoon, there was a sunny shower, which came down
so like a benediction that it seemed ungrateful to take shelter in the cabin or to put up an
umbrella.  Then there was a rainbow, or a large segment of one, so exceedingly brilliant and
of such long endurance that I almost fancied it was stained into the sky, and would continue
there permanently.  And there were clouds floating all about,-- great clouds and small, of
all glorious and lovely hues (save that imperial crimson which was revealed to our united gaze),--so
glorious indeed, and so lovely, that I had a fantasy of heaven's being broken into fleecy fragments
and dispersed through space, with its blest inhabitants dwelling blissfully upon those scattered
islands.

February 7th, 1840.--What beautiful weather this is!--beautiful, at least, so far as sun, sky,
and atmosphere are concerned, though a poor, wingless biped is sometimes constrained to wish
that he could raise himself a little above the earth.  How much mud and mire, how many pools
of unclean water, how many slippery footsteps, and perchance heavy tumbles, might be avoided,
if we could tread but six inches above the crust of this world.  Physically we cannot do this;
our bodies cannot; but it seems to me that our hearts and minds may keep themselves above moral
mud-puddles and other discomforts of the soul's pathway.

February 11th.--I have been measuring coal all day, on board of a black little British schooner,
in a dismal dock at the north end of the city. Most of the time I paced the deck to keep myself
warm; for the wind (northeast, I believe) blew up through the dock, as if it had been the pipe
of a pair of bellows.  The vessel lying deep between two wharfs, there was no more delightful
prospect, on the right hand and on the left, than the posts and timbers, half immersed in the
water, and covered with ice, which the rising and falling of successive tides had left upon
them, so that they looked like immense icicles.  Across the water, however, not more than half
a mile off, appeared the Bunker Hill Monument; and what interested me considerably more, a
church-steeple, with the dial of a clock upon it, whereby I was enabled to measure the march
of the weary hours.  Sometimes I descended into the dirty little cabin of the schooner, and
warmed myself by a red-hot stove, among biscuit-barrels, pots and kettles, sea-chests, and
innumerable lumber of all sorts,--my olfactories, meanwhile, being greatly refreshed by the
odor of a pipe, which the captain, or some one of his crew, was smoking.  But at last came
the sunset, with delicate clouds, and a purple light upon the islands; and I blessed it, because
it was the signal of my release.

February 12th.--All day long again have I been engaged in a very black business,--as black
as a coal; and, though my face and hands have undergone a thorough purification, I feel not
altogether fit to hold communion with doves.  Methinks my profession is somewhat akin to that
of a chimney-sweeper; but the latter has the advantage over me, because, after climbing up
through the darksome flue of the chimney, he emerges into the midst of the golden air, and
sings out his melodies far over the heads of the whole tribe of weary earth-plodders.  My toil
to-day has been cold and dull enough; nevertheless, I was neither cold nor dull.

March 15th.--I pray that in one year more I may find some way of escaping from this unblest
Custom-House; for it is a very grievous thraldom.  I do detest all offices,--all, at least,
that are held on a political tenure. And I want nothing to do with politicians.  Their hearts
wither away, and die out of their bodies.  Their consciences are turned to india-rubber, or
to some substance as black as that, and which will stretch as much. One thing, if no more,
I have gained by my custom-house experience,--to know a politician.  It is a knowledge which
no previous thought or power of sympathy could have taught me, because the animal, or the machine
rather, is not in nature.

March 23d.--I do think that it is the doom laid upon me, of murdering so many of the brightest
hours of the day at the Custom-House, that makes such havoc with my wits, for here I am again
trying to write worthily, . . . . yet with a sense as if all the noblest part of man had been
left out of my composition, or had decayed out of it since my nature was given to my own keeping.
. . . Never comes any bird of Paradise into that dismal region.  A salt or even a coal ship
is ten million times preferable; for there the sky is above me, and the fresh breeze around
me, and my thoughts, having hardly anything to do with my occupation, are as free as air.

Nevertheless, you are not to fancy that the above paragraph gives a correct idea of my mental
and spiritual state. . . . It is only once in a while that the image and desire of a better
and happier life makes me feel the iron of my chain; for, after all, a human spirit may find
no insufficiency of food fit for it, even in the Custom-House.  And, with such materials as
these, I do think and feel and learn things that are worth knowing, and which I should not
know unless I had learned them there, so that the present portion of my life shall not be quite
left out of the sum of my real existence. . . . It is good for me, on many accounts, that my
life has had this passage in it.  I know much more than I did a year ago.  I have a stronger
sense of power to act as a man among men.  I have gained worldly wisdom, and wisdom also that
is not altogether of this world.  And, when I quit this earthly cavern where I am now buried,
nothing will cling to me that ought to be left behind. Men will not perceive, I trust, by my
look, or the tenor of my thoughts and feelings, that I have been a custom-house officer.

April 7th.--It appears to me to have been the most uncomfortable day that ever was inflicted
on poor mortals. . . . Besides the bleak, unkindly air, I have been plagued by two sets of
coal-shovellers at the same time, and have been obliged to keep two separate tallies simultaneously.
But I was conscious that all this was merely a vision and a fantasy, and that, in reality,
I was not half frozen by the bitter blast, nor tormented by those grimy coal-beavers, but that
I was basking quietly in the sunshine of eternity. . . . Any sort of bodily and earthly torment
may serve to make us sensible that we have a soul that is not within the jurisdiction of such
shadowy demons,--it separates the immortal within us from the mortal.  But the wind has blown
my brains into such confusion that I cannot philosophize now.

April 19th.--. . . . What a beautiful day was yesterday!  My spirit rebelled against being
confined in my darksome dungeon at the Custom-House.  It seemed a sin,--a murder of the joyful
young day,--a quenching of the sunshine.  Nevertheless, there I was kept a prisoner till it
was too late to fling myself on a gentle wind, and be blown away into the country. . . . When
I shall be again free, I will enjoy all things with the fresh simplicity of a child of five
years old.  I shall grow young again, made all over anew.  I will go forth and stand in a summer
shower, and all the worldly dust that has collected on me shall be washed away at once, and
my heart will be like a bank of fresh flowers for the weary to rest upon. . . .

6 P. M.--I went out to walk about an hour ago, and found it very pleasant, though there was
a somewhat cool wind.  I went round and across the Common, and stood on the highest point of
it, where I could see miles and miles into the country.  Blessed be God for this green tract,
and the view which it affords, whereby we poor citizens may be put in mind, sometimes, that
all his earth is not composed of blocks of brick houses, and of stone or wooden pavements.
Blessed be God for the sky too, though the smoke of the city may somewhat change its aspect,--but
still it is better than if each street were covered over with a roof.  There were a good many
people walking on the mall,--mechanics apparently, and shopkeepers' clerks, with their wives;
and boys were rolling on the grass, and I would have liked to lie down and roll too.

April 30th.--. . . . I arose this morning feeling more elastic than I have throughout the winter;
for the breathing of the ocean air has wrought a very beneficial effect. . . . What a beautiful,
most beautiful afternoon this has been!  It was a real happiness to live. If I had been merely
a vegetable,--a hawthorn-bush, for instance,-- I must have been happy in such an air and sunshine;
but, having a mind and a soul, . . . . I enjoyed somewhat more than mere vegetable happiness.
. . . The footsteps of May can be traced upon the islands in the harbor, and I have been watching
the tints of green upon them gradually deepening, till now they are almost as beautiful as
they ever can be.

May 19th.--. . . . Lights and shadows are continually flitting across my inward sky, and I
know neither whence they come nor whither they go; nor do I inquire too closely into them.
It is dangerous to look too minutely into such phenomena.  It is apt to create a substance
where at first there was a mere shadow. . . . If at any time there should seem to be an expression
unintelligible from one soul to another, it is best not to strive to interpret it in earthly
language, but wait for the soul to make itself understood; and, were we to wait a thousand
years, we need deem it no more time than we can spare. . . . It is not that I have any love
of mystery, but because I abhor it, and because I have often felt that words may be a thick
and darksome veil of mystery between the soul and the truth which it seeks.  Wretched were
we, indeed, if we had no better means of communicating ourselves, no fairer garb in which to
array our essential being, than these poor rags and tatters of Babel.  Yet words are not without
their use even for purposes of explanation,--but merely for explaining outward acts and all
sorts of external things, leaving the soul's life and action to explain itself in its own way.

What a misty disquisition I have scribbled! I would not read it over for sixpence.

May 29th.--Rejoice with me, for I am free from a load of coal which has been pressing upon
my shoulders throughout all the hot weather.  I am convinced that Christian's burden consisted
of coal; and no wonder he felt so much relieved, when it fell off and rolled into the sepulchre.
His load, however, at the utmost, could not have been more than a few bushels, whereas mine
was exactly one hundred and thirty-five chaldrons and seven tubs.

May 30th.--. . . . On board my salt-vessels and colliers there are many things happening, many
pictures which, in future years, when I am again busy at the loom of fiction, I could weave
in; but my fancy is rendered so torpid by my ungenial way of life that I cannot sketch off
the scenes and portraits that interest me, and I am forced to trust them to my memory, with
the hope of recalling them at some more favorable period. Land and sea in Sandag Bay

iv. The gale

v. A man out of the sea

Will o' the Mill

Markheim

Thrawn Janet

Olalla

The Treasure of Franchard

i. By the dying Mountebank

ii.

Morning tale

iii. The adoption

iv. The education of the philosopher

v. Treasure trove

vi. A criminal investigation, in two parts

vii. The fall of the House of Desprez
viii. The wages of philosophy

THE MERRY MEN

CHAPTER I. EILEAN AROS.

It
was a beautiful morning in the late July when I set forth on foot
for the last time for Aros. A boat had put me ashore the night before
at Grisapol; I had such breakfast as the little inn afforded, and,
leaving all my baggage till I had an occasion to come round for it
by sea, struck right across the promontory with a cheerful heart.

I
was far from being a native of these parts, springing, as I did, from
an unmixed lowland stock. But an uncle of mine, Gordon Darnaway, after
a poor, rough youth, and some years at sea, had married a young wife
in the islands; Mary Maclean she was called, the last of her family;
and when she died in giving birth to a daughter, Aros, the sea-girt
farm, had remained in his possession. It brought him in nothing but
the means of life, as I was well aware; but he was a man whom ill-fortune
had pursued; he feared, cumbered as he was with the young child, to
make a fresh adventure upon life; and remained in Aros, biting his
nails at destiny. Years passed over his head in that isolation, and
brought neither help nor contentment. Meantime our family was dying
out in the lowlands; there is little luck for any of that race; and
perhaps my father was the luckiest of all, for not only was he one
of the last to die, but he left a son to his name and a little money
to support it. I was a student of Edinburgh University, living well
enough at my own charges, but without kith or kin; when some news
of me found its way to Uncle Gordon on the Ross of Grisapol; and he,
as he was a man who held blood thicker than water, wrote to me the
day he heard of my existence, and taught me to count Aros as my home.  There are two pictures there by our
friend Sarah Clarke,--scenes in Kentucky.

From the picture-gallery I went to the reading-rooms of the Athenaeum, and there read the magazines
till nearly twelve; thence to the Custom-House, and soon afterwards to dinner with Colonel
Hall; then back to the Custom-House, but only for a little while.  There was nothing in the
world to do, and so at two o'clock I cane home and lay down, with the Faerie Queene in my hand.

August 21st.--Last night I slept like a child of five years old, and had no dreams at all,--unless
just before it was time to rise, and I have forgotten what those dreams were.  After I was
fairly awake this morning, I felt very bright and airy, and was glad that I had been compelled
to snatch two additional hours of existence from annihilation.  The sun's disk was but half
above the ocean's verge when I ascended the ship's side.  These early morning hours are very
lightsome and quiet.  Almost the whole day I have been in the shade, reclining on a pile of
sails, so that the life and spirit are not entirely worn out of me. . . . The wind has been
east this afternoon,--perhaps in the forenoon, too,--and I could not help feeling refreshed,
when the gentle chill of its breath stole over my cheek.  I would fain abominate the east-wind,
. . . . but it persists in doing me kindly offices now and then.  What a perverse wind it is!
Its refreshment is but another mode of torment.

Salem, Oct. 4th.  Union Street [Family Mansion]--. . . . Here I sit in my old accustomed chamber,
where I used to sit in days gone by. . . . Here I have written many tales, many that have been
burned to ashes, many that doubtless deserved the same fate.  This claims to be called a haunted
chamber, for thousands upon thousands of visions have appeared to me in it; and some few of
them have become visible to the world.  If ever I should have a biographer, he ought to make
great mention of this chamber in my memoirs, because so much of my lonely youth was wasted
here, and here my mind and character were formed; and here I have been glad and hopeful, and
here I have been despondent.  And here I sat a long, long time, waiting patiently for the world
to know me, and sometimes wondering why it did not know me sooner, or whether it would ever
know me at all,-- at least, till I were in my grave.  And sometimes it seemed as if I were
already in the grave, with only life enough to be chilled and benumbed. But oftener I was happy,--at
least, as happy as I then knew how to be, or was aware of the possibility of being.  By and
by, the world found me out in my lonely chamber, and called me forth,--not, indeed, with a
loud roar of acclamation, but rather with a still, small voice,--and forth I went, but found
nothing in the world that I thought preferable to my old solitude till now. . . . And now I
begin to understand why I was imprisoned so many years in this lonely chamber, and why I could
never break through the viewless bolts and bars; for if I had sooner made my escape into the
world, I should have grown hard and rough, and been covered with earthly dust, and my heart
might have become callous by rude encounters with the multitude. . . . But living in solitude
till the fulness of time was come, I still kept the dew of my youth and the freshness of my
heart. . . . I used to think I could imagine all passions, all feelings, and states of the
heart and mind; but how little did I know! . . . . Indeed, we are but shadows; we are not endowed
with real life, and all that seems most real about us is but the thinnest substance of a dream,--till
the heart be touched.  That touch creates us,--then we begin to be,--thereby we are beings
of reality and inheritors of eternity. . . .

When we shall be endowed with our spiritual bodies, I think that they will be so constituted
that we may send thoughts and feelings any distance in no time at all, and transfuse them warm
and fresh into the consciousness of those whom we love. . . . But, after all, perhaps it is
not wise to intermix fantastic ideas with the reality of affection. Let us content ourselves
to be earthly creatures, and hold communion of spirit in such modes as are ordained to us. . . .

I was not at the end of Long Wharf to-day, but in a distant region,--my authority having been
put in requisition to quell a rebellion of the captain and "gang" of shovellers aboard a coal-vessel.
I would you could have beheld the awful sternness of my visage and demeanor in the execution
of this momentous duty.  Well,--I have conquered the rebels, and proclaimed an amnesty; so
to-morrow I shall return to that paradise of measurers, the end of Long Wharf,--not to my former
salt-ship, she being now discharged, but to another, which will probably employ me well-nigh
a fortnight longer. . . . Salt is white and pure,--there is something holy in salt. . . .

I have observed that butterflies--very broad-winged and magnificent butterflies--frequently
come on board of the salt-ship, where I am at work.  What have these bright strangers to do
on Long Wharf, where there are no flowers nor any green thing,--nothing but brick storehouses,
stone piers, black ships, and the bustle of toilsome men, who neither look up to the blue sky,
nor take note of these wandering gems of the air?  I cannot account for them, unless they are
the lovely fantasies of the mind.

November.--. . . . How delightfully long the evenings are now!  I do not get intolerably tired
any longer; and my thoughts sometimes wander back to literature, and I have momentary impulses
to write stories.  But this will not be at present.  The utmost that I can hope to do will
be to portray some of the characteristics of the life which I am now living, and of the people
with whom I am brought into contact, for future use. . . . The days are cold now, the air eager
and nipping, yet it suits my health amazingly.  I feel as if I could run a hundred miles at
a stretch, and jump over all the houses that happen to be in my way. . . .

I have never had the good luck to profit much, or indeed any, by attending lectures, so that
I think the ticket had better be bestowed on somebody who can listen to Mr. ------ more worthily.
My evenings are very precious to me, and some of them are unavoidably thrown away in paying
or receiving visits, or in writing letters of business, and therefore I prize the rest as if
the sands of the hour-glass were gold or diamond dust.

I was invited to dine at Mr. Baucroft's yesterday with Miss Margaret Fuller; but Providence
had given me some business to do, for which I was very thankful.

Is not this a beautiful morning?  The sun shines into my soul.

April, 1841.--. . . . There was no cultivation anywhere, and not one house in the ten miles
from Grisapol to Aros. Houses of course there were--three at least; but they lay so far on
the one side or the other that no stranger could have found them
from the track.  It has been a brisk, breezy day, an
effervescent atmosphere, and I have enjoyed it in all its freshness,--breathing air which had
not been breathed in advance by the hundred thousand pairs of lungs which have common and indivisible
property in the atmosphere of this great city.  My breath had never belonged to anybody but
me.  It came fresh from the wilderness of ocean. . . . It was exhilarating to see the vessels,
how they bounded over the waves, while a sheet of foam broke out around them.  I found a good
deal of enjoyment, too, in the busy scene around me; for several vessels were disgorging themselves
(what an unseemly figure is this,--"disgorge," quotha, as if the vessels were sick) on the
wharf, and everybody seemed to be working with might and main.  It pleased me to think that
I also had a part to act in the material and tangible business of this life, and that a portion
of all this industry could not have gone on without my presence.  Nevertheless, I must not
pride myself too much on my activity and utilitarianism.  I shall, doubtless, soon bewail myself
at being compelled to earn my bread by taking some little share in the toils of mortal men. . . .

Articulate words are a harsh clamor and dissonance.  When man arrives at his highest perfection,
he will again be dumb! for I suppose he was dumb at the Creation, and must go round an entire
circle in order to return to that blessed state.

END OF VOL. I

