LETTERS FROM FRANCE

by

C. E. W. BEAN

War Correspondent for the Commonwealth of Australia

With a Map and Eight Plates

Cassell and Company, Ltd London, New York, Toronto and Melbourne

1917

To those other Australians who fell in the Sharpest Action their Force has known, on July 19,
1916, before Fromelles, these Memories of a Greater, but not a Braver, Battle are herewith
Dedicated

PREFACE

These letters are in no sense a history--except that they contain the truth. They were written
at the time and within close range of the events they describe. Half of the fighting, including
the brave attack before Fromelles, is left untouched on, for these pages do not attempt to
narrate the full story of the Australian Imperial Force in France. They were written to depict
the surroundings in which, and the spirit with which, that history has been made; first in
the quiet green Flemish lowlands, then with a swift, sudden plunge into the grim, reeking,
naked desolation of the Somme. The record of the A.I.F., and its now historical units in their
full action, will be painted upon that background some day. If these letters convey some reflection
of the spirit which fought at Pozières, their object is well fulfilled. The author's profits
are devoted to the fund for nursing back to useful citizenship Australians blinded or maimed
in the war.

C. E. W. Bean.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

    Preface

 1. A Padre who said the Right Thing

 2. To the Front

 3. The First Impression--A Country with Eyes

 4. The Road to Lille

 5. The Differences

 6. The Germans

 7. The Planes

 8. The Coming Struggle: Our Task

 9. In a Forest of France

10. Identified

11. The Great Battle Begins

12. The British--Fricourt and La Boiselle

13. The Dug-outs of Fricourt

14. The Raid

15. Pozières

16. An Abysm of Desolation

17. Pozières Ridge

18. The Green Country

19. Trommelfeuer

20. The New Fighting

21. Angels' Work

22. Our Neighbour

23. Mouquet Farm

24. How the Australians were Relieved

25. On Leave to a New England

26. The New Entry

27. A Hard Time

28. The Winter of 1916

29. As in the World's Dawn

30. The Grass Bank

31. In the Mud of Le Barque

32. The New Draft

33. Why He is not "The Anzac"

LIST OF PLATES

Australians Watching the Bombardment of Pozières

Sketch Map

"Talking with the Kiddies in the Street"

"An Occasional Broken Tree-Trunk"

No Man's Land

Along the Road to Lille

The Trenches here have to be Built Above the Ground in Breastwork

A Main Street of Pozières

The Church Pozières

The Windmill of Pozières

The Barely Recognisable Remains of a Trench

The Tumbled Heap of Bricks and Timber which the World Knows as Mouquet Farm

"Past the Mud-Heaps Scraped by the Road Gangs"

LETTERS FROM FRANCE

CHAPTER I

A PADRE WHO SAID THE RIGHT THING

France, April 8th, 1916.

The sun glared from a Mediterranean sky and from the surface of the Mediterranean sea. The
liner heaved easily to a slow swell. In the waist of the ship a densely packed crowd of sunburnt
faces upturned towards a speaker who leaned over the rail of the promenade deck above. Beside
the speaker was a slight figure with three long rows of ribbons across the left breast. Every
man in the Australian Imperial Force is as proud of those ribbons as the leader who wears them
so modestly.

Australian ships had been moving through those waters for days. High over one's head, as one
listened to that speaker, there sawed the wireless aerial backwards and forwards across the
silver sky. Only yesterday that aerial had intercepted a stammering signal from far, far away
over the brim of the world. "S.O.S.," it ran, "S.O.S." There followed half inarticulate fragments
of a latitude. That evening about sundown we ran into the shreds of some ocean conversation
about boats' crews, and about someone who was still absent--just that broken fragment in the
buzz of the wireless conversation which runs around the world. A big Australian transport,
we knew, was some twelve hours away from us upon the waters. Could it be about her that these
personages of the ocean were calling one to another? Days afterwards we heard that it had not
been an Australian or any other transport.

Somewhere in those dazzling seas there was an eye watching for us too, just above the water,
and always waiting--waiting--waiting--. It would have been a rich harvest, that crowded deck
below one. If the monster struck just there he could not fail to kill many with the mere explosion.
But I don't believe a man in the crowd gave it a thought. The strong, tanned, clean-shaven
faces under the old slouch hats were all gazing up in rapt attention at the speaker. For he
was telling them the right thing.

He was not a regular chaplain--there was no regular padre in that ship, and we were likely
to have no church parade until there was discovered amongst the reinforcement officers one
little subaltern who was a padre in Tasmania, but who was going to the front as a fighting
man. We had heard other padres speak to troops on the eve of their plunging into a great enterprise,
when the sermon had made some of us wish that we only had the power and gift to seize that
wonderful opportunity as it might be seized, and have done with texts and doctrines and speak
to the men as men. Every man there had his ideals--he was giving his life, as like as not,
because, however crude the exterior, there was an eye within which saw truly and surely through
the mists. And now when they stood on the brink of the last great sacrifice, could he not seize
upon those truths--?

But this time we simply stood and wondered. For that slip of a figure in khaki, high up there
with one hand on the stanchion and the other tapping the rail, was telling them a thousand
times better than any of us could ever have put it to himself exactly the things one would
have longed to say.

He told them first, his voice firm with conviction, that God had not populated this world with
saints, but with ordinary human men; and that they need not fear that, simply because they
might not have been churchgoers or lived what the world calls religious lives, therefore God
would desert them in the danger and trials and perhaps the death to which they went. "If I
thought that God wished any man to be tortured eternally," he said, "to be tortured for all
time and not to have any hope of heaven, then I would go down to Hell cheerfully with a smile
on my lips rather than worship such a being. I don't know whether a man may put it beyond the
power of God to help him. But I know this, that whether you are bad or good, or religious or
not religious, God is with you all the time trying to help you.

"And what have we to fear now?" he went on, raising his eyes for a moment from the puckered,
interested brown foreheads below him and looking out over the shimmering distant silver of
the horizon, as if away over there, over the edge of the world, he could read what the next
few months had in store for them. "We know what we have come for, and we know that it is right.
We have all read of the things which have happened in Belgium and in France. We know that the
Germans invaded a peaceful country and brought these horrors into it, we know how they tore
up treaties like so much paper; how they sank the Lusitania and showered their bombs on harmless
women and children in London and in the villages of England. We came of our own free wills--we
came to say that this sort of thing shall not happen in the world so long as we are in it.
We know that we are doing right, and I tell you that on this mission on which we have come,
so long as every man plays the game and plays it cleanly, he need not fear about his religion--for
what else is his religion than that? Play the game and God will be with you--never fear.

"And what if some of us do pass over before this struggle is ended--what is there in that?
If it were not for the dear ones whom he leaves behind him, mightn't a man almost pray for
a death like that? The newspapers too often call us heroes, but we know we are not heroes for
having come, and we do not want to be called heroes. We should have been less than men if we
hadn't."

The rapt, unconscious approval in those weather-scarred upturned faces made it quite obvious
that they were with him in every word. In those simple sentences this man was speaking the
whole soul of Australia. He looked up for a second to the wide sky as clear as his own conscience,
and then looked down at them again. "Isn't it the most wonderful thing that could ever have
happened?" he went on. "Didn't everyone of us as a boy long to go about the world as they did
in the days of Drake and Raleigh, and didn't it seem almost beyond hope that that adventure
would ever come to us? And isn't that the very thing that has happened? And here we are on
that great enterprise going out across the world, and with no thought of gain or conquest,
but to help to right a great wrong. What else do we wish except to go straight forward at the
enemy--with our dear ones far behind us and God above us, and our friends on each side of us
and only the enemy in front of us--what more do we wish than that?"

There were tears in many men's eyes when he finished--and that does not often happen with Australians.
But it happened this time--far out there on a distant sea. And that was because he had put
his finger, just for one moment, straight on to the heart of his nation.

CHAPTER II

TO THE FRONT

France, April 8th.

So the Australians are in France. A great reception at the port of landing, so we hear. A long,
weary train journey in a troop train which never alters its pace, but moves steadily on, halts
for meals, jogs on again, waits interminably outside strange junctions. Some days ago it landed
the first units, somewhere behind the front.

We reached France some time after the first units. The excitement of seeing an Australian hat
had long since evaporated. A few troops had been left in camp near the port, and we met some
of those on leave in the big town. They might have been there since their babyhood for all
they or the big town cared.

And there we first heard mentioned the name of a town to which our troops were supposed to
have gone. It was quite a different town from the one which we had heard of on board ship.
It was snowing up there where our men were, they said.

The train took us through beautiful country not yet touched by the spring of the year. There
were magnificent horses in the rich brown fields--great draught horses such as I have never
seen in any country yet. But the figure that drove the harrow was always that of an old man
or a young boy; or, once or twice, of a woman. There were women digging in the fields everywhere;
or trudging back along the roads under great bundles of firewood. The country was almost all
cultivated land, one vast farming industry. And they had managed to get through the whole year's
work exactly as if the men were there. As far as we could see every field was ploughed, every
green crop springing. It is a wonderful performance.

We had not the least idea where we were going until in the end we actually got there. Travelling
in France is quite different from travelling in Egypt or England. In Egypt you still exercise
your brain as to which train you shall travel by and where you will stay and where you will
change. But in France there is no need for you to think out your own journey--it is useless
for you to do so. The moment you reach France the big hand of General Headquarters takes hold
of you; and from that instant it picks you up and puts you down as if you were a pawn on a
chessboard. Whatever the railway station, there is always a big British policeman. The policeman
directs you to the Railway Transport Officer and the Railway Transport Officer tells you how
long you will stay and when you will leave and where you will go to next. And when you get
to the next place there is another policeman who sends you to another Railway Transport Officer;
until you finally come to a policeman who directs you from the station and up the street of
a little French town, where, standing on the wet cobbles at the corner of the old city square,
under dripping stage scenery gables, you find another British policeman who passes you to another
policeman at another corner who directs you under the very archway and into the very office
which you are intended by General Headquarters to reach.

And if you go on right up to the very trenches themselves you will find that British policeman
all the way; directing the traffic at every country cross-road where there is likely to be
a congestion of the great lumbering motor-lorries; standing outside the ruined village church
which the long-range guns have knocked to pieces in trying to get at a supply dump or a headquarters;
waiting at the fork-roads where you finally have to leave your motor-car and walk only in small
parties if you wish to avoid sudden death; on point duty at the ruined farmhouses which it
is unhealthy at certain hours of the day to pass. At the corner where you finally turn off
the road into the long, deepening communication trench; even at the point where the second
line trenches cross the communication trench to the front trenches--in some cases you find
that policeman there also, faithfully telling you the way, incidentally with a very close and
critical eye upon you at the same time.

He is simply the British policeman doing his famous old job in his famous old way. He is mostly
the London policeman, but there are policemen from Burnley, from Manchester, from Glasgow amongst
them. And up near the lines you find the policeman from Sydney and Melbourne waving the traffic
along with a flag just as he used to do at the corner of Pitt and King Streets. Just as he
used to see that the by-laws of the local council were carried out, so he now has to see to
the rules and orders made by the local general. It is a thankless job generally; but when they
get as far as this most people begin to be a little grateful to the policeman.

Our railway train and the policeman had carried us over endless farmlands, through forests,
beside rivers, before we noticed, drawn up along the side of a quarter of a mile of road, an
endless procession of big grey motor-lorries. Every one was exactly like the next--a tall grey
hood in front and a long grey tarpaulin behind. It was the first sign of the front. Presently
a French regiment went by along a country road--not at all unlike our Australian troops in
some ways--biggish fellows in grey-blue overcoats, all singing a jolly song. They waved to
us in the same light-hearted way Australians have. There were more fair-haired men, among some
of the French troops we have seen, than there would be in one of our own battalions. 

She would be exquisitely careful not to hold herself too much aloof, and yet not to step beyond the
bounds of that sweet reserve that she conceived must have been at once Miss Crofutt's sword and
buckler.

Her object was to awaken in the most abandoned criminals a realization
that the world, in its most benignant phase, was still open to them;
that society, having obtained a requital for their wickedness, was
ready to embrace them again on proof of their repentance.

She determined to select at the outset two or three of the most remarkable monsters, and turn
the full head of her persuasions exclusively upon them, instead of sprinkling (as it were) the whole
community with her grace. She would arouse at first a very few, and then a few more, and a few more,
and so on ad infinitum.

It was on a hot July morning that she journeyed on foot over the bridge which led to the prison,
and there walked a man behind her carrying the flowers.

Her eyes were cast down, this being the position most significant
of her spirit.

Her pace was equal, firm, and rapid: she made herself oblivious of the bustle of the streets,
and she repented that her vanity had permitted her to wear white and lavender these making
a combination in her dress which she had been told became her well.

She had no right to embellish herself. Was she going to the races or a match, or a kettle-drum,
that she must dandify herself with particular shades of color? She stopped short, blushing.
Would Miss Cro----. But there was no help for it now. It was too
late to turn back.

She proceeded, feeling that the odds were against her.

She approached her destination in such a way that the prison came
into view suddenly.

She paused, with a feeling of terror.

The enormous gray building rose far above a lofty white wall of stone, and a sense of its prodigious
strength and awful gloom overwhelmed her. On the top of the wall, holding by an iron railing,
there stood a man with a rifle trailing behind him. He was looking down into the yard inside.
His attitude of watchfulness, his weapon, the unseen thing that was being thus fiercely guarded,
provoked in her such a revulsion that she came to a standstill.

What in the name of mercy had she come here for? She began to tremble. The man with the flowers
came up to her and halted.

From the prison there came at this instant the loud clang of a bell, and succeeding this a
prolonged and resonant murmur which seemed to increase. Miss Eunice looked hastily around her.
There were several people who must have heard the same sounds that reached her ears, but they
were not alarmed. In fact, one or two of them seemed to be going to the prison direct. The courage
of our philanthropist began to revive. A woman in a brick house opposite suddenly pulled up a
window-curtain and fixed an amused and inquisitive look upon her.

This would have sent her into a thrice-heated furnace. "Come, if you please," she commanded
the man, and she marched upon the jail.

She entered at first a series of neat offices in a wing of the structure, and then she came
to a small door made of black bars of iron. A man stood on the farther side of this, with a
bunch of large keys. When he saw Miss Eunice he unlocked and opened the door, and she passed
through.

She found that she had entered a vast, cool, and lofty cage, one hundred feet in diameter; it
had an iron floor, and there were several people strolling about here and there. Through several
grated apertures the sunlight streamed with strong effect, and a
soft breeze swept around the cavernous apartment.

Without the cage, before her and on either hand, were three more wings of the building, and in these
were the prisoners' corridors.

At the moment she entered, the men were leaving their cells, and mounting the stone stairs in
regular order, on their way to the chapel above. The noisy files went up and down and to the right
and to the left, shuffling and scraping and making a great tumult.

The men were dressed in blue, and were seen indistinctly through the lofty gratings. From
above and below and all around her there came the metallic snapping of bolts and the rattle of moving
bars; and so significant was everything of savage repression and impending violence, that Miss
Eunice was compelled to say faintly to herself "I am afraid it will take a little time to get
used to all this."

She rested upon one of the seats in the rotunda while the chapel services were being conducted, and
she thus had an opportunity to regain a portion of her lost heart. She felt wonderfully dwarfed
and belittled, and her plan of recovering souls had, in some way
or other, lost much of its feasibility.

A glance at her bright flowers revived her a little, as did also a surprising, long-drawn roar
from over her head, to the tune of "America." The prisoners were singing.

Miss Eunice was not alone in her intended work, for there were several other ladies, also with
supplies of flowers, who with her awaited until the prisoners should descend into the yard
and be let loose before presenting them with what they had brought. Their common purpose made
them acquainted, and by the aid of chat and sympathy they fortified each other.

Half an hour later the five hundred men descended from the chapel to the yard, rushing out upon
its bare broad surface as you have seen a burst of water suddenly irrigate a road-bed. A hoarse
and tremendous shout at once filled the air, and echoed against the walls like the threat of a volcano.
Some of the wretches waltzed and spun around like dervishes, some threw somersaults, some folded
their arms gravely and marched up and down, some fraternized, some walked away pondering, some
took off their tall caps and sat down in the shade, some looked toward the rotunda with expectation,
and there were those who looked toward it with contempt.

There led from the rotunda to the yard a flight of steps.

Miss Eunice descended these steps with a quaking heart, and a turnkey shouted to the prisoners
over her head that she and others had flowers for them.

No sooner had the words left his lips, than the men rushed up pell-mell.

This was a crucial moment.

There thronged upon Miss Eunice an army of men who were being punished for all the crimes in the
calendar. Each individual here had been caged because he was either a highwayman, or a forger,
or a burglar, or a ruffian, or a thief, or a murderer. The unclean and frightful tide bore down
upon our terrified missionary, shrieking and whooping.

Every prisoner thrust out his hand over the head of the one in front of him, and the foremost
plucked at her dress.

She had need of courage. A sense of danger and contamination impelled her to fly, but a gleam
of reason in the midst of her distraction enabled her to stand her
ground.

She forced herself to smile though she knew her face had grown pale.

She placed a bunch of flowers into an immense hand which projected from a coarse blue sleeve in
front of her; the owner of the hand was pushed away so quickly by those who came after him that
Miss Eunice failed to see his face. Her tortured ear caught a rough
"Thank y', miss!"

The spirit of Miss Crofutt revived in a flash, and her disciple thereafter
possessed no lack of nerve.

She plied the crowd with flowers as long as they lasted, and a jaunty self possession enabled
her finally to gaze without flinching at the mass of depraved and wicked faces with which she was
surrounded. Instead of retaining her position upon the steps, she gradually descended into the yard,
as did several other visitors. She began to feel at home; she found her tongue, and her color
came back again. She felt a warm pride in noticing with what care and respect the prisoners
treated her gifts; they carried them about with great tenderness,
and some compared them with those of their friends.

Presently she began to recall her plans. It occurred to her to select her two or three villains.
For one, she immediately pitched upon a lean-faced wretch in front of her. He seemed to be
old, for his back was bent and he leaned upon a cane. His features were large, and they bore an
expression of profound gloom. His head was sunk upon his breast, his lofty conical cap was pulled
over his ears, and his shapeless uniform seemed to weigh him down,
so infirm was he.

Miss Eunice spoke to him. He did not hear; she spoke again. He glanced at her like a flash, but
without moving; this was at once followed by a scrutinizing look. He raised his head, and then
he turned toward her gravely.

The solemnity of his demeanor nearly threw Miss Eunice off her balance, but she mastered herself
by beginning to talk rapidly. The prisoner leaned over a little to hear better. Another came up, and two
or three turned around to look. She bethought herself of an incident related in Miss Crofutt's book, and
she essayed its recital. It concerned a lawyer who was once pleading in a French criminal court
in behalf of a man whose crime had been committed under the influence of dire want. In his plea
he described the case of another whom he knew who had been punished
with a just but short imprisonment instead of a long one, which the
judge had been at liberty to impose, but from which he humanely refrained.

Miss Eunice happily remembered the words of the lawyer: "That man suffered like the wrong-doer
that he was. He knew his punishment was just. Therefore there lived perpetually in his breast
an impulse toward a better life which was not suppressed and stifled by the five years he
passed within the walls of the jail. He came forth and began to labor. He toiled hard. He struggled
against averted faces and cold words, and he began to rise. He secreted nothing, faltered at nothing,
and never stumbled. He succeeded; men took off their hats to him once more; he became wealthy,
honorable, God-fearing. I, gentlemen, am that man, that criminal." As she quoted this last declaration
Miss Eunice erected herself with burning eyes and touched herself proudly upon the breast.
A flush crept into her cheeks, and her nostrils dilated, and she grew tall.

She came back to earth again, and found herself surrounded with the
prisoners. She was a little startled.

"Ah, that was good!" ejaculated the old man upon whom she had fixed
her eyes.

Miss Eunice felt an inexpressible sense of delight.

Murmurs of approbation came from all of her listeners, especially from one on her right hand.
She looked around at him pleasantly.

But the smile faded from her lips on beholding him. He was extremely tall and very powerful. He
overshadowed her.

His face was large, ugly, and forbidding; his gray hair and beard were cropped close, his eyebrows
met at the bridge of his nose and overhung his large eyes like a screen. His lips were very wide,
and, being turned downward at the corners, they gave him a dolorous expression. His lower jaw
was square and protruding, and a pair of prodigious white ears projected from beneath his sugar-loaf
cap.

He seemed to take his cue from the old man, for he repeated his sentiment.

"Yes," said he, with a voice which broke alternately into a roar and a whisper, "that was a good
story."

"Y-yes," faltered Miss Eunice, "and it has the merit of being t-rue."

He replied with a nod, and looked absently over her head while he rubbed the nap upon his chin
with his hand. Miss Eunice discovered that his knee touched the skirt of her dress, and she was
about to move in order to destroy this contact, when she remembered that Miss Crofutt would probably
have cherished the accident as a promoter of a valuable personal influence, so she allowed
it to remain.

The lean-faced man was not to be mentioned in the same breath with this one, therefore she
adopted the superior villain out of hand.

She began to approach him. She asked him where he lived, meaning to discover whence he had come.
He replied in the same mixture of roar and whisper, "Six undered un one, North Wing."

Miss Eunice grew scarlet. Presently she recovered sufficiently to pursue some inquiries respecting
the rules and customs of the prison.

She did not feel that she was interesting her friend, yet it seemed clear that he did not
wish to go away. His answers were curt, yet he swept his cap off his head, implying by the act
a certain reverence, which Miss Eunice's vanity permitted her to exult at. Therefore she became
more loquacious than ever. Some men came up to speak with the prisoner, but he shook them
off, and remained in an attitude of strict attention, with his chin
on his hand, looking now at the sky, now at the ground and now at
Miss Eunice.

In handling the flowers her gloves had been stained, and she now held them in her fingers nervously
twisting them as she talked. In the course of time she grew short of subjects, and as her listener
suggested nothing, several lapses occurred; in one of them she absently spread her gloves out
in her palms, meanwhile wondering how the English girl acted under similar circumstances.

Suddenly
a large hand slowly interposed itself between her eyes and her gloves,
and then withdrew, taking one of the soiled trifles with it.

She was surprised, but the surprise was pleasurable. She said nothing at first. The prisoner
gravely spread his prize out upon his own palm, and after looking at it carefully, he rolled
it up into a tight ball and thrust it deep in an inner pocket.

This act made the philanthropist aware that she had made progress. She rose insensibly to the
elevation of patron, and she made promises to come frequently and
visit her ward and to look in upon him when he was at work; while
saying this she withdrew a little from the shade his huge figure had
supplied her with.

He thrust his hands into his pockets, but he hastily took them out
again.

Still he said nothing and hung his head. It was while she was in the mood of a conqueror that Miss
Eunice went away. She felt a touch of repugnance at stepping from before his eyes a free woman,
therefore she took pains to go when she thought he was not looking.

She pointed him out to a turnkey, who told her he was expiating the sins of assault and burglarious
entry. Outwardly Miss Eunice looked grieved, but within she exulted that he was so emphatically
a rascal.

When she emerged from the cool, shadowy, and frowning prison into the gay sunlight, she experienced
a sense of bewilderment. The significance of a lock and a bar seemed greater on quitting them
than it had when she had perceived them first. The drama of imprisonment and punishment oppressed
her spirit with tenfold gloom now that she gazed upon the brilliancy and freedom of the outer world.
That she and everybody around her were permitted to walk here and there at will, without question
and limit, generated within her an indefinite feeling of gratitude; and the noise, the colors,
the creaking wagons, the myriad voices, the splendid variety and
change of all things excited a profound but at the same time a mournful
satisfaction.

Midway in her return journey she was shrieked at from a carriage, which at once approached the sidewalk.
Within it were four gay maidens bound to the Navy-Yard, from whence they were to sail, with
a large party of people of nice assortment, in an experimental steamer, which was to be made to
go with kerosene lamps, in some way. They seized upon her hands and cajoled her. Wouldn't she
go? They were to sail down among the islands (provided the oil made the wheels and things
go round), they were to lunch at Fort Warren, dine at Fort Independence, and dance at Fort
Winthrop Come, please go. Oh, do! The Germanians were to furnish the music.

Miss Eunice sighed, but shook her head. She had not yet got the air of the prison out of her lungs,
nor the figure of her robber out of her eyes, nor the sense of horror and repulsion out of
her sympathies.

At another time she would have gone to the ends of the earth with such a happy crew, but now she
only shook her head again and was resolute. No one could wring a reason from her, and the
wondering quartet drove away.

II.

Before the day went, Miss Eunice awoke to the disagreeable fact that her plans had become shrunken
and contracted, that a certain something had curdled her spontaneity, and that her ardor had
flown out at some crevice and had left her with the dry husk of an intent.

She exerted herself to glow a little, but she failed. She talked well at the tea-table, but
she did not tell about the glove. This matter plagued her. She ran over in her mind the various
doings of Miss Crofutt, and she could not conceal from herself that
that lady had never given a glove to one of her wretches; no, nor
had she ever permitted the smallest approach to familiarity.

Miss Eunice wept a little. She was on the eve of despairing.
In the silence of the night the idea presented itself to her with
a disagreeable baldness. There was a thief over yonder that possessed
a confidence with her.

They had found it necessary to shut this man
up in iron and stone, and to guard him with a rifle with a large leaden
ball in it.

This villain was a convict. That was a terrible word,
one that made her blood chill.

She, the admired of hundreds and the
beloved of a family, had done a secret and shameful thing of which
she dared not tell. In these solemn hours the madness of her act appalled
her.

She asked herself what might not the fellow do with the glove?
Surely he would exhibit it among his brutal companions, and perhaps
allow it to pass to and fro among them. They would laugh and joke
with him, and he would laugh and joke in return, and no doubt he would
kiss it to their great delight. Again, he might go to her friends,
and, by working upon their fears and by threatening an exposure of
her, extort large sums of money from them. Again, might he not harass
her by constantly appearing to her at all times and all places and
making all sorts of claims and demands? Again, might he not, with
terrible ingenuity, use it in connection with some false key or some
jack-in-the-box, or some dark-lantern, or something, in order to effect
his escape; or might he not tell the story times without count to
some wretched curiosity-hunters who would advertise her folly all
over the country, to her perpetual misery?

She became harnessed to
this train of thought. She could not escape from it. She reversed
the relation that she had hoped to hold toward such a man, and she
stood in his shadow, and not he in hers.

In consequence of these
ever-present fears and sensations, there was one day, not very far
in the future, that she came to have an intolerable dread of. This
day was the one on which the sentence of the man was to expire. She
felt that he would surely search for her; and that he would find her
there could be no manner of doubt, for, in her surplus of confidence,
she had told him her full name, inasmuch as he had told her his.

When
she contemplated this new source of terror, her peace of mind fled
directly. So did her plans for philanthropic labor. Not a shred remained.
The anxiety began to tell upon her, and she took to peering out of
a certain shaded window that commanded the square in front of her
house. It was not long before she remembered that for good behavior
certain days were deducted from the convicts' terms of imprisonment.
Therefore, her ruffian might be released at a moment not anticipated
by her. He might, in fact, be discharged on any day. He might be on
his way toward her even now.

She was not very far from right, for
suddenly the man did appear.

He one day turned the corner, as she
was looking out at the window fearing that she should see him, and
came in a diagonal direction across the hot, flagged square.

Miss
Eunice's pulse leaped into the hundreds. She glued her eyes upon him.
There was no mistake. There was the red face, the evil eyes, the large
mouth, the gray hair, and the massive frame.

What should she do?
Should she hide? Should she raise the sash and shriek to the police?
Should she arm herself with a knife? or--what? In the name of mercy,
what? She glared into the street. He came on steadily, and she lost
him, for he passed beneath her. In a moment she heard the jangle of
the bell. She was petrified. She heard his heavy step below. He had
gone into the little reception-room beside the door. He crossed to
a sofa opposite the mantel. She then heard him get up and go to a
window, then he walked about, and then sat down; probably upon a red
leather seat beside the window.

Meanwhile the servant was coming
to announce him. From some impulse, which was a strange and sudden
one, she eluded the maid, and rushed headlong upon her danger. She
never remembered her descent of the stairs. She awoke to cool contemplation
of matters only to find herself entering the room.

Had she made a
mistake, after all? It was a question that was asked and answered
in a flash. This man was pretty erect and self-assured, but she discerned
in an instant that there was needed but the blue woollen jacket and
the tall cap to make him the wretch of a month before.

He said nothing.
Neither did she. He stood up and occupied himself by twisting a button
upon his waistcoat. She, fearing a threat or a demand, stood bridling
to receive it. She looked at him from top to toe with parted lips.

He
glanced at her. She stepped back. He put the rim of his cap in his
mouth and bit it once or twice, and then looked out at the window.
Still neither spoke. A voice at this instant seemed impossible. Here both you and
the enemy have scores of miles behind you, and two or three hundred yards more or less makes
no difference worth mentioning.

For this reason you would almost say that the German line in this country was asleep compared
with the line we used to know. A hundred and fifty yards of green grass, with the skeleton
that was once some old hay wagon up-ended in the middle of it, and sky-blue water showing through
the grass blades in the depressions; a brown mud wall straggling along the other side of the
green--more or less parallel to your breastwork, with white sandbags crowning it like an irregular
coping; the inevitable stumpy stakes and masses of rusted barbed wire in front. You might watch
it for an hour and the only sign of life you would see would be a blue whiff of smoke from
some black tin chimney stuck up behind it. If you fire at the chimney probably it will be taken
down. The other day, chancing to look into a periscope, I happened for a moment to see the
top of a dark object moving along half hidden by the opposing parapet. Some earth was being
thrown up over the breastwork just there, and probably the man had to step round the work which
was going on. It was the first and only time I have seen a German in his own lines.

The German here really snipes much more with his field gun than with his rifle. He does use
his rifle, too, and is a good shot, but slow. A spout of dust on the parapet--and a periscope
has been shattered in the observer's hand within a few yards of us. But it is generally the
German field gun that does his real sniping for him, shooting at any small body of men behind
the lines. Half a dozen are quite enough to make a target, if he sees them.

The Turks used to snipe us at times with their field guns and mountain guns, but generally
at certain fixed places--down near the mouth of the Aghyl Dere, for example. The German snipes
with them more generally. There is no place that I have visited which can compare for perpetual
"unhealthiness" to Anzac Beach, but it is quite possible that such places do exist.

The German gives you the impression of being a keener observer than the Turk. The hills and
trees behind his lines are really within view of you over miles of your own country, though
you scarcely realise it at first, and they are full of eyes. Also every fine day brings out
his balloons like a crop of fat grubs--and also our own. In Gallipoli our ships had the only
balloons--the Turks had all the hill-tops.

The aeroplane here affords so big a part of the hourly spectacle of warfare, and makes so great
a difference in the obvious conditions of the fight, that he deserves a letter to himself.
But of all the differences, by far the greatest is that our troops here have a beautiful country
and a civilised, enlightened population at the back of them, which they are defending against
the invading enemy whom they have always hoped to meet. They are amongst a people like their
own, living in villages and cottages and paddocks not so different from those of their own
childhood. Right up into the very zone of the trenches there are houses still inhabited by
their owners. As we were entering a communication trench a few days ago we noticed four or
five British soldiers walking across the open from a cottage. The officer with me asked them
what they were doing. "We've just been to the inn there," they said.

The people of that house were still living in it, with our trenches wandering through their
orchard.

In Gallipoli there were brigade headquarters in the actual fire trenches. From the headquarters
of the division or the corps you could reach the line by ten minutes' hard walking, any time.
It is a Sabbath day's journey here--indeed, the only possible way of covering the longer distances
regularly is by motor-car or motor-cycle, and no one dreams of using any other means. Nearly
the whole army, except the troops in the actual firing-line, lives in a country which is populated
by its normal inhabitants.

And--wherein lies the greatest change of all--the troops in the trenches themselves can be
brought back every few days into more or less normal country, and have always the prospect
before them at the end of a few months of a stay in surroundings that are completely free from
shell or rifle fire, and within reach of village shops and the normal comforts of civilisation.
And throwing the weather and wet trenches and the rest all in, that difference more than makes
up for all of them.

"You see, a fellow must look after himself a bit," one of them said to me the other day. "A
man didn't take any care how he looked in Gallipoli; but here with these young ladies about,
you can't go around like what we used to there."

Through one's mind there flashed well-remembered figures, mostly old slouch hat and sunburnt
muscle--the lightest uniform I can recollect was an arrangement of a shirt secured by safety
pins. Here they go more carefully dressed than if they were on leave in Melbourne or Sydney.

Yesterday the country was en fête, the roads swarming with young and old, and the fields with
children picking flowers. The guns were bumping a few miles away--mostly at aeroplanes. I went
to the trenches with a friend. Our last sight, as we came away from the region of them, was
of a group of French boys and girls and a few elders around a haystack; and half a dozen big
Australians, with rolled shirtsleeves, up on the farming machinery helping them to do the work
of the year.

That is the difference.

CHAPTER VI

THE GERMANS

France, May.

The night air on every side of us was full of strange sound. It was not loud nor near, but
it was there all the time. We could hear it even while we talked and above the sound of our
footsteps on the cobbles of the long French highway. Ahead of us, and far on either side, came
this continuous distant rattle. It was the sound of innumerable wagons carrying up over endless
cobble stones the food and ammunition for another day.

A cart clattered past from the front with the jingle of trace chains and hammer of metal tyres
upon stones. So one driver had finished his job for the night. Farther on was a sound of voices
and a chink of spades; some way to our left across a field we can make out dark figures--they
may be stunted willows along the far hedge, or they may be a working party going up, with their
spades and picks over their shoulders, to one of those jobs which in this flat country can
only be done by night.

Twenty miles behind the lines, or more, you can see every night along the horizon in front
of you a constant low flicker of light--the flares thrown up by both sides over the long ribbon
of No Man's Land--the ribbon which straggles without a break from one end of France to the
other. We were getting very close to that barrier now--within a couple of miles of it; and
the pure white stars of these glorified Roman candles were describing graceful curves behind
a fretwork of trees an inch or two above the horizon. Every five or six seconds a rifle cracked
somewhere along the line--very different from the ceaseless pecking of Gallipoli. Then a distant
German machine-gun started its sprint, stumbled, went on again, tripped again. A second machine-gun
farther down the line caught it up, and the two ran along in perfect step for a while. Then
a third joined in, like some distant canary answering its mates. The first two stopped and
left it trilling along by itself, catching occasionally like a motor-car engine that misfires,
until it, too, stuttered into silence. "Some poor devils being killed, I suppose," you think
to yourself, "suppose they've seen a patrol out in front of the lines, or a party digging in
the open somewhere behind the trenches." You can't help crediting the Germans--at first, when
you come to this place as a stranger--with being much more deadly than the Turks both with
their machine-guns and their artillery. But you soon learn that it is by no means necessary
that anyone is dying when you hear their machine-guns sing a chorus. They may chatter away
for a whole night and nobody be in the least the worse for it. Their artillery can throw two
or three hundred shells, or even more, into one of its various targets, not once but many times,
and only a man or two be wounded; sometimes no one at all. War is alike in that respect all
the world over, apparently; which is comforting.

Presently the road ends and the long sap begins. You plunge into the dark winding alley much
as into some old city's ugly by-lane. It is Centennial Avenue. There is room in it to pass
another man even when he is carrying a shoulderful of timber. But you must be careful when
you do pass him, or one of you will find yourself waist deep in mud. I have said before that
you do not walk on the bottom of the trench as you did in Gallipoli, but on a narrow wooden
causeway not unlike the bridge on which ducks wander down from the henhouse to the yard--colloquially
known as the "duck-boards." The days have probably passed when a man could be drowned in the
mud of a communication trench. But it is always unpleasant to step off the duck-boards in wet
weather. Seeing that the enemy may have fixed rifles trained on you at any bend of the trench,
it is unwise to carry a light; and in a dark night and an unaccustomed trench you are almost
sure to flounder.

A party of men loaded with new duck-boards is blocked ahead of you. As you stand there talking
to another wayfarer and waiting for the unknown obstacle to move, a bullet flicks off the parapet
a few feet away. It was at least a foot above the man's head and was clearly fired from some
rifle laid on the trench during the daytime. Every now and then the parapet on one side becomes
dense black against a dazzling white sky, and the trench wall on the other side becomes a glaring
white background on which the shadow of your own head and shoulders sail slowly past you in
inky black silhouette. The sharp-cut shadow gradually rises up the white trench wall, and all
is black again until the enemy throws another flare.

As you talk there comes suddenly over the flats on your left a brilliant yellow flicker and
a musical whine: "Whine--bang, whine--bang, whine--bang, whine--bang," just like that spoken
very quickly.

"That's right over the working party in Westminster Abbey," says the last man in the procession.
"Some bally fool lit a pipe, I suppose."

The man next him reckons it was about Lower George Street that got it that time. "They been
registerin' that place all day on an' off," he says.

There was just that one swift salvo, and nothing more. Presently, when the procession moved
on, we came across men who had a shower of earth thrown down their backs by the burst of those
shells. Just one isolated salvo in the night on one particular spot. Goodness knows what the
Germans saw or thought they saw. No one was hit, nothing was interfered with. But it is a great
mistake to think it all foolishness. The most methodical soldier in the world is behind those
other sandbags, and he doesn't do things without reason.

Farther on we came through a series of hovels, more like dog kennels than the shelters of men,
to the dark parapet where men are always watching, watching, across a hundred yards or so of
green pasture, the dark mud parapet on the other side. Here and there over a dug-out there
fidgets a tiny toy aeroplane such as children make, or a miniature windmill. The aeroplane
propeller is revolving slowly, tail away from the enemy, clicking and rattling as it turns.
"Just-a-perfect-night-for-gas"--that is what the aeroplane propeller is saying.

Once only in the night there is a clatter opposite--one machine-gun started it, then two together,
then forty or fifty rifles. Perhaps they think they saw a patrol. The Turks used to get precisely
similar nerve-storms on Russell's Top. Nobody even troubles to remark it. Dawn breaks over
the watching figures without one incident to report.

It is after the light has grown and become fixed that you will notice, if you look carefully
for it, a thin film of blue smoke floating upwards from behind the sandbags on the other side
of No Man's Land. Only a hundred and fifty yards away from you the German cook must be fitting
his old browned and burned dixies and kerosene tins over their early morning fire.

We had our early morning coffee, too. And as we walked homewards we found that from a particular
point we were looking straight at a distant barn roof which is in German territory. Near it,
towards his trenches, ran a road. Of curiosity we turned our telescopes on to that path, and
while we watched there strolled along it two figures in grey--grey tunics, grey loose trousers,
little grey buttony caps, walking down the path towards us, talking, at their ease. Twenty
seconds later along came another pair.

Clearly they had said to themselves, "We must not walk about here except in twos or threes
or we shall draw a shell from one of those Verfluchte British whizz-bangs."

And so those Germans strolled--as we did--from their breakfast to their daily work.

CHAPTER VII

THE PLANES

France, May.

Gallipoli had its own special difficulties for aeroplanes. There was no open space on which
they could dream of alighting at Anzac; and one machine which had to come down at Suvla was
shelled to pieces as soon as it landed. So planes had to live at Imbros, and there were ten
miles of sea to be crossed before work began and after it finished, and some planes, which
went out and were never heard of, were probably lost in that sea. There were brave flights
far over the enemy's country. But, until the very last days at Helles, there was scarcely ever
an enemy's plane which put up a successful fight against our own.

In France the enemy is almost as much in the air as we are. He has to be reckoned with all
the time, and fierce fighting in the air, either against German machines or in face of German
shell-fire such as we scarcely even imagined in watching the air-fighting of Gallipoli, is
the daily spectacle of the trenches. We have seen a brave flight by a German low down within
rifle-shot. But never anything to compare with the indifference to danger of the British pilots.

I was in the lines the other day when there sounded close at hand salvo after salvo so fast
that I took it for a bombardment. The Germans were firing at one of our aeroplanes. It was
flying as low as I ever saw a plane fly in Gallipoli--you could make out quite clearly the
rings painted on the planes, which meant a British machine. A sputtering rifle fire broke out
from the German trenches opposite--their infantry were firing at him. Then came that salvo
again--twelve reports in quick succession--a sheaf of shells whining overhead like so many
puppies--burst after burst in the sky, some short, some far past him--you would swear they
must have gone through him--one right over him.

The hearts of our men were in their mouths as they watched. He sailed straight through the
shrapnel puffs, turned sharply, and steered away. A new salvo broke out over the sky where
he should have been. He immediately swerved into it like a footballer making a dodging run,
then turned away again. A minute later a third sheaf of shells burst behind him, following
him up. "He ought to be safe now," one thought to oneself, "but my word, they nearly got him--"

And then, as we were congratulating him on having escaped with a whole skin, and breathing
more freely at the thought--he turned slowly and came straight up towards those guns again.

The Australians holding the trenches were delighted. "My word, he's got more guts than what
I have," said one. Sheaf after sheaf of shells burst in the air all about him; but he steered
straight up the middle of them till he reached the point he wanted to make, and then wheeled
and made his patrol up and down over the trenches. He was flying higher but still low, and
the crackle of rifles again broke out from the German lines. He was within the range of the
feeblest "Archie" even at his highest. They were literally just so many big shot-guns, firing
at a great bird; only this bird came up time and again to be shot at, simply trusting to the
chance that they would not hit him.

"The rest may take their luck, but I should be dead sick if they was to get him," grunted a
big Australian as he tugged a pull-through out of his rifle.

Of course they will get him if he does that often--you only need two eyes to know that. The
communiqués tell of it every week. As you scurry past the hinterland of the lines in your motor-car
you will sometimes see two or three aeroplanes flying like great herons overhead. They seem
to be in company, keeping station almost, and holding on the same course, all mates together--until
you catch the cough of a machine-gun, and realise that they are actually engaged in the deadliest
sort of duel which can possibly be fought in these days. In a battle of infantry you are mostly
hit by an unaimed shot, or a shot aimed into a mass of men. Even if a man fires at you once,
it is probably someone else whom he aims at next time. But in the air the man who shoots at
you is coming after you, and intends to go on shooting at you until he kills. The moment when
you see an enemy's plane, and realise that you have to fight it, must be one to set even the
strongest nerves tingling.

Generally the aeroplane with the black crosses on its wings is very high--barely visible. Sometimes,
when the other planes are near it, it swoops steeply to earth behind the German lines. Or it
may be that, far behind our own lines, you see a plane diving to earth at an angle which makes
you wonder whether it is falling or being steered. It straightens out suddenly, and lands a
few fields away. By the time you are there, a cluster of khaki is already round it. An English
boy steps out of it, flushed and excited, and with intense strain written in his eyes and in
every jerk of his head. Out of the seat just behind him they are lifting a man with a terrible
wound in his side. In the arms of the seat from which they lift him are two holes as big as
a shell would make--but they were not made by a shell. A cluster of bullets from the machine-gun
of a German plane at close range has passed in at one side of the seat and out at the other.
The rifle which the observer was carrying dropped from his hands out into space, and the pilot
saw it fall just before he dived.

The German pilots are sometimes youngsters too--not very unlike our own. Our first sight of
active war in France was when the train stopped at a country siding many miles behind the lines,
and two British soldiers with fixed bayonets marched a third man--a youngster with a slight
fair moustache--over the level crossing in front of us. He wore a grey peaked cap and a short
overcoat jacket with a warm collar and tall, tight-fitting boots--very much like those of our
own officers; and he walked with a big, swift stride, looking straight ahead of him. Somewhere,
far over behind the German lines, they were probably expecting him at that moment. His servant
would be getting ready his room. He had left the aerodrome only an hour before, and flown over
strange lines which we have never seen, but which had become as familiar as his home to him,
with no idea than to be back, as he always was before, within an hour or so. And then something
seems to be wrong with the plane--he has to come down in a strange country; and within an hour
he is out of the war for good and all. He strides along biting his lip. His comrades will expect
him for an hour or so. By dinner-time they will realise that there is another member gone from
their mess.

While I am writing these words someone runs in to say that a German aeroplane has been shot
down--came down in flames, they say, and tore a great hole in the roadside. There seems to
be some such news every day, now it is one of ours, now one of theirs. It is a brave game.

I suppose it needs a sportsman, even if he is a German, to fight in a service like that. The
pity of it that he is fighting for such an ugly cause.

CHAPTER VIII

THE COMING STRUGGLE: OUR TASK

[Up to this time the Australians had been in quiet trenches in the green lowlands near Armentières.
From this time the coming struggle began to loom ahead.]

France, May 23rd.

I sat down to write an article about a log-chopping competition. But the irony of writing such
things with other things on one's mind is too much even for a war correspondent. One's pen
goes on strike. One impression above all has been brought home in the two months we have spent
in France. For some reason, people at home are colossally ignorant of the task now in front
of them. We have now seen three theatres of war, and it was the same everywhere. Indeed, in
Gallipoli we ourselves were just as ignorant of the state of affairs elsewhere. All the news
we had of Salonica came from the English newspapers. We thought, "However difficult things
may be here, at any rate the Salonica army is only waiting for a few more men before it cuts
the railway to Constantinople." Then somebody came from Salonica, and we found that the army
there was comforting itself with exactly the same reflections about us. As for England, everyone
who reached us from there arrived with the conviction that we needed only a few more men to
push through.

When the attempt to get through from Suvla failed the public turned to Bulgaria, and, on the
strength of what they read, many of those on the Peninsula could not help doing the same. Now
that we see with our eyes the nature of Britain's task in France, there is only one depressing
thing about it, and that is that one doubts if the British people have any more idea of its
magnitude than it had of the difficulties of Gallipoli.

The world hears from the British public vague talk of some future offensive. It goes without
saying that we hear nothing of any plans here. If there were any, it would be in London that
they would first become common knowledge. But if such an offensive ever does happen, have the
British people any idea of its difficulties? In this warfare, when you have brought up such
artillery as was unbelievable even in the first year of the war, and reduced miles of trenches
to powder, and have walked over the line of the works in front of you, a handful of batmen
and Headquarters' cooks may still hold up the greatest attack yet delivered, and you may spend
the next month dashing your strength away against a barrier of ever-increasing toughness.

If an offensive ever is made, we know it will not be made without good reason for its success.
But everything which one has seen points to the conclusion that a vague belief in the success
of such an offensive ought not to be the sole mental effort that a great part of the nation
makes towards winning the war. And yet, from what I saw lately during a recent visit to Great
Britain, I should say that such was the case. "If we fail to break through," the public says,
"surely the Russians will manage it, or the French will succeed this time." Wherever we have
seen the war there is always this tendency to look elsewhere for success. There is not the
slightest doubt we have success in our power. The game is in our hands if we will only play
it. The talk about our resources and staying power is not all "hot air," as the Americans say.
The resources were there, and it was always known that in the later stages of the war, when
Germany and our Allies who entered the war at final strength, had used most of their resources,
then those of Britain would become decisive because she had not yet used them. That stage we
are reaching now--Britain's resources measured against those of Germany. We have the advantage
in entering it. The danger is that while we squander our wealth without organisation, the German,
by bringing all his brains and resolution to bear on the problem, may so eke out his strained
resources as to outstay our rich ones.

One sees not the least sign that the British people understand this. I do not know how it is
in Australia, but in Britain life runs its normal course. Gigantic sums flow away daily, and
the only efforts at economy one hears of are a Daylight Saving Act adopted only because Germany
adopted it first; a list of prohibited imports and petty economies, which we mistook when first
we read it for an elaborate satire; and a pious hope, in the true voluntary and official British
style, that meat would be shunned on two days in the week.

By way of contrast there are dished out for our encouragement reports of all the pains which
the Germans are put to to economise food in their country. Potatoes instead of flour, meat
twice a week, food strictly regulated by ticket, children taught to count between each mouthful
in order to avoid over-eating. We are supposed to draw comfort from this contrast.

It is the most depressing literature we have. The obvious comment is, "Well, there is a nation
organised to win a war--that is the sort of nation which the men in the opposite trenches have
behind them. A nation which has organised itself for war, and is already organising itself
for peace after the war"; and all that we, who are organised neither for war nor peace, have,
in answer to a national effort like that, is an ignorant jeer at what is really the most formidable
of the dangers threatening us.

If the British Empire took the war as business, were ready to disturb its daily life, alter
its daily habits, to throw on the scrap-heap its sacred individualism, and do and live for
the national cause, no one doubts but we could win this war so as to avoid an inconclusive
peace. Some of us were talking to a middle-aged British merchant. We had left our fellows in
France cheerfully facing unaccustomed mud and frosts, cheerfully accepting the chance of being
blown into undiscoverable atoms or living horribly maimed in mind or body, cheerfully accepting
all this with the set, deliberate purpose of fighting on for a conclusive settlement--one which
put out of question for the future the rule of brute force, or tearing up of treaties, or renewal
of the present war. We had left those fellows fighting for an ideal they perfectly well realised,
and cheerful in the belief that they would attain it.

The merchant was dressed in black morning coat and black tie, and looked in every way a very
respectable merchant. He was full of respectable hopes. But when we spoke of a long war he
drew a long face and talked lugubriously of dislocated trade and strain upon capital--doubted
how long the industry could stand it, and shook his head.

Whenever one thinks of that worthy man one is overcome with a great anger. What he meant was
that if the war went on he might be broken, and that was a calamity which he could not be expected
to face. We thought of all those fellows in France--British, Australians, Canadians--cheerfully
offering their lives for an ideal at which this worthy citizen shied because it might cost
him his fortune. Suppose it did, suppose he had to leave his fine home and end his days in
a villa, suppose he had to start as a clerk in someone else's counting-house, what was it beside
what these boys were offering? I think of a fair head which I had seen matted in red mud, of
young nerves of steel shattered beyond repair, of a wild night at Helles, when I found, stumbling
beside me in the first bitterness of realisation, a young officer who a few yards back had
been shot through both eyes. And here was this worthy man shaking his head for fear that their
ideals might interfere with his business.

As to which, one can only say that, if the British nation, or the Australian nation, because
it shirks interference with its normal life, because it is afraid of State enterprise, because
of any personal or individual consideration whatever, lets this struggle go by default, and
by inconclusive peace, to the people which is organised body and soul in support of the grey
tunics behind the opposite parapet, then it is a betrayal of every gallant heart now sleeping
under the crosses on Gallipoli, and of every boyish head that has reddened the furrows of France.

There are good reasons for saying that the struggle is now with the British Empire. With your
staying power you can win. But in Heaven's name, if you wish to win, if you have in you any
of the ideals for which those boys have died, cast your old prejudices to the winds and organise
your staying power. Organise! Organise! Organise!

CHAPTER IX

IN A FOREST OF FRANCE

France, May 26th.

It was in "A forest of France," as the programme had it. The road ran down a great aisle with
the tall elm trees reaching to the sky, and stretching their long green fingers far above,
like the slender pillars of a Gothic cathedral. Down the narrow road below sagged a big motor-bus,
painted grey, like a battleship; and, after it, a huge grey motor-lorry; and, in front and
behind them, an odd procession of motor-cars of all sizes, bouncing awkwardly from one hollow
in the road to another.

Out of the dark interior of the motor-bus, as we passed it, there groped a head with a grey
slouch hat. It came slowly round on its long, brown, wrinkled neck until it looked into our
car. "Hey, mate," it said, "is this the track to the races?" Then it smiled at the landscape
in general and withdrew into the interior like a snail into its shell. In this bus was an Australian
Brass Band.

We drew up where there was a collection of motor-cars, lorries, and odd riding horses along
the roadside, exactly as you might see at the picnic races. We struck inland up one of those
glades which the French foresters leave at intervals running from side to side of their well-managed
forests. The green moss sank like a soft carpet beneath our feet. The little watergutters bubbled
beneath the twigs as we trod across them. The cowslips and anemones nodded as our boots brushed
them. Hundreds of birds sang in the branches, and the sunlight came down in shafts from the
lacework patches of sky far above, and lit up patches of grass, and fallen leaves, and moss-covered
tree trunks, on which sat a crowd chiefly of Australians and New Zealanders. As one of the
English correspondents said, "It was just such a forest as Shakespeare wrote about." Who would
have thought that scene believable two years before?

A contest had been arranged between Australasians and Canadians in France to decide which could
fell trees in the quickest time. It began really with the French forest authorities, who insisted
on the well-known forest rule that no young trees under one metre twenty in girth must be felled
after the middle of May, because if you cut the young tree after the sap begins to rise it
will not grow again. The British officer in control of the forest had obtained an extension
until the end of May, but he had to get felled by then all the young timber that he wanted
before September. He had borrowed some Maoris to help, and he noticed how they cut and the
sort of sportsmen they were. He was struck with an idea. A French forest officer was with him.
"How long do you think it would take a New Zealander to chop down a tree like that?" asked
the Frenchman. "A minute," was the answer. "Unbelievable," exclaimed the Frenchman. A Maori
was called up, and the tree was down in forty seconds.

After that a contest was arranged between Maoris and French wood-cutters. Trees had to be cut
in the French style, which, it must be admitted, is much neater and more economical, and about
five times as laborious. The trees are cut off at ground level, and so straightly that the
stump would not trip you if it were in the middle of the road. Each team consisted of six men,
and felled twelve small trees, using its own accustomed axes. The Maoris won by four minutes.

It was out of this that the big contest sprang. The Canadians and Australasians challenged
one another. This time the teams were to be of three men. Each team was to cut three trees--only
service axes to be used; but otherwise each man could cut in any style he wished. The trees
averaged about two feet thick--hard wood. The teams started to practise. And the forest officers'
problem was solved.

The teams tossed for trees, and tossed for the order in which they were to cut. I believe that
when some question arose out of this toss, the Maoris immediately offered to toss again, in
order to have no advantage from the result.

It was interesting to see the difference of style. All three types of colonial woodsmen cut
the tree almost breast high, but the Australian seemed to be the only one that took advantage
of that understroke, with a hiss through the clenched teeth, which looks so formidable when
you watch our timber-getters. It was a Canadian team which started. They cut coolly, and the
one whom I watched struck one by his splendid condition. A wiry man, not thick-set, but well
built and athletic, who never turned a hair. I think he was perhaps too cool to win. His comrades
were not quite so fast as he. They cut the tree with a fairly narrow scarf, the top cut coming
down at a steep angle, and the lower cut coming straight in to meet it, so that the upper end
of the stump, when the tree falls, is left cut off as straight as a table top. Their first
tree crashed in fourteen minutes, the next in fifteen, and then they all three tackled the
last and toughest, which fell in twenty-one; fifty minutes altogether when the three times
were added.

The next team was Australian. From the first rapid swing one's anxiety was whether they could
possibly stand the pace. They tackled the job so much more fiercely than the Canadians. I watched
a young Tasmanian, his whole soul in it, brow wrinkled, and sweat pouring from his face. You
would have thought that he was cutting almost wildly, till you noticed how every cut went home
exactly on top of the cut before. These Australians--they were Western Australians mostly--made
a wide scarf, the top cut coming down at an angle, and the lower cut coming up at a similar
angle to meet it, making a wide open angle between the two. The odds would, I think, have been
taken by most of those who went there as being in favour of the Canadians; and it was a great
surprise when the three Australian trees were all down in thirty-one minutes and eight seconds.

The New Zealanders cut third. Their team consisted of Maoris. They did not seem to be cutting
with the fire of the Australians. There was not the visible energy; their actions struck one
as easier, and one doubted if their great, lithe, brown muscles were carrying them so fast.

Yet the time told the truth. Their three trees were down in twenty-two minutes and forty seconds,
and no one else approached them. One Canadian team improved the Canadian time to forty-five
minutes twenty-two seconds. The Maoris seemed mostly to cut with a narrower scarf even than
the Canadians, both upper and lower cuts sloping downward at a narrow angle. In fairness it
must be said that the Maoris had practised about six weeks, the Canadians and Australians about
one week.

An Australian won the log-chopping competition; and the Canadians won with the crosscut saw.
A New Zealander won the competition for style.

Later the men were mostly sitting watching the Frenchmen, workers in the forest, giving an
exhibition cut. Two of a Canadian team were sitting on a log next to me, yarning in the slow,
quizzical drawl of the Canadian countryman, when some of their mates sat down beside them.
The man next me turned to them, and the next instant they were all talking French among themselves,
talking it as their native tongue. Their officer, a handsome youngster, spoke it too. It was
not till that moment that I realised that most of these Canadian woodsmen here were French.

Meanwhile the exhibition chop went on. The French woodsmen were digging at the roots of their
trees with long, ancient axes, more like a cold chisel than a modern axe. "I think I could
do as well with a knife and fork," said one great kindly Australian as he watched with a smile.

But, to my mind, that exhibition was the most impressive of all. For every one of those who
took part in it was either an old man or a slip of a slender boy.

CHAPTER X

IDENTIFIED

France, June 28th.

It was about three months ago, more or less. The German observer, crouched up in the platform
behind the trunk of a tree, or in a chimney with a loose brick in it--in a part of the world
where the country cottages, peeping over the dog-rose hedges, have more broken bricks in them
than whole ones--saw down a distant lane several men in strange hats. The telescope wobbled
a bit, and in the early light all objects in the landscape took on much the same grey colour.

The observer rubbed his red eyes and peered again. Down the white streak winding across a distant
green field were coming a couple more of these same hats. I expect Fritz saw a good number
of them in those days. Many of the wearers of those hats had never seen an aeroplane before;
much less two aeroplanes, fighting a duel with machine-guns at close range, 10,000 feet over
their heads, or being sniped at by a battery of hidden 15-pounder guns, every shot marking
itself for the open-mouthed spectators by its little white cotton-wool shell burst.

The German observer spent several hours jotting painful notes into a well-thumbed pocket-book,
staring in the intervals through his telescope. Then the tree shook. Something ponderous from
below felt its way up the creaking ladder. A red face, like the face of the sun, peered over
the platform.

"Anything new, Fritz?" it puffed.

"Ja; those new troops we have noticed yesterday--I think they were Australians."

So the observer sent it back to his officer, and his officer sent it back to the brigade, and
the brigade sent it on to the division. The division was a little sceptical. "That crowd is
always making these wild discoveries," grunted the divisional Intelligence Officer, but he
thought it worth while passing it on to the Army Corps, who in their turn sent it to the Army;
and so, in due course, it arrived in those awe-inspiring circles where lives the great German
military brain.

"So that is where they have turned up," said a very big man with spectacles--a big man in more
ways than one. And a note went down in red ink in a particular page of a huge index, to appear
duly printed in the next edition of that portentous volume. Only, after the note, there was
a query.

Far away at the front, Fritz told his mates over their evening coffee that the new regiment
whose heads they had been noticing over the parapet opposite were Australians.

"Black swine dogs, one of them nearly had me as I was bringing the mail-bags," snorted a weedy
youth scarcely out of his teens, looking over the top of his coffee pot. "I always said that
was a dangerous gap where the communication trench crosses the ditch."

"You babies should keep your stupid heads down like your elders," retorted a grizzled reservist
as he stuffed tobacco into the green china bowl of a real German pipe.

The talk gradually went along the front line for about the distance of one company's front
on either side, that there had been a relief in the British trenches, and that there were Australians
over there. One man had heard the sergeant saying so in the next bay of the trench; it meant
exactly as much to them as it would to Australian troops to hear the corps opposite them was
Bavarian or Saxon or Hanoverian. They knew the English and the French possessed some of these
colonial corps. They had been opposite the Algerians in the Champagne before they came to this
part of the line.

"They are ugly swine to meet in the dark," they thought. "These white and black colonial regiments."

Fritz lives very much in his dug-out--is very good at keeping his head below the parapet--and
he thought very little more about it. His head was much fuller of the arrival of the weekly
parcel of butter and cake from his hardworking wife at home, and of the coming days when his
battalion would go out of the trenches into billets in the villages, when he might get a pass
to go to a picture theatre in Lille--he had kept the old pass because a slight tear of the
corner or a snick opposite the date would make it good for use on half a dozen occasions yet.
He did not bother his head about what British division was holding the trenches opposite to him.

But that divisional Intelligence Officer did--he worried very much. He wanted to get a certain
query removed from an index as soon as possible.

It is always best to get information for nothing. A good way to do this is to make the enemy
talk; and you may be able to make him talk back if you send over a particular sort of talk
to him. So a message was thrown over into our lines, "Take care"; and "You offal dogs must
bleed for France."

This effort did not fetch any incriminating reply; and so, on a later night, a lantern was
flashed over the parapet, "Australian, go home," it winked. "Go in the morning--you will be
dead in the evening; we are good."

Later again appeared a notice-board, "Advance Australia fair--if you can."

Indeed, Fritz became quite talkative, and put up a notice-board, "English defeat at sea--seven
cruisers sunk, one damaged, eleven other craft sunk. Hip! Hip! Hurrah!"

This did draw at last some of the men in the front line, and they slipped over the parapet
a placard giving a British account of the losses in the North Sea fight. The putting up of
notices is an irregular proceeding, and this placard had to be withdrawn at once, even before
the Germans could properly read it. The result was an immediate message posted on the German
trenches, "Once more would you let us see the message?" Still there was no sign from our trenches.
So another plaintive request appeared on the German parapet, "We beg of you to show again the
table of the fleet."

But they were Saxons. Clearly they did not believe all that their Prussian brother told them
about his naval victory. Another day they hoisted a surreptitious request, "Shoot high--peace
will be declared June 15." They evidently had their gossip in the German trenches just as we
have it in ours--and as we had it in Sydney and Melbourne--absurd rumours which run all round
the line for a week, and which no amount of experience prevents some people from believing.

"After all, these 'furphies' make life worth living in the trenches," as one of our men said
to me the other day. All the Germans, in a certain part of the line opposite, now firmly believe
that the war is going to end on August 17th.

But this is merely the gossip of the German trenches telegraphed across No Man's Land. I do
not know how far the divisional Staff Officer satisfied himself as the result of all his messages,
but he did not satisfy the gentleman with the big index.

"There is one way to find out who is there," the Big Man said, "and that is always the same--to
go there and bring some of them back."

And so twice in the next three weeks the German artillery fired about £30,000 worth of shells,
and a party of picked men stole across the open, and in spite of a certain loss on one occasion
they took back a few prisoners. And the query went out of the index.

It would be quite easy to present to the German for a penny the facts which it cost him £60,000
and good men's lives to obtain. When you know this, you can understand why the casualties reported
in the papers do not any longer state the units of the men who have suffered them.

CHAPTER XI

THE GREAT BATTLE BEGINS

France, July 1st.

Below me, in the dimple beyond the hill on which I sit, is a small French town. Straight behind
the town is the morning sun, only an hour risen. Between the sun and the town, and, therefore,
only just to be made out through the haze of sunlight on the mists, are two lines--a nearer
and a farther--of gently sloping hill-tops. On those hills is being fought one of the greatest
battles in history. It is British troops who are fighting it, and French. The Canadians are
in their lines in the salient. The Australians and New Zealanders--it has now been officially
stated--are at Armentières.

A few minutes ago, at half-past six by summer-time, the British bombardment, which has continued
heavily for six days, suddenly came in with a crash, as an orchestra might enter on its grand
finale. Last night, some of us who were out here watched the British shells playing up and
down the distant skyline, running over it from end to end as a player might run the fingers
of one hand lightly over the piano keys. There were three or four flashes every second, here
or there in that horizon; night and day for six days that had continued. Within the last few
minutes, starting with two or three big heart bangs from a battery near us, the noise suddenly
expanded into a constant detonation. It was exactly as though the player began, on an instant,
to use all the keys at once.

We now ought to be able to see, from where we sit with our telescopes, the bursts of our shells
on those distant ridges. But I cannot swear that I see a single one. The sound of the bombarding
is like the sound of some titanic iron tank which a giant has set rolling rapidly down an endless
hill. We can hear the soft whine of scores of shells hurrying all together through the air.
Every five minutes or so a certain howitzer, tucked into some hiding-place, vents its periodical
growl, and we can hear the huge projectile climbing slowly, up his steep gradient with a hiss
like that of water from a fire-hose. There is some other heavy shell which passes us also,
somewhere in the middle of his flight. We cannot distinguish the report of the gun, and we
do not hear the shell burst; but at regular intervals we can quite distinctly hear the monster
making his way leisurely across our front.

We can distinguish in the uproar the occasional distant crash of a heavy shell-burst. But not
one burst can I see. The sun upon the mist makes the distant hill crests just a vague blue
screen against the sky.

There is one point on those hills where the two lines of trenches ought to be clearly visible
to us. With a good glass on a clear day you should be able to distinguish anything as big as
a man at that distance--much more a line of men. Within less than an hour, at half-past seven,
the infantry will leave our trenches over twenty miles of front and launch a great attack.
The country town below us is Albert--behind the centre of the British attack. One can see the
tall, battered church tower rising against the mist, with the gilt figure of the Virgin hanging
at right angles from the top like the arm of a bracket. On the hills beyond can just be made
out the woods of Fricourt behind the German line. They are in the background behind Albert
church tower. The white ruins of Fricourt may be the blur in the background south of them.
We shall be attacking Fricourt to-day.

The Germans have not a single "sausage" in the air that I can see. The sausage is the very
descriptive name for the observation balloon. We have twenty-one of them up, specking the sky
as clearly as a bacteriologist's slide is specked with microbes.

The Germans used to have a whole fleet of them looking down over us. But a week ago our aeroplanes
bombed all along the line, and eight of them, more or less, went down in flames within a single
afternoon.

7.10 a.m.--Six of our aeroplanes are flying over, very high, in a wedge-shaped flight like
that of birds. Single British aeroplanes have been coming and going since the bombardment started.
I have not seen any German plane. The distant landscape is becoming fainter. The flashes of
our guns can be seen at intervals all over the slopes immediately below us, and their blast
is clearly shown by the film of smoke and dust which hurries into the air. The haze makes a
complete screen between us and the battle.

7.15 a.m.--Our fire has become noticeably hotter. Some of us thought it had relaxed slightly
after the first ten minutes. I doubt if it really did--probably we were growing accustomed
to the sound. There is no doubt about its increase now. We can hear the crump, crump, crump
of heavy explosives almost incessantly. I fancy our heavy trench mortars must have joined in.

7.20 a.m.--Another sound has suddenly joined in the uproar. It is the rapid detonation of our
lighter trench mortars.[1] I have never heard anything like this before--the detonation of
these crowds of mortars is as rapid as if it were the rattle of musketry. Indeed, if it were
not for the heavy detonation one would put it down for rifle fire. Only eight minutes now,
and the infantry goes over the parapet along the whole line.

[1] Note.--What I took for the sound of trench mortars was almost certainly that of the British
field guns. These heavy Somme bombardments were then a novelty, and the idea that field guns
could be firing like musketry did not enter one's head. What I took for the sound of heavy
trench mortars was also, certainly, that of German shells.

7.27 a.m.--The heaviness of the bombardment has slightly decreased. A large number of guns
must be altering range on to the German back lines in order to allow our infantry to make their
attack. The hills are gradually becoming clearer as the sun gets higher, but the haze will
be far too thick for us to see them go over.

7.29 a.m.--One minute to go. I have not seen a single German shell burst yet. They may be firing
on our trenches; they are not on our batteries.

7.32 a.m.--Ever so distant, but quite distinctly, under the thunder of the bombardment I can
hear the sound of far-off rifle firing.

So they are into it--and there are Germans still left in those trenches.

7.35 a.m.--Through the bombardment I can hear the chatter of a machine-gun. And there is a
new thunder added, quite distinguishable from the previous sounds. It is only the last minute
or so that one has noticed it--a low, ceaseless pulsation.

It is the drumming of the German artillery upon our charging infantry. Behind that blue screen
they must be in the thick of it. God be with our men!

CHAPTER XII

THE BRITISH--FRICOURT AND LA BOISELLE

France, July 3rd.

Yesterday three of us walked out from near the town of Albert to a hill-side within a few hundred
yards of Fricourt. And there all day, lying amongst the poppies and cornflowers, we watched
the fight of the hour--the struggle around Fricourt Wood and the attack on the village of La
Boiselle.

To call these places villages conveys the idea of recognisable streets and houses. I suppose
they were villages once, as pretty as the other villages of France; each with its red roofs
showing out against its dark, overshadowing woodland. They are no more villages now than a
dust-heap. Each is a tumbled heap of broken bricks, like the remains of a Chinese den after
it has been pulled down by order of the local council. Through this heap runs a network of
German trenches, here and there breaking through some still recognisable fragment of a wall.

It was by the sight of two or three English soldiers clambering up one of these jagged fragments
and peering into whatever lay beyond it, that we knew, as we came in sight of Fricourt, that
the village had already been taken. A string of men was winding past the end of the dust-heap
into the dark wood behind it, where they became lost to view. Somewhere in the heart of the
wood was the knock-knock of an occasional rifle. So the fight had gone on thither.

In front of us was a long gentle hill-slope, gridironed with trenches which broke out above
the green grass like the wandering burrow of a mole. The last visible trench was in redder
soil and ran along the crest of the hill. It passed through or near to several small woods
and clumps of trees--the edges of them torn to shreds with shell-fire. They stood up against
the skyline. In one of them, clearly visible, was a roadside crucifix.

Our men possessed the whole of that slope right into the trench at the top. We could see occasional
figures strolling about the old German trenches--probably from posts established here or there
behind the line of battle. All day long odd men wandered up or down some part of the hill-side--a
guard with a German prisoner coming down, a messenger or stretcher-bearers going up. Now and
then one could even see heads, with our flat steel helmets on them, showing out from the red
trench against the skyline. So the fighting could not be severe at the moment on the crest
of the hill.

Yet we were clearly not holding the whole of that skyline trench. On its southern or right-hand
shoulder the hill ran into Fricourt Wood, which covered all that end of it. At the lower end
of the wood, standing out against it, was the dusty yellow ruin which once was Fricourt. Behind
that shoulder of the hill was a valley, of which we could see the gentle green slopes stretching
away to Mametz and Montauban, both taken the day before, in the first half-day's fighting.
The green slopes must have been covered with the relics of that attack. But the kindly grass,
the uncut growth of two years, hid them; and the valley, except for a few thin white trench
lines, might have been any other smiling summer landscape.

When the wave of our attack swept through that country the Germans in Fricourt village and
wood still held on. Another promontory was left jutting out into the wave of our attack in
a similar village on our left--La Boiselle, where the main road for Bapaume runs straight out
from our lines through the German front. We could see this heap of yellow-brown ruins sticking
up beyond the left shoulder of the opposite hill much as Fricourt did on its right. There was
a valley between, but it could only be guessed. Boiselle, too, had the remains of a small wood
rising behind it. The bark hung from its ragged stumps as the rigging droops from the broken
masts of a wreck.

We were looking another way, watching our troops trying to creep up to the extreme right-hand
end of the red trench on the top of the hill. We could see them on the centre of the crest;
but here, where the trench ran into the upper end of Fricourt Wood, there was apparently a
check. Men were lined up at this point, not in the trench, but lying down on the surface a
little on our side of it. From beyond that corner of the wood there broke out occasionally
a chatter of machine-gun fire. Evidently the Germans still hung on there. The bursts of machine-gun
must have been against small rushes of our men across the open. I believe that one British
unit was attacking round this left-hand corner of the wood while another was attacking around
its right. The drive through the wood was going forward at the same time. Clearly they were
having some effect; for out of the wood there suddenly appeared a number of figures. Someone
thought they were our men coming back, until it was noticed that they were unarmed, and held
their hands up. They were a party of the enemy who had surrendered, and for the next quarter
of an hour we watched them being marched slowly down the hill-side opposite.

Our advance here seemed to be held up by some cause we could not see. German 5.9 shell were
falling just on our side of Fricourt village, and in a line from there up the valley behind
our attack. It was not a really heavy barrage--big black shell-bursts at intervals on the ground,
helped by fairly constant white puffs of shrapnel in the air above them. Just then our attention
was attracted in quite another direction: La Boiselle.

It had been fairly obvious for some time that La Boiselle was about to be attacked. While the
rest of the landscape before us was only treated to an occasional shell-burst, heavy explosions
had been taking place in this clump of ruins. Huge roan-coloured bouquets of brickdust and
ashes leaped from time to time into the air and slowly dissolved into a tawny mist which floated
slowly beyond the scarred edge of the hill. It must have been a big howitzer shell, or perhaps
a very large trench mortar bomb, which was making them. Gradually most of our artillery in
the background to the left of us seemed to be converging upon this village. Suddenly, at a
little before 4 p.m., there lashed on to the place the shrapnel from three or four batteries
of British field guns. They seemed to be fired as fast as they could be served. Shell after
shell laid whip strokes across the dry earth as swiftly as a man could ply a lash. One knew
perfectly well that our infantry must now be advancing for the attack, and that this hailstorm
was to make the garrison, if any were left, keep its heads down. But the shoulder of the hill
prevented us from seeing where the infantry was going to issue.

In the turmoil which covered that corner we scarcely noticed that the nature of the shelling
had suddenly changed. Our shell-bursts had gone much farther up the hill--one realised that;
and heavy black clouds were spurting into the air below Boiselle, just behind the hill's shoulder.
The crash, crash, crash, crash of four heavy shells, one following another almost as quickly
as you would read the words, focused all one's attention on that point. The fire on it was
growing. The Germans were shooting down a valley, almost a funnel, invisible to us. But we
could see that the fire was increasing every minute; 4.2's were joining in, and field guns;
the lighter guns firing shrapnel, the heavier guns high explosive. The black smoke of German
high explosive streamed up the valley like a thundercloud. La Boiselle was entirely hidden by it.

There could be no doubt now where our infantry was to attack. That cauldron was the barrier
of shell fire which the German artillery was throwing in front of them.

It seemed no living thing could face it. Our fire had lengthened at about 4 o'clock. The German
barrage began almost immediately after. Minute after minute passed without a sign of any troops
of ours. Our spirits fell. "It is one of these fearful attacks on small objectives," one thought,
"where the enemy knows exactly where you must come out, and is able to converge an impenetrable
artillery fire on that one small point. If you attack on a wide front, your artillery is bound
to leave some of the enemy's machine-guns unharmed. And when you have to mop up the small points
that are left, and attack on a small front, he gets you with his artillery--you get it one
way or the other." One took it for granted that the head of this attack had been turned.

Suddenly, out of the mist, came the sound of a few rifle shots. Then bursts of a machine-gun.
It could only be the Germans firing on advancing British infantry.

And presently they came out, running just beyond the shoulder of that hill. We could only see
their heads at first, tucked down into it as a man bends when he hurries into a hailstorm.
Presently the track on which they were advancing--I don't know whether it was originally a
road or a trench, but it is a sort of chalky sandhill now[2]--brought them for a moment rather
to our side of the hill into partial shelter. Each section that reached the place crouched
down there for a moment. Spurts of shrapnel lashed past them whirling the white dust. Black
rolling clouds sprang into existence on the earth beside them. Every minute one expected to
see one of them obliterate the whole party. But, at the end of a minute or so, someone would
pick himself up and run on--and the remainder would follow.

[2] What we thought was a road or sandhill I afterwards found to be the upturned edge of one
of the two giant mine craters, south of La Boiselle.

Not all of them. Some there were who did not stir with the rest. Other figures came running
up, heads down into it, often standing out black against white bursts of chalk dust. I saw
one gallant fellow racing up quite alone, never stopping, running as a man runs a flat race.
But there were an increasing number who never moved. And, though we watched them for an hour,
they were still there motionless at the end of it.

For thirty minutes batches continued to come up. We could see them building up a line a little
farther up the hill, where another bank gave cover. Then movement stopped and our heavy shell-bursts
in La Boiselle began again. The whole affair was being repeated a step farther forward. The
last we saw was the men leaping over the bank and down into the space between them and the village.

This morning we went to the same view point. The firing had gone well beyond Fricourt Wood.
They were German shells which were now falling on the smoking site of La Boiselle.

On the white bank there still lay twelve dark figures.

CHAPTER XIII

THE DUG-OUTS OF FRICOURT

France, July 3rd.

Yesterday from the opposite slope of a gentle valley we watched Fricourt village taken. This
morning we walked down through the long grass across what two days ago was No Man's Land into
the old German defences. The grass has been uncut for two years on these slopes, and that is
why there springs from them such a growth of flowers as I have rarely seen. I think it was
once a wheat field that we were walking through. It is a garden of poppies, cornflowers, and
mustard flower now.

Half-way down the slope we noticed that we were crossing a line which seemed to have been strangely
ruled through the wheat field. It was covered with grass, but there was a line of baby apple
trees on each side of it. It took one some seconds to realise that it was a road.

We jumped across trench after trench of our own. At the bottom of the valley we stepped over
a trench which had a wire entanglement in front of it. It was the old British front line. The
space in front of it had been No Man's Land.

Some of our men were still lying where shrapnel or rifle fire had caught them. By them ran
another old road up the valley. Beyond the road the railway trucks were still standing as they
have stood for two years in what once was Fricourt siding. The foundations of Fricourt village
stood up a little beyond, against the dark shades of Fricourt Wood. Immediately before us,
in front of this battered white ash heap, were the remains of the rusted wire which had once
been the maze in front of the German line.

We found fragments of that wire in the bottom of the trenches themselves; lengths of it were
lying among the shattered buildings behind the lines. The British shells and bombs must have
tossed it about as you would toss hay with a rake. In the tumbled ruins behind the lines you
simply stepped from one crater into another. Into many of those craters you could have placed
a fair-sized room. One big shell, and two unexploded bombs like huge ancient cannon balls,
lay there on a shelf covered with rubbish.

Through this rubbish heap were scattered odd fragments of farming machinery--here an old wagon
wheel--there a ploughshare or a portion of a harrow--in another place some old iron press of
which I do not know the use. The rest of the village was like a deserted brick-field, or the
remains of some ancient mining camp--I do not think there were three fragments of wall over
10 feet high left. And in and out of this debris wandered the German front line. We jumped
down into those trenches where some shell had broken them in. They were deep and narrow, such
as we had in Gallipoli. Back from them led narrow, deep, winding communication trenches which,
curiously enough, in parts where we saw them, seemed to have no supports to their walls such
as all the trenches in the wet country farther north must have. Here and there some shell-burst
had broken or shaken them in.

As we made our way along the front line we found, every few yards or so, a low, squared, timbered
opening below the parapet. A dozen wooden steps led down and forwards into some dark interior
far below.

We clambered down into the first of these chambers. It was exactly as its occupants had left
it. On the floor amongst some tumbled blankets and odd pieces of clothing, socks for the most
part, was scattered a stock of German grenades, each like a grey jampot with a short handle.
The blankets had come from a series of bunks which almost filled up the whole dark chamber.
These bunks were made roughly of wood, in pairs one over another, packed into every corner
of the narrow space with as much ingenuity as the berths in an emigrant ship. There were, I
think, six of them in that first chamber. Inlet into the wall, at the end of one set of bunks,
was a wooden box doing service for a cupboard. In it were a penny novel, and three or four
bottles of a German table water. At least one of these was still full. So the garrison of Fricourt
was not as hard put to it for supplies as some of the German prisoners with whom I spoke the
day before. They had told me that for three or four days no water could be brought to them
up their communication trenches owing to the British bombardment.

I expect that the garrison of Fricourt had been almost entirely in those dug-outs during the
bombardment. The chambers seemed to have more than one entrance in some cases, and one suspects
they also led into one another underground. A subterranean passage led forward beneath the
parapet to a door opening into No Man's Land--you could see the daylight at the end of it.

The fire trench was battered in places out of recognition. But here and there we came across
a bay of it which the bombardment had left more or less untouched. There were slings of cartridges
still hanging against the wall of the trench. There were the two steel plates through which
they had peered out into No Man's Land, the slits in them half covered by the flap so as just
to give a man room to peep through them. There was the machine-gun platform, with a long, empty
belt still lying on it. There was the periscope standing on its spike, which had been stuck
into the trench wall. It looked out straight across No Man's Land, but both mirrors were gone.

As we picked our way through the brick heaps there came towards us a British soldier with fixed
bayonet, and an elderly bareheaded man. The elderly man's hair was cut short, and was grizzly.
He had not shaved for three days. He was stout, but his face had a curious grey tinge shot
through the natural complexion. His lips were tightly compressed. He looked about him firmly
enough, but with that open-eyed gaze of a wild animal which seemed to lack all comprehension.
It was the face of a man almost witless. He wore the uniform of a German captain.

He was one of the men who had been through that bombardment.

CHAPTER XIV

THE RAID

France, July 9th.

During the first week of the battle of the Somme the Anzac troops far to the north, near Armentières,
raided the German trenches about a dozen times. Here is a sample of these raids.

We were late. For some reason we had decided to watch this one from the firing-line. We had
stayed too long at Brigade Headquarters getting the details of the night's plan. Just as we
hurried out of the end of the communication trench into the dark jumble of the low sandbag
constructions which formed this part of the firing-line, there came two bangs from the southward
as if someone had hit an iron ship's tank with a big drumstick. It was our preparatory bombardment
which had begun.

A light showed dimly from one or two crevices in our trenches. We peeped into one. It was very
small, and someone was busy in there. The bombardment was not half a minute old, but it was
now continuous along the whole horizon behind us. The noise was that of a large orchestra of
street boys each heartily banging his kerosene-tin drum. Our shells streamed overhead with
an almost continuous swish.

I do not know why, but some curious sense made one keep low in ducking round to a bay of the
front trench. The enemy's reply was not due for some minutes yet. There was a sudden lurid
red glare with a heavy crash over the parapet to our right--perhaps 150 yards away. "That's
not one of their 5.9's, surely?" exclaims a friend.

"One of our trench mortars, I think," says another. As we sit in the narrow trench, with our
knees tucked up to our chins, there is no doubt whatever of the advent of a new sheaf of missiles
through the air above our heads. We can hear the swish of our own shells, perhaps 100 feet
up, and the occasional rustle of some missile passing overhead a good deal higher than that.
One knows that this must be one of our howitzer shells making his slow path, perhaps 200 or
300 feet above us, on his way to fall on some German communication trench, and blow it in.
I do not know, but I rather suspect his duty is so to jumble up the walls and banks of that
trench as to prevent German supports from reaching their front line without clambering into
the open fields where our shrapnel is falling like hail.

But under those two streams of overhead traffic is a third quite easily distinguishable. It
comes with short, descending screams--sheafs of them together.

At the end of each there is a momentary glare over the sandbags, and the bang as of an exploding
rocket.

That is German shrapnel, bursting in the air and projecting its pellets in a cone like a shot-gun.
A little to the south of us there is a much more formidable crash, always recurring several
times in the minute. We always know when that crash is coming by a certain fierce orange glare
which lights up the tops of our sandbags immediately before we hear the sound. Three or four
times the crash and the glare came together, and a big cloud of stuffy-smelling white smoke
drifted low overhead, and bits of mud and earth cascaded down upon us from the sky above; and
just for two minutes the sheaf of four shells from some particular field battery, which sent
them passing as regularly as a clock about five times a minute overhead, seemed to lower and
burst just above us; and one or two odd high-explosive bursts--4.2, I should say--crept in
close upon us from the rear, while the parapet gave several ponderous jumps towards us from
the other direction. One would swear that it had shifted inwards a good inch, though I do not
suppose it had. The dazzling orange flashes and crashes close around us were rather like a
bad dream. One could not resist the reflection that often comes over a man when he begins his
holiday with a rough sea crossing, "How on earth did I ever imagine that there was advantage
to be obtained out of this?"

That was the moment which was chosen by one of the party to go along and see that the men were
all right. There was a sentry in the next bay of the trench. All by himself, but "right as
rain," as he puts it. Shrapnel was breaking in showers on the parapet, swishing overhead like
driven hail. While the enemy is bursting shell on your parapet he cannot come there himself.
Provided that your sentry's nerves are all right, and that a "crump" does not drop right into
his little section of trench, there is not much that can go wrong. And there is nothing much
wanting in the nerves of this infantry.

However, something had clearly gone wrong with this attack. It was quite obvious that the enemy
somehow or another knew that it was coming off, and where; for he had begun to shoot back within
a very few minutes of our opening shot, and he was shooting very hard. Clearly he had noticed
some point in our preparations, and he too had prepared. "I will teach these people a lesson
this time," he thought, as he laid his guns on the likely section.

Right in the midst of all this uproar we heard one of his machine-guns cracking overhead. Then
another joined in--we could hear them traversing from flank to front and round to flank again.
"Of course, the raiders cannot have got in," one thought. "Perhaps he has seen them crossing
No Man's Land, and those machine-guns are on to them in the open. Poor beggars! Not much chance
for them now"--and one shivered at the thought of them out there, open and defenceless to that
hail. As the minutes slipped on towards the hour, and our bombardment slackened, but the enemy's
did not, and no one stirred at all in the trenches, one felt quite sure of it--of course, we
had failed this time--well, we ought to expect such failures; we cannot always hope to jump
into German trenches exactly whenever we please.

Just then a dark figure crept round the traverse of the buttress of the trench. "Room in here?"
he asked.

Two others came after him, bending, and then a fourth. We squeezed along to make room.

"Was you hit?" asked the second man of the first.

"Only a bang on the scalp, and I wouldn't have got that if it hadn't been for the prisoner--waiting
to get him over."

"Keep your head down, Mac, you'll only get hit," said a third. "Where's Mr. Franks--you all
right, sir?--Mr. Little was hit, wasn't he?"

So these were the raiders, and they had come through it after all. They were rather distracted.
The man next me wiped his forehead, and took a cigarette. He looked disinterestedly up at the
shell-bursts, but he talked very little. He looked on the raid as a bit of a failure, clearly.

An hour later we heard all about it. The racket had quietened down. The enemy was contenting
himself with throwing a few shrapnel shells far back over communication trenches. We were in
a room lighted with candles. In the midst of an interested crowd of half a dozen young officers
was a youngster in grey cloth, with a mud be-spattered coat, a swollen face, and two bandaged
hands. On the table were a coffee-pot, some cups, and biscuits, and a small heap of loot--gas
masks and bayonets, and such stuff from German dug-outs. Most of the crowd was interestedly
fingering a grey steel helmet with a heavy steel shield or visor in front of the forehead,
evidently meant to be bullet-proof when the wearer looked over the parapet. The prisoner was
murmuring something like "Durchgeschossen," "Durchgeschossen."

"He says he's shot through," said someone, who understood a little German.

"Oh, nonsense," broke in a youth; "you were shot through the hand, old man, but you were not
shot there." The prisoner was pointing to his ribs.

"Oh, you've got a rat," said the youngster, as the man went on pointing to the same place.
But he tore the man's shirt open quickly. "Yes, you have, sure enough," he exclaimed, showing
the small, neat entry hole of a bullet in the side. "Here, sit down, old man, and take this,"
he added tenderly, giving the man a cup of warm coffee, and pressing him to a chair. The whole
attitude had changed to one of solicitude.

It was while the prisoner sat there that we heard about the raid. They clearly considered it
something of a failure. They had to get through a ditch full of water to their necks, then
some trip-wire, then a knee-deep entanglement, then a ditch full of rusty wire, then some "French"
coils of barbed wire, then more wire knee-deep, with trip-wire after that. Moreover, the enemy's
artillery fire was heavy. They simply went on over the parapet into the enemy's trench for
a few minutes and killed with their bombs about a dozen Germans, and brought in as prisoners
those who were left wounded. Every man of their own who was wounded they carried carefully
back through the tempest in No Man's Land. The Germans had spent at least as much artillery
ammunition as we had, and in spite of all the noise they had done wonderfully little damage.
We put a dozen of them out of action till the end of the war--a dozen that our men saw and
know of; and they may have put out of action five of ours.

As we took a tired prisoner to the hospital through the grey light of morning, I thought I
would give, for a change, an account of a "failure."

[It was almost immediately after this that the Australians were brought down to the Somme battle.
From this time on they left the neighbourhood of green fields and farmhouses and plunged into
the brown, ploughed-up nightmare battlefield where the rain of shells has practically never
since ceased. They came into the battle in its second stage, exactly three weeks after the
British.]

CHAPTER XV

POZIÈRES

France, July 26th.

I have been watching the units of a certain famous Australian force come out of action. They
have fought such a fight that the famous division of British regular troops on their flank
sent them a message to say that they were proud to fight by the side of them.

Conditions alter in a battle like this from day to day. But at the time when the British attack
upon the second German line in Longueval and Bazentin ended, the farther village of Pozières
was left as the hub of the battle for the time being. This point is the summit of the hill
on which the German second line ran. And, probably for that reason, the new line which the
Germans had dug across from their second line to their third line--so as to have a line still
barring our way when we had broken through their second line--branched off near Pozières to
meet the third line near Flers. The map of the situation at this stage of the battle will show
better than a page of description why it was necessary that Pozières should next be captured.

There were several days' interval between the failure of the first attack on Pozières and the
night on which the Australians were put at it. The Germans probably had little chance of improving
their position in the meanwhile, for the village was kept under a slow bombardment with heavy
shells and shrapnel which made movement there dangerous. Our troops could see occasional parties
of Germans hurrying through the tattered wood and powdered, tumbled foundations. The garrison
lost men steadily, and on about the night of Thursday or Friday, July 20th or 21st, the Second
Guard Reserve Division, which had been mainly responsible for holding this part of the line,
was relieved; and a fresh division, from the lines in front of Ypres, was put in. The new troops
brought in several days' rations with them, and never lacked food or water. It was probably
a belated party of these new-comers that our men noticed wandering through the village in daytime.

During the afternoon of Saturday our bombardment of Pozières became heavier. Most of these
ruined villages are marked on this shell-swept country by the trees around them. It is not
that they originally stood in a woodland; but when the village is a mere heap of foundations
powdered white the only relic of it left standing erect, if you except a battered wall or two,
is the shredded trunks and stumps of trees which once made the gardens or orchards or hedges
behind the houses. Our troops had three obstacles before them--first a shallow, hastily dug
trench in the open in front of the trees around the village; then certain trenches running
generally through the trees and hedges and behind a trench railway; thirdly, such lines as
existed in the village itself. The village is strung out along a stretch of the Albert-Bapaume
road up which the battle has advanced from the first. Just beyond the village, near what remains
of the Pozières Mill on the very top of the hill, is the German second line still (at time
of writing) in possession of the Germans. Another line crossing the road in front of the village
was then in their hands.

On Saturday afternoon our heavy shells were tearing at regular intervals into the rear of the
brickheaps which once were houses, and flinging up branches of trees and great clouds of black
earth from the woods. A German letter was found next day dated "In Hell's Trenches." It added:
"It is not really a trench, but a little ditch, shattered with shells--not the slightest cover
and no protection. We have lost 50 men in two days, and life is unendurable." White puffs of
shrapnel from field guns were lathering the place persistently, so that when the German trenches
were broken down it was difficult to repair them or move in them.

Our men in their trenches were cleaning rifles, packing away spare kit, yarning there much
as they yarned of old over the stockyard fence or the gate of the horse paddock.

That night, shortly after dark, there broke out the most fearful bombardment I have ever seen.
As one walked towards the battlefield, the weirdly shattered woods and battered houses stood
out almost all the time against one continuous band of flickering light along the eastern skyline.
Most of it was far away to the east of our part of the battlefield--in some French or British
sector on the far right. There must have been fierce fire upon Pozières, too, for the Germans
were replying to it, hailing the roads with shrapnel and trying to fill the hollows with gas
shell. They must have suspected an attack upon this part of their line as well, and were trying
to hamper the reserves from moving into position.

About midnight our field artillery lashed down its shrapnel upon the German front line in the
open before the village. A few minutes later this fire lifted and the Australian attack was
launched.

The Germans had opened in one part with a machine-gun before that final burst of shrapnel,
and they opened again immediately after. But there would have been no possibility of stopping
that charge with a fire twenty times as heavy. The difficulty was not to get the men forward,
but to hold them. With a complicated night attack to be carried through it was necessary to
keep the men well in hand.

The first trench was a wretchedly shallow affair in places. Most of the Germans in it were
dead--some of them had been lying there for days. The artillery in the meantime had lifted
on to the German trenches farther back. Later they lifted to a farther position yet. The Australian
infantry dashed at once from the first position captured, across the intervening space over
the tramway and into the trees.

It was here that the first real difficulty arose along parts of the line. Some sections found
in front of them the trench which they were looking for--an excellent deep trench which had
survived the bombardment. Other sections found no recognisable trench at all, but a maze of
shell craters and tumbled rubbish, or a simple ditch reduced to white powder. Parties went
on through the trees into the village, searching for the position, and pushed so close to the
fringe of their own shell fire that some were wounded by it. However, where they found no trench
they started to dig one as best they could. Shortly after the bombardment shifted a little
farther, and a third attack came through and swept, in most parts, right up to the position
which the troops had been ordered to take up.

As daylight gradually spread over that bleached surface Australians could occasionally be seen
walking about in the trees and through the part of the village they had been ordered to take.
The position was being rapidly "consolidated." German snipers in the north-east of the village
and across the main road could see them, too. A patrol was sent across the main road to find
a sniper. It bombed some dug-outs which it found there, and from one of them appeared a white
flag, which was waved vigorously. Sixteen prisoners came out, including a regimental doctor.
There were several other dug-outs in this part and various scraps of old trenches, probably
the site of an old battery. The Germans, now that they had been driven from their main lines,
were naturally fighting from the various scraps of isolated fortification which exist behind
all positions. During the afternoon two patrols were sent to clear out other snipers from these
half-hidden lurking places. But the garrison was sufficiently organised to summon up some sort
of reserve, and the patrols had to come back after a short, sharp fight more or less in the open.

After dark, the Australians pushed across the road through the village. By morning the position
had been improved, so that nearly the whole village was secure against sudden attack.

An official report would read: "The same progress continued on Tuesday night, and by Wednesday
morning the whole of Pozières was consolidated." That is to say--in the heart of the village
itself there was little more actual hand-to-hand fighting. All that happened there was that,
from the time when the first day broke and found the Pozières position practically ours, the
enemy turned his guns on to it. Hour after hour--day and night--with increasing intensity as
the days went on, he rained heavy shell into the area. It was the sight of the battlefield
for miles around--that reeking village. Now he would send them crashing in on a line south
of the road--eight heavy shells at a time, minute after minute, followed up by burst upon burst
of shrapnel. Now he would place a curtain, straight across this valley or that, till the sky
and landscape were blotted out, except for fleeting glimpses seen as through a lift of fog.
Gas shell, musty with chloroform; sweet-scented tear shell that made your eyes run with water;
high bursting shrapnel with black smoke and a vicious high explosive rattle behind its heavy
pellets; ugly green bursts the colour of a fat silkworm; huge black clouds from the high explosive
of his 5.9's. Day and night the men worked through it, fighting this horrid machinery far over
the horizon as if they were fighting Germans hand-to-hand--building up whatever it battered
down; buried, some of them, not once but again and again and again.

What is a barrage against such troops! They went through it as you would go through a summer
shower--too proud to bend their heads, many of them, because their mates were looking. I am
telling you of things I have seen. As one of the best of their officers said to me, "I have
to walk about as if I liked it--what else can you do when your own men teach you to?" The same
thought struck me not once but twenty times.

On Tuesday morning the shelling of the day before rose to a crescendo, and then suddenly slackened.
The German was attacking. It was only a few of the infantry who even saw him. The attack came
in lines at fairly wide intervals up the reverse slope of the hill behind Pozières windmill.
Before it reached the crest it came under the sudden barrage of our own guns' shrapnel. The
German lines swerved away up the hill. The excited infantry on the extreme right could see
Germans crawling over, as quickly as they might, from one shell crater to another, grey backs
hopping from hole to hole. They blazed away hard; but most of our infantry never got the chance
it was thirsting for. The artillery beat back that attack before it was over the crest, and
the Germans broke and ran. Again the enemy's artillery was turned on. Pozières was pounded
more furiously than before, until by four in the afternoon it seemed to onlookers scarcely
possible that humanity could have endured such an ordeal. The place could be picked out for
miles by pillars of red and black dust towering above it like a Broken Hill dust-storm. Then
Germans were reported coming on again, as in the morning. Again our artillery descended upon
them like a hailstorm, and nothing came of the attack.

During all this time, in spite of the shelling, the troops were slowly working forwards through
Pozières; not backwards. Every day saw fresh ground gained. A great part of the men who were
working through it had no more than two or three hours' sleep since Saturday--some of them
none at all, only fierce, hard work all the time.

The only relief to this one-sided struggle against machinery was the hand-to-hand fighting
that occurred in the two trenches before-mentioned--the second-line German trench behind Pozières
and the similar trench in front of it. The story of it will be told some day--it would almost
deserve a book to itself.

CHAPTER XVI

AN ABYSM OF DESOLATION

France, August 1st.

When I went through Boiselle I thought it was the limit that desolation could reach. A wilderness
of powdered chalk and broken brick, under which men had burrowed like rats, but with method,
so as to make a city underneath the shattered foundations of the village. And then their rat
city had been crushed in from above; and through the splintered timbered entrances you peered
into a dark interior of dishevelled blankets and scattered clothing. It was only too evident
that there had been no time as yet, in the hustle of battle, to search these ghastly, noisome
dug-outs for the Germans who had been bombed there. The mine craters in the white chalk of
La Boiselle are big enough to hide a large church.

But for sheer desolation it will not compare with Pozières. On the top of a gently rising hill,
over which the Roman road ran as is the way with Roman roads, was a pretty village, with its
church, its cemetery under the shady trees; its orchards and picturesque village houses. When
the lines crystallised in front of Albert it was some miles behind the German trenches. Our
guns put a few shells into it; but six weeks ago it was still a country village, somewhat wrecked
but probably used for the headquarters of a German regiment. Then came the British bombardment
for a week before the battle of the Somme.

The bombardment shattered Pozières. Its buildings were scattered as you would scatter a house
of toy bricks. Its trees began to look ragged. By the time Boiselle and Ovilliers were taken,
and the front had pushed up to within a quarter or half a mile of Pozières, a tattered wood
was all that marked the spot. Behind the brushwood you could still see in three or four places
the remains of a pink wall. Some way to the north-east of the village, near the actual summit
of the hill, was a low heap of bleached terra-cotta. It was the stump of the Pozières windmill.

Since then Pozières has had our second bombardment, and a German bombardment which lasted four
days, in addition to the normal German barrage across the village which has never really ceased.
You can actually see more of the buildings than before. That is to say, you can see any brick
or stone that stands. For the brushwood and tattered branches which used to hide the road have
gone; and all that remain are charred tree stumps standing like a line of broken posts. The
upland around was once cultivated land, and it should be green with the weeds of two years.
It is as brown as the veldt. Over the whole face of the country shells have ploughed up the
land literally as with a gigantic plough, so that there is more red and brown earth than green.
From the distance all the colour is given by these upturned crater edges, and the country is
wholly red.

But even this did not prepare one for the desolation of the place itself. Imagine a gigantic
ash heap, a place where dust and rubbish have been cast for years outside some dry, derelict,
God-forsaken up-country township. Imagine some broken-down creek bed in the driest of our dry
central Australian districts, abandoned for a generation to the goats, in which the hens have
been scratching as long as men can remember. Then take away the hens and the goats and all
traces of any living or moving thing. You must not even leave a spider. Put here, in evidence
of some old tumbled roof, a few roof beams and tiles sticking edgeways from the ground, and
the low faded ochre stump of the windmill peeping over the top of the hill, and there you have
Pozières.

I know of nothing approaching that desolation. Perhaps it is that the place is still in the
thick of the fight. In most other ruins behind battlefields that I have seen there are the
signs of men again--perhaps men who have visited the place like yourself. There is life, anyhow,
somewhere in the landscape. In this place there is no sign of life at all. When you stand in
Pozières to-day, and are told that you will find the front trench across another hundred yards
of shell-holes, you know that there must be life in the landscape. The dead hill-side a few
hundred yards before you must contain both your men and the Germans. But as in most battlefields,
where the warmest corner is, there is the least sign of movement. Dry shell crater upon shell
crater upon shell crater--all bordering one another until some fresh salvo shall fall and assort
the old group of craters into a new one, to be reassorted again and again as the days go on.
It is the nearest thing to sheer desert that I have seen since certain lonely rides into the
old Sahara at the back of Mena Camp two years ago. Every minute or two there is a crash. Part
of the desert bumps itself up into huge red or black clouds and subsides again. Those eruptions
are the only movement in Pozières.

That is the country in which our boys are fighting the greatest battle Australians have ever
fought. Of the men whom you find there, what can one say? Steadfast until death, just the men
that Australians at home know them to be; into the place with a joke, a dry, cynical, Australian
joke as often as not; holding fast through anything that man can imagine; stretcher bearers,
fatigue parties, messengers, chaplains, doing their job all the time, both new-joined youngsters
and old hands, without fuss, but steadily, because it is their work. They are not heroes; they
do not want to be thought or spoken of as heroes. They are just ordinary Australians doing
their particular work as their country would wish them to do it. And pray God Australians in
days to come will be worthy of them!

CHAPTER XVII

POZIÈRES RIDGE

France, August 14th.

You would scarcely realise it from what the world has heard, but I think that the hardest battle
ever fought by Australians was probably the battle of Pozières Ridge.

There have been four distinct battles fought by the Australian troops on the Somme since they
made their first charge from the British trenches near Pozières. The first was the heavy three
days' fight by which they took Pozières village. The second was the fight in which they tried
to rush the German second line along the hill-crest behind Pozières. The third was the attack
in which this second line was broken by them along a front of a mile and a half. The fourth
has been the long fight which immediately began along the German second line northwards from
the new position, along the ridge towards Mouquet Farm. It has been hard fighting all the way,
and what was three weeks ago a German salient into the British line is now a big Australian
salient into the German line. But I think that the hardest fight of all was that of the second
and third phases--the battle for Pozières Ridge.

Pozières village itself was not on the crest of the hill. It was on the British side of it,
where the German was naturally hanging on because it was almost the highest point in his position
and gave him a view over miles of our territory. On the other hand, the German main second
line behind Pozières was practically on the summit; in some parts farther north it was actually
on or just over the summit. It was from two to seven hundred yards beyond the village itself.

The German line on the hill-crest was attacked as soon as ever the village was properly cleared.
The Australians went at it in the night across a wide strip of waste hill-top. The thistles
there, and the brown earth churned up in shell craters, and the absolute absence of any kind
of movement (simply because it was too dangerous to move), call to one's mind Shakespeare's
old stage direction of a "blasted heath." There had been a short artillery preparation; the
attack reminded one of our old raids up on the Armentières front.

I have seen Germans who were in the line in front of that attack. They state that they were
not surprised. In the light of their flares they had seen numbers of "Englishmen" advancing
over the shoulder of the hill. When the rush came, one German officer told me, he, in his short
sector of the line alone, had three machine-guns all hard at work. The attack reached the remnants
of the German wire. Some brave men picked a path through the tangle, and, in spite of the cross-fire,
managed to reach the German trench. They were very few. We have since discovered men in the
craters even beyond the front German trench. The German officer told me that his men had afterwards
found an Australian who had been lying in a crater in front of his line for four days. He had
been shot through the abdomen and had a broken leg, but he had been brought in by the Germans
and was doing well. We also afterwards brought in both Australians and Germans who had been
out there for six days, wounded, living on what rations they had with them.

It was a brave attack. On the extreme left it succeeded. But the trenches won by the Victorians
there were on the flank, not on the hill-top. The country behind that crest, sloping gradually
down to the valley of Courcelette and beyond, where the German field batteries were firing
and where the Germans could come and go unseen--all this was so far an unknown land into which
no one on the British side had peered since the battle began.

Six days later the Australians went for that position again. They attacked just after dusk.
There was enough light to make out the face of the country as if by a dim moonlight. They were
the same troops who had made the attack a week before, because there was a determination that
they, and they alone, should reach that line. The artillery had been pounding it gradually
during the week.

The German troops who were holding that part were about to be relieved. They had suffered from
the slow, continual bombardment. There were deep dug-outs in their trenches, where they saved
the men as far as possible, but one after another these would be crushed or blocked by a heavy
shell. The tired companies had lost in some cases actually half their men by this shell fire,
losing them slowly, day by day, as a man might bleed to death. The remainder had their packs
made up ready to march out to rest. The young officer of one of the relieving battalions was
actually coming into the trenches at the head of his platoon--when there crashed on them a
sudden hail of shell fire. The officer extended his men hurriedly and pushed on. It was about
half-past ten by German time, which is half-past nine by ours.

The first sight that met him, as he reached the support line of German trenches, was two wounded
Australians lying in the bottom of it. So the British must be attacking, he thought. He ordered
his platoon to advance over the trench and counter-attack. But in the dark and the dust they
lost touch and straggled to the north--he saw no more of them. He tumbled on with two men into
a shell crater and began to improve it for defence--then they found Australians towering around
them in the dark. They surrendered.

It was a most difficult business to get the various parties for our attack into position in
the night, and some of the troops behind had to be pushed forward hurriedly. In consequence
the officers out in front had to carry on as if theirs were the only troops in the attack,
and see the whole fight through without relying upon supports. The way in which junior officers
and N.C.O.'s have acted upon their own initiative during some of this fighting has been beyond
praise. The attack went through up to time. The supports had to come in parties organised in
the dark on the spur of the moment. The Germans had several machine-guns going. But as another
German officer told me, "This time they came on too thick. We might have held them in front,
but they got in on one side of us; then we heard they were in on the other; then they came
from the rear as well--on all four sides. What could we do?"

Almost immediately after the Australians reached the trenches, watchers far behind could see
the horizon beyond them lit by five slow illuminations, about ten minutes' interval between
each. They were beyond the crest of the hill. I do not know, but I think the German must have
been blowing up his field-gun ammunition.

The men in the new trenches may, or may not, have seen this. What they did notice, as soon
as the battle cleared and they had time to look into the darkness in front of them, was a succession
of brilliant glares from some position just hidden by the slope of the hill. It was the flash
of the German guns which were firing at them. It is, as far as I know, the first time in this
battle that our men have seen the actual flash of the enemy's guns.

When day broke they found beyond them a wide, flat stretch of hill-top, with a distant hill
line beyond. Far down the slope there were Germans moving. And in the distant landscape they
saw the German gun teams limber up and hurry away with the field guns which for a fortnight
had been firing upon our men.

The Germans have twice afterwards attacked that position. In the early light of the first morning
a party of them came tumbling up from some trench against a sector of the captured line. In
front of them was an officer, well ahead, firing his automatic pistol as he went, levelling
it first at one Australian, then at another, as he saw them in the trenches before him. He
was shot, and the attack quickly melted; it never seemed very serious. Two days later, after
a long, heavy bombardment, the Germans attacked again--this time about fifteen hundred of them.
They penetrated the two trenches at one point, but our company officers, again acting on their
own initiative, charged them straight, on the instant, without hesitation. Every German in
that section was captured, and a few Australians, whom they had taken, were released.

CHAPTER XVIII

THE GREEN COUNTRY

France, August 28th.

For a mile the country had been flayed. The red ribs of it lay open to the sky. The whole flank
of the ridge had been torn open--it lies there bleeding, gaping open to the callous skies with
scarcely so much as a blade of grass or a thistle to clothe its nakedness--covered with the
wreckage of men and of their works as the relics of a shipwreck cover the uneasy sea.

As we dodged over the last undulations of an unused trench, the crest of each crater brought
us for an instant into view of something beyond--something green and fresh and brilliant, like
new land after a long sea journey. Then we were out of view of it again, for a time; until
we came to a point where it seemed good to climb and peep over the low parapet.

It was a peep into paradise. Before us lay a green country. There was a rich verdure on the
opposite hills. Beyond them ran a valley filled with the warm haze of summer, out of which
the round tree-tops stood dark against the still higher hills beyond. The wheat was ripe upon
the far hill slopes. The sun bathed the lap of the land with his midday summer warmth. Along
the crest of the distant hills ran the line of tall, regular trees which in this country invariably
means a road. A church spire rose from a tree clump on a nearer crest. Some of the foreground
was pitted with the ugly red splashes which have become for us, in this horrible area, the
normal feature of the countryside. But, beyond it, was the green country spread out like a
picture, sleeping under the heat of a summer's sun.

It was the promised land--the country behind the German lines--the valley about Bapaume where
the Germans have been for two years undisturbed in French territory, until our troops for the
first time peeped over the ridge the other day at the flashes of the very German guns which
were firing at them.

Quite close at hand was a wood. The trees were not more than half a mile away, if that. It
was a growing wood--with the green still on the branches, very different from the charred posts
and tree stumps which are all that now remain of the gardens and orchards of Pozières. I remember
a little over a month ago, when some of us first went up near to Pozières village--on the day
when the bombardment before our first attack was tearing branches from off the trees a hundred
yards away--Pozières had a fairly decent covering then. There was enough dead brushwood and
twigs, at any rate, to hide the buildings of the place. A few pink walls could then be half
seen behind the branches, or topping the gaps in the scrub.

Within four days the screen in front of Pozières had been torn to shreds--had utterly disappeared.
The German bombardment ripped off all that the British had left. The buildings now stood up
quite naked, such as they were. There was the church--still recognisable by one window; and
a scrap of red wall at the north-east end of the village, past which you then had to crawl
to reach an isolated run of trench facing the windmill. Both trench and red wall have long
since gone to glory. I doubt if you could even trace either of them now. The solitary arched
window disappeared early, and a tumbled heap of bricks is all that now marks Pozières church.
One scrap of gridironed roof sticking out from the powdered ground cross-hatches the horizon.
There is not so much foliage left as would shelter a cock sparrow.

But here were we, with this desolation behind us, looking out suddenly and at no great distance
on quite a respectable wood. It tempted you to step out there and just walk over to it--I never
see that country without the feeling that one is quite free to step across there and explore it.

There are men coming up the farther side of the slope--men going about some normal business
of the day as our men go about theirs in the places behind their lines.

Those men are Germans; and the village in the trees, the collection of buildings half guessed
in the wood, is Courcelette. It has been hidden ground to us for so long that you feel it is
almost improper to be overlooking them so constantly; like spending your day prying over into
your neighbour's yard. Away in the landscape behind, in some hollow, there humps itself into
the air a big geyser of chestnut dust. One has seen German shell burst so often in that fashion,
back in our hinterland, that it takes a moment to realise that this shell is not German but
British. I cannot see what it is aimed at--some battery, I suppose; or perhaps a much-used
road; or some place they suspect to be a headquarters. Clearly, it is not always so safe as
it seems to be in the green country behind the German lines.

CHAPTER XIX

TROMMELFEUER

France, August 21st.

The Germans call it Trommelfeuer--drum fire. I do not know any better description for the distant
sound of it. We hear it every day from some quarter of this wide battlefield. You will be sitting
at your tea, the normal spasmodic banging of your own guns sounding in the nearer positions
five, ten, perhaps fifteen times in the minute. Suddenly, from over the distant hills, to left
or right, there breaks out the roll of a great kettledrum, ever so far away. Someone is playing
the tattoo softly and very quickly. If it is nearer, and especially if it is German, it sounds
as if he played it on an iron ship's tank instead.

That is Trommelfeuer--what we call intense bombardment. When it is very rapid--like the swift
roll of a kettledrum--you take it that it must be the French seventy-fives down South preparing
the way for a French assault. But it is often our own guns after all--I doubt if there are
many who can really distinguish between the distant sound of them.

Long afterwards--perhaps in the grey of the next morning--one may see outside of some dug-out,
in a muddy wilderness of old trenches and wheel-tracks, guarded by half a dozen Australians
with fixed bayonets, a group of dejected men in grey. The cold Scotch mist stands in little
beads on the grey cloth--the bayonets shine very cold in the white light before the dawn--the
damp, slippery brown earth is too wet for a comfortable seat. But there is always some Australian
there who will give them a cigarette; a cheery Melbourne youngster or two step down into the
crowd and liven them with friendly chaff; the blue sky begins to show through the mist--the
early morning aeroplane hums past on its way to the line, low down, half hidden in the wrack.
The big bushman from Gippsland at a neighbouring coffee stall--praise heaven for that institution--gives
them a drink of the warm stuff. And I verily believe that at that moment they emerge for the
first time out of a frightful dream.

For they are the men who have been through the Trommelfeuer.

Strong men arrive from that experience shaking like leaves in the wind. I have seen one of
our own youngsters--a boy who had fought a great fight all through the dark hours, and who
had refused to come back when he was first ordered to--I have seen him unable to keep still
for an instant after the strain, and yet ready to fight on till he dropped; physically almost
a wreck, but with his wits as sharp and his spirits as keen as a steel chisel. I have seen
other Australians who, after doing glorious work through thirty or forty hours of unimaginable
strain, buried and buried and buried again and still working like tigers, have broken down
and collapsed, unable to stand or to walk, unable to move an arm except limply, as if it were
string; ready to weep like little children.

It is the method which the German invented for his own use. For a year and a half he had a
monopoly--British soldiers had to hang on as best they could under the knowledge that the enemy
had more guns and more shell than they, and bigger shell at that. But at last the weapon seems
to have been turned against him. No doubt his armaments and munitions are growing fast, but
ours have for the moment overtaken them. And hell though it is for both sides--something which
no soldiers in the world's history ever yet had to endure--it is mostly better for us at present
than for the Germans. I have heard men coming out of the thick of it say, "Well, I'm glad I'm
not a Hun."

Now, here is what it means. There is no good done by describing the particular horrors of war--God
knows those who see them want to forget them as soon as they can. But it is just as well to
know what the work in the munition factories means to your friends--your sons and fathers and
brothers at the front.

The normal shelling of the afternoon--a scattered bombardment all over the landscape, which
only brings perhaps half a dozen shells to your immediate neighbourhood once in every ten minutes--has
noticeably quickened. The German is obviously turning on more batteries. The light field-gun
shrapnel is fairly scattered as before. But 5.9-inch howitzers are being added to it. Except
for his small field guns, the German makes little use of guns. His work is almost entirely
done with howitzers. He possesses big howitzers--8-inch and larger--as we do. But the backbone
of his artillery is the 5.9 howitzer; and after that probably the 4.2.

The shells from both these guns are beginning to fall more thickly. Huge black clouds shoot
into the air from various parts of the foreground, and slowly drift away across the hill-top.
Suddenly there is a descending shriek, drawn out for a second or more, coming terrifyingly
near; a crash far louder than the nearest thunder; a colossal thump to the earth which seems
to move the whole world about an inch from its base; a scatter of flying bits and all sorts
of under-noises, rustle of a flying wood splinter, whir of fragments, scatter of falling earth.
Before it is half finished another shriek exactly similar is coming through it. Another crash--apparently
right on the crown of your head, as if the roof beams of the sky had been burst in. You can
just hear, through the crash, the shriek of a third and fourth shell as they come tearing down
the vault of heaven--crash--crash. Clouds of dust are floating over you. A swifter shriek and
something breaks like a glass bottle in front of the parapet, sending its fragments slithering
low overhead. It bursts like a rainstorm, sheet upon sheet, smash, smash, smash, with one or
two more of the heavier shells punctuating the shower of the lighter ones. The lighter shell
is shrapnel from field guns, sent, I dare say, to keep you in the trench while the heavier
shell pounds you there. A couple of salvos from each, perhaps twenty or thirty shells in the
minute, and the shrieks cease. The dust drifts down the hill. The sky clears. The sun looks
in. Five minutes later down comes exactly such another shower.

That is the beginning. As the evening wears on, the salvos become more frequent. All through
the night they go on. The next morning the intervals are becoming even less. Occasionally the
hurricane reaches such an intensity that there seems no interval at all. There is an easing
in the afternoon--which may indicate that the worst is over, or merely that the guns are being
cleaned, or the gunners having their tea. Towards dusk it swells in a wave heavier than any
that has yet come. All through the second night the inferno lasts. In the grey dawn of the
second day it increases in a manner almost unbelievable--the dust of it covers everything;
it is quite impossible to see. The earth shakes and quivers with the pounding.

It is just then that the lighter guns join in with the roll as of a kettledrum--Trommelfeuer.
The enemy is throwing out his infantry, and his shrapnel is showering on to our lines in order
to keep down the heads of our men to the last moment. Suddenly the whole noise eases. The enemy
is casting his shrapnel and big shell farther back.

The chances are that most men in those racked lines do not know whether the enemy ever delivers
the attack or not. Our artillery breaks the head of it before it crosses No Man's Land. A few
figures on the skyline, hopping from crater to crater, indicate what is left of it. As soon
as they find rifle fire and machine-guns on them the remnant give it up as hopeless. They thought
our men would have run--and they found them still at their post; that is all.

And what of the men who have been out there under that hurricane, night and day, until its
duration almost passed memory--amidst sights and sounds indescribable, desperately tried? I
was out there once after such a time as that. There they were in their dusty ditch in that
blasted, brown Sahara of a country--Sydney boys, country fellows from New South Wales, our
old friends just as we knew them, heavy eyed, tired to death as after a long fight with a bush
fire or heavy work in drought time--but simply doing their ordinary Australian work in their
ordinary Australian way. And that is all they had been doing and all they wished anyone to
believe they had been doing.

But what are we going to do for them? The mere noise is enough to break any man's nerves. Every
one of those shrieking shells which fell night and day might mean any man's instant death.
As he hears each shell coming he knows it. He saw the sights around him--he was buried by earth
and dug out by his mates, and he dug them out in turn. What can we do for him? I know only
one thing--it is the only alleviation that science knows of. (I am talking now of the most
modern and heaviest of battles, and of the thick and centre of it; for no men have ever been
through a heavier fight than Pozières.) We can force some mitigation of all this by one means
and one alone--if we can give the Germans worse. The chief anxiety in the mind of the soldier
is--have we got the guns and the shells--can we keep ahead of them with guns and our ammunition?
That means everything. These men have the nerve to go through these infernos, provided their
friends at home do not desert them. If the munition worker could see what I have seen, he would
toil as though he were racing against time to save the life of a man.

I saw yesterday a letter picked up on the battlefield--it was from an Australian private. "Dear
Mother, sisters, brothers and Auntie Lill," it said. "As we are about to go into work that
must be done, I want to ask you, if anything should happen to me, not to worry. You must think
of all the mothers that have lost ones as dear to them. One thing you can say--that you lost
one doing his little bit for a good cause.

"I know you shall feel it if anything does happen to me, but I am willing and prepared to give
my life for the cause."

Such lives hang from hour to hour on the work that is done in the British factories.

CHAPTER XX

THE NEW FIGHTING

France, August 20th.

It is a month this morning since Australians plunged into the heart of the most modern of battles.
They had been in many sorts of battle before; but they had never been in the brunt of the whole
war where the science and ingenuity of war had reached for the moment their highest pitch.
One month ago they plunged into the very brunt and apex of it. And they are still fighting there.

People have spoken of this war as the war of trenches. But the latest battles have reached
a stage beyond that. The war of trenches is a comfortable out-of-date phase, to be looked upon
with regret and perhaps even some longing. The war of to-day is a war of craters and potholes--a
war of crannies and nicks and crevices torn out of the earth yesterday, and to be shattered
into new shapes to-morrow. It may not seem easy to believe, but we have seen the Germans under
heavy bombardment leaving the shelter of their trenches for safety in the open--jumping out
and running forward into shell holes--anywhere so long as they got away from the cover which
they had built for themselves. The trench which they left is by next day non-existent--even
the airmen looking down on it from above in the mists of the grey dawn can scarcely tell where
it was. Then some community of ants sets to work and the line begins to show again. Again it
is obliterated, until a stage comes when the German decides that it is not worth while digging
it out. He has other lines, and he turns his energy on to them.

The result of all this is that areas of ground in the hot corners of battles like that of the
Somme and Verdun, and especially disputed hill summits such as the Mort Homme or this Pozières
Ridge, become simply a desert of shell craters.

A few days back, going to a portion of the line which had considerably altered since I was
there, I went by a trench which was marked on the map. It was a good trench, but it did not
seem to have been greatly used of late, which was rather surprising. "You won't find it quite
so good all the way," said a friend who was coming down.

Presently, and quite suddenly, the trench shallowed. The sides which had been clean cut were
tumbled in. The fallen earth blocked the passage, and the journey became a switchback over
tumbled rubbish and into the trench again. Someone had before been living in the trench, for
there were tools in it and bits of soldiers' gear. Here and there a shattered rifle stuck out
of the terra-cotta soil. The trench shallowed still further. There had been little hastily
scraped dug-outs in the sides of it. They were more than three parts filled with earth; but
in them, every now and again, there showed a patch of muddy grey cloth above the debris. It
was part of the uniform of a German soldier buried by the shell that killed him. It must have
been an old German trench taken by our men some weeks before. It can scarcely have been visited
since, for its garrison lay there just as the shells had buried them. Probably it had been
found too broken for use and had been almost forgotten.

The trench led on through these relics of battle until even they were lost altogether; and
it came out into a region where it was really a puzzle to say what was trench and what was
not. Around one stretched a desert of shell craters--hole bordering upon hole so that there
was no space at all between them. Each hole was circular like the ring of earth at the mouth
of an ants' nest several thousand times magnified, and they stretched away like the waves of
the sea. Far to the left was a bare, brown hill-side. In front, and to the right, billows of
red shell-holes rose to the sharp-cut, white skyline a hundred yards away.

You feel as a man must feel in a very small boat lost in a very wide ocean. In the trough of
a shell-hole your horizon was the edges of the crater on a level with your head. When you wandered
over from that shell-hole into the next you came suddenly into view of a wide stretch of country
all apparently exactly the same as that through which you were plunging. The green land of
France lay behind you in the distance. But the rest of the landscape was an ocean of red craters.
In one part of it, just over the near horizon, there protruded the shattered dry stubble of
an orchard long since reduced to about thirty bare, black, shattered tree stumps. Nearer were
a few short black stakes protruding among the craters--clearly the remains of an ancient wire
entanglement. The trench was still traceable ten or twelve paces ahead, and there might be
something which looked like the continuation of it a dozen yards farther--a line of ancient
parapet appeared to be distinguishable there for a short interval. That was certainly the direction.

It was the parapet sure enough. There, waterlogged in earth, were the remains of a sandbag
barricade built across the trench. A few yards on was another similar barrier. They must have
been the British and German barricade built across that sap at the end of some fierce bomb
fight, already long-forgotten by the lapse of several weeks. What Victoria Crosses, what Iron
Crosses were won there, by deeds whose memory deserved to last as long as the race endures,
God only knows--one trusts that the great scheme of things provides some record of such a sacrifice.

Here the trench divided. There was no sign of a footprint either way. Shells of various sizes
were sprinkling the landscape impartially--about ten or fifteen in the minute; none very close--a
black burst on the brown hill--two white shrapnel puffs five hundred yards on one side--a huge
brick-red cloud over the skyline--an angry little high-explosive whizzbang a quarter of a mile
down the hill behind. It is so that it goes on all day long in the area where our troops are.

One picked the likeliest line, and was ploughing along it, when a bullet hissed not far away.
It did not seem probable that there were Germans in the landscape. One looked for another cause.
Away to one side, against the skyline, one had a momentary glimpse of three or four Australians
going along, bent low, making for some advanced position. It must be some stray bullet meant
for them. Then another bullet hissed.

So out on that brown hill-side, in some unrecognisable shell-hole trench, the enemy must still
have been holding on. It was a case for keeping low where there was cover and making the best
speed where there was not; and the end of the journey was soon reached.

Now that is a country in which I, to whom it was a rare adventure, found Australians living,
working, moving as if it were their own back yard. In that country it is often difficult, with
the best will in the world, to tell a trench when you come to it. One of the problems of the
modern battle is that, when men are given a trench to take, it is sometimes impossible to recognise
that trench when they arrive at it. The stretch in front of the lines is a sea of red earth,
in which you may notice, here or there, the protruding timber of some old German gun position
with its wickerwork shell-covers around it--the whole looking like a broken fish basket awash
in a muddy estuary. An officer crawled out to some of this jetsam the other day, and, putting
up his head from the wreckage, found nothing in the horizon except one solitary figure standing
about two hundred yards in front of him; and it was a German.

Imagine the factory hand from Saxony set down to do outpost duty in this sort of wilderness.
I spoke the other day to a little tailor or bootmaker, with a neck that you could have put
through a napkin ring, a tremendous forehead, and big, startled eyes. "Yes, we were put out
there to dig an outpost trench," he said. "The sergeant gave us a wrong direction, I think.
We took two days' rations and went out hundreds of yards. No one came near us. There was firing
on all sides, and we did not know where we were. Our food was finished--we saw men working--we
did not know who they were--but they were English, and we were captured."

CHAPTER XXI

ANGELS' WORK

France, August 28th.

It had been a wild night. Not a first-rate full-dress attack on a big front, but one of those
fierce struggles on a small front which have been so frequent in the stubborn fight northwards,
up the Pozières Ridge towards Mouquet Farm. Along a good part of the line the troops were back
in the trenches they had left, or had dug themselves a new trench only slightly in advance
of it. At other points they were in the trenches they had gone out for.

The bombardment, which had been turned on as though somebody held the key to the thunderstorm,
and which had crashed and flashed into the hill-side nearly all the night, had gradually died
down. The artillery Staff officers on both sides had long since read the last pink signal form,
and had given instructions to cover any possible trouble, and had turned into bed. The normal
early morning gun was sending its normal shell at intervals ranging up the long valley--rattle,
rattle, rattle, until the echo died away up the slopes, like that of a vanishing railway train,
or the long-drawn bark of a dog. As it died another gun would bark, and another, until for
a few seconds the noise dwindled and died altogether, and there was a silence; as if somebody,
just for a second or two, had stopped the battle. The German artillery Staff had left its gun
barking too--every now and again the little shell came and spat over the hill-side.

The morning broke very pale and white through the mist--as though the earth were tired to death
after that wild nightmare. The soft white hand of the fog covered the red land, so that your
sight ranged no more than three hundred yards at most, and often not a hundred. We were stumbling
over ground smashed in by the last night's fire--red earth new turned. Only a few hundred yards
away another fold of the land loomed out of the mist--you could see the crest rising dull grey
out of the white vapour in the dip between. That hill-crest was in German territory--not ours.
For which good reason we hurried to the shelter of a trench.

It was while we did so that I noticed a little grey procession coming towards us from the ground
out beyond the trench in front of the German lines. It came very slowly--the steady, even pace
of a funeral. The leader was a man--a weatherbeaten, square-jawed, rugged old bushman--who
marched solemnly, holding a stick in front of him, from which hung a flag. When we are so near
death, all radiant with glory, which smiles upon us through the gloom, perhaps we are conscious
of it.

A certain number of men, strangers to the Assembly, all as determined as the Representatives
themselves, accompanied them and surrounded them.

Cournet was the leader. Amongst them there were workmen, but no blouses. In order not to alarm
the middle classes the workmen had been requested, notably those employed by Derosne and Cail,
to come in coats.

Baudin had with him a copy of the Proclamation which I had dictated
to him on the previous day.

Cournet unfolded it and read it. "Let us at once post it up in the Faubourg," said he. "The
People must know that Louis Bonaparte is outlawed." A lithographic workman who was there offered
to print it without delay. All the Representatives present signed it, and they added my name
to their signatures. Aubry (du Nord) headed it with these words, "National Assembly." The workman carried
off the Proclamation, and kept his word. Some hours afterwards Aubry (du Nord), and later on
a friend of Cournet's named Gay, met him in the Faubourg du Temple paste-pot in hand, posting
the Proclamation at every street corner, even next to the Maupas placard, which threatened the
penalty of death to any one who should be found posting an appeal
to arms.

Groups read the two bills at the same time. We may mention an incident which ought to be noted,
a sergeant of the line, in uniform, in red trousers, accompanied him and protected him. He was
doubtless a soldier who had lately left the service.

The time fixed on the preceding evening for the general rendezvous was from nine to ten in the
morning. This hour had been chosen so that there should be time to give notice to all the members
of the Left; it was expedient to wait until the Representatives should
arrive, so that the group should the more resemble an Assembly, and
that its manifestation should have more authority on the Faubourg.

Several of the Representatives who had already arrived had no sash
of office. Some were made hastily in a neighboring house with strips
of red, white, and blue calico, and were brought to them. Baudin and
De Flotte were amongst those who girded on these improvised sashes. Five or six angry pieces hissed by, but they no more heeded them than if it were a schoolboy
pelting mud. They were intent on their business and nothing else. They did not ask for a trench
to get into, but only to be shown the way. Their burden was carried easier over the open. They
were stretcher-bearers.

We started home a good deal later from another part of the line by a short cut. Five minutes
after we had set out, the Germans happened to turn their barrage across a patch whither our
aged trench seemed certain to lead. There may not have been more than fifteen shells in the
minute, but it seemed, looking along that path, more like thirty. They were of all sorts mixed--ugly,
black, high-explosive shrapnel bursting with the crash of a big shell; little, spiteful whizzbang
field gun tearing into the brown earth; 5.9 shells flinging up fountains of it. We pushed on
until the shelter petered out and the shorter shells were already bursting behind us, and the
trench was little more than a crater to nip into when you heard them singing towards you--and
then we decided to give it up. At one time, as we dodged back, a visitor came singing so straight
that we dived headlong into a crater just as you would dive into the sea.

A few minutes later we were back in the comfort of a fair trench, perfectly snug, watching
the storm. As we reached that trench and turned into it, two men were clambering up on to the
bank to join a party of five others who were standing up there already, in the open. They were
stooping down to arrange with others the lifting of something up to them.

They were stretcher-bearers--Australian stretcher-bearers. The two pair on the bank already
had their load, and the others were lifting theirs up thither. They were just setting out to
carry their burden overland on a track which led straight to the barrage which had turned us back.

I learned more about Australian stretcher-bearers that morning than I had known since the first
week in Gallipoli. I cursed my fate that I was not permitted to have a camera there, to prove
to Australians that these things are true. As luck would have it, the next time I saw that
same scene the British official photographer was beside me. We saw the smoke of a barrage on
the skyline. And coming straight from it were two little parties each headed by a flag.

We hurried to the place--and there it is on record, in the photograph for every man to see
some day just as we saw it, the little party coming down the open with the angry shells behind
them.

I asked those stretcher-bearers as I looked up at the shell-bursts how the Germans treated them.

"They don't snipe us so long as we have this flag," one of them said. "You see, we started
it by not firing on theirs when they came out to their wounded. Of course, we can't help the
artillery," he added, looking over his shoulder at the place from which he had come, where
a line of black shell-bursts was fringing the hill. "That's not meant for us."

That understanding, if you can maintain it honourably and trust the enemy to do the same, means
everything--everything--to the wounded of both sides. The commander who, sitting safely at
his table, condemns his wounded and the enemy's in No Man's Land to death by slow torture without
grounds for suspecting trickery, would incur a responsibility such as few men would face the
thought of.

Load after load, day and night, mile upon mile in and out of craters across the open and back
again--assuredly the Australian stretcher-bearer has not degenerated since he made his name
glorious amongst his fellow soldiers at Gallipoli. Hear them speak of him.

CHAPTER XXII

OUR NEIGHBOUR

France, October 10th.

There are next to us at present some Scotsmen.

Australians and New Zealanders have fought alongside of many good mates in this war. I suppose
the 29th Division and the Navy and the Indian Mountain Batteries and Infantry were their outstanding
friends in Gallipoli. In France--the artillery of a certain famous regular division. And the
Scotsmen.

It is quite remarkable how the Australian seems to forgather with the Scotsman wherever in
France he meets him. You will see them sharing each other's canteens at the base, yarning round
each other's camp fires at the front. Wherever the pipers are, there will the Australians be
gathered together.

I asked an Australian the other day how it was that he and his mates had struck up such a remarkable
friendship with some of these Highland regiments now camped near them. "Well, I think it's
their sense of humour," he said.

We looked at him rather hard.

"You see, they can understand our jokes," he said. "They don't seem to take us too serious like."

And I think he had just hit it. The Australian has a habit of pulling his mate's leg, and being
on his guard against a leg-pull in return. He has sharpened his conversation against the conversation
of his friends from the time he could speak--his uncles are generally to blame for it; they
started him on the path of repartee by pulling his legs before those same legs had learnt to
walk. As a result he is always sparring in conversation--does not mean to be taken seriously.
And the Scotsman, cautious and always on the look-out for a feint, is seldom caught by it.
If he is, the chances are he gives it back--with interest.

It is a grim, old, dry variety of humour, and it goes with a wonderful, grim, sturdy nature.
Few people here see a Scottish regiment passing without waiting, if they have the time, to
watch the last square figure disappear down the road. Many look at the perfect swing of the
kilts, and the strong bare knees. For myself I can never take my eyes off their faces. There
is a stalwart independence in their strong mouths and foreheads and chins which rivets one's
interest. Every face is different from the next. Each man seems to be thinking for himself,
and ready to stand up for his own decision against the world. There is a sort of reasoned determination
uniting them into a single whole, which, one thinks, must be a very terrible sort of whole
to meet in anger.

And it is. The Scotsman is, I think, the most unrelenting fighter that I have come across.
The Australian is a most fierce fighter in battle, but he is quite ready to make friends afterwards
with his enemy. Once he has taken a German prisoner, he is apt to treat him more liberally
than most troops--more so even, I think, than the English soldier--and that is saying a good
deal. To the Scotsman, when he escorts his prisoners home, those prisoners are Germans still.
He has never forgotten the tremendous losses which Scottish regiments suffered at the beginning
of the war. He does not feel kindly towards the men who inflicted them. With the Australian,
once the fight is over, the bitterness is left behind. The Scotsman makes prisoners, but he
does not make friends.

I shall not forget a talk that I had, some time since, with a Scottish driver who had been
very badly wounded during the first winter. He had not been in the Army Service Corps in those
days. He was in a certain famous regiment of infantry--joined up in the first weeks of the
war as a recruit, and was sent to the front with a draft almost at once--by some process which
I do not now understand--to replace heavy casualties. He was with them through that first winter
in their miserable, overflowing apology for a trench. It was a shallow ditch with a wretched
parapet, and all they could do for weeks on end was to send the men into the trench over the
top of the ground at night--they had actually to approach this trench from the front, at times,
because the rear was a marsh--get into it over the parapet, and sit there on the back of the
trench until nightfall, sheltered only by the parapet, since the trench was too wet to live in.

At last there came a dawn when the regiment charged, to cover operations elsewhere. They left
their ditch, and half-way across No Man's Land John Henderson--it is not his name, but it will
do as well as another--John Henderson was hit. He lay out there for a day and a night. A brave
officer bandaged him and passed on to others. John Henderson was brought in at last, delirious,
with two bullets in him and a heavy rheumatism. He was invalided out of the service, and as
soon as he thought himself well enough he came back and enlisted at another place, under another
name, in another corps; he could not face his native village if he remained out of it, and
at the same time he could not get into the fight again if the authorities knew he had once
been invalided. His dread still was that they might find out. He would not ask for his leave,
when it became due, for fear of causing inquiries; he preferred to stick it out at the front.

He was as stern against the German after two years as he was on the day when he enlisted. "It's
a funny thing," he said to me, "but Ah was no worrying about anything at all that night, when
Ah was lying out there wounded, excepting that they might tak me a prisoner. For a long time
blithe and fragile Miss Eunice, demure, correct in deportment, and yet not wholly without enthusiasm,
thought that day the unluckiest in her life on which she first took
into her hands that unobtrusive yet dramatic book, "Miss Crofutt's
Missionary Labors in the English Prisons."

It came to her notice by mere accident, not by favor of proselyting friends; and such was its singular
material, that she at once devoured it with avidity. As its title suggests, it was the history
of the ameliorating endeavors of a woman in criminal society, and it contained, perforce, a
large amount of tragic and pathetic incident. But this last was so blended and involved with
what Miss Eunice would have skipped as commonplace, that she was led to digest the whole volume--statistics,
philosophy, comments, and all.

She studied the analysis of the atmosphere of cells, the properties and waste of wheaten flour,
the cost of clothing to the general government, the whys and wherefores of crime and evil-doing; and
it was not long before there was generated within her bosom a fine
and healthy ardor to emulate this practical and courageous pattern.

She was profoundly moved by the tales of missionary labors proper.

She was filled with joy to read that Miss Crofutt and her lieutenants
sometimes cracked and broke away the formidable husks which enveloped
divine kernels in the hearts of some of the wretches, and she frequently
wept at the stories of victories gained over monsters whose defences
of silence and stolidity had suddenly fallen into ruin above the slow
but persistent sapping of constant kindness.



It was a heavy punch this time. I cannot tell of all these fierce struggles here--they shall
be told in full some day. In the earliest steps towards Mouquet British troops attacked on
the Australian flank, and at least once the fighting which they met with was appallingly heavy.
Victorians, South Australians, New South Welshmen have each dealt their blow at it. The Australians
have been in heavy fighting, almost daily, for six solid weeks; they started with three of
the most terrible battles that have ever been fought--few people, even here, realise how heavy
that fighting was. Then the tension eased as they struck those first blows northwards. As they
neared Mouquet the resistance increased. Each of the last five blows has been stiffer to drive.
On each occasion the wedge has been driven a little farther forward. This time the blow was
heavier and the wedge went farther.

The attack was made just as a summer night was reddening into dawn. Away to the rear over Guillemont--for
the Australians were pushing almost in an opposite direction from the great British attack--the
first light of day glowed angrily on the lower edges of the leaden clouds. You could faintly
distinguish objects a hundred yards away. Our field guns, from behind the hills, broke suddenly
into a tempest of fire, which tore a curtain of dust from the red shell craters carpeting the
ridge. A few minutes later the bombardment lengthened, and the line of Queenslanders, Tasmanians
and Western Australians rushed for the trenches ahead of them.

On the left, well down the shoulder of the hill towards Thiépval, was the dust-heap of craters
and ashes, with odd ends of some shattered timber sticking out of it, which goes by the name
of Mouquet Farm. It was a big, important homestead some months ago. To-day it is the wreckage
of a log roof, waterlogged in a boundless tawny sea of craters. There is no sign of a trench
left in it--the entrances of the dug-outs may be found here and there like rat-holes, about
half a dozen of them, behind dishevelled heaps of rubbish. They open into craters now--no doubt
each opening has been scratched clear of debris a dozen times. You have to get into some of
them by crawling on hands and knees.

The first charge took the Western Australians far beyond the farm. They reached a position
two hundred yards farther and started to dig in there. Within an hour or two they had a fairly
good trench out amongst the craters well in front of the farm. The farm behind them ought to
be solidly ours with such a line in front of it. A separate body of men, some of them Tasmanians,
came like a whirlwind on their heels into the farm. The part of the garrison which was lying
out in front in a rough line of shell craters found them on top of the craters before they
knew that there were British troops anywhere about. They were captured and sent back. The Australians
tumbled over the debris into the farm itself.

The fight that raged for two days on this ridge was not one of those in which the enemy put
up his hands as soon as our men came on to him. Far on the top of the hill to the right, and
in the maze of trenches between, and in the dug-outs of the farm on the left, he was fighting
stiffly over the whole front. In the dim light, as the party which was to take the farm rushed
into it, a machine-gun was barking at them from somewhere inside that rubbish yard itself.
They could hear the bark obviously very close to them, but it was impossible to say where it
came from, whether thirty yards away or fifty. They knew it must be firing from behind one
of the heaps of rubbish where the entrances of the dug-outs probably were, firing obliquely
and to its rear at the men who rushed past it. They chose the heap which seemed most probable,
and fired six rifle grenades all at once into it. There was a clatter and dust; the machine-gun
went out like a candle. Later they found it lying smashed at the mouth of a shaft there.

The Germans fought them from their rat-holes. When a man peered down the dark staircase shaft,
he sometimes received a shot from below, sometimes a rifle grenade fired through a hole in
a sandbag barricade, which the Germans had made at the bottom of the stair. Occasionally a
face would be seen peering up from below--for they refused to come out--and our men would fling
down a bomb or fire a couple of shots. But those on the top of the stair always have the advantage.
The Germans were bombed and shot out of entrance after entrance, and at last came up through
the only exit left to them. Finding Australians swarming through the place, they surrendered;
and the whole garrison of Mouquet Farm was accounted for. Those who were not lying dead in
the craters and dust-heap were prisoners. Mouquet Farm was ours, and a line of Australian infantry
was entrenching itself far ahead of it.

On the ridge the charge had farther to go. It swarmed over one German trench and on to a more
distant one. The Germans fought it from their trench. The rush was a long one, and the German
had time to find his feet after the bombardment. But the men he was standing up to were the
offshoot of a famous Queensland regiment; and, though the German guardsmen showed more fight
than any Germans we have met, they had no match for the fire of these boys. The trench is said
to have been crowded with German dead and wounded. On the left the German tried at once to
bomb his way back into the trench he had lost, and for a time he made some headway. Part of
the line was driven out of the trench into the craters on our side of it. But before the bombing
party had gone far, the Queenslanders were into the trench again with bomb and bayonet, and
the trenches on the right flank of the attack were solidly ours.

The Queenslanders who reached this trench and took it, found themselves looking out over a
wide expanse of country. Miles in front of them, and far away to their flank, there stretched
a virgin land. They were upon the crest of the ridge, and the landscape before them was the
country behind the German lines. Except for a gentle rise, somewhat farther northward behind
Thiépval, they had reached about the highest point upon the northern end of the ridge.

The connecting trenches, between Mouquet Farm and the ridge above and behind it, were attacked
by the Tasmanians. The fire was very heavy, and for a moment it looked as if this part of the
line, and the Queenslanders immediately next to it, would not be able to get in. Officer after
officer was hit. Leading amongst these was a senior captain, an officer old for his rank, but
one who was known to almost every man in the force as one of the most striking personalities
in Gallipoli. He had two sons in the Australian force, officers practically of his own rank.
He was one of the first men on to Anzac Beach; and was the last Australian who left it: Captain
Littler.

I had seen him just as he was leaving for the fight, some hours before. He carried no weapon
but a walking-stick. "I have never carried anything else into action," he said, "and I am not
going to begin now." He was ill with rheumatism and looked it, and the doctor had advised that
he ought not to be with his company. But he came back to them that evening for the fight; and
one could see that it made a world of difference to them. He was a man whom his own men swore
by. Personally, one breathed more easily knowing that he was with them. It would be his last
big fight, he told me.

Half-way through that charge, in the thick of the whirl of it, he was seen standing, leaning
heavily upon his stick. It was touch and go at the moment whether the trench was won or lost.
"Are you hit, sir?" asked several around him. Then they noticed a gash in his leg and the blood
running from it--and he seemed to be hit through the chest as well.

"I will reach that trench if the boys do," he said.

"Have no fear of that, sir," was the answer. A sergeant asked him for his stick. Then--with
the voice of a big man, like his officer, the sergeant shouted, and waved his stick, and took
the men on. In the half-dark his figure was not unlike that of his commander. They made one
further rush and were in the trench.

They were utterly isolated in the trench when they reached it. A German machine-gun was cracking
away in the same trench to their right, firing between them and the trench they had come from.
There was barbed wire in front of it. When they tried to force a way with bombs up the trench
to the gun, German bombers in craters behind the trench showered bombs on to them. Then a sergeant
crawled out between the wire and the machine-gun--crawled on his stomach right up to the gun
and shot the gunner with his revolver. "I've killed three of them," he said, as he crawled
back. Presently a shell fell on him and shattered him. But our bombers, like the Germans, crept
out into craters behind the trench, and bombed the German bombers out of their shelter. That
opened the way along the trench, and they found the three machine-gunners, shot as the sergeant
had said. The Tasmanians went swiftly along the trench after that, and presently saw a row
of good Australian heads in a sap well in front of them. There went up a cheer. Other German
guardsmen, who had been lying in craters in front of the trench, and in a scrap of trench beyond,
heard the cheering; seeing that there were Australians on both sides of them, they stumbled
to their feet and threw up their hands. They were marched off to the rear, and the Tasmanians
joined up with the Queenslanders.

So the centre was joined to the right. On the left it was uncertain whether it was joined or
not. There was a line of trench to be seen on that side running back towards the German lines.
It was merely a more regular line of mud amongst the irregular mud-heaps of the craters; but
there were the heads of the men looking out from it--so clearly it was a trench. As the light
grew they could make out men leaning on their arms and elbows, looking over the parapet. Every
available glass was turned on them, but it was too dark still to see if they were Australians.
Two scouts were sent forward, creeping from hole to hole. Both were shot. A machine-gun was
turned at once on to the line of heads. They started hopping back down their tumbled sap towards
the German rear. Clearly they were Germans. The machine-gun made fast practice as the line
of backs showed behind the parapet.

There were Germans, not Australians, in the trenches on the Tasmanians' left--in the same trench
as they. The flank there was in the air. There was nothing to do except to barricade the trench
and hold the flank as best they could.

And for the next two days they held it, shelled with every sort of gun and trench mortar, although
fresh companies of the Prussian Guard Reserve constantly filed in to the gap which existed
between this point and Mouquet Farm. Their old leader, who had promised to reach that trench
with them, was not there. They found him lying dead within a few yards of it, straight in front
of the machine-gun which they had silenced. So Littler had kept his promise--and lost his life.
They had a young officer and a few sergeants. All through that day their numbers slowly dwindled.
They held the trench all the next night, and in the grey dawn of the second day a sentry, looking
over the trench, saw the Germans a little way outside of it. As he pointed them out he fell
back shot through the head. They told the Queenslanders, and the Queenslanders came out instantly
and bombed from their side, in rear of the Germans. The Queensland officer was shot dead, but
the Germans were cleared out or killed.

That afternoon the Germans attacked that open flank with heavy artillery. For hours shell after
shell crashed into the earth around. A heavy battery found the barricade and put its four big
shells systematically round it. They reduced the garrison as far as possible, and four or five
only were kept by the barricade. They were not all Australians now.

For the end of the Australian work was coming very near. But that occasion deserves a letter
to itself.

CHAPTER XXIV

HOW THE AUSTRALIANS WERE RELIEVED

France, September 19th.

It was before the moment at which my last letter ended that the time had come for the first
relieving troops to be drafted into the fight.

I shall not forget the first I saw of them. We were at a certain headquarters not a thousand
miles from the enemy's barrage. Messages had dribbled through from each part of the attacking
line telling exactly where every portion of it had got to; or rather telling where each portion
believed it had got to--as far as it could judge by sticking up its collective head from shell
craters and broken-down trench walls and staring out over the limitless sea of craters and
crabholes which surrounded it. As the only features in the landscape were a ragged tree stump,
and what looked like the remains of a broken fish basket over the horizon, all very distant--and
a dozen shell-bursts and the bark of an unseen machine-gun, all very close--the determination
was apt to be a trifle erratic. Still, the points were marked down, where each handful believed
and trusted itself to be. The next business was to fill up certain gaps. An order was dispatched
to the supports. They were to send an officer to receive instructions.

He came. He was a man nearing middle age, erect, tough as wire, with lines in his face such
as hard fighting and responsibility leave on the face of every soldier.

The representative of authority upon the spot--an Australian who also had faced ugly scenes--explained
to him quietly where he wished him to take his men, into such and such a corner, by such and
such a route. It meant plunging straight into the thick of the Somme battle, with all its unknown
horrors--everyone there knew that. But the new-comer said quietly, "Yes, sir"--and climbed
up and out into the light.

It was not an Australian who spoke. That "Yes, sir" came unmistakably from the other side of
the Pacific. It was the first of the Canadians upon the Somme battlefield.

An hour or so later an Australian officer, moving along with his men to improve an exposed
and isolated trench (a trench which was outflanked already, and enfiladed, and in half a dozen
ways unhealthy) into a condition to be held against any attacks at all costs--found, coming
across the open towards his exposed flank, a line of stalwart men in kilts. His men were dead
tired, the enemy's shell-fire was constant and heavy, grey heads and helmets constantly seen
behind a red mud parapet, across a hundred yards of red mud craters, proved that the Prussian
Guard Reserve was getting ready to counter-attack him. Every message he sent back to Headquarters
finished, "But we will hold this trench."

And yet here the new men came--a line of them, stumbling from crater into crater, and by one
of those unaccountable chances that occur in battles, only two or three of them were hit in
crossing over. They dropped into the trench by the side of the Australians. Their bombers went
to the left to relieve the men who had been holding the open flank. They brought in with them
keen, fresh faces and bodies, and an all-important supply of bombs. It was better than a draught
of good wine.

So it was that the first of the Canadians arrived.

Long before the last Australian platoon left that battered line, these first Canadians were
almost as tired as they. For thirty-six hours they had piled up the same barricades, garrisoned
the same shell-holes, were shattered by the same shells. Twenty-four hours after the Canadians
came, the vicious bombardment described in the last letter descended on the flank they both
were holding. They were buried together by the heavy shell-bursts. They dug each other out.
When the garrison became so thin that whole lengths of trench were without a single unwounded
occupant, they helped each others' wounded down to the next length, and built another barricade,
and held that. 

Saint Bartholomew has been blessed by the Pope and decorated with the Catholic medal.[22]

Meanwhile Ossian Dumas appeared determined. The captain made a last effort.

"You will ruin yourself," said he.

"I shall save my honor."

"It is precisely your honor that you are sacrificing."

"Because I am going away?"

"To go away is to desert."

This seemed to impress Ossian Dumas. The captain continued,--

"They are about to fight. In a few minutes the barricade will be attacked. Your comrades will
fall, dead or wounded.

You are a young officer--you have not yet been much under fire."

"At all events," warmly interrupted Ossian Dumas, "I shall not have
fought against the Republic; they will not say I am a traitor."

"No, but they will say that you are a coward."

Ossian made no reply.

A moment afterwards the command was given to attack.

The regiment started at the double. The barricade fired.

       Ossian Dumas was the first who fell.

He had not been able to bear that word "coward," and he had remained
in his place in the first rank.

They took him to the ambulance, and from thence to the hospital.

Let us at once state the conclusion of this touching incident.

Both of his legs were broken.

The doctors thought that it would be necessary to amputate them both.

General Saint-Arnaud sent him the Cross of Honor.

As is known, Louis Bonaparte hastened to discharge his debt to his
praetorian accomplices.

After having massacred, the sword voted.

The combat was still smoking when the army was brought to the ballot-box.

The

garrison of Paris voted "Yes."

It absolved itself.

With the rest of the army it was otherwise. Military honor was indignant, and roused the civic
virtue. Notwithstanding the pressure which was exercised, although the regiments deposited their
votes in the shakos of their colonels, the army voted "No" in many districts of France and
Algeria.

The Polytechnic School voted "No" in a body. Nearly everywhere the
artillery, of which the Polytechnic School is the cradle, voted to
the same effect as the school.

Scipio Dumas, it may be remembered,
was at Metz.

By some curious chance it happened that the feeling
of the artillery, which everywhere else had pronounced against the
coup d'état, hesitated at Metz, and seemed to lean towards Bonaparte.

Scipio
Dumas, in presence of this indecision set an example. He voted in
a loud voice, and with an open voting paper, "No."

Then he sent in
his resignation. At the same time that the Minister at Paris received
the resignation of Scipio Dumas, Scipio Dumas at Metz, received his
dismissal, signed by the Minister.

After Scipio Dumas' vote, the
same thought had come at the same time to both the Government and
to the officer, to the Government that the officer was a dangerous
man, and that they could no longer employ him, to the officer that
the Government was an infamous one, and that he ought no longer to
serve it.

The resignation and the dismissal crossed on the way. By
this word "dismissal" must be understood the withdrawal of employment.

According
to our existing military laws it is in this manner that they now "break"
an officer. Withdrawal of employment, that is to say, no more service,
no more pay; poverty.

Simultaneously with his dismissal, Scipio Dumas
learnt the news of the attack on the barricade of the Rue Aumaire,
and that his brother had both his legs broken. In the fever of events
he had been a week without news of Ossian. Scipio had confined himself
to writing to his brother to inform him of his vote and of his dismissal,
and to induce him to do likewise.

His brother wounded! His brother
at the Val-de. Grâce! He left immediately for Paris.

He hastened
to the hospital. They took him to Ossian's bedside. The poor young
fellow had had both his legs amputated on the preceding day.

At the
moment when Scipio, stunned, appeared at his bedside, Ossian held
in his hand the cross which General Saint-Arnaud had just sent him.

The
wounded man turned towards the aide-de-camp who had brought it, and
said to him,--

"I will not have this cross. On my breast it would
be stained with the blood of the Republic."

And perceiving his brother,
who had just entered, he held out the cross to him, exclaiming,--

"You
take it. You have voted "No," and you have broken your sword! It is
you who have deserved it!"

[20] Died in exile in Guernsey. See the
"Pendant l'Exil," under the heading Actes et Paroles, vol. ii.

[21]
Died in exile at Termonde.

[22] Pro Hugonotorum strage. Medal struck
at Rome in 1572.

CHAPTER XV.

THE QUESTION PRESENTS ITSELF

It was
one o'clock in the afternoon.

Bonaparte had again become gloomy.

The
gleams of sunshine on such countenances as these last very short time. Staff officers,
brigadier-generals, captains, privates and lance-corporals--they were all just Englishmen off
to their homes. They jostled one another up the gangway--I never heard a rough word in that
dense crowd. They lay side by side outside the saloon of the Channel turbine steamer. A corporal
with his head half in the doorway, too seasick to know that it was fair in the path of a major-general's
boots; a general Staff officer and a French captain with their backs propped against the oak
panelling and their ribs against somebody else's baggage; a subaltern of engineers with his
head upon their feet; a hundred others packed on the stairs and up to the deck; and a horrible
groaning from the direction of the lavatories--it was truly the happiest moment in all their lives.

The crossing passed like a dream--scarcely noticed. Seven weeks of strain can leave you too
tired almost to think. A journey in a comfortable railway compartment through prim, hazy English
fields, the carriage blue with smoke from the pipes of its inhabitants (a Canadian, three or
four Englishmen and a couple of Australians), has gone almost unremembered. As the custom is
in England, they were mostly ensconced behind their newspapers, although there is more geniality
in an English railway carriage to-day than was usual before the war. But most people in that
train, I think, were too tired for conversation.

It was the coming into London that left such an impression as some of us will never forget.
Some of us knew London well before the war. It is the one great city in the world where you
never saw the least trace of corporate emotion. It divides itself off into districts for the
rich and districts for the poor, and districts for all the grades in between the two, which
are the separate layers in the big, frowning edifice of British society; they may have had
some sort of feeling for their class or their profession--the lawyer proud of his Inns of Court
and of the tradition of the London Bar, the doctor proud of London schools of medicine, and
the Thames engineer even proud of the work that is turned out upon the Thames. But there was
no more common feeling or activity in the people of London than there would be common energy
in a heap of sand grains. They would have looked upon it as sheer weakness to exhibit any interest
in the doings even of their neighbours.

The battle of the Somme had begun about nine weeks before when this particular train, carrying
the daily instalment of men on leave from it, began to wind its way in past the endless back-gardens
and yellow brick houses, every one the replica of the next, and the numberless villa chimneys
and chimney-pots which fence the southern approaches of the great capital. They are tight,
compact little fortresses, those English villas, each jealously defended against its neighbour
and the whole world by the sentiment within, even more than by the high brick wall around it.
But if they were all rigidly separate from each other, there was one thing that bound them
all together just for that moment.

It happened in every cottage garden, in every street that rattled past underneath the railway
bridges, in every slum-yard, from every window, upper and lower. As the leave train passed
the people all for the moment dropped whatever they were doing and ran to wave a hand at it.
The children in every garden dropped their games and ran to the fence and clambered up to wave
these tired men out of sight. The servant at the upper window let her work go and waved; the
mother of the family and the girls in the sitting-room downstairs came to the window and waved;
the woman washing in the tub in the back-yard straightened herself up and waved; the little
grocer out with his wife and the perambulator waved, and the wife waved, and the infant in
the perambulator waved; the boys playing pitch-and-toss on the pavement ran towards the railway
bridge and waved; the young lady out for a walk with her young man waved--not at all a suppressed
welcome, quite the reverse of half-hearted; the young man waved, much more demurely, but still
he did wave. The flapper on the lawn threw down her tennis-racket and simply flung kisses;
and her two young brothers expressed themselves quite as emphatically in their own manner;
the old man at the corner and the grocer-boy from his cart waved. For a quarter of an hour,
while that train wound in through the London suburbs, every human being that was near dropped
his work and gave it a welcome.

I have seen many great ceremonies in England, and they have left me as cold as ice. There have
been big set pieces even in this war, with brass bands and lines of policemen and cheering
crowds and long accounts of it afterwards in the newspapers. But I have never seen any demonstration
that could compare with this simple spontaneous welcome by the families of London. It was quite
unrehearsed and quite unreported. No one had arranged it, and no one was going to write big
headlines about it next day. The people in one garden did not even know what the people in
the next garden were doing--or want to know. The servant at the upper window did not know that
the mistress was at the lower window doing exactly as she was, and vice versa. For the first
time in one's experience one had experienced a genuine, whole-hearted, common feeling running
through all the English people--every man, woman and child, without distinction, bound in one
common interest which, for the time being, was moving the whole nation. And I shall never forget
it.

It was the most wonderful welcome--I am not exaggerating when I say that it was one of the
most wonderful and most inspiriting sights that I have ever seen. I do not know whether the
rulers of the country are aware of it. But I do not believe for a moment that this people can
go back after the war to the attitude by which each of those families was to all the others
only so much prospective monetary gain or loss.

CHAPTER XXVI

THE NEW ENTRY

France, November 13th.

Last week an Australian force made its attack in quite a different area of the Somme battle.

The sky was blue in patches, with cold white clouds between. The wind drove icily. There had
been practically no rain for two days.

We were in a new corner. The New Zealanders had pushed right through to the comparatively green
country just here--and so had the British to north and south of it. We were well over the slope
of the main ridge, up which the Somme battle raged for the first three months. Pozières, the
highest point, where Australians first peeped over it, lay miles away to our left rear. From
the top of the ridge behind you, looking back over your left shoulder, you could just see a
few distant broken tree stumps. I think they marked the site of that old nightmare.

We were looking down a long even slope to a long up-slope beyond. The country around us was
mostly brown-mud shell-holes. Not like the shell-holes of that blasted hill-top of two months
back--I have never seen anything quite like that, though they say that Guillemont, which I
have not seen, is as devastated. In this present area there is green grass between the rims
of the craters. But not enough green grass to matter. The general colour of the country on
the British side is brown--all gradations of it--from thin, sloppy, grey-brown mud, trampled
liquid with the feet of men and horses, to dull, putty-like brown mud so thick that, when you
get your foot into it, you have a constant problem of getting it out again.

For it is the country over which the fight has passed. As we advance, we advance always on
to the area which has been torn with shells--where the villages and the trenches and the surface
of the green country have been battered and shattered, first by our guns and then by the German
guns, until they have made a hell out of heaven.

And always just ahead of us, a mile or so behind the German lines, there is heaven smiling--you
can see it clearly; in this part, up the opposite slope of the wide, open valley. There is
the green country on which the Germans are always being driven back, and up which this monstrous
engine of war has not yet begun its slow, gruesome climb. There are the beautiful green woods
fading to soft autumn brown and yellow--the little red roofs in the trees, an empty village
in the foreground--you can see the wet mud shining in its street and the white trickle of water
down the centre of the road.

Down our long muddy hill-slope, near where the knuckles of it dip out of sight into the bottom
of the valley, one notices a line of heads. In some places they are clear and in others they
cannot be seen. But we guess that it is the line ready to go out.

At the top of the opposite up-slope the tower of Bapaume town hall showed up behind the trees.
We made out that the hands of the clock were at the hour--but I have heard others say that
they were permanently at half-past five, and others a quarter past four--it is one of those
matters which become very important on these long dark evenings, and friendships are apt to
be broken over it. The clock tower, unfortunately, disappeared finally at eighteen minutes
past eleven yesterday morning, so the controversy is never likely to be settled.

The bombardment broke out suddenly from behind us. We saw the long line of men below clamber
on to the surface, a bayonet gleaming here and there, and begin to walk steadily between the
shell-holes towards the edge of the hill. From where we were you could not see the enemy's
trench in the valley--only the brown mud of crater rims down to the hill's edge. And I think
the line could not see it either, in most parts at any rate. They would start from their muddy
parapet, and over the wet grass, with one idea above all others in the back of every man's
head--when shall we begin to catch sight of the enemy?

It is curious how in this country of shell craters you can look at a trench without realising
that it is a trench. A mud-heap parapet is not so different from the mud-heap round a crater's
rim, except that it is more regular. Even to discover your own trench is often like finding
a bush road. You are told that there is a trench over there and you cannot miss it. But, once
you have left your starting-point, it looks as if there were nothing else in the world but
a wilderness of shell craters. Then you realise that there is a certain regularity in the irregular
mud-heaps some way ahead of you--the top of a muddy steel helmet moves between two earth-heaps
on the ground's surface--then another helmet and another; and you have found your bearings.
That is clearly the trench they spoke about.

Well, finding the German trench seems to be much the same experience, varied by a multitude
of bullets singing past like bees, and with the additional thought ever present to the mind--when
will the enemy's barrage burst on you? When it does come, you do not hear it coming--there
is too much racket in the air for your ears to catch the shell whistling down as you are accustomed
to. There are big black crashes and splashes near by, without warning--scarcely noticed at
first. In the charge itself men often do not notice other men hit--we, looking on from far
behind, did not notice that. A man may be slipping in a shell-hole, or in the mud, or in some
wire--often he gets up again and runs on. It is only afterwards that you realise....

Across the mud space there were suddenly noticed a few grey helmets watching--a long, long
distance away. Then the grey helmets moved, and other helmets moved, and bunched themselves
up, and hurried about like a disturbed hive, and settled into a line of men firing fast and
coolly. That was the German trench.

It was fairly packed already in one part. The rattle of fire grew quickly. The chatter of one
machine-gun--then another, and another, were added to it. Our shells were bursting occasionally
flat in the face of the Germans--one big bearded fellow--they are close enough for those details
to be seen now--takes a low burst of our shrapnel full in his eyes. A high-explosive shell
bursts on the parapet, and down go three others. But they are firing calmly through all this.

Three or four Germans suddenly get up from some hole in No Man's Land, and bolt for their trench
like rabbits. Within forty yards of the German parapet the leading men in our line find themselves
alone. The line has dwindled to a few scanty groups. These are dropping suddenly--their comrades
cannot say whether they are taking cover in shell-holes, or whether they have been hit. The
Germans are getting up a machine-gun on the parapet straight opposite. The first two men fall
back shot. Two or three others struggle up to it--they are shot too; our men are making desperate
shooting to keep down that machine-gun. But the Germans get it up. It cracks overhead. In this
part of the line the attack is clearly finished.

One remembers a day, some months back, when a Western Australian battalion, after a heavy bombardment
of its trench, found a German line coming up over the crest of the hill about two hundred yards
away. The Western Australians stood up well over the parapet, and fired until the remnant of
that line sank to the ground within forty or fifty yards of them. That line was a line of the
Prussian Guard Reserve. We have had that opportunity three or four times in the Somme battle.
This time it was the Germans who had it. The Germans were of the Prussian Foot Guards--and
it was Western Australians who were attacking.

In another part, where the South Australians attacked, they found fewer Germans in the trench.
They could see the Germans in small groups getting their bombs ready to throw--but they were
into the trench before the Germans had time to hold them up. They killed or captured all the
German garrison, and destroyed a machine-gun, and set steadily to improve the trench for holding
it.

Everything seemed to go well in this part, except that they could get no touch with any other
of our troops in the trench. As far as they knew the other portions of the attack had succeeded,
as well as theirs. And then things changed suddenly. After an hour a message did come from
Australians farther along in the same trench--a message for urgent help. At the same time a
similar message came from the other flank as well. A shower of stick-bombs burst with a formidable
crash from one side. A line of Germans was seen, coming steadily along in single file against
the other end of the trench. A similar shower of crashes descended from that direction. A machine-gun
began to crackle down the trench. Our men fought till their bombs, and all the German bombs
they could find, were gone. Finally the Germans began to gain on them from both ends, and the
attack here, too, was over. They were driven from the trench.

CHAPTER XXVII

A HARD TIME

France, November 28th.

He is having a hard time. I do not see that there is any reason to make light of it. If you
do, you rob him of the credit which, if ever man deserved it, he ought to be getting now--the
credit for putting a good face upon it under conditions which, to him, especially at the beginning,
were sheer undiluted misery. Some people think that to tell the truth in these matters would
hinder recruiting. Well, if it did, it would only mean that the young Australians who stay
at home are guilty of greater meanness than one has ever thought. For the Australian here has
plunged straight into an existence more like that of a duck in a farmyard drain than to any
other condition known or dreamed of in his own sunny land. He is resisting it not only passably
but well. And if you want to know the reason--as far as any general reason can be given--the
motive, which keeps him trying day after day, is the desire that no man shall say a word against
Australia. I don't know if his country is thinking of him--a good part of it must be--but he
is thinking of his country all the time. Australia has made her name in the world during this
war--the world knows her now. It is these men--not the men who shout at stadiums and race meetings
at home, but the simple, willing men who are described in this letter--who are making Australia's
name for her--and just at present holding on to it like grim death.

Even the life of a duck in a farmyard drain becomes in a wonderful way supportable when you
tackle it as cheerfully as that. It comes to the Australian as a shock, at the first introduction--the
Manning River country after the Manning River flood has subsided is, as a New South Welshman
suggested, the nearest imitation that he has ever seen. But then there was blue sky and dazzling
sun over that; whereas here the whole grey sky seems to drip off his hatbrim and nose and chilled
fingers and the shiny oil sheet tied around his neck, and to ooze into his back and his boots.
It is all fairly comfortable in the green country from which he starts. There has been a fairly
warm billet in the half dark of a big barn, where the morning light comes through in strange
shafts and triangles up in the blackness amongst the gaunt roof beams. There was a canteen--which
is really an officially managed shop for good, cheap groceries--in an outhouse at the end of
the village; there were three or four estaminets and cafés, with cheerful and passably pretty
mademoiselles, and good coffee, and very vile wine, labelled temporarily as champagne. For aught
she knew, this tranquillity and good-will might go on forever, without
affording her an opportunity.

She must be denied the smallest contact with these frightful faces and figures, these bars and
cages, these deformities of the mind and heart, these curiosities of conscience, shyness, skill,
and daring; all these dramas of reclamation, all these scenes of fervent gratitude, thankfulness,
and intoxicating liberty--all or any of these things must never come to be the lot of her eyes;
and she gave herself up to the most poignant regret. In the nature
of things military, there will be another four miles to march at the other end. The platoon
at the tail thoroughly appreciates this. Its philosophy of life is wasted, unfortunately, on
four miles of stately, dripping French elm trees which cannot understand, and one richly appreciative
Australian subaltern who can.

The battalion was not disappointed. The motor-buses brought it to a most comfortable-looking
village--pretty well as good as the one it had left. It climbed out, and straightaway marched
to another village five miles distant. The darkness had come down--huge motor-wagons shouldered
them off the road into gutters, where they found themselves ankle deep in the mud-heaps scraped
by the road gangs. Every second wagon blinded them with its two glaring gig-lamps, and slapped
up the mud on to their cheeks. A mule wagon, trotting up behind, splashed it into their back
hair, where they found it in dry beads of assorted sizes next morning. It was raining dismally.
The head of the column was commenting richly on its surroundings--the platoon at the tail had
ceased to comment at all. The last couple were a pair who, I will swear, must have tramped
together many a long road over the Old Man Plains towards the evening sun--old felt hats slightly
battered; grim, set lips, knees and backs a little bent with the act of carrying; and pack,
oil sheet, mess tin rising heavenwards in one mighty hump above their spines. At the gap in
a hedge, where the column turned off into a sort of mud lake, stood an officer whose kindly
eyes were puckered from the glare of the central Australian sun. You could have told they were
Australians at a mile's distance. He looked at them with a queer smile.

"Are you the Scottish Horse?" he asked inquiringly.

"We are the blanky camel corps," was the answer.

That march at both ends of the motor trip was the adjutant's salvation. When the battalion
splashed up to its appointed billets, and found them calculated for receiving only half of
its number of soldiers awake, he shifted two-thirds of them in; and, as they promptly fell
to sleep the moment the column ceased to move, he shifted in the remainder when they were asleep.

When the battalion drew its breath next morning, it was inclined to think that it was enduring
the full horror of war; and was preparing to summarise the situation. But before it could draw
a second breath it was marched off to--to what I will call a reserve camp. It was not technically
a reserve camp, which was farther on; but they knew it was a camp for battalions to rest in--when
they have been very good, and it is desired to give them time to recover their wind. They were
rather "bucked" with the idea of this resting-place.

At midday they arrived there. That is to say, they waded up to a collection of little tents,
not unlike bushmen's tents in Australia, and stood knee deep at the entrances, looking into
them--speechless. Truly a worthy ambition! Why should I be considered man?

From 1848 to 1851 three years elapsed. Louis Bonaparte had had dissimulating ministers such
as Magne and Rouher; but he had also had straightforward ministers such as Léon Faucher and
Odilon Barrot; and these last had affirmed that he was upright and sincere. He had been seen
to beat his breast before the doors of Ham; his foster sister, Madame
Hortense Cornu, wrote to Mieroslawsky, "I am a good Republican, and
I can answer for him."

His friend of Ham, Peauger, a loyal man, declared, "Louis Bonaparte is incapable of treason."
Had not Louis Bonaparte written the work entitled "Pauperism"? In the intimate circles of the
Elysée Count Potocki was a Republican and Count d'Orsay was a Liberal; Louis Bonaparte said to
Potocki, "I am a man of the Democracy," and to D'Orsay, "I am a man of Liberty." The Marquis du Hallays
opposed the coup d'état, while the Marquise du Hallays was in its
favor.

Louis Bonaparte said to the Marquis, "Fear nothing" (it is true that he whispered to the Marquise,
"Make your mind easy").

The Assembly, after having shown here and there some symptoms of uneasiness, had grown calm.
There was General Neumayer, "who was to be depended upon," and who from his position at Lyons
would at need march upon Paris. Changarnier exclaimed, "Representatives of the people, deliberate
in peace." Even Louis Bonaparte himself had pronounced these famous words, "I should see an
enemy of my country in any one who would change by force that which has been established by law,"
and, moreover, the Army was "force," and the Army possessed leaders, leaders who were beloved and
victorious. Lamoricière, Changarnier, Cavaignac, Leflô, Bedeau, Charras; how could any one imagine
the Army of Africa arresting the Generals of Africa?

On Friday, November 28, 1851, Louis Bonaparte said to Michel de Bourges, "If I wanted to do
wrong, I could not. Yesterday, Thursday, I invited to my table five Colonels of the garrison
of Paris, and the whim seized me to question each one by himself. All five declared to me that
the Army would never lend itself to a coup de force, nor attack the inviolability of the Assembly.
You can tell your friends this."--"He smiled," said Michel de Bourges, reassured, "and I also
smiled." After this, Michel de Bourges declared in the Tribune, "this is the man for me." In that
same month of November a satirical journal, charged with calumniating the President of the Republic,
was sentenced to fine and imprisonment for a caricature depicting
a shooting-gallery and Louis Bonaparte using the Constitution as a
target.

When it came back some time later to these familiar dwellings, heavy-eyed and heavy-footed,
there was no insincerity in the relief with which it regarded them. They were a resting-place
then. Another battalion had kept them decently clean, and handed them over drained and dry;
for which thoughtfulness, not always met with, they were more grateful than those tired men
could have explained.

For they had been up into the line, and the places behind the line, and out again.

CHAPTER XXVIII

THE WINTER OF 1916

France, December 20th.

A friend has shown me a letter from Melbourne. Its writer had asked a man--an educated man--if
he would give a subscription for the Australian Comforts Fund. "Certainly not," was the reply.
"The men have every comfort in the trenches."

That is the sort of dense-skinned ignorance which makes one unspeakably angry--the ignorance
which, because it has heard of or read a letter from some brave-hearted youngster, making light
of hardships for his mother's sake, therefore flies to the conclusion that everything written
and spoken about the horrors of this war is humbug, and what the Army calls "eyewash"--a big
conspiracy to deceive the people who are not there.

As a matter of fact, the early winter of 1916 which these men have just been going through
will have a chapter to itself in history as long as history lasts. It is to some extent past
history now--to what extent I do not suppose anyone on the German side or ours can tell.

I, personally, do not know how the men and their officers can live through that sort of time.
Remember that a fair proportion of them were a few months ago adding up figures in the office
of an insurance company or a shipping firm--gulping down their midday coffee and roll in a
teashop in King or Collins Streets. But take even a Central District farmer or a Newcastle
miner--yes, or a Scottish shepherd or an English poacher--take the hardest man you know, and
put him to the same test, and it is a question whether the ordeal would not break even his
spirit. Put him out of doors into the thick of a dirty European winter; march him ten miles
through a bitter cold wind and driving rain, with--on his back--all the clothing, household
furniture, utensils and even the only cover which he is allowed to take with him; dribble him
in through mud up to his knees--sometimes up to his waist--along miles and miles of country
that is nothing but broken tree stumps and endless shell holes--holes into which, if a man
were to fall, he might lie for days before he were found, or even might never be found at all.
After many hours, trickle him, half dead with dragging his feet at every step out of the putty-like
mud, into a shallow, straggling, open ditch not in any way different from a watery drain between
two sodden country paddocks, except that there is no grass about it--nothing but brown, slippery
mud on floor and trench sides and over the country in all directions as far as eye can see.
At the end of it all put him to live there, with what baggage he carried on his back and nothing
more; put him in various depths of mud, to stay there all day in rain, wind, fog, hail, snowstorm--whatever
weather comes--and to watch there during the endless winter nights, when the longed-for dawn
only means another day and another night out there in the mud ditch, without a shred of cover.
And this is what our men have had to go through.

The longed-for relief comes at last--a change to other shell-battered areas in support or reserve--and
the battalion comes back down the long road to the rear, white-faced and dreary-eyed, dragging
slowly through the mud without a word. For they have been through a life of which you, or any
people past and present who have not been to this war, have not the first beginnings of a conception;
something beside which a South Polar expedition is a dance and a picnic. And that is without
taking into account the additional fact that night and day, on the Somme where these conditions
existed, men live under the unceasing sound of guns. I can hear them as I write--it is the
first longed-for gloriously bright day, and therefore there is not an interval of a second
in that continuous roar, hour after hour. There is nothing like it anywhere else in the world--there
has never yet been anything to approach it except at Verdun.

Life is hard enough in winter in the old-established trenches along more settled parts of the
front--there is plenty for the Comforts Fund to do there. Dropping into the best of quiet front
trenches straight from his home life the ordinary man would consider himself as undergoing
hardships undreamt of. Visiting those trenches straight from the Somme the other day, with
their duck-boards and sandbags, and the occasional ping of a sniper's bullet, and the momentary
spasm of field guns and trench mortars which appeared in the official summary next day as "artillery
and trench mortar activity"--after the Somme, I say, one found oneself looking on it, in the
terms of the friend who went with me, as "war de luxe."

It is unwise to take what one man writes of one place as true of all places or all times, or
indeed of anything except what he personally sees and knows at the moment. These conditions
which I have described are what I have seen, and are fortunately past history, or I should
not be describing them. I personally know that English troops, Scottish troops and Australian
troops went through them, and have, in some cases, issued from such trenches and taken similar
German trenches in front of them. Our troops are more comfortable than they were, but it is
in the nature of war to find yourself plunged into extremes of exertion and hardship without
warning; and no man knows when he writes to-day--and I doubt whether anyone of his superiors
could tell him--whether he will, at any given date, be in a worse condition or a better one.

What the German is going through on his side of the muddy landscape is described in another
chapter. For our grand men--and though to be called a hero is the last thing most Australians
desire, the men are never grander than at these times--the Australian Comforts Fund, the Y.M.C.A.
and the canteen groceries provide almost all the comfort that ever enters that grim region.
In the areas to which those tired men come for a spell, the Comforts Fund is beginning to give
them theatres for concert troupes and cinemas. It provides some hundreds of pounds to be spent
locally on the most obtainable small luxuries at Christmas, besides such gifts in kind as Christmas
brings.

But, for those who are actually in the front or just behind it, one cup of warm coffee in a
jam-tin from a roadside stall has been, in certain times and places, all that can be given;
the Fund has given that, and it has been the landmark in the day for many men. In those conditions
there was but one occasional solace. A friend of mine found an Australian in the trenches in
those days, standing in mud nearly to his waist, shivering in his arms and every body muscle,
leaning back against the trench side, fast asleep.

CHAPTER XXIX

AS IN THE WORLD'S DAWN

France, December 20th.

Yesterday morning we were looking across a bare, shallow valley at the opposite knuckle of
hill-side, around the foot of which the valley doubled back out of sight. A solitary grey line
of broken earth ran like a mole burrow up the bare knuckle and vanished over the top. A line
of bare, dead willow stumps marked a few yards of the hollow below. On the skyline, beyond
the valley's end, stood out a distant line of ghostly trees--so faint and blue as to be scarcely
distinguishable from the sky. There was nothing else in the landscape--absolutely nothing but
the bare, blank shape of the land; save for those old ghosts of departed willows--no trees--no
grass--no colour--no living or moving or singing or sounding thing.

Only--that morning at dawn had found a number of men tumbling, jumping, running, dodging in
and out of the shell-holes across that slope, making towards our lines. The peck of occasional
rifles came from some farther part of the grey, featureless hill-side--the report was the only
trace of the rifles or of the men firing them. But as the men who were dodging back were Australians
the rifles must have been the rifles of Germans, in trenches or shell-holes, somewhere on the
face of that waste. Who these Australians were, the men who watched from where we stood did
not know. Apparently they were men who had lost their way in the dark and wandered beyond our
trenches; as the light grew they had suddenly realised that they were in front of our front
line, and not behind it, as they thought, and had come tumbling back over the craters. They
all reached the trench safely.

For this battle has now reached such a formless, featureless landscape, that it is a hard thing
to tell whether you are looking at your own country or the German country, or the country between
the lines. The stretch between the two sides has for the moment widened, the Germans abandoning
many of their waterlogged, sodden ditches close in front of our lines, and contenting themselves
with fighting a sort of rearguard action there, while they tunnel, bore, dig, burrow like moles
into the farther heights where their reserve line runs near Bapaume. The battle has widened
out generally over the landscape.

It is a very great difference from that boiling, bursting nightmare of Pozières, where the
whole struggle tightened down to little more than one narrow hill-top. This battle is now being
fought in a sort of dreamland of brown mudholes, which the blue northern mist turns to a dull
purple grey. The shape of the land is there, the hills, valleys, lines of willow stumps, ends
of broken telegraph poles. But the colour is all gone. It is as though the bed of the ocean
had suddenly risen, as though the ocean depths had become valleys and the ocean mudbanks hills,
and the whole earth were a creation of slime. It is as though you suddenly looked out upon
the birth of the world, before the grass had yet begun to spring and when the germs of primitive
life still lay in the slime which covered it; an old, old age before anything moved on the
earth or sang in the air, and when the naked bones of the earth lay bare under the naked sky
century after century, with no change or movement save when the cloud shadows chased across
it, or the storms lashed it, or the evening sunlight glinted from the water trapped in its
meaningless hollows. It is to that unremembered chaos that German ideas of life have reduced
the world.

Up the hill-side opposite there is running a strange purple-grey streak between two purple-grey
banks. There is something mysterious in this flat ribbon, ruled, as if by the hand of man,
across that primeval colourless slope. The line of it can be traced distinctly over the hill
and out of sight. It takes a moment's thinking to realise that the grey streak was once a road.
It is a road which one has read of as the centre of some desultory fighting. I dare say it
will appear in its own small way in history. "The battalion next attacked along the Bapaume-Cambrai
road"--to give it a name it does not own; and readers will picture the troops in khaki dodging
along a hedge, beneath green, leafy elm trees....

Something moved. Yes, as I live, something is moving up that old purple-grey scar across the
hill-side. Two figures in pink, untanned leather waistcoats are strolling up the old road,
side by side. Their hands are in their trousers pockets, and the only sign of war visible about
them is their copper-green hats. A sniper's rifle pecks somewhere in the landscape thereabout,
but the two figures do not even turn a head. They are Bill and Jim from South Melbourne let
loose upon the antediluvian landscape, strolling up it, yawning. And they gave me much the
same shock as if some green and pink animal had suddenly issued from its unsuspected burrow
in a field of primeval grey slime and begun crawling over its face to some haunt in the slime
elsewhere. Two other distant figures were moving on the far hill-side too. Perhaps it was at
them the rifle was pecking; for to our certain knowledge the crest of that hill was German
territory.

Men lose their bearings in that sort of country every day. Germans find themselves behind our
lines without knowing that they have even passed over their own; and an Australian carrying
party has been known to deposit its hot food, in the warm food containers, all ready steaming
to be eaten, in German territory. To their great credit be it said that the party got back
safely to the Australian trenches--save for one who is missing and three who lie out there,
face upwards.... Brave men.

There is only one time when that unearthly landscape returns to itself again. I suppose men
and women lived in those valleys once; French farmers' girls tugged home at dusk up that ghostly
roadway slow-footed, reluctant cows; I dare say they even made love--French lads and sweethearts--down
some long obliterated path beside those willow stumps where the German patrol sneaks nightly
from shell-hole to shell-hole. There comes an afternoon when the sky turns dull yellow-white
like an old smoker's beard, and before dusk the snowflakes begin to fall. Far back the cursing
drivers are dragging their jibbing horses past half-frozen shell-holes, which they can scarcely
see. And out there, where the freezing sentries keep watch over the fringe where civilisation
grinds against the German--out there under the tender white mantle, flickering pink and orange
under the gun flashes--out there for a few short hours the land which Kultur has defaced comes
by its own.

CHAPTER XXX

THE GRASS BANK

France, December 10th.

The connection of Tamar the Hammerhead, who cut the Grass Bank out of the forest, with Timothy
Gibbs, of Booligal, in New South Wales, may not be clear at first sight. Tam's beech forest
covered two or three green hills in Gaul at the time when Caius Sulpicius, and his working
party of the Tenth Legion, were laying down new paving stones on the big road from Amiens over
the hill-tops. The wagon carrying the military secretary to the Governor had bumped uncomfortably
down that long slope the week before; and as the Tenth Legion was resting, its commanding officer
received, two days later, an order to detail another fatigue party. The big trees looked down
on a string of private soldiers shouldering big square paving stones from a neighbouring dump,
where the wagons stood, and fitting them carefully into the pavement, and--and otherwise enjoying
their rest. Caius Sulpicius and his orderly officer stood watching them. The orderly officer
leant on his stick. Caius had a piece of bread in one hand and a wedge of cheese in the other.
His forearm was black with grubbing amongst the paving stones.

"When the Tenth Legion gets a rest without some old brass helmet helping us to spend it," he
said with his mouth full, "I'll begin to think the end of the war is coming." 

Some of them slept. At day break the bolts creaked, the door was half-opened and the jailers
cried out to them, "Get up!"

They went into the adjoining corridor, the jailer took up the mattresses, threw a few buckets
of water on the floor, wiped it up anyhow, replaced the mattresses on the damp stones, and said
to them, "Go back again." They locked them up until the next morning. From time to time they
brought in 100 new prisoners, and they fetched away 100 old ones (those who had been there for
two or three days). What became of them?--At night the prisoners could hear from their dungeon
the sound of explosions, and in the morning passers-by could see,
as we have stated, pools of blood in the courtyard of the Prefecture. The orange
mud bank of his terrace had been the labour of twelve months, and there was a year's work in
it yet. He had scarcely hoped to possess even a rood of land, and now he had two acres. He
was going to use every inch of it. That was Tamar the Hammerhead's life's work.

The Tenth Legion did get its rest. Caius lay beneath a moss-covered, tilted gravestone--long,
long forgotten--not so far from the great road. One of a much later generation of orderly officers,
who had scraped part of the inscription clean with his penknife, went back and told the mess
at dinner that he had come across the grave of an officer of their own unit, who had died thereabouts
in some camp a hundred and fifty years before. He did not mention that, on his stroll, he had
scrambled down a steep grass bank which ran curiously across the hill-side. There was green
grass above it, and green grass below it; and green grass and patches of ploughland all over
the downs. The white frost still hung to the blades, though it was midday. The remnant of a
small wood stood from the hill-side. "I must get a fatigue party on to that timber to-morrow,"
had said the orderly officer to himself.

And so it was that the forest passed away--the general service wagons from the neighbouring
Roman camp called there daily for sixty years for fuel cut by generations of fatigue parties.
The only trees left, over miles of sloping downs, were the thickets around the villages and
one row of walnut trees growing along the top of that steep grass embankment--the one remnant
of Hammerhead's old orchard. Years later the tow-haired Franks swept through the country. The
walnut trees were cut by a farmer for the uprights in his long barn. His children rolled down
the old bank in their games, and in bad baby Latin invited the youngsters of the farm next
door to charge up "the Grass Bank" while they defended it. The generations, whose bad Latin
gradually became French, still spoke of Hammerhead's old landmark--now situated in a large
grass field--as "The Grass Bank."

On the military maps some way behind the arterial system of red lines which stood for the German
trenches--exactly as on a German map it stands for ours--was a shaded mark shaped like an elongated
pea pod. There was no name to it--but a note in some pigeonhole of the local Intelligence Officer
stated that the inhabitants called the place "The Grass Bank." Through it the map showed a
lonely little red capillary, wandering by itself for a quarter of an inch, and fading off into
nothing again. The stout German colonel of the local artillery group--big guns which barked
mostly of nights--having found his forward observation post knocked in by a small field-gun
shell, had come back and growled like a bear all dinner-time, most inconsequentially, about
the lack of cover from heavy shells in the back areas. His real object was to abuse the men
at the table with him; but one junior Staff Officer, hankering after promotion, looked round
for the best dug-out site; and caused to be burrowed downwards, from the bottom of a steep
grassy bank which ran half-way across a neighbouring field, four narrow dark tunnels leading
into low square rooms, held up with stout beams, and all connected with each other. Two were
lined with rough bunks on wooden frames folding against the wall. Another held a table covered
with papers, a telephone switchboard, and four busy clerks. The fourth was panelled carefully
with deal, the ceiling neatly gridironed with dark stained wood, a cupboard let into a recess
with a looking-glass panel above it, a comfortable bunk with an electric bulb above the pillow
and a telephone by the bedside. The group commander slept there undisturbed, even when the
British suddenly pushed their front forward, and the Grass Bank began to shake with the thump
of 9-inch shells. The junior Staff Officer wonders why he is a junior Staff Officer still.

The great battle climbed like some slow, devouring monster up one green slope, down the next,
and up the green slopes beyond, clawing on to green fields, and leaving them behind it a wilderness
of pock-marked slime. One of the many small obstacles, which held up its local progress for
a while, was some sort of nest of Germans behind a certain bank. Several attacks had been made
on it. The Intelligence Officer of an Australian Brigade followed the Intelligence Officer
of an Australian Battalion on his stomach, for one night, up to the barbed wire; and gave it
as his opinion that the enemy kept his machine-guns in dug-outs at the bottom of the bank.
Later, a wild night of driving rain, and flashes, and crashes, and black forms struggling in
the mud against the glint of flares on slimy white crater edges, left things still uncertain.

It was there that Tim Gibbs came in--and Booligal. Tradition in New South Wales puts the climate
of Hay, Hell, and Booligal in that order. Tim had driven starving, rickety sheep across his
native plains when the earth's surface had been powdered to red sand and driven by shrivelling
westerlies in travelling sandhills from mirage to summer mirage. Tim was used to hot places.
That is why he became a stretcher-bearer for his company in Gallipoli, and transferred to the
regimental bombers when they reached France. When they came to a sea of brown mud waves, which
some cynic had misnamed the "Grass Bank," it was not Tim who volunteered to take it. He had
been in far too many hot corners to retain any of his old hankering after them, and the Grass
Bank was hotter than Booligal. He went for the place because his colonel told him to--went
cheerfully to do a thing he horribly disliked, without letting anyone guess by word or deed
or the least little sign that he disliked it--which, if you think of it, is more heroic by
a long chalk.

It was after dark on a winter's night that he and his men--about sixteen of them--crept out
up a slimy trench deep to the knees in sloppy mud; peered at the enemy's wire against the skyline;
half crawled, half slid through a gap in it, and disappeared, Tim leading. A white flash--a
shower of bombs--red and orange flares breaking like Roman candles in the sky--the chatter
of a machine-gun--the enemy's barrage presently shrieking down the vault of heaven. A dozen
wounded men came back before dawn. And Tim--Tim lay with his face to the stars, dreaming for
ever and ever of red plains and travelling sheep, on the edge of Tamar the Hammerhead's Grass Bank.

Slime Trench--Grass Bank--Gibbs' Corner--you will read of them all in their chapter in the
War's History. She confirmed the story. Yes, certainly! she had shut the door in the face of this
wretch; a soldier, a traitor to his flag who dared visit her! She receive such a man? No! she could
not do that, "and," states Xavier Durrieu, she added, "And yet I have no character to lose."

Another mystery was in progress at the Prefecture of Police.

Those belated inhabitants of the Cité who may have returned home at a late hour of the night might
have noticed a large number of street cabs loitering in scattered groups at different points
round about the Rue de Jerusalem.

From eleven o'clock in the evening, under pretext of the arrivals
of refugees at Paris from Genoa and London, the Brigade of Surety
and the eight hundred sergents de ville had been retained in the Prefecture.

At three o'clock in the morning a summons had been sent to the forty-eight Commissaries of Paris
and of the suburbs, and also to the peace officers. An hour afterwards all of them arrived.
They were ushered into a separate chamber, and isolated from each
other as much as possible.

At five o'clock a bell was sounded in the Prefect's cabinet.

The Prefect Maupas called the Commissaries of Police one after another
into his cabinet, revealed the plot to them, and allotted to each
his portion of the crime.

None refused; many thanked him.

It was a question of arresting at their own homes seventy-eight Democrats who were influential
in their districts, and dreaded by the Elysée as possible chieftains of barricades. It was necessary,
a still more daring outrage, to arrest at their houses sixteen Representatives
of the People. For this last task were chosen among the Commissaries
of Police such of those magistrates who seemed the most likely to
become ruffians. They put down the death of those men to
the mud and the mud alone. The sunken road at Le Barque had been mashed with shells and trampled
to slime with traffic; some runner from battalion headquarters at night, slipping through the
sleet, some couple of men straggling after the tail of an incoming platoon on a wild night
when the English barrage suddenly startled them and caused them to miss the path by a few yards
in the blackness, had stumbled unnoticed into a shell-hole. All their company officer knew
was that they were missing--and no trace of them was found until three bodies were dragged
from a shell crater, when men told stories of men missed there before.

Now, I do not know if it really was the mud which engulfed alive the three Germans who lay
beside the sunken road of Le Barque; but I know that their comrades thought it was. And that
is a simple proof that the mud, of which the Germans talk so much, is not all on the British
side of the trenches.

Looking from our lines yesterday across a valley one noticed a German trench running up the
farther side, the grey mud parapet heaped out, like the earth of one long, continuous grave,
on both sides of the trench. Behind that trench, along its whole length, as far as we could
see, ran a sinuous thread of light-coloured soil. It was the beaten track by which the Germans
had moved up and down their trench. They could not move in the trench, so when they wanted
to move they had to hop up and move outside of it. If we were sniping by day they could not
move at all; and the track had probably been made by Germans moving at night. It hugged the
trench in case we started shooting or shelling--when the Germans could at once jump back into
the mud again.

The Germans in some parts of the Somme battlefield have been going down with frostbite in great
numbers, so great as to put at least one battalion out of action. This is through getting feet
wet and frozen in muddy trenches. To reach their front line, last month, in these valleys in
front of Bapaume and Le Transloy, has been quite impossible to the Germans unless they went
up over the open, or used such trenches as a self-respecting man could scarcely enter. They
came up, as would any other soldiers under the same circumstances, across the open land. Even
then there were places which a man could scarcely pass. I know a man who, in that same sunken
road at Le Barque, pulled two of his comrades by force out of the mud--an everyday matter.
They left their boots and socks in the mud behind them.

If a man is wounded in some of those German trenches it takes eight men to get him to the dressing
station and five hours to arrive there, and very much longer if there is any fighting in progress.
One would not say that any of these difficulties have been more acute amongst the Germans than
with the British and Australians--in some ways our men have faced and overcome greater hardships
than the Germans. But there is this chief difference--the German is now getting back the shells
which for two years he rained upon the British. And he is talking--like a German--about the
unfairness of it.

The German Staff claims that German infantry is the best in the world. Certainly it is tough,
and thoroughly convinced that it is better than any of its friends. "The Turk is a pretty good
fighter," said a German to me a few days ago, "and the Bulgars fight well. The Austrians are
worth little. Every time the Russians drive the Austrians back they have to call us in to repulse
the Russians again for them."

The German infantryman is tough, but not tougher than ours, and without the dash; his outstanding
virtue is his great power of work. But I do not believe from what I have seen that he works
one scrap harder than the Australian. He might be supposed to have his heart more in the war
than the soldier of any other nation, but he certainly has not. Many German soldiers have told
me that there was a universal longing for the war to end--but they seem to wonder at your asking
them what they think, or what their people in Germany think--as though it mattered one straw.
They tell you, in a detached sort of way, that a great many of their people in Germany are
tired of the war. "But they have no influence on these matters," they say, "nor have the soldiers.
We do not meet together--we have nothing to say with it. They would go on with the war all
next year even if a million more men are killed--they will bring back all the wounded, and
the sick, if necessary."

The German who used those words seemed to have no quarrel with those who were driving his country,
and no pride in them--he did not approve and he did not disapprove. He seemed to accept them
as part of the unquestioned, unchangeable laws of his existence; they were there--and what
business was it of his to interfere with them?

One can scarcely see a gleam of hope for them in the attitude of their prisoners--a people
that cannot rebel. But perhaps it is unfair to judge.

For these men, whom we now see, have been at long, long last through the fire of guns heavier
than their own; and through the mud of Le Barque.

CHAPTER XXXII

THE NEW DRAFT

France, December 11th.

A fair-sized shell recently arrived in a certain front trench held by Australians in France.
It exploded, and an Australian found himself struggling amongst some debris in No Man's Land.
He tried to haul himself clear, but the tumbled rubbish kept him down; and, as often as he
was seen to move, bullets whizzed past him from a green slope near by. The green slope ran
like a low railway embankment along the other side of the unkempt paddock between the trenches.
It was the German front line.

Finally one of his mates, I am told, jumped over to his help and dragged him clear. When he
got in he asked to be put into the very next party that should visit the German trenches. He
wanted his own back.

He was one of the newest Australians. That is exactly the sort of request that would have been
made by the oldest ones.

We have seen the newest Australian draft in France, and the verdict from first to last amongst
those who know them is, "They will do." There is always a certain amount of chaff thrown out
by the oldest Australians at the latest arrivals. The sort of Australian who used to talk about
our "tinpot navy" labelled the Australians who rushed at the chance of adventure the moment
the recruiting lists were opened "the six bob a day tourists." Well--the "Tourists" made a
name for Australia such as no other Australians can ever have the privilege to make. The next
shipment were the "Dinkums"--the men who came over on principle to fight for Australia--the
real, fair dinkum[3] Australians. After them came the "Super-dinkums"--and the next the "War
Babies," and after them the "Chocolate Soldiers," then the "Hard Thinkers," who were pictured
as thinking very hard before they came. And then the "Neutrals." "We know they are not against
the Allies," the others said, when came news of the latest drafts still training steadily under
peace conditions, "we know they are not against us--we suppose they are just neutral."

[3] "Dinkum"--Australian for "true."

There has always been some chaff thrown at the latest arrival--and it is a mistake to think
that there was never any feeling behind the chaff. For example: "Phrenological development;
size of cells; ounces of solid and liquid; tissue-producing food; were mirrors allowed? if
so, what was the effect? jimmy and skeleton-key, character of; canary birds: query, would
not their admission into every cell animate in the human prisoners a similar buoyancy? to urge
upon the turnkeys the use of the Spanish garrote in place of the present distressing gallows;
to find the proportion of Orthodox and Unitarian prisoners to those
of other persuasions." There is a tendency to feel that soldiers
who are still at home are getting all the limelight--the parading of streets and praises of
the newspapers--and will probably live to reap most of the glory at the end of it all.

If so, there was never a feeling that melted more quickly the moment each new draft arrives
and is really tested. The moment it goes into the whirl of a modern battle, and acquits itself
through some wild night as every Australian draft always has done in its first fight and always
will do, every sign of that old feeling melts as if it had never existed; and the new draft
finds itself taken into the heart of the old force on the same terms as the oldest and proudest
regiment there. I make no apology for talking of them as "old" regiments. There are regiments
in this war, not three years old, which have seen as much terrible fighting as others whose
record goes back over hundreds of years. Ages ago, prehistoric ages, the "Dinkums" became a
title for men to be intensely proud of. Men who were through the first fortnight at Pozières
need never be ashamed to compare their experiences with those of any soldiers in the world,
for it is the literal truth that there has never in history been a harder battle fought. The
"Chocolate Soldiers" became veterans in one terrible struggle. The "War Babies" were old soldiers
almost before they had cut their teeth. It is one of the pities of the censorship, but a necessary
one, that the Australian public cannot know, until the story of this war is fully told at the
end of it, the famous Australian battalions which will most assuredly go down to history as
household names.

And if there are not battalions, amongst the newest troops, which will go down to history with
some of the very best Australia possesses--then I am a German. They have had a wonderful training
of late--a training which can only be compared in thoroughness with that of Mena Camp in Egypt
where our first troops trained, and with the full experience of this war to back it. The British
authorities are equipping the new Australian drafts generously. The discipline of Australians,
once they come to understand their work, has never given the slightest real anxiety to those
responsible for them. The newest men have exactly the same straight frank look and speech as
has every other batch that I have seen. If there is any difference between them first and last
I will be bound that it is beyond the keenest eye to detect it.

Indeed, if there is a difference between one Australian infantry battalion and another, it
is, and has always been, a matter of officers. A commander who can make all his subordinates
feel that they are pulling in the same boat's crew--that they are all swinging together, not
only with their own but with every other battalion and brigade; who can make them look upon
themselves as all helping in the one big cause; who can make them regard the difficulty of
another battalion merely as a chance for freely and fully assisting it--a commander who can
do these things with his officers can make a wonderful force of his Australians. This may sound
abstract and vague, but it is real to such an extent that it is the main reason of all differences
that exist between Australian units.

Australian units have, like the Scots, a wonderful confidence in each other. They have been
proud to fight by the side of grand regiments and divisions; but I fancy they would rather
fight beside other Australians or New Zealanders than beside the most famous units in the world.
Chaffing apart, that is the feeling of the oldest unit towards the newest.

CHAPTER XXXIII

WHY HE IS NOT "THE ANZAC"

France, November 28th.

"You don't call us the Anzacs, do you?" asked the man with the elbow sling appealingly. "You
call us just Australians and New Zealanders, don't you?" 

They left the Salle Roysin in order, two by two, arm in arm. Fifteen or twenty men of the people
escorted them. They went before them, crying, "Long live the Republic!

To arms!"

Some children preceded and followed them, shouting, "Long live the Mountain!"
The entrances of the closed shops were half opened. A few men appeared
at the doors, a few women showed themselves at the windows. Knots
of workmen going to their work watched them pass. They cried, "Long
live our Representatives!

"Oh, that is all right--Anzac troops--there's no objection to that--we are that," went on the
grammarian with the elbow sling, "but there's no such thing as an Anzac--the Anzacs--it's nonsense."

I remember that day well. It was the day before their first entry on the Somme. The man with
the elbow sling had stopped a shrapnel pellet one frosty morning eight months before at Anzac;
the man who sat next to him had a Turkish shrapnel shell burst between his shins at Hell Spit.
They were some of the oldest hands, back again, and about to plunge with the oldest division
into the heaviest battle the division had yet faced.

It was more than a grammatical objection. You know the way in which it makes you wince, if
ever you have lived in Australia or New Zealand or Canada, to hear people talk of "the colonies"
or "the colonials." The people who use the words do not realise that there is anything unpopular
in their use, although the objection is really quite universal in the self-governing States,
and represents a revolt against an out-of-date point of view which still lingers in some quarters.

In the same way anyone who is in touch with them knows that to speak of the feats of "an Anzac"
or of "the Anzacs" is unpopular with the men to whom it is applied. You will never hear the
men refer to themselves as Anzacs. They call themselves simply Australians or New Zealanders.

It is an interesting mental phase. The reason of it is not that Australians and New Zealanders
dislike being clubbed together. Quite the reverse--the Australians are never more satisfied
than when they are next to the New Zealanders. The two certainly feel themselves in some respects
one and inseparable to a greater extent than any other troops here. They are proud of Anzac
as the name of their corps, and as the name of that hill-side in Gallipoli where their graves
lie side by side. The reason why they always avoid calling themselves "the Anzacs" is that
the term was at one time associated in the Press with so many highly coloured, imaginative,
mock heroic stories of individual feats, which they were supposed to have performed, that its
use from that time forth was, by a sort of tacit consent, irrevocably damned within the force.
The picture which it called up was that of the "Anzac" in London, with his shining gaiters
and buttons and generally unauthorised cock's feathers in his hat, reaping the glory of the
acrobatic performances which his battered countrymen, very unlovely with sweat and dust, were
credited with achieving in No Man's Land. This was before the Somme fight, when first these
Gallipoli troops came to Europe. The regular British war correspondents were not responsible
for it--this nonsense was not written by them; when the day of real trial came they wrote of
it conscientiously and brilliantly, and nothing that could be written was too much. But the
vogue of the wildest stories of the "Anzacs" was when Australians and New Zealanders were doing
little beyond hard work in France, and knew it. The interior of the police-vans was lighted while
the Representatives were entering. The air-holes of each compartment were not closed. In this
manner Marc Dufraisse through the aperture could see M. du Rémusat
in the opposite cell to his own.

 They are also intensely proud of their two-year-old units--and
one of the drawbacks of the necessary rules of censorship is, that battalions of our army,
which are famous throughout the force by name, have to be known to you only through vague references.
Their character and history, as distinct and strongly marked as those of different men, will
only come to be known to Australia when the history of these campaigns comes to be written.

