But a perfect home is never created all at once and by one person, and let the anxious house-mistress
take comfort in the thought. She should also remember that it is in the nature of beauty to
grow, and that a well-rounded and beautiful family life adds its quota day by day. Every book,
every sketch or picture--every carefully selected or characteristic object brought into the
home adds to and makes a part of a beautiful whole, and no house can be absolutely perfect
without all these evidences of family life.

It can be made ready for them, completely and perfectly ready, by professional skill and knowledge;
but if it remained just where the interior artist or decorator left it, it would have no more
of the sentiment of domesticity than a statue.

CHAPTER II

CHARACTER IN HOUSES

"For the created still doth shadow forth the mind and will which made it.

"Thou art the very mould of thy creator."

It needs the combined personality of the family to make the character of the house. No one
could say of a house which has family character, "It is one of ----'s houses" (naming one or
another successful decorator), because the decorator would have done only what it was his business
to do--used technical and artistic knowledge in preparing a proper and correct background for
family life. Even in doing that, he must consult family tastes and idiosyncracies if he has
the reverence for individuality which belongs to the true artist.

A domestic interior is a thing to which he should give knowledge and not personality, and the
puzzled home-maker, who understands that her world expects correct use of means of beauty,
as well as character and originality in her home, need not feel that to secure the one she
must sacrifice the other.

An inexperienced person might think it an easy thing to make a beautiful home, because the
world is full of beautiful art and manufactures, and if there is money to pay for them it would
seem as easy to furnish a house with everything beautiful as to go out in the garden and gather
beautiful flowers; but we must remember that the world is also full of ugly things--things
false in art, in truth and in beauty--things made to sell--made with only this idea behind
them, manufactured on the principle that an artificial fly is made to look something like a
true one in order to catch the inexpert and the unwary. It is a curious fact that these false
things--manufactures without honesty, without knowledge, without art--have a property of demoralizing
the spirit of the home, and that to make it truly beautiful everything in it must be genuine
as well as appropriate, and must also fit into some previously considered scheme of use and beauty.

The esthetic or beautiful aspect of the home, in short, must be created through the mind of
the family or owner, and is only maintained by its or his susceptibility to true beauty and
appreciation of it. It must, in fact, be a visible mould of invisible matter, like the leaf-mould
one finds in mineral springs, which show the wonderful veining, branching, construction and
delicacy of outline in a way which one could hardly be conscious of in the actual leaf.

If the grade or dignity of the home requires professional and scholarly art direction, the
problem is how to use this professional or artistic advice without delivering over the entire
creation into stranger or alien hands; without abdicating the right and privilege of personal
expression. If the decorator appreciates this right, his function will be somewhat akin to
that of the portrait painter; both are bound to represent the individual or family in their
performances, each artist using the truest and best methods of art with the added gift of grace
or charm of colour which he possesses, the one giving the physical aspect of his client and
the other the mental characteristics, circumstances, position and life of the house-owner and
his family. This is the true mission of the decorator, although it is not always so understood.
What is called business talent may lead him to invent schemes of costliness which relate far
more to his own profit than to the wishes or character of the house-owner.

But it is not always that the assistance of the specialist in decoration and furnishing is
necessary. There are many homes where both are quite within the scope of the ordinary man or
woman of taste. In fact, the great majority of homes come within these lines, and it is to
such home-builders that rules, not involving styles, are especially of use.

The principles of truth and harmony, which underlie all beauty, may be secured in the most
inexpensive cottage as well as in the broadest and most imposing residence. Indeed, the cottage
has the advantage of that most potent ally of beauty--simplicity--a quality which is apt to
be conspicuously absent from the schemes of decoration for the palace.

CHAPTER III

BUILDERS' HOUSES

"Mine own hired house."

A large proportion of homes are made in houses which are not owned, but leased, and this prevents
each man or family from indicating personal taste in external aspect. A rich man and house-owner
may approximate to a true expression of himself even in the outside of his house if he strongly
desires it, but a man of moderate means must adapt himself and his family to the house-builder's
idea of houses--that is to say, to the idea of the man who has made house-building a trade,
and whose experiences have created a form into which houses of moderate cost and fairly universal
application may be cast.

Although it is as natural to a man to build or acquire a home as to a bird to build a nest,
he has not the same unfettered freedom in construction. He cannot always adapt his house either
to the physical or mental size of his family, but must accept what is possible with much the
same feeling with which a family of robins might accommodate themselves to a wren's nest, or
an oriole to that of a barn-swallow. But the fact remains, that all these accidental homes
must, in some way, be brought into harmony with the lives to be lived in them, and the habits
and wants of the family; and not only this, they must be made attractive according to the requirements
of cultivated society. The effort toward this is instructive, and the pleasure in and enjoyment
of the home depends upon the success of the effort. The inmates, as a rule, are quite clear
as to what they want to accomplish, but have seldom had sufficient experience to enable them
to remedy defects of construction.

There are expedients by which many of the malformations and uglinesses of the ordinary "builder's
house" may be greatly ameliorated, various small surgical operations which will remedy badly
planned rooms, and dispositions of furniture which will restore proportion. We can even, by
judicious distribution of planes of colour, apparently lower or raise a ceiling, and widen
or lengthen a room, and these expedients, which belong partly to the experience of the decorator,
are based upon laws which can easily be formulated. Every one can learn something of them by
the study of faulty rooms and the enjoyment of satisfactory ones. Indeed, I know no surer or
more agreeable way of getting wisdom in the art of decoration than by tracing back sensation
to its source, and finding out why certain things are utterly satisfactory, and certain others
a positive source of discomfort.

In what are called the "best houses" we can make our deductions quite as well as in the most
faulty, and sometimes get a lesson of avoidance and a warning against law-breaking which will
be quite as useful as if it were learned in less than the best.

There is one fault very common in houses which date from a period of some forty or fifty years
back, a fault of disproportionate height of ceilings. In a modern house, if one room is large
enough to require a lofty ceiling, the architect will manage to make his second floor upon
different levels, so as not to inflict the necessary height of large rooms upon narrow halls
and small rooms, which should have only a height proportioned to their size. A ten-foot room
with a thirteen-foot ceiling makes the narrowness of the room doubly apparent; one feels shut
up between two walls which threaten to come together and squeeze one between them, while, on
the other hand, a ten-foot room with a nine-foot ceiling may have a really comfortable and
cozy effect.

In this case, what is needed is to get rid of the superfluous four feet, and this can be done
by cheating the eye into an utter forgetfulness of them. There must be horizontal divisions
of colour which attract the attention and make one oblivious of what is above them.

Every one knows the effect of a paper with perpendicular stripes in apparently heightening
a ceiling which is too low, but not every one is equally aware of the contrary effect of horizontal
lines of varied surface. But in the use of perpendicular lines it is well to remember that,
if the room is small, it will appear still smaller if the wall is divided into narrow spaces
by vertical lines. If it is large and the ceiling simply low for the size of the room, a good
deal can be done by long, simple lines of drapery in curtains and portieres, or in choosing
a paper where the composition of design is perpendicular rather than diagonal.

To apparently lower a high ceiling in a small room, the wall should be treated horizontally
in different materials. Three feet of the base can be covered with coarse canvas or buckram
and finished with a small wood moulding. Six feet of plain wall above this, painted the same
shade as the canvas, makes the space of which the eye is most aware. This space should be finished
with a picture moulding, and the four superfluous feet of wall above it must be treated as
a part of the ceiling. The cream-white of the actual ceiling should be brought down on the
side walls for a space of two feet, and this has the effect of apparently enlarging the room,
since the added mass of light tint seems to broaden it. There still remain two feet of space
between the picture moulding and ceiling-line which may be treated as a ceiling-border in inconspicuous
design upon the same cream ground, the design to be in darker, but of the same tint as the ceiling.

The floor in such a room as this should either be entirely covered with plain carpeting, or,
if it has rugs at all, there should be several, as one single rug, not entirely covering the
floor, would have the effect of confining the apparent size of the room to the actual size
of the rug.

If the doors and windows in such a room are high and narrow, they can be made to come into
the scheme by placing the curtain and portiere rods below the actual height and covering the
upper space with thin material, either full or plain, of the same colour as the upper wall.
A brocaded muslin, stained or dyed to match the wall, answers this purpose admirably, and is
really better in its place than the usual expedient of stained glass or open-work wood transom.
A good expedient is to have the design already carried around the wall painted in the same
colour upon a piece of stretched muslin. This is simple but effective treatment, and is an
instance of the kind of thought or knowledge that must be used in remedying faults of construction.

Colour has much to do with the apparent size of rooms, a room in light tints always appearing
to be larger than a deeply coloured one.

Perhaps the most difficult problem in adaptation is the high, narrow city house, built and
decorated by the block by the builder, who is also a speculator in real estate, and whose activity
was chiefly exercised before the ingenious devices of the modern architect were known. These
houses exist in quantities in our larger and older cities, and mere slices of space as they
are, are the theatres where the home-life of many refined and beauty-loving intelligences must
be played.

In such houses as these, the task of fitting them to the cultivated eyes and somewhat critical
tests of modern society generally falls to the women who represent the family, and calls for
an amount of ability which would serve to build any number of creditable houses; yet this is
constantly being done and well done for not one, but many families. I know one such, which
is quite a model of a charming city home and yet was evolved from one of the worst of its kind
and period. In this case the family had fallen heir to the house and were therefore justified
in the one radical change which metamorphosed the entrance-hall, from a long, narrow passage,
with an apparently interminable stairway occupying half its width, to a small reception-hall
seemingly enlarged by a judicious placing of the mirrors which had formerly been a part of
the "fixtures" of the parlour and dining-room.

The reception-room was accomplished by cutting off the lower half of the staircase, which had
extended itself to within three feet of the front door, and turning it directly around, so
that it ends at the back instead of the front of the hall. The two cut ends are connected by
a platform, thrown across from wall to wall, and furnished with a low railing of carved panels,
and turned spindles, which gives a charming balcony effect. The passage to the back hall and
stairs passes under the balcony and upper end of the staircase, while the space under the lower
stair-end, screened by a portière, adds a coat-closet to the conveniences of the reception-hall.

This change was not a difficult thing to accomplish, it was simply an expedient, but it has
the value of carefully planned construction, and reminds one of the clever utterance of the
immortal painter who said, "I never lose an accident."

Indeed the ingenious home-maker often finds that the worse a thing is, the better it can be
made by competent and careful study. To complete and adapt incompetent things to orderliness
and beauty, to harmonise incongruous things into a perfect whole requires and exercises ability
of a high order, and the consciousness of its possession is no small satisfaction. That it
is constantly being done shows how much real cleverness is necessary to ordinary life--and
reminds one of the patriotic New York state senator who declared that it required more ability
to cross Broadway safely at high tide, than to be a great statesman. And truly, to make a good
house out of a poor one, or a beautiful interior from an ugly one, requires far more thought,
and far more original talent, than to decorate an important new one. The one follows a travelled
path--the other makes it.

Of course competent knowledge saves one from many difficulties; and faults of construction
must be met by knowledge, yet this is often greatly aided by natural cleverness, and in the
course of long practice in the decorative arts, I have seen such refreshing and charming results
from thoughtful untrained intelligence,--I might almost say inspiration,--that I have great
respect for its manifestations; especially when exercised in un-authoritative fashion.

CHAPTER IV

COLOUR IN HOUSES

  "Heaven gives us of its colour, for our joy,
  Hues which have words and speak to ye of heaven."

Although the very existence of a house is a matter of construction, its general interior effect
is almost entirely the result of colour treatment and careful and cultivated selection of accessories.

Colour in the house includes much that means furniture, in the way of carpets, draperies, and
all the modern conveniences of civilization, but as it precedes and dictates the variety of
all these things from the authoritative standpoint of wall treatment, it is well to study its
laws and try to reap the full benefit of its influence.

As far as effect is concerned, the colour of a room creates its atmosphere. It may be cheerful
or sad, cosy or repellent according to its quality or force. Without colour it is only a bare
canvas, which might, but does not picture our lives.

We understand many of the properties of colour, and have unconsciously learned some of its
laws;--but what may be called the science of colour has never been formulated. So far as we
understand it, its principles correspond curiously to those of melodious sound. It is as impossible
to produce the best effect from one tone or colour, as to make a melody upon one note of the
harmonic scale; it is skilful variation of tone, the gradation or even judicious opposition
of tint which gives exquisite satisfaction to the eye. In music, sequence produces this effect
upon the ear, and in colour, juxtaposition and gradation upon the eye. Notes follow notes in
melody as shade follows shade in colour. We find no need of even different names for the qualities
peculiar to the two; scale--notes--tones--harmonies--the words express effects common to colour
as well as to music, but colour has this advantage, that its harmonies can be fixed, they do
not die with the passing moment; once expressed they remain as a constant and ever-present delight.

Notes of the sound-octave have been gathered by the musicians from widely different substances,
and carefully linked in order and sequence to make a harmonious scale which may be learned;
but the painter, conscious of colour-harmonies, has as yet no written law by which he can produce
them.

The "born colourist" is one who without special training, or perhaps in spite of it, can unerringly
combine or oppose tints into compositions which charm the eye and satisfy the sense. Even among
painters it is by no means a common gift. It is almost more rare to find a picture distinguished
for its harmony and beauty of colour, than to see a room in which nothing jars and everything
works together for beauty. It seems strange that this should be a rarer personal gift than
the musical sense, since nature apparently is far more lavish of her lessons for the eye than
for the ear; and it is curious that colour, which at first sight seems a more apparent and
simple fact than music, has not yet been written. Undoubtedly there is a colour scale, which
has its sharps and flats, its high notes and low notes, its chords and discords, and it is
not impossible that in the future science may make it a means of regulated and written harmonies:--that
some master colourist who has mechanical and inventive genius as well, may so arrange them
that they can be played by rule; that colour may have its Mozart or Beethoven--its classic
melodies, its familiar tunes. The musician, as I have said--has gathered his tones from every
audible thing in nature--and fitted and assorted and built them into a science; and why should
not some painter who is also a scientist take the many variations of colour which lie open
to his sight, and range and fit and combine, and write the formula, so that a child may read it?

We already know enough to be very sure that the art is founded upon laws, although they are
not thoroughly understood. Principles of masses, spaces, and gradations underlie all accidental
harmonies of colour;--just as in music, the simple, strong, under-chords of the bass must be
the ground for all the changes and trippings of the upper melodies.

It is easy, if one studies the subject, to see how the very likeness of these two esthetic
forces illustrate the laws of each,--in the principles of relation, gradation, and scale.

Until very recently the relation of colour to the beauty of a house interior was quite unrecognised.
If it existed in any degree of perfection it was an accident, a result of the softening and
beautifying effect of time, or of harmonious human living. Where it existed, it was felt as
a mysterious charm belonging to the home; something which pervaded it, but had no separate
being; an attractive ghost which attached itself to certain houses, followed certain people,
came by chance, and was a mystery which no one understood, but every one acknowledged. Now
we know that this something which distinguished particular rooms, and made beautiful particular
houses, was a definite result of laws of colour accidentally applied.

To avail ourselves of this influence upon the moods and experiences of life is to use a power
positive in its effects as any spiritual or intellectual influence. It gives the kind of joy
we find in nature, in the golden-green of light under tree-branches, or the mingled green and
gray of tree and rock shadows, or the pearl and rose of sunrise and sunset. We call the deep
content which results from such surroundings the influence of nature, and forget to name the
less spiritual, the more human condition of well-being which comes to us in our homes from
being surrounded with something which in a degree atones for lack of nature's beauty.

It is a different well-being, and lacks the full tide of electric enjoyment which comes from
living for the hour under the sky and in the breadths of space, but it atones by substituting
something of our own invention, which surprises us by its compensations, and confounds us by
its power.

CHAPTER V

THE LAW OF APPROPRIATENESS

I have laid much stress upon the value of colour in interior decoration, but to complete the
beauty of the home something more than happy choice of tints is required. It needs careful
and educated selection of furniture and fittings, and money enough to indulge in the purchase
of an intrinsically good thing instead of a medium one. It means even something more than the
love of beauty and cultivation of it, and that is a perfect adherence to the law of appropriateness.

This is, after all, the most important quality of every kind of decoration, the one binding
and general condition of its accomplishment. It requires such a careful fitting together of
all the means of beauty as to leave no part of the house, whatever may be its use, without
the same care for appropriate completeness which goes to the more apparent features. The cellar,
the kitchen, the closets, the servants' bedrooms must all share in the thought which makes
the genuinely beautiful home and the genuinely perfect life. It must be possible to go from
the top to the bottom of the house, finding everywhere agreeable, suitable, and thoughtful
furnishings. The beautiful house must consider the family as a whole, and not make a museum
of rare and costly things in the drawing-room, the library, the dining-room and family bedrooms,
leaving that important part of the whole machinery, the service, untouched by the spirit of
beauty. The same care in choice of colour will be as well bestowed on the servants' floor as
on those devoted to the family, and curtains, carpets and furniture may possess as much beauty
and yet be perfectly appropriate to servants' use.

On this upper floor, it goes almost without saying, that the walls must be painted in oil-colour
instead of covered with paper. That the floors should be uncarpeted except for bedside rugs
which are easily removable. That bedsteads should be of iron, the mattress with changeable
covers, the furniture of painted and enameled instead of polished wood, and in short the conditions
of healthful cleanliness as carefully provided as if the rooms were in a hospital instead of
a private house--but the added comfort of carefully chosen wall colour, and bright, harmonizing,
washable chintz in curtains and bed-covers.

These things have an influence upon the spirit of the home; they are a part of its spiritual
beauty, giving a satisfied and approving consciousness to the home-makers, and a sense of happiness
in the service of the family.

In the average, or small house, there is room for much improvement in the treatment and furnishing
of servants' bedrooms; and this is not always from indifference, but because they are out of
daily sight, and also from a belief that it would add seriously to the burden of housekeeping
to see that they are kept up to the standard of family sleeping-rooms.

In point of fact, however, good surroundings are potent civilizers, and a house-servant whose
room is well and carefully furnished feels an added value in herself, which makes her treat
herself respectfully in the care of her room.

If it pleases her, the training she receives in the care of family rooms will be reflected
in her own, and painstaking arrangements made for her pleasure will perhaps be recognised as
an obligation.

Of course the fact must be recognised, that the occupant is not always a permanent one; that
it may at times be a fresh importation directly from a city tenement; therefore, everything
in the room should be able to sustain very radical treatment in the way of scrubbing and cleaning.
Wall papers, unwashable rugs and curtains are out of the question; yet even with these limitations
it is possible to make a charming and reasonably inexpensive room, which would be attractive
to cultivated as well as uncultivated taste. It is in truth mostly a matter of colour; of coloured
walls, and harmonising furniture and draperies, which are in themselves well adapted to their
place.

As I have said elsewhere, the walls in a servant's bedroom--and preferably in any sleeping-room--should
for sanitary reasons be painted in oil colours, but the possibilities of decorative treatment
in this medium are by no means limited. All of the lighter shades of green, blue, yellow, and
rose are as permanent, and as easily cleaned, as the dull grays and drabs and mud-colours which
are often used upon bedroom walls--especially those upper ones which are above the zone of
ornament, apparently under the impression that there is virtue in their very ugliness.

"A good clean gray" some worthy housewife will instruct the painter to use, and the result
will be a dead mixture of various lively and pleasant tints, any one of which might be charming
if used separately, or modified with white. A small room with walls of a very light spring
green, or a pale turquoise blue, or white with the dash of vermilion and touch of yellow ochre
which produces salmon-pink, is quite as durably and serviceably coloured as if it were chocolate-brown,
or heavy lead-colour; indeed its effect upon the mind is like a spring day full of sunshine
instead of one dark with clouds or lowering storms.

The rule given elsewhere for colour in light or dark exposure will hold good for service bedrooms
as well as for the important rooms of the house. That is; if a bedroom for servants' use is
on the north or shadowed side of the house, let the colour be salmon or rose pink, cream white,
or spring green; but if it is on the sunny side, the tint should be turquoise, or pale blue,
or a grayish-green, like the green of a field of rye. With such walls, a white iron bedstead,
enameled furniture, curtains of white, or a flowered chintz which repeats or contrasts with
the colour of the walls, bedside and bureau rugs of the tufted cotton which is washable, or
of the new rag-rugs of which the colours are "water fast," the room is absolutely good, and
can be used as an influence upon a lower or higher intelligence.

As a matter of utility the toilet service should be always of white; so that there will be
no chance for the slovenly mismatching which results from breakage of any one of the different
pieces, when of different colours. A handleless or mis-matched pitcher will change the entire
character of a room and should never be tolerated.

If the size of the room will warrant it, a rocking-chair or easy-chair should always be part
of its equipment, and the mattress and bed-springs should be of a quality to give ease to tired
bones, for these things have to do with the spirit of the house.

It may be said that the colouring and furnishing of the servants' bedroom is hardly a part
of house decoration, but in truth house decoration at its best is a means of happiness, and
no householder can achieve permanent happiness without making the service of the family sharers
in it.

What I have said with regard to painted walls in plain tints applies to bedrooms of every grade,
but where something more than merely agreeable colour effect is desired a stencilled decoration
from the simplest to the most elaborate can be added. There are many ways of using this method,
some of which partake very largely of artistic effect; indeed a thoroughly good stencil pattern
may reproduce the best instances of design, and in the hands of a skilful workman who knows
how to graduate and vary contrasting or harmonising tints it becomes a very artistic method
and deserves a place of high honour in the art of decoration.

Its simplest form is that of a stencilled border in flat tints used either in place of a cornice
or as the border of a wall-paper is used. This, of course, is a purely mechanical performance,
and one with which every house-painter is familiar. After this we come to borders of repeating
design used as friezes. This can be done with the most delicate and delightful effect, although
the finished wall will still be capable of withstanding the most energetic annual scrubbing.
Frieze borders of this kind starting with strongly contrasting colour at the top and carried
downward through gradually fading tints until they are lost in the general colour of the wall
have an openwork grille effect which is very light and graceful. There are infinite possibilities
in the use of stencil design without counting the introduction of gold and silver, and bronzes
of various iridescent hues which are more suitable for rooms of general use than for bedrooms.
Indeed in sleeping-rooms the use of metallic colour is objectionable because it will not stand
washing and cleaning without defacement. The ideal bedroom is one that if the furniture were
removed a stream of water from a hose might be played upon its walls and ceiling without injury.
I always remember with pleasure a pink and silver room belonging to a young girl, where the
salmon-pink walls were deepened in colour at the top into almost a tint of vermilion which
had in it a trace of green. It was, in fact, an addition of spring green dropped into the vermilion
and carelessly stirred, so that it should be mixed but not incorporated. Over this shaded and
mixed colour for the space of three feet was stencilled a fountain-like pattern in cream-white,
the arches of the pattern rilled in with almost a lace-work of design. The whole upper part
had an effect like carved alabaster and was indescribably light and graceful.

The bed and curtain-rods of silver-lacquer, and the abundant silver of the dressing-table gave
a frosty contrast which was necessary in a room of so warm a general tone. This is an example
of very delicate and truly artistic treatment of stencil-work, and one can easily see how it
can be used either in simple or elaborate fashion with great effect.

Irregularly placed floating forms of Persian or Arabic design are often admirably stencilled
in colour upon a painted wall; but in this case the colours should be varied and not too strong.
A group of forms floating away from a window-frame or cornice can be done in two shades of
the wall colour, one of which is positively darker and one lighter than the ground. If to these
two shades some delicately contrasting colour is occasionally added the effect is not only
pleasing, but belongs to a thoroughly good style.

One seldom tires of a good stencilled wall; probably because it is intrinsic, and not applied
in the sense of paper or textiles. It carries an air of permanency which discourages change
or experiment, but it requires considerable experience in decoration to execute it worthily;
and not only this, there should be a strong feeling for colour and taste and education in the
selection of design, for though the form of the stencilled pattern may be graceful, and gracefully
combined, it must always--to be permanently satisfactory--have a geometrical basis. It is somewhat
difficult to account for the fact that what we call natural forms, of plants and flowers, which
are certainly beautiful and graceful in themselves, and grow into shapes which delight us with
their freedom and beauty, do not give the best satisfaction as motives for interior decoration.
Construction in the architectural sense--the strength and squareness of walls, ceilings, and
floors--seem to reject the yielding character of design founded upon natural forms, and demand
something which answers more sympathetically to their own qualities. Perhaps it is for this
reason that we find the grouping and arrangement of horizontal and perpendicular lines and
blocks in the old Greek borders so everlastingly satisfactory.

It is the principle or requirement, of geometric base in interior design which, coupled with
our natural delight in yielding or growing forms, has maintained through all the long history
of decoration what is called conventionalised flower design. We find this in every form or
method of decorative art, from embroidery to sculpture, from the Lotus of Egypt to the Rose
of England, and although it results in a sort of crucifixion of the natural beauty of the flower,
in the hands of great designers it has become an authoritative style of art.

Of course, there are flower-forms which are naturally geometric, which have conventionalised
themselves. Many of the intricate Moorish frets and Indian carvings are literal translations
of flower-forms geometrically repeated, and here they lend themselves so perfectly to the decoration
of even exterior walls that the fretted arches of some Eastern buildings seem almost to have
grown of themselves, with all their elaboration, into the world of nature and art.

The separate flowers of the gracefully tossing lilac plumes, and the five-and six-leaved flowers
of the pink, have become in this way a very part of the everlasting walls, as the acanthus
leaf has become the marble blossom of thousands of indestructible columns.

These are the classics of design and hold the same relation to ornament printed on paper and
silk that we find in the music of the Psalms, as compared with the tinkle of the ballad.

There are other methods of decoration in oils which will meet the wants of the many who like
to exercise their own artistic feelings and ability in their houses or rooms. The painting
of flower-friezes upon canvas which can afterward be mounted upon the wall is a never-ending
source of pleasure; and many of these friezes have a charm and intimacy which no merely professional
painter can rival. These are especially suitable for bedrooms, since there they may be as personal
as the inmate pleases without undue unveiling of thoughts, fancies, or personal experiences
to the public. A favourite flower or a favourite motto or selection may be the motive of a
charming decoration, if the artist has sufficient art-knowledge to subordinate it to its architectural
juxtaposition. A narrow border of fixed repeating forms like a rug-border will often fulfil
the necessity for architectural lines, and confine the flower-border into limits which justify
its freedom of composition.

If one wishes to mount a favourite motto or quotation on the walls, where it may give constant
suggestion or pleasure--or even be a help to thoughtful and conscientious living--there can
be no better fashion than the style of the old illuminated missals. Dining-rooms and chimney-pieces
are often very appropriately decorated in this way; the words running on scrolls which are
half unrolled and half hidden, and showing a conventionalised background of fruit and flowers.

In all these things the knowingness, which is the result of study, tells very strongly--and
it is quite worth while to give a good deal of study to the subject of this kind of decoration
before expending the requisite amount of work upon a painted frieze.

Canvas friezes have the excellent merit of being not only durable and cleanable, but they belong
to the category of pictures; to what Ruskin calls "portable art," and one need not grudge the
devotion of considerable time, study, and effort to their doing, since they are really detachable
property, and can be removed from one house or room and carried to another at the owner's or
artist's will.

There is room for the exercise of much artistic ability in this direction, as the fact of being
able to paint the decoration in parts and afterward place it, makes it possible for an amateur
to do much for the enhancement of her own house.

More than any other room in the house, the bedroom will show personal character. Even when
it is not planned for particular occupation, the characteristics of the inmate will write themselves
unmistakably in the room. If the college boy is put in the white and gold bedroom for even
a vacation period, there will shortly come into its atmosphere an element of sporting and out-of-door
life. Banners and balls and bats, and emblems of the "wild thyme" order will colour its whiteness;
and life of the growing kind make itself felt in the midst of sanctity. In the same way, girls
would change the bare asceticism of a monk's cell into a bower of lilies and roses; a fit place
for youth and unpraying innocence.

The bedrooms of a house are a pretty sure test of the liberality of mind and understanding
of character of the mother or house-ruler. As each room is in a certain sense the home of the
individual occupant, almost the shell of his or her mind, there will be something narrow and
despotic in the house-rules if this is not allowed. Yet, even individuality of taste and expression
must scrupulously follow sanitary laws in the furnishing of the bedroom. "Stuffy things" of
any sort should be avoided. The study should be to make it beautiful without such things, and
a liberal use of washable textiles in curtains, portières, bed and table covers, will give
quite as much sense of luxury as heavily papered walls and costly upholstery. In fact, one
may run through all the variations from the daintiest and most befrilled and elegant of guests'
bedrooms, to the "boys' room," which includes all or any of the various implements of sport
or the hobbies of the boy collector, and yet keep inviolate the principles of harmony, colour,
and appropriateness to use, and so accomplish beauty.

The absolute ruling of light, air, and cleanliness are quite compatible with individual expression.

It is this characteristic aspect of the different rooms which makes up the beauty of the house
as a whole. If the purpose of each is left to develop itself through good conditions, the whole
will make that most delightful of earthly things, a beautiful home.

CHAPTER VI

KITCHENS

