THE BURGLAR'S FATE AND THE DETECTIVES.

by

ALLAN PINKERTON,

Author of "Expressman and Detective," "Melnotte and Detectives," "Professional Thieves and
Detectives," "Railroad Forger and Detectives," "Mollie Maguires and Detectives," "Spiritualists
and Detectives," Etc., Etc., Etc.

New York: G. W. Carleton & Co., Publishers. London: S. Low, Son & Co. MDCCCLXXXIV. Copyright,
by Allan Pinkerton. Stereotyped by Samuel Stodder, 42 Dey Street, N.Y. Trow's Printing And
Book-Binding Co., N.Y.

PREFACE.

In the pages which follow I have narrated a story of actual occurrence. No touch of fiction
obscures the truthful recital. The crime which is here detailed was actually committed, and
under the circumstances which I have related. The four young men, whose real names are clothed
with the charitable mantle of fiction, deliberately perpetrated the deed for which they suffered
and to-day are inmates of a prison. No tint or coloring of the imagination has given a deeper
touch to the action of the story, and the process of detection is detailed with all the frankness
and truthfulness of an active participant. As a revelation of the certain consequences which
follow the perpetration of crime, I send this volume forth, in the fervent hope that those
who may read its pages, will glean from this history the lessons of virtue, of honor, and of
the strictest integrity. If in the punishment of Eugene Pearson, Dr. Johnson, Newton Edwards
and Thomas Duncan, the young men of to-day, tempted by folly or extravagance, will learn that
their condemnation was but the natural and inevitable result of thoughtless crime, and if their
experience shall be the means of deterring one young man from the commission of a deed, which
the repentance of years will not obliterate, I shall feel that I have not labored in vain.
As a true story of detective experience, the actors in which are still living, I give this
volume to the world, trusting that its perusal may not fail in its object of interesting and
instructing the few or many who may read its pages.

ALLAN PINKERTON.

CONTENTS.

PREFACE                                                                  v

CHAPTER I. Geneva--The Robbery--Search for the Burglars--My Agency notified        11

CHAPTER II. The Investigation begun--John Manning's Visit to Geneva--Eugene Pearson's Story--The
Detective's Incredulity--A Miraculous Deliverance with a Ten-Cent Coin                    
22

CHAPTER III. An Interview with Miss Patton--Important Revelations--Doubts Strengthened--Mr.
Bartman's Story--William Resolves to seek Newton Edwards                                  
38

CHAPTER IV. The Work Progresses--Eugene Pearson's Early Life--On the Trail of Newton Edwards
51

CHAPTER  V. New Developments--Tidings of Newton Edwards--Suspicions Strengthening against Eugene
Pearson--Mr. Silby's Confidence            63

CHAPTER  VI. The Detective at Woodford--An Interview with the Discarded Wife of Newton Edwards
77

CHAPTER  VII. A Fire and a Talkative Fireman--Mrs. Edwards Receives a Letter          90

CHAPTER  VIII. A Plan to Intercept Correspondence--Edwards fully Identified A pretty Servant
Girl and a Visit to Church                            102

CHAPTER  IX. Waiting and Watching--Two Letters--Newton Edwards' Hiding-Place Discovered   
116

CHAPTER  X. The Burglar Tracked to his Lair--The old Stage Driver--A Fishing Party--A Long
Wait--A Sorrowful Surprise--The Arrest of Newton Edwards                                  
125

CHAPTER XI. Newton Edwards brought back to Chicago--Attempt to Induce a Confession--a Visit
to his Relatives--The Burglar Broken Down          141

CHAPTER XII. The Confession of Newton Edwards--The foul Plot fully Explained Eugene Pearson's
Guilt clearly Proven--A Story of Temptation and Crime                                     
154

CHAPTER XIII. Edwards taken to Geneva--The Arrest of Eugene Pearson His Confession--More Money
Recovered--Dr. Johnson Arrested             167

CHAPTER XIV. Proceedings at Geneva--Speculations as to the Missing Five Thousand Dollars--John
Manning Starts in Search of Thomas Duncan                182

CHAPTER XV. On the Track of the fleeing Burglar--Duncan's Home--Some Reflections   192

CHAPTER XVI. Bob King meets with a Surprise--His Story of Duncan's Flight The Detective starts
Westward                                          208

CHAPTER XVII. Manning Strikes the Trail--An Accommodating Tailor--Temporary Disappointment
and final Success--The Detective reaches Minneapolis    224

CHAPTER XVIII. The Detective at Bismarck--Further Traces of the Fugitive A Protracted Orgie--A
Jewish Friend of the Burglar in Trouble          241

CHAPTER XIX. From Bismarck to Bozeman--The trail Growing Warmer--Duncan Buys a Pony--A long
Stage Ride                                                254

CHAPTER XX. The Stage Driver's Story                                               266

CHAPTER XXI. False Information which nearly Proves Fatal--A Night Ride to Helena--Dangers by
the Wayside                                         280

CHAPTER XXII. In Helena--A Fruitless Quest--Jerry Taylor's Bagnio--Reliable Tidings--A Midnight
Ride--Arrival at Butte City                        293

CHAPTER XXIII. The Long Trail Ended--Duncan Traced to his Lair--Caught at last The Escaping
Burglar a prisoner                                        306

CHAPTER XXIV. The Burglar Returns to Chicago--Revelations by the Way The Missing Five Thousand
Dollars                                      319

CHAPTER XXV. The Mystery of the Missing Five Thousand Dollars Solved at Last The Money Recovered--Duncan
at Geneva                                  328

CHAPTER XXVI. Conclusion--Retribution                                                337

THE BURGLAR'S FATE AND THE DETECTIVES.

CHAPTER I.

Geneva--The Robbery--Search for the Burglars--My Agency Notified.

Geneva is one of the prettiest and most thriving little towns in the west. Situated, as it
is, in the midst of one of the finest agricultural districts in the country, its growth has
been rapid beyond expectation, while its social progress has been almost phenomenal. Stretching
for miles in all directions, over a country beautifully interspersed with gentle elevations
and depressions, lie the well-cultivated farms of the honest tillers of the soil. The farm-houses,
which nestle down beneath the tall trees, present an appearance of comfort and beauty rarely
witnessed, while the commodious and substantial out-buildings evince the thorough neatness
of systematic husbandry. Standing upon a high knoll, and gazing over the scene upon a bright
sunny morning, the eye lights upon a panorama of rustic splendor that delights the vision and
entrances the senses. The vast fields, with their varied crops, give indications of a sure
financial return which the gathered harvests unfailingly justify, and the rural population
of Geneva are, in the main, a community of honest, independent people, who have cheerfully
toiled for the honest competence they so fully enjoy.

Nor is the town dependent alone upon the farmer and the herdsman for its success in a financial
sense. Nature has been bounteous in her gifts to this locality, and in addition to the fertile
and fruitful soil, there is found imbedded under the surface, great mines of coal, of excellent
quality, and seemingly inexhaustible in quantity. This enterprise alone affords employment
to hundreds of men and boys, who, with their begrimed faces and brawny arms, toil day and night
in the bowels of the earth for the "black diamonds," which impart warmth and light to countless
happy homes, and materially add to the wealth of the miners.

Numerous manufacturing industries also find a home here. Large buildings, out of whose huge
chimneys the black smoke is pouring forth in dense volumes, and whose busy wheels and roaring
furnace fires, mingled with the sound of scores of ringing hammers, make merry music throughout
the day.

On certain days in the week Geneva presents a cheerful and animated appearance. On every hand
are heard the sounds of honest toil and the hum of busy trade. Farmers from the surrounding
country come in numbers into the village to purchase their necessary supplies and to listen
to the news and gossip of the day, and the numerous stores transact a thriving business and
reap a handsome profit on their wares.

The old mill, weather-beaten and white with the accumulating flour dust of ages, and with the
cobwebs hanging thick and heavy from its dingy rafters, stands near by, and this too is an
object of interest to the sturdy farmers of the surrounding country. From morn till night its
wheels go round, transmuting the grain into the various articles of consumption for man and
beast, and bringing a goodly share of "honest toll" into the coffers of the unimpeachable old
miller. The mill is a great place of meeting for the farmers, and the yard in its front is
daily filled with teams from the country, whose owners congregate in groups and converse upon
topics of general interest, or disperse themselves, while waiting for their "grist," about
the town to transact the various matters of business which had brought them hither.

In common with all progressive American towns, Geneva boasts of its school-house, a large brick
building, where rosy-cheeked children daily gather to receive the knowledge which is to fit
them more thoroughly for the great battle of life, when the years shall have passed and they
become men and women.

Here, too, are banking institutions and warehouses, and every element that contributes to the
thrift and advancement of a happy, honest, hard-working and prosperous people.

Of its history, but few words are necessary for its relation. Not many years ago it was the
home of the red man, whose council fires gleamed through the darkness of the night, and who
roamed, free as the air, over the trackless prairie, with no thought of the intruding footsteps
of the pale-face, and with no premonition of the mighty changes which the future was to bring
forth.

Then came the hardy pioneers--those brave, self-reliant men and women who sought the broad
acres of the west, and builded their homes upon the "edge of civilization." From that time
began the work of progress and cultivation. Towns, villages and cities sprang up as if under
the wand of the magician. Fifty years ago, a small trading post, with its general store, its
hand grist-mill, rude blacksmith-shop and the fort. To-day, a busy active town, with more than
five thousand inhabitants, a hundred business enterprises, great railroad facilities, and every
element that conduces to prosperity, honesty and happiness.

Such is Geneva to-day, a substantial, bustling, thriving and progressive village of the west.

It is a hot, sultry day in August, 18--, and the shrill whistles from the factories have just
announced the arrival of six o'clock. Work is suspended for the day, and the army of workmen
are preparing for their homes after the labors of the day.

At the little bank in Geneva the day has been an active one. Numerous herders have brought
their stock into market, and after disposing of them have deposited their moneys with the steady
little institution, in which they have implicit confidence, and through which the financial
affairs of the merchants and farmers round about are transacted.

The last depositor has departed, and the door has just been closed. The assistant cashier and
a lady clerk are engaged within in settling up the business of the day. At the Geneva bank
the hours for business vary with the requirements of the occasion, and very frequently the
hour of six arrives ere their customers have all received attention and their wants have been
supplied. This had been the case upon this day in August, and breathing a sigh of relief as
the last customer took his leave, the front door was locked and the work of balancing up the
accounts was begun.

Suddenly, a knock is heard at the outer door, and Mr. Pearson, the assistant cashier, being
busily engaged, requested the young lady with him to answer the summons. As she did so, two
men, roughly dressed, and with unshaved faces, burst into the room. Closing the door quickly
behind them, one of the men seized the young lady from behind and placed his hand upon her
mouth. Uttering a piercing scream, the young lady attempted to escape from the grasp upon her,
and with her teeth she inflicted several severe wounds upon the ruffianly hand that attempted
to smother her cries. In a moment she was knocked down, a gag was placed in her mouth, and
she was tied helplessly hand and foot. While this had been transpiring, the other intruder
had advanced to the assistant cashier, and in a few moments he too was overpowered, bound and
gagged. In less time than is required to tell the story, both of them were lying helpless before
their assailants, while the open doors of the bank vault revealed the treasures which had excited
the passions of these depraved men, and led to the assault which had just been successfully
committed.

No time was to be lost, the alarm might be sounded in a moment, and the thieves, picking up
a valise which stood near by, entered the vault, and securing all the available gold, silver
and bank-notes, placed them in the satchel and prepared to leave the place.

Before doing so, however, they dragged the helpless bodies of the young man and woman into
the despoiled vault, and laying them upon the floor, they deliberately closed the doors and
locked them in.

Not a word had been spoken during this entire proceeding, and now, in silence, the two men
picked up the satchel, and with an appearance of unconcern upon their faces, passed out of
the bank and stood upon the sidewalk.

The streets were filled with men and women hurrying from their work. The sun was shining brightly
in the heavens, and into this throng of human beings, all intent upon their own affairs, these
bold burglars recklessly plunged, and made their way safely out of the village.

How long the two persons remained in the bank it is impossible to tell; Miss Patton in a death-like
swoon, and Mr. Pearson, in the vain endeavor to extricate himself from the bonds which held
him. At length, however, the young man succeeded in freeing himself, and as he did so, the
young lady also recovered her consciousness. Calling loudly for help, and beating upon the
iron door of their prison, they indulged in the futile hope that some one would hear their
cries and come to their rescue.

At last, however, Mr. Pearson succeeded in unscrewing the bolts from the lock upon the inside
of the doors of the vault, and in a few minutes thereafter, he leaped out, and dashing through
a window, gave the alarm upon the street. The news spread far and wide, and within an hour
after the robbery had taken place, the town was alive with an excited populace, and numerous
parties were scouring the country in all directions in eager search of the fugitives. All to
no avail, however, the desperate burglars were not discovered, and the crest-fallen bank officers
contemplated their ruin with sorrowful faces, and with throbbing hearts.

Meanwhile, Miss Patton had been carefully removed to her home, her injuries had been attended
to, and surrounded by sympathetic friends, who ministered to her wants, she was slowly recovering
from the effects of the severe trial of the afternoon.

An examination of the vault revealed the fact that the robbers had succeeded in obtaining about
twenty thousand dollars in gold, silver and currency--all the available funds of the bank,
and the loss of which would seriously impair their standing, and which would be keenly felt
by every one interested in its management.

Though sorely crippled by their loss, the bank officials were undismayed, and resolved to take
immediate steps for the capture of the criminals, and the recovery of the stolen property.
To this end they decided to employ the services of my agency at once, in the full hope that
our efforts would be crowned with success. Whether the trust of the directors was well founded,
and the result so much desired was achieved, the sequel will show.

On the evening of the same day on which this daring robbery occurred, and as I was preparing
to leave my agency for the day, a telegram was handed to me by the superintendent of my Chicago
office, Mr. Frank Warner. The message read as follows:

                        "GENEVA, August --, 18--.

     "Bank robbed to-day. Twenty thousand
      dollars taken. Please send or come at once.

               "(Signed,) HENRY SILBY, President."

This was all. There was no detail of particulars, no statement of the means employed, only
a simple, concise and urgent appeal for my services. As for myself, realizing the importance
of promptness and despatch in affairs of this nature, and fully appreciating the anxiety of
the bank officials, I resolved to answer their call as speedily as possible. But few words
of consultation were required for the subject, and in a short time I had selected the man for
the preliminary investigation, and requested his presence in my office. John Manning was the
operative chosen for this task, an intelligent, shrewd and trusty young man of about thirty
years of age, who had been in my employ for a long time. Well educated, of good address, and
with a quiet, gentlemanly air about him that induced a favorable opinion at a glance. Frequently,
prior to this, occasions had presented themselves for testing his abilities, and I had always
found him equal to any emergency. Sagacious and skillful as I knew him to be, I felt that I
could implicitly rely upon him to glean all the information that was required in order to enable
me to devise an intelligent plan of detection, and which would, as I hoped, lead to eventual
success.

Giving John Manning full instructions as to his mode of proceeding, and cautioning him to be
particular and thorough in all his inquiries, I directed him to proceed as soon as possible
to the scene of the robbery, and enter at once upon the performance of his duties.

In a very short time Manning had made his preparations, and at eight o'clock that evening he
was at the depot awaiting the departure of the train that was to bear him to his new field
of operation.

After a journey of several hours, in which the detective endeavored to snatch as much comfort
as possible, the train drew up at the neat little station at Geneva, and Manning was upon the
ground.

It was two o'clock in the morning when he arrived, consequently there were but few people stirring,
and the station was almost entirely deserted. Two or three passengers who were awaiting the
train, the persons connected with the railroad, and the runners of the two hotels (Geneva boasted
of two of these very necessary establishments), were the only persons who greeted him upon
his arrival.

Having never been to Geneva before, and being entirely ignorant of the accommodations afforded
by either of these houses of entertainment, Manning, at a hazard, selected the "Geneva Hotel"
as his place of abode. Consigning his valise to the care of the waiting porter, he was soon
on his way to that hostelrie, and serenely journeyed along through the darkness, all unconscious
of the reception that awaited him. On arriving at their destination, he perceived through the
glimmering light that hung over the doorway, that the "Geneva Hotel" was an old, rambling frame
structure, which stood in the midst of an overgrowth of bushes and shrubbery. So dense was
the foliage that the detective imagined the air of the place was damp and unwholesome in consequence.
Certain it was, as he discovered afterward, the air and sunshine had a desperate struggle almost
daily to obtain an entrance into the building, and after a few hours engaged in the vain attempt,
old Sol would vent his baffled rage upon the worm-eaten old roof, to the decided discomfort
of the lodgers in the attic story.

Ceremony was an unheard-of quality at the "Geneva House," and the railway porter performed
the multifarious duties of night clerk, porter, hall boy and hostler. As they entered the hotel,
the porter lighted a small lamp with the aid of a stable lantern, and without further parley
led the detective up two flights of stairs which cracked and groaned under their feet, as if
complaining of their weight, and threatening to precipitate them to the regions below. Opening
the door of a little box of a room, out of which the hot air came rushing like a blast from
a furnace fire, the porter placed the lamp upon a dilapidated wash-stand and the valise upon
the floor, and without uttering a word, took himself off.

With all its progressiveness, it was evident that Geneva was far behind the age in regard to
her hotel accommodations; at least so thought Manning as he gazed disconsolately around upon
his surroundings. The room was small, close and hot, while the furniture exceeded his powers
of description. The unpainted wash-stand seemed to poise itself uneasily upon its three remaining
legs--the mirror had evidently been the resort of an army of self-admiring flies, who had left
their marks upon its leaden surface until reflection was impossible--two hard and uncomfortable-looking
chairs--and a bed, every feature of which was a sonorous protest against being slept upon--completed
the provisions which had been made for his entertainment and comfort. Casting a dismal look
upon his uninviting quarters, but being thoroughly tired, the detective threw himself upon
the couch, which rattled and creaked under him like old bones, and in a few moments was sound
asleep.

How long he might have remained in this somnolent condition if left to himself, it is impossible
to state, for a vigorous alarm upon his door cut short his slumbers, and startled him from
his dreams.

Imagining that the hotel had taken fire, or that the porter had eloped with the silver ware,
he jumped hastily out of bed and opened the door.

"It's late and breakfast is waitin'," was the laconic message delivered to him by the porter
of the night before, as he started away.

With a muttered malediction upon this ruthless destroyer of his rest, the detective donned
his clothing, and, feeling as tired and unrefreshed as though he had not slept at all, descended
to the dining-room. If his experiences of the previous evening had been distressing, the breakfast
which was set before him was positively heart-rending. A muddy-looking liquid which they called
coffee--strong, soggy biscuits, a beefsteak that would rival in toughness a piece of baked
gutta percha, and evidently swimming in lard, and potatoes which gave decided tokens of having
been served on more than one previous occasion. With a smothered groan he attacked the unsavory
viands, and by dint of great effort managed to appease his hunger, to the serious derangement
of his digestive organs. After he had finished his repast he lighted a cigar, and as the hour
was still too early for a conference with the bank officials, he resolved to stroll about the
town and ascertain the locality of the Geneva bank, before entering upon the duties of the
investigation.

His stroll, however, was not a very extended one, for as he started from the hotel he noticed
upon the opposite side of the street the sign of the bank. The building in which it was located
was a large, square brick structure, occupied in part by the bank, and in part as a store for
the sale of hardware and agricultural implements. The upper floor was used as an amusement
hall, and was called the "Geneva Opera House." Here the various entertainments of a musical
and dramatic nature were given, to the intense delight of the people of the village.

There was no notice of the bank having suspended operations on account of the loss they had
sustained, and the operative inferred from this, that business was being transacted as usual.

When the doors were at length opened the operative entered the banking room, and requesting
to see Mr. Silby, was ushered into the private office of the president. As he passed through
the room he took a passing inventory of the young assistant cashier, Mr. Pearson, who was busily
engaged upon his books. He appeared to be a young man of about twenty-four years of age; of
a delicate and refined cast of countenance and about medium height. His hair and a small curly
mustache were of a light brown shade, and his complexion was as fair as a woman's. The young
lady who had been the other victim of the assault was not present, and the detective concluded
that she was as yet unable to attend to her duties.

These thoughts and impressions passed through his mind as he walked through the banking room
into the office of the president. As he entered this apartment, he found several gentlemen
evidently awaiting his appearance, all of whom wore a thoughtful, troubled look, as though
they keenly felt the losses they had sustained and were resolved to bear up manfully under
their misfortune.

Mr. Silby, the president, a tall, fine-looking gentleman in the prime of life, arose as the
detective entered. Mr. Silby was one of those persons who instinctively impress the beholder,
with a confidence closely approaching to veneration. Of a commanding presence, a broad noble
face surmounted with a wealth of hair in which the silvery touch of time has left many traces,
while his deep blue eyes were as bright as those of a youth of twenty. There was such an air
of rugged and uncompromising honesty, of kindly feeling and warm-heartedness about the man,
that even before he had spoken the detective experienced a strong impulse of regard for him,
and a corresponding determination to perform his full duty in this investigation and to devote
all the energy of his being to the task before him.

Presenting his letter of introduction, Mr. Silby hastily ran his eyes over the contents, and
then extending his hand he gave the detective a most cordial greeting, and introduced him to
the other gentlemen present, all of whom received him warmly.

"Take a seat, Mr. Manning," said Mr. Silby, drawing up a chair. "You find us anxiously awaiting
your arrival, and prepared to give you any information you desire."

"Thanks," responded the operative, taking the proffered chair. "As I have come here for the
purpose of making an examination into this case, I shall require all the information that is
possible to obtain."

"Very well," said Mr. Silby. "Now, what do you desire first?"

"A full statement as to how the robbery was committed," answered the detective, promptly.

"Mr. Welton," said Mr. Silby, turning to a gentleman at his right, who had been introduced
to the detective as the cashier of the bank, "perhaps you can relate the particulars better
than I can."

"Excuse me," interrupted the detective, "but were you present at the time the robbery occurred?"

"No, sir, I was not present," replied Mr. Welton. "Mr. Pearson, our assistant cashier, and
Miss Patton, were the only persons in the bank at that time."

"Then," said the detective, "suppose we have Mr. Pearson in at once, and hear the story from
him. We always prefer," he added, with a smile, "to receive the particulars of these affairs
from eye-witnesses."

The other gentlemen nodded a cordial assent to this proposition, and Mr. Welton arose, and
going to the door, requested Mr. Pearson to enter the consulting room.

The young man entered the office, and upon being introduced, greeted the detective with an
air of frank earnestness, and signified his readiness to relate all that he knew about the robbery.

He remained standing, and from his statement the facts were elicited which I have given in
the preceding chapter. As he finished, he pointed to a scar upon his forehead, which he stated
was the result of the blow he received at the time from the robber who attacked him. The wound
did not appear to be a very serious one, although the skin had been broken and blood had evidently
flowed freely.

"Mr. Pearson," inquired the detective, after the young man had concluded, "do you remember
having seen either of those men before?"

The assistant cashier darted a quick glance at the detective, and then answered:

"Yes, sir; about three o'clock yesterday afternoon, a well-dressed gentleman came into the
bank, carrying a small valise in his hand, which he requested permission to leave here until
the next morning. I asked him if it was of any value, and he replied no. Informing him that
I would then place it in the office, the man thanked me, and went away. When the two men entered
the bank at six o'clock in the evening, I instantly recognized one of them as the man who had
called in the afternoon. He was, however, dressed very roughly on the occasion of this last
visit, and had evidently changed his clothes for the purpose of escaping detection or recognition."

"Which one of the men attacked you?" now asked the detective.

"The one who left the valise in the afternoon. While the tallest of the two was struggling
with Miss Patton, who was screaming loudly, the other one came behind the counter and struck
me upon the head with the butt end of his revolver. I became insensible after this, and knew
nothing until I found myself in the vault."

"How did you extricate yourself from this dilemma?" inquired Manning.

"Well, sir," began Pearson; and the detective imagined that he noticed a hesitancy in his manner,
which was not apparent before, "when I recovered consciousness, I found myself locked up in
the vault, with Miss Patton lying beside me. When she recovered, we both shouted loudly for
help, and beat with our hands upon the iron doors, in the hope of attracting attention. This
failed, and we were nearly desperate. Just then, however, my foot came in contact with some
loose silver upon the floor, and on stooping to pick them up, I found that they were ten-cent
pieces. Instantly, the idea occurred to me, to attempt to remove the screws which fastened
the lock to the inside of the door, and of using one of these coins for the purpose. To my
intense joy the screws yielded to my efforts, and in a short time the heavy door swung open,
and we were free. I have told you already what followed."

As John Manning jotted these recitals down in his note-book, he could not repress nor account
for, a feeling of doubtfulness which crept over him at this point. He looked up into the young
man's face, but there he saw only the evidence of serious truthfulness, and honest frankness;
but still that lingering doubt was upon him and he could not shake it off.

At his request, young Pearson then furnished him with a description of the two men, as nearly
as his memory would serve him, and these the detective noted down for future use.

At length, finding that he had obtained all the information which could be afforded him here,
he thanked the gentlemen for their assistance, and promised to call again in the course of the day.

"Remember, Mr. Manning," said Mr. Silby, "we rely entirely upon the resources of Mr. Pinkerton's
agency, and that we are confident that you will succeed."

"I cannot promise that," returned Manning, "but you may be assured that if success is possible,
we will accomplish it."

So saying, he shook hands with the gentlemen, and left the bank. He betook himself at once
to the hotel to prepare himself for further action in this investigation.

As the morning was not yet very far advanced, John Manning concluded to pay a visit to Miss
Patton, the other eye-witness to, and active participant in the robbery.

Ascertaining the locality of her residence, he walked along the pleasant shaded street, revolving
in his mind the various points upon which he had been enlightened during the interview just
concluded. Arriving at his destination, he found a neat, cosy little cottage, set in the midst
of a bright garden of blooming flowers, the perfume of which filled the morning air. There
was an appearance of neatness and beauty and comfort about the place, which at once gave evidence
of the refinement of those who dwelt within, and as the detective walked along the graveled
path that led to the front door, he found himself involuntarily arranging his shirt-collar,
and calling up his best manner for the occasion.

His knock was responded to by a kindly-faced, matronly looking lady, whom he instinctively
felt was the mother of the young lady. Making his business known, and requesting an interview
with Miss Patton, he was ushered into a cool, well-furnished parlor, to await the conveyance
of his message and to learn the disposition of the invalid.

In a few minutes the lady reappeared, and stated that although her daughter was still very
weak and nervous from the shock she had sustained, she would see him, and requested him to
step into her room.

Entering a neatly furnished little chamber, he beheld the young lady reclining upon a couch,
looking very pale, but with a pleasant smile of welcome upon her face that at once gave him
the courage to proceed with the unpleasant business he had in hand.

Bidding her a polite good morning, he took the seat, which had been placed for him near the
bed, and as delicately as possible, stated his business and the reason for his calling upon
her. At this point Mrs. Patton excused herself, and retired, with the evident intention of
leaving them alone.

Manning quietly and delicately made his inquiries, and the girl answered them in a plain, straightforward
manner. Her story corroborated all that had previously been related by young Pearson, and left
no doubt in the mind of the detective that the occurrences of the eventful afternoon had been
correctly detailed. He could not, however, control the doubtfulness that was impressing him
with regard to Eugene Pearson.

"I cannot forbear the thought," said he, when Miss Patton had concluded her story, "that if
Mr. Pearson had displayed a reasonable amount of manly bravery, this robbery could not have
taken place."

"There is something very strange to me," said the girl, musingly, "about the manner in which
Eugene acted; and--there are some things that I cannot understand."

"Would you object to telling me what they are?" said the detective. "Perhaps I can enlighten you."

"Well," responded the girl reluctantly, "I fear that Eugene has not told the entire truth in
this matter."

"In what respect?" inquired the detective.

"I would not do anything to injure Mr. Pearson for the world, Mr. Manning, and he may have
forgotten the circumstance altogether, but I am sure that I saw one of those robbers on two
occasions before this occurred, in the bank and talking to Mr. Pearson."

"Why should he seek to conceal this?" asked the operative.

"That is just what I cannot understand," answered the lady.

"Tell me just what you know, and perhaps I can help you in coming to a correct conclusion."

"I don't like to say anything about this, but still I think it is my duty to do so, and I will
tell you all that I know. More than two weeks ago, I returned from my dinner to the bank one
day, and I saw this man in the private office with Mr. Pearson; I noticed then that their manner
toward each other showed them to be old acquaintances rather than mere strangers. This man
left the bank in a few minutes after I came in. He had the manner and appearance of a gentleman,
and I did not think anything of it at the time."

"Did Mr. Pearson tell you who he was, or explain his presence there at that time?"

"No, I did not ask anything about him, and he did not mention the matter to me."

"When did you see them together again?"

"That same evening about dusk. I had been making a call upon a friend, and was returning home
when I met them walking and conversing together."

"Did Mr. Pearson recognize you on that occasion?" inquired the detective.

"No, sir, he did not seem to notice me at all, and I passed them without speaking."

"You are quite sure about this?"

"Oh, yes, quite sure. I recognized him immediately when he came yesterday afternoon to leave
the valise in the bank, and also when he came with the other man when the robbery was committed."

"Do you feel confident that you would be able to identify him, if you were to see him again?"

"I am quite sure that I would," returned the girl confidently, "his features are too indelibly
fixed in my mind for me to make any mistake about it."

"Have you said anything to Mr. Pearson about this?"

"Yes; as soon as we were out of the vault, I said to him--'One of those men was the man who
left the valise and the same one I saw in the office the other day.'"

"What reply did he make."

"He appeared to be doubtful, and simply said, 'Is that so?'"

"Very well, Miss Patton," said the detective at length, "we will look fully into this matter;
but in the meantime, I particularly desire that you will say nothing to any one about what
you have told me to-day. It is very necessary that a strict silence should be preserved upon
this point."

The young lady cheerfully promised compliance with this request, and in a few moments the detective,
after thanking her for her kindness in seeing him, arose and took his departure.

As he strolled back to the hotel, he revolved the information he had received carefully in
his mind. He had also obtained from Miss Patton a description of the two men, and found that
they agreed very nearly with what he had learned from Mr. Pearson. He went to his room immediately,
and prepared a report of all that had transpired during the morning, carefully detailing all
that he had heard relating to Mr. Pearson's alleged intimacy with one of the robbers, and of
the successful attempt he made to extricate himself from the vault, by means of the ten-cent
piece. After concluding his relations, he requested the assistance of another operative, in
order that they might scour the country round about, in the hope of finding some clues of the
escaping robbers.

On the next morning, operative Howard Jackson, a young, active and extremely intelligent member
of my force, arrived at Geneva, and placed himself in communication with John Manning, for
the continuance of this investigation.

When Manning's reports were duly received by my son, William A. Pinkerton, the superintendent
of my Chicago agency, he gave the matter his most careful and earnest attention, and as he
finished their perusal, he formed the opinion that young Pearson was not entirely guiltless
of some collusion in this robbery. The more he weighed the various circumstances connected
with this case, the more firm did this conclusion become, until at last he experienced a firm
conviction that this young man knew more about the matter than he had yet related.

It seemed strange to him that a young, strong and active man like Pearson should not have manifested
even ordinary courage in a crisis like this. He was behind the desk when the attack was made
upon Miss Patton at the door, and saw what was transpiring before the second assailant had
time to reach him. Even if powerless to defend her, it seemed reasonable that he could have
raised an alarm, which would have attracted the attention of the passers by; or, failing in
that, he could, at least, have hastily closed the vault doors, and thus have saved the money
of the bank. He knew that these doors were open, and that within the vault were nearly thirty
thousand dollars, for which he was indirectly responsible. But a moment's time would have sufficed
to close these doors and adjust the combination, and yet he made no effort to prevent a robbery
which he knew was intended.

The ordinary promptings of manhood would, it was thought, have induced him to make some show
of resistance, or to have gone to the rescue of a young and delicate girl; but none of these
things did he do, and, if the story related was true, the young man had acted like a base coward
at the best, and submitted without a murmur to the outrages that were perpetrated in his presence.
Instead of acting like a man, he stood tamely by and allowed a woman to be cruelly beaten,
the bank robbed, and the robbers to walk off unmolested and unharmed.

There was another matter which seemed impossible of accomplishment. Pearson had stated that
while in the vault he had removed the screws from the lock upon the door with the aid of a
ten-cent piece. This idea seemed to be utterly incredible, and prompted by his doubts, William
attempted the same feat upon the lock on his office door. After several efforts, in which he
exerted his strength to the utmost, he was obliged to desist. The screws utterly defied the
efforts to move them, while the coin was bent and twisted out of all shape, by the pressure
that it was subjected to.

While he was thus engaged with his thoughts upon this perplexing problem, he was informed that
two gentlemen from Geneva desired to speak with him. Signifying his readiness to receive them,
two well-dressed gentlemen entered and announced their business.

One of these men was a Mr. Perry, a director of the Geneva bank, and his companion was a Mr.
Bartman, a merchant in Newtonsville, a little town situated but a few miles distant from Geneva.

"Mr. Bartman," said Mr. Perry, addressing my son, "has some information to communicate, which
I think is important enough to deserve serious consideration, and I have brought him to you."

Mr. Bartman's information proved to be of very decided importance. He stated that he was a
merchant, doing business in Newtonsville, and that he was in the habit of purchasing his goods
from various traveling salesmen who represented Chicago houses. Among this number was a young
man named Newton Edwards, who was in the employ of a large commission house, located on South
Water Street, in the city of Chicago. He had known Edwards for some years, and had frequently
dealt with him during that period. During the forenoon of the day on which the robbery occurred,
he saw Newton Edwards in Newtonsville, but that instead of attempting to sell his goods, that
gentleman was apparently seeking to avoid observation. He met him upon the street and familiarly
accosted him, but Edwards received his salutations coldly, and did not engage in any conversation.
Mr. Bartman thought nothing of this at the time, but in the afternoon, having business in Geneva,
he drove over to that place, and, to his surprise, he found Edwards, in company with a strange
young man, lingering around the public house in Geneva, apparently having nothing whatever
to do. He noticed also, that Edwards was somewhat under the influence of liquor, and that he
had effected a complete change in his apparel. A few hours after this he heard of the robbery,
and instantly his mind reverted to the strange appearance and actions of Newton Edwards. He
endeavored to find him, but, as if in confirmation of his suspicions, both Edwards and his
companion had disappeared.

Mr. Bartman gave a full description of Edwards as he appeared that day; and in substantiation
of his suspicions, it was found to agree perfectly with that given by both Eugene Pearson and
Miss Grace Patton.

Mr. Perry stated that within two hours after the robbery had been discovered, men had been
sent out in all directions, in search of the fleeing robbers, but without success. They had
only been enabled to learn that two men, carrying a valise between them, had been seen walking
along the railroad track in a north-westerly direction from Geneva, but that was all. In the
darkness of the night, they had succeeded in eluding their pursuers, and on the following day
all traces of them were obscured.

Two things were now to be done at once; to ascertain the antecedents of Eugene Pearson, and
to seek the whereabouts of Newton Edwards. To these tasks William applied himself immediately,
and with what result will be shown hereafter.

In the meantime operatives Manning and Jackson had been untiring in their efforts to obtain
some traces of the robbers. They had found a number of people who recollected seeing two men,
answering the description of the suspected thieves, who carried a valise between them, but
beyond a certain point all traces of them stopped. It seemed that the ground had opened and
swallowed them up, so effectual had been their disappearance.

While thus engaged, operative Manning received instructions to keep a watchful eye upon young
Pearson, and also to make quiet and judicious inquiries as to his habits and associates in Geneva.

The result of these inquiries was most favorable to the young man, and under ordinary circumstances
would have disarmed suspicion at once. During the progress of this search after truth, operative
Manning had preserved the utmost good feeling and cordiality in his dealings with Eugene Pearson,
and had succeeded in establishing a friendly intimacy with him, that would have allayed any
fears which the young man might have had, as to the opinions entertained by the detectives
with regard to himself. Mr. Pearson was very positive that one of the robbers was the same
man who had left the valise at the bank during the afternoon, and, after learning that Manning
had paid a visit to Miss Patton, he stated his belief that this same person had called at the
bank a few weeks before. He could not remember the name he had given at that time, but thought
he had inquired as to the financial standing of several of the business men of Geneva. During
all these interviews Mr. Pearson displayed the utmost willingness to assist the detectives
in their investigation, and with a frankness that was refreshing, answered every question that
was put to him as if with the earnest desire of facilitating their labors and contributing
to the accomplishment of their success.

Eugene Pearson was a young man, it was learned, who had first seen the light in the little
town of Geneva, then a straggling little village with none of the pretensions it now presented.
His parents were most exemplary people, and his father at one time had been a wealthy grain
merchant, but during one of the financial panics that swept over the country, he was unfortunate
enough to suffer embarrassments which stripped him of his fortune and left him penniless in
his old age to begin again the battle of life. At the present time, he was a benevolent-looking,
intelligent old gentleman, who occupied the honorable and not very lucrative position of postmaster
of Geneva, from the receipts of which, and a few other interests he was enabled to maintain
his family in comparative comfort.

Young Pearson had grown to manhood surrounded by the refining influences of his family, and,
save for a few months spent at a business college in a neighboring city, had always dwelt in
his native town. Among the residents of Geneva he was universally respected and admired. Possessed,
as he was, of more than ordinary intelligence, and evincing good business qualifications, he
had occupied his present position in the bank for several years, and at the time of the robbery,
arrangements were being made for his promotion to the position of cashier, owing to the contemplated
retirement of Mr. Welton, the present incumbent. His personal habits were unexceptionable,
so far as known, and every one with whom John Manning conversed upon the subject, were loud
in his praises. In the social circles of the town, he was an acknowledged favorite; he was
a fair musician, was a member of the choir in the leading church of Geneva, and a teacher in
the Sunday-school. His handsome face and pleasing manners gained for him a host of friends,
and his companionship was eagerly sought by the young people with whom he associated. The young
ladies were particularly partial to his society, and it was stated that he was engaged to be
married to a beautiful young lady of the town, whose father was one of the wealthiest men in
the country round about. At the bank, he was held in high esteem by both the officers and directors,
and Mr. Silby's affection for him amounted almost to the love of a father for a favorite child.
From infancy to manhood his name had never been associated with aught that was injurious or
degrading, and among all the young men of Geneva, Eugene Pearson stood highest in public esteem
and general favor.

The result of these inquiries were not calculated to strengthen the doubts which had been formed
of young Pearson's participation in this robbery, and yet the suspicion remained unchanged,
and we determined to await developments before yielding our opinions to what seemed to be a
pressure of circumstances.

In the meantime, William had not been idle in the city. Ascertaining the name of the firm for
which Newton Edwards was traveling, and determined to satisfy his mind upon this point, he
dispatched an operative to the business house to which he had been referred. The result of
this inquiry was that Mowbray, Morton & Co., the firm with which Edwards had at one time been
engaged, stated that he had severed his connection with them a short time before, and since
then had done nothing for them, but had been traveling for another house on the same street,
and they believed he was the junior partner of the firm. Inquiry at this house elicited the
information that Edwards had retired from this firm, and had connected himself with a large
eastern house, which dealt extensively in fruits and a general line of groceries. At this place,
however, several items of information were gleaned which were of importance. The gentlemen
connected with this establishment were very well acquainted with Newton Edwards, of whom they
spoke in the highest terms. He had been in Chicago during all of the week previous to the robbery,
but had left the city on Saturday, stating that he intended to travel through Wisconsin and
Minnesota in the interest of the new firm which he represented. He had not been seen since,
nor had they heard from him.

Finding that the gentleman who furnished this information was an intimate acquaintance of Edwards,
the operative next inquired as to his family connections and his place of residence. On these
points he was fully informed, and he cheerfully imparted the desired information. Edwards,
it appeared, had been married recently to a lovely and accomplished young lady from one of
the outlying towns, and since his marriage had been residing with the husband of his sister,
a gentleman named Samuel Andrews, who resided at 29 Logan Place, in Chicago. Edwards also had
a brother who was married, and who lived in the city, and the location of this gentleman's
residence was also cheerfully furnished by the merchant.

Upon returning with this information, the operative at once reported to my son William, who
decided upon an immediate course of action. Directing the operative to inquire for tidings
of Edwards at both of the places named, he indited a telegraphic message to the chief of police
at Milwaukee and Minneapolis, for the purpose of ascertaining if Edwards had been at either
place since leaving the city. He described the man fully, stated the name of the house which
he represented, gave the fullest particulars as to his identity, and then requested to be informed
if he had made his appearance in either of these cities.

To all these messages the answer was received that Edwards had not, as yet, arrived, although
the chief at Milwaukee stated that he had met a friend of Edwards, who informed him that he
had received a letter from the young man dated four days prior to the robbery, stating that
he would be in Milwaukee in a few days, and that he would be accompanied by his wife. As yet,
however, he had not arrived, and nothing further had been heard of him.

This was a corroboration of the first suspicion regarding Newton Edwards, and was convincing
of the fact that he had not done as he had informed his friends that he would do. William was
convinced, therefore, that he was upon the right track, and impatiently awaited the return
of the operative who had been sent to the residences of Edwards' relatives.

The detective delegated for that purpose proceeded to the locality to which he had been directed,
where he found a comfortable-looking, well-kept brick dwelling-house, and upon a metal plate
upon the door, he noticed the name he was in search of. Ascending the steps, he rang the bell,
and shortly afterward was ushered into a handsomely furnished parlor, where he was greeted
by a pleasant-faced lady, who announced herself as the sister of Mr. Newton Edwards.

"Is Mr. Edwards residing with you?" inquired the detective.

"Not now," answered the lady, "he was here until Saturday last, when he left, saying that he
was going to Milwaukee upon business. I have heard however, that he was in town on Sunday last,
but that I am not sure of."

"Did his wife go with him?" now asked the operative, hoping to obtain an interview with her,
if possible.

"No, sir," replied Mrs. Andrews, with an air of sudden coldness and reserve, which was not
lost upon the watchful man before her. "Mrs. Edwards left on the same day, in company with
her brother, who has taken her to his home; I do not wish to allude to this matter, but I am
afraid my brother and his wife do not live happily together."

"Have they separated?" asked the detective, in a tone of solicitude.

After a momentary hesitation, the woman replied: "I am inclined to think they have. Newton
has not been himself lately, and has, I am sorry to say, been drinking a great deal. This naturally
led to harsh treatment of his wife, and I presume she wrote to her brother, and on last Saturday
he came and took her away."

Finding the lady indisposed to furnish further information, the detective took his leave.

At the second place he received much the same information, and concluding that he had exhausted
this matter, he started to return to the agency. At this latter place, however, he had casually
inquired for the name and residence of Mrs. Edwards' brother, and on learning that, had concluded
his visit.

Everything thus far had favored a belief that Edwards was concerned in this robbery. His leaving
home a day or two before the act was committed, his quarrel with his wife, his statement made
to friends that he was going upon a business trip, which it was evident he had not done, his
strange appearance at Newtonsville and Geneva on the day the robbery took place, the fact that
his personal appearance agreed perfectly with that given of the robber, by eye-witnesses to
that event, and his mysterious disappearance since, all went to prove beyond question that
Newton Edwards was the thief, and that decided steps should be taken to discover his whereabouts.

Leaving William to devise a plan to accomplish this much-desired result, we will return to
Geneva, and watch the movements of John Manning and Howard Jackson.

In extending their investigations in and around Geneva, operatives Manning and Jackson had
discovered numerous items of intelligence corroborative of their previous suspicions. A salesman,
connected with a large mercantile house from one of the large cities, furnished the information
that on Monday, the day on which the robbery occurred, he had traveled with Edwards as far
as Newtonsville, and as he did not see him after leaving that place, he concluded that he must
have stopped there. He also stated that Edwards appeared to be unusually cold and reserved,
and that he was accompanied by a companion whom he did not introduce to his friends. At Newtonsville
it was learned that a man, fully answering the description of Edwards' companion, had visited
both of the livery stables in that town, and had attempted to hire a team of horses and a carriage.
He had been refused in both instances, for the reasons that he was a stranger, and appeared
to be under the influence of liquor. Several people both in Geneva and Newtonsville were found
who remembered seeing Edwards, whom they knew--and a companion who was a stranger to them--about
these towns on the day of the robbery, and they described their actions as being very peculiar.
They had disappeared immediately after that and had not been seen since. If further proofs
of the complicity of Edwards were required they could have been procured by the score, and
as all traces of their route from Geneva had been lost, William resolved to commence a thorough
and systematic process of espionage, which he believed would eventually lead to the discovery
of his hiding-place. He thoroughly canvassed the situation and his conclusions were soon found.
Newton Edwards had a father and mother--he had brothers and sisters; and in addition to these
he had a lovely young wife, from whom he had parted in anger. It was not possible that he could
shake himself loose from all these ties of kindred and affection at one blow, and it was reasonably
sure that sooner or later he would attempt to correspond with them in some manner. Again, it
might be the case that some of his relatives were already aware of his crime, and of the fact
that he was hiding from the officers of the law, and it could not be expected that they would
voluntarily give information that would lead to his discovery. However grieved and disappointed
they might be, however angry they must naturally feel, they could not be expected at such a
time as this to turn his accusers, and aid in his capture.

I have known cases in the course of my professional practice, however, when fathers, actuated
by what they considered the highest motives, have delivered up their sons to the law, and,
though the ordeal was an exceedingly trying and distressing one, they never faltered for a
moment in what they considered the performance of their duty. I need not say that such evidences
of self-sacrifice were painful to me, and that my feelings were always deeply touched by the
mental sufferings of the poor criminals, who in the hour of their sorest need, found themselves
deserted by the only friends upon whom they believed they could rely in an emergency which
threatened disgrace and servitude.

While this is true, it is equally certain that I have yet to record a single case in which
a female relative ever assisted, in any manner, toward the apprehension of a criminal. No power
seemed able to force from her a word that would tend to work him injury, and though her heart
was breaking, and her love for the lost one had passed away, yet, with a persistence worthy
of all admiration, she refused to do aught that would add to the misery of the fallen one;
and, if occasion offered, invariably rendered her assistance to secure his escape.

Taking these ideas into consideration, therefore, it would not do to rely at all upon any assistance
from the relatives of Edwards, and to advise them of our suspicions and search, would naturally
only tend to place both him and them upon their guard.

A slower and more laborious operation was therefore necessary. Fully in earnest in his determination
to capture these men, and firmly supported by the officials of the bank, who were as resolute
as he in their resolve to apprehend the robbers, William at once put this plan into execution.

Operatives were posted to watch the residences of the relatives of Edwards in the city, and
instructed to carefully note their actions, particularly in the matter of receiving or posting
of any letters. Another operative was despatched to Woodford to note the movements of Mrs.
Edwards, the wife of the suspected thief, and to endeavor to obtain some information that would
assist us in the chase. It might be possible that this reported quarrel was a mere ruse, to
blind the detectives, and to throw them off the scent; and it was important that the truthfulness
of this story should be substantiated. At the same time, William decided on no account to lose
sight of young Pearson, and directed the operatives at Geneva to maintain a strict watch over
his movements, and by no means to permit him to leave town unaccompanied by some one who could
note his every action. The young bank clerk, however, gave no cause for any new suspicion.
He performed his duties at the bank with unflagging industry and evinced the greatest desire
that the thieves might soon be captured. His solicitude for Miss Patton was apparently sincere
and unceasing, and he frequently reproached himself for not having acted in a more manly manner
at the time the assault was made. So humiliated did he appear at the loss the bank had sustained,
and so earnest was he in everything that approached a vigorous and determined chase after the
robbers, that he soon became an object of profound sympathy and higher regard to the bank officers
and his numerous friends in Geneva. After fully considering this matter of young Pearson, William
deemed it his duty to acquaint Mr. Silby with his suspicions. It was due to that gentleman,
he argued, that he should be thus informed, and then if results should justify the suspicion
he would be prepared for what would follow, while if the contrary should prove true he would
have all the more reason for his high estimation of his young assistant cashier.

He did not have long to wait before making this revelation, for in a few days after he had
put his plans into operation and posted his men, William received a call from Mr. Silby, who
desired to be informed of the progress that was being made. After fully detailing to the honest
old banker all that we had thus far learned, and the steps which had been taken to ascertain
the whereabouts of Newton Edwards, all of which met with his hearty approval, William delicately
broached the unpleasant subject.

"Mr. Silby," said he, "there is another matter which I desire to speak of, and one which I
fear may occasion you some pain, or may meet with your opposition."

"Let me know what it is, by all means," responded Mr. Silby, with a smile. "I am satisfied
that what you have to say is for the best interests of the bank, and it would be absurd in
me to offer opposition to that."

"Well," said William, "there have been certain developments made in this case which, I regret
to say, lead me to believe that Eugene Pearson is not entirely blameless in this robbery."

"What do you mean?" exclaimed Mr. Silby, starting to his feet, and with a tremor in his voice,
which told of inward agitation; "you do not mean that you suspect Eugene?"

"I must confess that I do," said William solemnly, "and I regret it sincerely, both on your
account and his own."

"But this will not do," suddenly interrupted the old gentleman, "this cannot be. Why, I have
known that boy ever since his childhood, and I have loved him as my own son. No, no, Mr. Pinkerton,
you must be mistaken about this."

"Mr. Silby," said my son, "let us look at this matter calmly and dispassionately. You have
employed us to ferret out the thieves, and to recover, if possible, the money of which you
have been robbed. We have therefore but one duty to perform, and that is to find the men. I
have looked into this case carefully; I have noted every point thus far attained; I have weighed
every item philosophically, and I tell you now, that I am convinced that Eugene Pearson knows
more about this robbery than has yet been revealed."

William then slowly and concisely detailed the various points upon which he founded his suspicions.
The fact that Eugene Pearson had been seen in intimate conversation with the suspected man,
his presence at the bank on the afternoon of the robbery, his actions, cowardly at best, when
the assault was made upon the helpless girl, his peculiar statements since, and then the manner
of his release by the aid of the ten-cent silver piece. Taking a coin from his pocket, he requested
Mr. Silby to attempt the feat upon the slight lock upon the office door, which he tried, and
though he labored strenuously, he was unable to move it. He also informed him that Manning
had attempted the same thing upon the lock of the vault door, and that he could not budge a
screw. All these facts he pointed out to the old gentleman as strong proofs of the young man's
guilt.

Mr. Silby sat during this recital with a dazed and stricken look upon his face, and when William
had finished, he sat for a time in speechless amazement. Recovering himself at length, he said:

"Mr. Pinkerton, this may all prove to be true; but at present, you must excuse me, I cannot
believe it--it is too terrible."

True and trustful old man! he could not be brought to believe that one so dearly loved and
highly trusted could prove so base and undeserving.

"Now, Mr. Silby," said William, "I have only this to ask--I may be wrong, or I may be right;
but until definite results are achieved, I must request you to keep this matter a profound
secret, and to keep a close watch upon young Pearson without exciting his suspicion; will you
do this?"

"I will do what you request," responded Mr. Silby; "but believe me, you will find that you
are mistaken."

"Another thing," continued William. "If at any time I should telegraph to you these words--'Look
out for that package!' please remember that 'that package' means Pearson, and he must not be
allowed to go away."

"All this I will do, because I know you are doing what you think best; but I am confident all
will be made right for the boy in good time."

"For your sake, Mr. Silby, I hope so, too, but I am not so sanguine of that: and we cannot
afford to take any risks."

Mr. Silby arose to his feet, and grasping my son's hand, withdrew without a word. As he passed
out, William looked after him with a feeling of compassion he rarely experienced.

"It is a great pity," he murmured to himself, "that so much strong, manly faith should be so
sadly misplaced, and I fear very much that before we are through with this case, Mr. Silby's
trust in human nature will be badly shattered. But we must do our duty, and the right must
triumph at last--we must await the result."

It was on a hot sultry morning in August, about ten days after the robbery at Geneva, that
William Everman arrived at the picturesque little city of Woodford. Woodford was the home of
the brother of Mrs. Newton Edwards, with whom that lady was supposed to have taken refuge after
her quarrel with her husband. Everman proceeded directly to the hotel upon his arrival, and
quickly announced himself as a traveling salesman from a neighboring city. In a casual conversation
with the clerk, he ascertained that Edwards and his wife were quite well known in the place,
and that the clerk was an intimate acquaintance of the lady's husband.

"Is Edwards stopping here now?" inquired the detective, in a careless manner.

"No!" answered the clerk, as he fondly curled the ends of a very delicate and scarcely perceptible
mustache. "He hasn't stopped here since his marriage; he usually goes to the home of his wife's
family now."

"Do you know whether he is in town now?"

"I think not, unless he arrived last night," answered the young man. "There are several letters
here for him, and he would have called for them before this. He has his mail always directed here."

"I am sorry for that," said Everman. "I have some instructions for him from the house he travels
for, and he ought to get them as soon as possible."

"Perhaps Mr. Black could tell you where he is. I believe Edwards' wife is staying with him,
and she certainly could tell you where you could address him, or whether he is expected here
very soon."

After thanking the clerk for his information and ascertaining the business place of Mr. Black,
the detective left the hotel, and sauntered about the city.

Walking leisurely down the main street, he soon came in sight of the place to which he had
been directed. It was a small frame building, somewhat old and dilapidated, and was sadly in
need of the painter's brush and a new covering of paint. Over the doorway swung a dingy, time-worn
and weather-beaten sign, upon which he could barely decipher the words: "HENRY BLACK, Locksmith,"
and over which were suspended a pair of massive crossed keys which at one time had been bright
golden, but which now were old and rusty looking. In the low window in front there was a rare
and curious collection of articles that would have delighted the eyes of an antiquarian. Locks
there were, that were relics of a by-gone age, and seemed as if they might have done service
on dungeon doors in some ancient keep in feudal times--strange and grotesque locks that had
evidently pleased the fancy of some old connoisseur, whose treasures were guarded by these
strange looking protectors, which had now outgrown their usefulness, and were exhibited as
curiosities in the practical age of to-day. Locks of latest finish and design, and locks red
and rusty and worn out, were mingled together with a confusion and carelessness that bespoke
a thriving business, which left no time for order or arrangement.

Entering the shop without hesitation and with a careless air of assurance, Everman found himself
in the presence of the locksmith, who was busily employed at his work. Mr. Black was a stout,
good-looking, middle-aged man, who wore bushy whiskers and a pair of iron-rimmed spectacles.
On the entrance of the detective he came forward with a pleasant smile on his face, as though
expecting a profitable customer, and greeted the operative.

"Well, sir, what can I do for you to-day?"

"Nothing in the way of business," replied the detective; "I am seeking some information which
perhaps you can give me."

"Take a seat," said the locksmith, pushing a stool toward the detective, and at the same time
seating himself upon the counter. "I don't know a great deal, but if I can tell you what you
want to know I shall be happy to do so."

"Thank you," replied Everman, as he produced a couple of fragrant cigars, and handed one to
Mr. Black. "My name is Everman; I am a salesman for a city house, and am a neighbor of your
brother-in-law, Newton Edwards. I have a message for him from his employer, and want to find
out where to address him. I understood he had come to Woodford, and was informed at the hotel
that I would be apt to learn from you whether he was in town."

While he was speaking, he watched the countenance of the locksmith carefully, and as he mentioned
the name of Edwards he noticed that the cheerful smile disappeared from his face and was replaced
with a heavy frown; this remained but a moment, and when Everman finished speaking, he promptly
and pleasantly replied:

"I cannot tell you, I am sorry to say, where Mr. Edwards is at present, for I do not know myself.
I only know that he was in Chicago on Saturday, a week ago, and at that time he stated that
he was going to Milwaukee and St. Paul; whether he did so or not I cannot tell you."

"I understood from his employer that he and Mrs. Edwards contemplated stopping in Woodford
for a few days before he started upon his business trip."

In response to this, Mr. Black stated to the detective, after much hesitation, but believing
he was speaking to a friend, that on the Saturday mentioned, he had received a telegram from
his sister, who was the wife of Newton Edwards, requesting him to come to her at once. He immediately
responded to this summons, and on going to the house where she was stopping, he found her in
great distress, and weeping violently. From her he then learned that Edwards had come to the
house that morning in a state of intoxication, and had shamefully abused her. That he had ordered
her to return to her family, and declared that he would never live with her again. Mr. Black
had therefore brought his sister home with him, and threatened to inflict personal chastisement
upon Edwards if he ever crossed his path again.

Finding that the story of the separation was a truthful one, at least so far as the relatives
of Mrs. Edwards were concerned, Everman decided to obtain an interview, if possible, with the
forsaken wife. Inviting Mr. Black to accompany him to the hotel, which was but a short distance
from the shop, the locksmith took off his leather apron and paper cap, and the two strolled
away together.

Over their cigars and a cooling draught of very good beer, the brother-in-law of the suspected
criminal became quite friendly and communicative, relating many trifling particulars of Edwards'
earlier life, which need not be repeated here. Preferring his request, at length, Mr. Black
cordially invited him to his residence, and giving him explicit directions, suggested that
he should call that afternoon. To this proposition Everman readily assented, and after a short
time spent in friendly conversation, Mr. Black returned to his shop, and the detective wended
his way to the locksmith's house.

Arriving at the place designated, he found a pretty little cottage, overgrown with climbing
vines, while a garden of bright blooming flowers rendered the front of the house an attractive
spot. Ascending the stoop, he rang the bell, and in a few moments a pleasant-faced lady appeared
at the door. Inquiring if Mrs. Edwards was within, and being informed in the affirmative, he
was invited to enter the cool and cosy parlor and await her appearance.

After a short delay Mrs. Edwards entered the room, and the heart of the detective was at once
touched at the sad and sorrowful expression which she wore. She was young, scarcely more than
twenty, and a handsome brunette. Her dark hair was brushed in wavy ringlets back from a broad,
intellectual brow, and the dark eyes were dewy, as if with recent tears. Her cheeks were pale,
and there were heavy shadows under the eyes, which told of sorrow and a heart ill at ease.
Another thing the detective noticed, with a feeling of compassion, for he was himself a man
of family, the lady was about to become a mother. How strange and unreasonable it seemed, that
a young man of Edwards' position in society, with a lovely and loving wife, with business prospects
of the most excellent character, could sacrifice all upon the altar of a base and ignoble ambition
to be suddenly rich. That he could at one fell blow cast away the ties of kindred, the love
of a devoted wife, the blissful anticipation of becoming a happy and proud father, and in an
evil hour yield to a temptation which eventually would place the brand of the felon upon his
brow, would cause him to be shunned and despised by his former friends and associates, clothe
him in the garb of the convict, and, if justice were meted out to him, would make him an inmate
of a prison. These thoughts flitted through the mind of the detective as he gazed upon the
pale sad features of the suffering wife, and for a moment he regretted the profession which
he had adopted. It is a common error, I fear, to imagine that a detective is devoid of those
finer feelings which animate humanity, and to credit him with only the hard, stern and uncompromising
ideas of duty which only appear upon the surface. This is a grave mistake, and does gross injustice
to many noble men and women, who, in my own experience, have developed some of the most delicate
and noble traits of which human nature is capable. It is true, their duty is hard and unyielding,
its imperative requirements must be rigidly observed; but many a criminal to-day has urgent
reasons to be thankful to the man who was instrumental in bringing him to account for the crimes
he had committed. Many a convict's wife and children are the recipients of kindly actions from
the very men whose duty it was to deprive them, by a legal process, of a husband and father.
This may seem strange and incredible, but from my own experience I can testify to its absolute
truthfulness. With the capture of the criminal the detective's duty ceases, and all the sympathetic
promptings of his nature have full play. He has performed his duty to the state, to the law
and to society, and that done, his knowledge of the sufferings which crime have caused leads
him to acts of kindness and of practical assistance. To-day, I have some of the warmest and
most grateful friends among the families of the men whom I was compelled to bring to justice,
and in many cases the criminals themselves have acknowledged my actions, and have been better
men in consequence. But this is a digression, and we will return to our narrative.

Rising to his feet, the detective politely acknowledged the salutation of Mrs. Edwards, and
in as few words as possible he stated his errand. With painful embarrassment of manner, Mrs.
Edwards informed him that she could not tell him anything about her husband's movements, as,
contrary to his usual custom, he had not informed her of the route he intended to take when
he left home. Not a word or a hint was given of the trouble that was preying upon her heart,
of the harsh, unfeeling treatment to which she had been subjected, or of the brutal order,
expulsion and separation. The dignity of the noble little woman sustained her grandly, and
no confession of her wrongs escaped her lips. She then informed the detective that she expected
to hear from him every day, and that she believed he was now traveling through Wisconsin.

That she was entirely unaware, at present at least, of her husband's whereabouts, the operative
was firmly convinced; and she appeared to be equally uninformed of the suspicions that were
entertained regarding him.

After a few moments spent in friendly converse, the detective arose to take his leave; and
after being invited to renew his visit, he departed from the house.

"By George!" murmured Everman to himself, as he made his way back to the hotel; "that little
woman is a wife to be proud of. That she knows nothing at present I am fully convinced, but
I am also certain that if she learns of the crime her husband has committed, she would sacrifice
her life rather than aid us in his discovery. What a strange, unequal world this is!--bad men
linked with angelic wives; and vicious and unprincipled women yoked with men who are the very
soul of honor. Well, well, I cannot set things right. I have only my duty to perform, and moralizing
is very unprofitable."

So pondering he returned to the hotel and resolving to call upon the chief of police in the
afternoon, he went into the spacious dining-room and ordered his dinner.

After dinner operative Everman called upon the chief of police, and acquainting him fully with
the nature of his business in the city, he enlisted his services in our behalf. Men were detailed
to watch the arriving and departing trains, in order to discover if Edwards either paid a visit
to Woodford or attempted to leave the place. This step was taken as a mere precaution, for
the detective as yet felt confident that Mrs. Edwards was entirely ignorant of the movements
of her husband or of the crime which he was suspected of committing. This was continued without
result for three days, but on the afternoon of the fourth, the chief sought Everman at the
hotel and informed him that he had important news to communicate.

"What is it?" inquired Everman, when they were alone.

"Well," said the chief, "it is just this. Last night, one of my men informs me, Mrs. Edwards
received a letter from her husband, and to-day she appears to be in great trouble and distress
of mind. There can be no doubt that she has been informed of his crime, and also that she now
knows his present whereabouts."

"She will never tell any one where that is, unless I am very much mistaken in her," interrupted
Everman, "and we must look elsewhere for the information we desire."

"Just my opinion exactly," replied the chief; "and I have thought of a way in which we might
get what we want."

"Let me hear what it is," said Everman.

"It is just this--Mrs. Black has an intimate friend and confidante, to whom she tells everything
she knows, and there is no doubt that she will soon, if she has not already done so, inform
this lady of the letter received yesterday. Well, so far, so good. Now, this lady has a husband
to whom she tells all she hears, and so he is apt to be as well informed in a short time. This
man is Tom Nelson by name, a carpenter by trade, and a jovial, easy, good-natured fellow by
nature. This man you must work up, and if you touch him correctly, you will find out all he knows."

"Very good," replied Everman confidently; "now point out Tom Nelson to me and leave me to work
the rest."

At this moment an alarm of fire was sounded, and in a few minutes the street in front of the
hotel was alive with people hurrying to the scene of the conflagration. Men and boys were running
at the top of their speed, and shouting at the top of their voices; women were gazing from
doors and windows, and the merry jingle of the bells of the fire-engines were soon heard, as
the brave fire laddies were rushing to the rescue of the burning building.

"The very thing!" ejaculated the chief. "I must go to the fire, and do you come along with
me. Tom Nelson is one of the most active firemen of the city, and I will point him out to you.
After that you must work your own way, for if I was to approach him upon the subject, he would
become suspicious at once."

So saying the chief hurried out of the hotel, closely followed by the detective. Turning a
corner they saw, not a great distance off, the flames leaping from the windows and roof of
a large frame structure, which was blazing and crackling like a huge pile of kindling prepared
for the torch. Already the department was upon the ground, and when the chief and the detective
reached the scene, several streams of water, shimmering like ropes of silver, were pouring
into the burning building. With a noble self-sacrifice and a disregard for their own safety
which was truly admirable, the brave fire laddies battled with the flames, and exerted themselves
to the utmost to prevent the fire from reaching the adjoining buildings. At last, yielding
to the almost superhuman efforts of the firemen, the fire was extinguished, leaving only the
bare and blackened walls standing as monuments of the destruction that had been wrought. Foremost
among the brave fellows who were performing their self-appointed and herculean duty was a man
about thirty-five years of age, stout and muscular in form, and with a good-humored, honest
face, that would attract your friendly regard at a glance. He was the most active and energetic
man upon the ground, and it could be seen at once, that his whole heart was in the work in
which he was then so earnestly engaged.

"That's your man," said the chief, pointing toward him, "and now you can commence upon him
as soon as you please."

"All right," answered Everman; "I will see what I can do."

The firemen had by this time, gathered up their hose and were preparing to return to their
various houses, and Thomas Nelson, after assisting in this labor until it was completed, left
his companions, and proceeded along the sidewalk in the direction of the hotel. Everman walked
on slowly behind him, and seeing him enter the building, he followed closely after him. Nelson
proceeded to the bar-room and had just tossed off a cooling glass of beer, when the operative
made his appearance.

"You seem to be thirsty after your hard work this morning," said the detective, in a laughing tone.

"It was pretty hot work, and no mistake," replied Nelson; "and we were mighty lucky in saving
the adjoining houses. I was afraid once they would certainly go."

"Fill up your glass again," said Everman; and Nelson graciously acquiesced. "Yes," continued
the operative, "you boys did excellent work, and you deserve great credit for it. I suppose
your fire department here is composed entirely of volunteers?"

"Yes, sir," answered Nelson, quite pleased with the encomiums which his pet hobby received;
"and a better organized fire department is not to be found anywhere."

"Well," said the detective, as he raised his glass, "here's to the health of your fire laddies;
may you never miss a run, and always have as good luck as you did to-day."

"Good," said the delighted fireman; "I don't know your name, but you're a good fellow, and
I am glad to hear you speak so favorably of us."

"My name is Everman," answered the detective frankly. "I only arrived in Woodford yesterday,
and expected to meet a friend whose family resides here; but I regret to say I have been disappointed."

"May I ask who you were waiting to meet?"

This was the very question the detective most desired to be asked, and he answered at once.

"Yes. I expected to meet Newton Edwards here, and I have some letters for him from his employer,
which he ought to receive."

At the mention of the name, Nelson started in astonishment, and then gave vent to a long, low
whistle.

"I am afraid you won't find him here," he said at last.

"Afraid, Mr. Nelson! Why, what's the matter?" quickly inquired the detective.

"Well, sir, I am afraid your friend has turned rascal, and has run away."

"What do you mean?" sharply asked Everman. "Surely, you have no reference to my friend, Newton
Edwards?"

"Yes, I mean him exactly. He is a damned thief, that's what he is; and he has broken his wife's
heart!"

This was enough for Everman; and in a short time he had learned all that the honest carpenter
could tell him. On the evening before, it appeared, Mrs. Edwards had received a letter from
her husband, the contents of which had made her frantic with grief, and to-day she was unable
to leave her bed. In this letter he had informed her that he had been connected with the robbery
of the bank at Geneva, and that he had succeeded in eluding all pursuit, and was now hiding
in some obscure place in the state of New York.

"This is all I know about it," added Nelson, "and I suppose I ought not to tell this; but when
a man turns out a damned rogue like that, honest people cannot afford to shield or uphold him
in his rascality."

"That's my opinion, exactly," rejoined the detective, "and I am sorry, indeed, for Edwards'
wife, although I am free to confess that I have no further sympathy for him."

"I ought not to have told you this," said Nelson, with some compunctions of conscience at his
garrulity. "And if my wife was to hear that I had done so, she would take my head off."

"Well, she won't hear of it from me, I can assure you, and I am too much disappointed in my
friend to speak of it unnecessarily to any one."

Their conversation was continued a few minutes longer, and then Nelson, promising to see my
operative again, took his leave.

Here was a revelation, which amounted to a direct confirmation of our suspicion regarding Edwards,
and was convincing testimony of the fact that he was hiding from the officers of the law. The
information about his location, while indefinite, was a surety of the fact that he had not
gone west, according to his previous arrangement, and that he must be looked for in the state
of New York.

One thing, however, was necessary to be done at once, and that was to keep a sharp lookout
for any letter which might be mailed by Mrs. Edwards or any member of her family. There was
no doubt that this lady would sooner or later attempt to write to her husband, and that too
within a few days. It was therefore of the utmost importance that a close watch should be kept
upon all the movements of the members of Mr. Black's household, and then to endeavor to get
at the address of any letters which they might attempt to mail.

Everman immediately sent his report of what he had learned to me, and then sought the chief
of police in order to enlist his further aid in such efforts as were now necessary to be taken.

When the chief had listened somewhat incredulously to what Everman had been enabled to learn
in the few minutes' conversation which he enjoyed with Tom Nelson, he was overwhelmed with
surprise at the rapid success he had met with, and he readily proffered all the assistance
in his power.

Everman resolved to see Nelson again, and endeavor to induce him to ascertain the exact locality
in which Edwards was hiding. The carpenter could not recollect it at the first interview, and
was not sure that he had heard it, but Everman concluded to try to jog his memory upon that
point still further. He did not have to seek an opportunity for meeting his man, for that evening
he received another call from Nelson, who had evidently taken a great fancy to my affable operative.
During the conversation that followed, Everman was informed by his new-found friend, that as
well as he could recollect the name of the place from which Edwards' letter was posted began
with a "Mac," and that was all that could be elicited from him.

Everman gave as his reasons for desiring to learn this fact, that he wanted to write to him
himself, and convey the letters which had been intrusted to him.

After spending some time in the vain endeavor to refresh the carpenter's memory, they at length
parted for the night.

"Remember, Mr. Everman," said Nelson, as he left the hotel, "if I can find out for you what
you want, I will surely do so; but for heaven's sake don't let my wife know it, or I will be
scalped alive."

The detective laughingly promised to beware of the sanguinary Mrs. Nelson, and the carpenter
went his way.

While these events were transpiring at Woodford, William had not been idle in the city. A constant
watch had been maintained upon the several premises occupied by the relatives of Newton Edwards,
in the hope of detecting some attempt upon their part to communicate with the suspected thief.
This at all times is rather a difficult object to achieve, but we have frequently been obliged
to resort to this mode of acquiring information from lack of definite knowledge on which to
base intelligent action. In order that one of the many of these expedients may be fully understood,
a few words in detail may not be out of place. As is well known, the mail of an individual
is so sacredly guarded by the laws of the country which govern the postal service, that an
attempt to interfere with the letters of another is regarded as a felony and punished with
severity. Of course, therefore, no efforts of ours would be directed to the obtaining or opening
of any letters which might be mailed to the suspected individual. Our object was simply to
obtain the addresses upon the envelopes, if possible, and then to search out the parties to
whom they had been consigned. In this instance our manner of proceeding was quite simple, but
it required that it should be managed with great care and without exciting the suspicion of
any one. For this purpose each of the operatives, detailed for this duty, was provided with
a number of envelopes of a peculiar size and color, and all addressed to fictitious persons.
Our plan was, that if any one of Edward's relatives deposited a letter in any of the street
boxes, the operative should be on hand and be prepared to drop his letter into the box immediately
on the top of it. Another operative was then to await the visit of the postman on his round
for collection, when he would step up to him and making a pretense of a mistake in the address
of a letter which he had mailed, would from its position be enabled to obtain a glimpse of
the suspected letters below, and their addresses.

This watch was maintained unceasingly for several days without result, and it appeared either
that the family were unaware of Edwards' hiding-place, or else that they were fearful of being
watched, and avoided communicating with him on that account.

In the meantime, William received another visit from Mr. Silby, the president of the despoiled
bank, who stated very reluctantly, that he and Mr. Welton, the cashier, during the absence
of Eugene Pearson from the bank, had attempted the feat of loosening the screws upon the lock
of the vault, and had been unable to do so. They had exerted their strength to the utmost,
and the screws had sturdily resisted their efforts. He was therefore compelled to admit that
thus far the suspicions against young Pearson appeared to be well founded, and that the screws
had evidently been loosened before the prisoners were confined in the vault, in order to allow
them to escape, should the atmosphere prove too oppressive for their safety. Mr. Silby also
stated, that he had obtained an interview with a Mr. Crampton, the president of the bank at
Independence, where it was learned that the parents of Newton Edwards resided, and that without
divulging any of our plans regarding that young man, he had acquired considerable information
concerning him. It was learned that Edwards had for some time been regarded as a very fast
young man, and several episodes were related of him, in which he had figured in no very enviable
light.

His parents were elderly people of eminent respectability, and were much distressed at the
actions of their son, from whom they had expected so much. He had begun life with bright prospects,
had entered into business with his own capital, but had failed after a short career, owing
to his extravagant habits and his inattention to business. After this he had traveled for several
firms, and while it was believed he received a large salary, there were many who shook their
heads at the stories of his dissipation which reached their ears from time to time.

This was information which was of some value, and opened up the way to accomplish an object
which William had long desired. He therefore requested Mr. Silby to introduce John Manning
to Mr. Crampton, and directed Manning to accompany that gentleman to Independence, and by their
joint efforts endeavor to obtain a photograph of Edwards. This was attended to at once, and
in a few days, through the assistance of the sheriff at Independence, we were enabled to secure
an admirable likeness of the absconding burglar, although the same had been taken nearly two
years prior to this. A number of copies of this photograph were at once printed, and they were
furnished to the various operatives who were at work upon the case. Hitherto we had been compelled
to rely upon the rather unsatisfactory method of identifying him by description only, and in
many cases, except where persons are trained to the work of accurately describing individuals
whom they meet, there is danger of not being able to identify any one who has no very prominent
distinguishing marks about him.

The first use to which this photograph was put was to exhibit it to Miss Patton, the young
lady who had been assaulted in the bank, and she instantly recognized it as the picture of
one of the men who had committed the robbery, and the one who had attacked Eugene Pearson,
while the other intruder was engaged in the attempt to gag and bind her. This was very important,
and no further efforts were now needed to establish the identity of Newton Edwards, or to connect
him with the robbery as an active participant.

After several days of unproductive watchfulness at the city residences of Edwards' relatives,
it became apparent that something more decisive would have to be attempted. From the reports
of the operatives who had been detailed upon this part of the investigation, it seemed evident
that the inmates had become suspicious of the fact that their movements were being made the
subject of espionage, and it was resolved to adapt another system of operation, and endeavor
to have one of my men enter the family, and by some means establish a friendly footing with
its members. By this means he would be enabled, while unsuspected, to learn of the movements
of the people whom he was watching.

I did not have far to seek for a man who would fully answer the purpose I had in view, and
one who would succeed if success were possible. I had tried him in several operations where
this kind of work was necessary, and he had invariably accomplished what had been delegated
to him to perform. I therefore called Harry Vinton into my office, and stated to him the nature
of the mission upon which he was to be sent. He was a handsome, jolly, quick-witted and intelligent
young fellow, who had been with me for a long time. Entering my employment as an office boy,
and evincing a decided task and talent for the profession of a detective, he had continued
in my service, until at this time he was quite an adept in his particular line, and many a
successful operation had been largely due to his intelligent efforts, while far removed from
the directing eye of myself or my superintending assistants. His manners were frank and easy,
and among the ladies he was a general favorite, therefore, I concluded to intrust him with
the task of obtaining admission into the residence of the sister of Edwards, on Logan Place.

Our operatives had reported that at this house there was employed, in the capacity of domestic,
a young and handsome girl, whose conduct as far as could be judged was exemplary in the highest
degree, and informing Vinton of this fact, William inquired if he thought he could manage it
successfully.

A merry twinkle shone in Vinton's eyes for a moment and then he answered:

"I think I can, sir; and I am willing to make the attempt."

"Very well," replied William, laughing. "Only look out for yourself. I hear she is a very charming
young girl, and you may find yourself in earnest before you are aware of it."

"Perhaps I may," said Vinton, "and perhaps I might not do better than that if I tried."

"All right," said William; "I will not burden you with instructions at present, and you will
proceed according to your own judgment, only remember what we want to discover, and succeed
if you can."

With these words Vinton took his departure.

A few days passed uneventfully by and no report came from Vinton. He was evidently looking
over the ground, and as undue haste would avail nothing in a matter of this kind William forbore
to push him.

Vinton, however, had not been idle, and his inquiries had developed the fact that the young
servant of Mrs. Andrews was a regular attendant at church on Sunday afternoon, when she was
allowed her liberty from her domestic duties.

The following Sunday, therefore, found him wending his way toward the church. The day was bright
and balmy, and the streets were thronged with pedestrians all bedecked in their Sunday attire,
and apparently enjoying to the full their day of rest.

Vinton reached the church, a magnificent structure, with its many spires glistening in the
rays of the sun, and its chime of bells which were ringing out their harmonious cadences upon
the air. He had been fortunate to find among his acquaintances a young man who also attended
this church, and in his company he repaired to the sacred edifice, and joined in the services
of the hour. When the last hymn had been sung and the congregation had been dismissed, Vinton
and his companion hurried out to the sidewalk, where they could observe all who came out.

Soon the doors were filled with little groups of men and women, all exchanging friendly greetings,
and indulging in pleasant gossip before seeking their homes, and to the intense delight of
Vinton, he noticed among a company of young ladies, the face and form of Mary Crilly, the pretty
servant of the sister of Newton Edwards.

Finding his gaze riveted upon this group, his companion lightly pulled him by the arm, exclaiming:

"What's the matter, Vinton. Has Mary Crilly captivated your senses?"

"I don't know who you allude to, but there is one of the prettiest girls I have seen for a
long time."

"I know who you mean, though," said his companion laughingly, "and she is one of the nicest
girls I know. Although she is simply a servant, she is both pretty, intelligent and industrious."

"Do you know her?" asked Vinton, both delighted and surprised.

"Certainly I do," answered his companion; "her name is Mary Crilly, and she is living with
a family on Logan Place."

"Can't you introduce me?" inquired Vinton anxiously.

"Yes, if you want me to; that's my sister she is talking to now, they are fast friends, and
Mary will probably spend the evening at our house. Come along, and perhaps you will lose your
heart."

The apples had certainly fallen right into his lap, and fortune had favored him this time,
if never before.

Stepping up with his friend, Vinton was soon made acquainted with the pretty young domestic,
and in a short time afterward was walking by her side in the direction of his friend's house,
where Mary was to spend the afternoon and evening.

Strange as it may appear, young Vinton, when not on duty, associated freely with his companions,
not one of whom suspected the business in which he was engaged. They only knew that he was
employed in an office "down town," and that frequently he was required to be absent from the
city for weeks. In a large city, however, there is not the same inclination to inquire about
the private affairs of one's neighbors, and hence he had been able, for prudential reasons,
to avoid announcing his real occupation, and was not compelled to make a social hermit of himself
because of his profession.

Being pressed to remain at the house of his friend, Vinton cordially accepted the situation,
and devoted himself to the fair Miss Crilly so assiduously that he soon was in high favor with
that young lady. After an enjoyable afternoon, he had the pleasure of escorting Miss Crilly
to her home, and when he left her at her door, he was gratified to receive an invitation to
call again, which he joyfully accepted, and resolved to take advantage of at an early date.

Thus far we had been successful; we had obtained a photograph of Edwards, which had been promptly
recognized. We had learned from his wife that he was hiding in the state of New York; and we
had reliable men carefully posted in such a manner that in a very short time definite information
must assuredly be obtained.

Harry Vinton continued his attentions to the fair young domestic, and in a few days he invited
her to accompany him to the theater. Edwards' sister, Mrs. Andrews, was present when this invitation
was extended, and having formed a very favorable opinion of my good-looking operative, she
at once consented, and Mary blushingly signified her inclination to accept his escort. His
deportment toward Mrs. Andrews was most deferential and polite, and in a very short time he
had quite won her kindly regard. This, of course, was precisely what he was most desirous of
accomplishing, and he improved every opportunity that offered to ingratiate himself into the
good opinion of Mary's mistress. So agreeably and gentlemanly did he conduct himself that ere
a week had elapsed he was quite graciously received, not only by the pretty young servant girl,
but by the members of the family as well. Mrs. Andrews, who appeared to be a kind-hearted lady,
although seemingly oppressed with some trouble, which was not made apparent, was deeply interested
in Mary's welfare, and had taken especial pains to cultivate Vinton's acquaintance. This was
done evidently with the view of satisfying herself as to the sincerity of his intentions toward
the girl, and to advise with her in the event of her discovering that he was an unworthy suitor
for her hand.

Vinton lost no opportunity to advance his friendly footing in the family, and frequently offered
his services to Mrs. Andrews in the way of performing trifling commissions for her, which he
could execute while on his way to and from his daily labor.

From Mary, Vinton learned that the family were in much distress regarding a brother of Mrs.
Andrews, but what it was she could not tell.

He also learned that this brother (who was none other than Newton Edwards), and his wife had
resided with the family for some time, but that Mrs. Andrews was very unfriendly to the young
woman, and scarcely treated her with the respect which was due to her brother's wife. The young
lady was very unhappy, Mary said, and several times she had seen her weeping bitterly in her
room. Thus matters continued until on one Saturday morning, but a short time previous to this,
the brother came home intoxicated, and abused his wife in a dreadful manner, and after ordering
her to return to her family, had left the house, and had not been seen since.

"What has become of the young lady?" inquired Vinton, after he had expressed his sympathy for
her unfortunate condition.

"Oh, her brother came for her that very afternoon, and after expressing his mind pretty freely
to Mrs. Andrews, he took her to his home, somewhere away from the city."

"Did her husband go away, too?" asked Vinton.

"Yes, he went about the same time, and has not been here since."

"Do the people in the house know where he is?" inquired Vinton.

"I don't think they do," answered the girl, "and they are very much worried about him. There
was a letter came from some one the other day, and ever since that time Mrs. Andrews has been
in great trouble. She does not tell me anything about it, but I think it is about her brother."

"That's very strange, isn't it?"

"Yes, and what is more so," answered the girl, "for several days past there have been several
men about the neighborhood who are strangers, and Mrs. Andrews is very much frightened about
it. She is afraid to go out of the house, and seems almost afraid to move."

"Does she think they have anything to do with her?" asked Vinton, surprisedly.

"Oh, I don't know about that; but it is a very unusual thing to have strange men loitering
about our neighborhood, and she feels very nervous about it."

Vinton expressed his profound sympathy for the unfortunate family, and without hinting any
suspicion that anything of a criminal nature had occurred, he parted from the young lady and
returned to his home.

A few evenings after this, Vinton again called upon Mary Crilly, and while he was conversing
with her, Mrs. Andrews came into the room.

"Mr. Vinton," said she, "before you go, I want to give you a couple of letters to post for
me, if it is not too much trouble."

"Certainly not," he replied, "anything I can do for you, Mrs. Andrews, will be cheerfully done
by me, I assure you."

"Thanks," said the lady, "I will have them ready before you leave, and would like to have them
posted this evening."

"I will attend to it, madam," said Vinton respectfully.

After passing a pleasant hour with Mary, Mrs. Andrews returned, and handed Vinton two letters
which he placed in his pocket without looking at the addresses, a proceeding which he noticed
gave Mrs. Andrews some degree of pleasure. After a few moments' further talk he took his leave,
and hastened to the agency. Here he was fortunate enough to find my son William, and he immediately
produced the two letters and laid them upon the desk.

"I don't know whether there is anything in these or not," said he, "but I thought I had better
let you see them."

William took up the two envelopes, and looked at their addresses. With a start of surprise,
he read the superscriptions. One of them was addressed to "William Amos, McDonald, New York,"
and the other to "Newton Edwards, Denver, Colorado, care Windsor Hotel."

Here was a dilemma! Could it be possible that Newton Edwards, knowing that the detectives were
upon his track, would continue to use his own proper name, and have letters addressed to him
in that open manner? This was certainly a most foolhardy thing for a sensible man to do, who
was seeking to evade the officers of justice. Was it not more reasonable to think that Mrs.
Andrews, taking alarm at the possibility of the actions of herself and family being watched,
and being fully aware of the crime her brother had committed, would be advised to direct her
letter to him under an assumed name?

A glance at the inside of these neat little envelopes would have satisfied all doubts upon
the question, but with a delicate regard for the privacy of individual correspondence, William
would not have opened them for any consideration.

"This is very clever," said he; "but I am afraid Mrs. Andrews is not quite sharp enough for
us this time. However, we will sleep upon the matter, and see what will turn up by to-morrow."

The next morning all doubts were set at rest. Mr. Warner, my son William and myself, were seated
in my office discussing this question. We were unanimous in our opinion that the letter addressed
to Newton Edwards was a decoy; and with Everman's information before us, that Edwards was hiding
somewhere in New York state, which began with a "Mac," all of us were convinced that the second
letter alone was deserving of serious attention.

While we were thus debating the question, the mail brought us a report from William Everman
at Woodford, that settled all doubts. Mrs. Edwards, he stated, had been seen to mail a letter
that evening, and after a serious effort, Everman had obtained a glance at the address. It
was as follows:

     William Amos,
         McDonald,
             New York.

"That settles it!" said I; "send at once to McDonald, and my word for it, Edwards will be found."

Whether I prophesied true or not, will soon be seen.

Our plans were soon completed for a visit to the place indicated by the address upon the two
letters. In the meantime, however, I had telegraphed to the police officials at Denver, and
learned from them that no such person as Newton Edwards had been about that place, or was known
there at all. They also promised that if any one called for a letter addressed to that name
they would arrest him at once and inform us immediately.

McDonald, I soon learned, was a little village in the central part of New York, remotely situated,
and with no railroad or telegraph facilities of any kind. An excellent hiding-place for a fugitive
certainly, particularly, as I suspected, if he had relatives residing there. Far away from
the swift and powerful messengers of steam and electricity, he might safely repose in quiet
seclusion until the excitement had died away and pursuit was abandoned. Such places as these
afford a secure harbor for the stranded wrecks of humanity, and many a fleeing criminal has
passed years of his life in quiet localities, where he was removed from the toil and bustle,
and the prying eyes of the officers of the law in the more populous cities and towns.

Two men were selected for this journey, and their preparations were soon made. That evening
they were flying over the ground in the direction of the little hamlet, where they were hopeful
of finding the man they were seeking.

As an additional precaution, and fearing that Edwards might not remain in McDonald for any
length of time, I telegraphed to my son, Robert A. Pinkerton, at New York city, to also repair,
as soon as possible, to that place, and if Edwards was there to arrest him at once, and await
the arrival of my operatives from Chicago.

Immediately upon the receipt of this message, Robert left New York city by the earliest train,
and without event, arrived at the station nearest to the village of McDonald, which he learned
was about twelve miles distant. Here he was obliged to take a stage coach, and after a long,
hot and fatiguing journey of several hours, he arrived about nightfall at the sleepy little
village, which was his point of destination. By making inquiries of the stage-driver in a careless
manner, and without exciting any suspicion, he learned that there was a constable at that place,
and on arriving, he immediately sought out this important official. From him Robert learned
that there was a strange young man stopping with an old farmer about two miles out of the village,
who had been there several days, and who was represented as a nephew to the old gentleman.
Upon showing him the photograph of Edwards, he recognized it at once, and signified his readiness
to render any service in the matter which might be required of him. After disclosing as much
as he deemed advisable to the constable, whose name was Daniel Bascom, Robert gladly accepted
his hospitality for the night, and feeling very tired and weary after his hard journey, he
retired to rest, and slept the sleep of the just, until he was awakened in the morning by his
hospitable entertainer. Springing from his bed, and looking out at his window, he saw that
the sun was just peeping over the hills in the east, and throwing its first faint rays over
the beautiful landscape that was spread before him, lighting up hill and dale with the roseate
but subdued splendor of its morning beams.

After partaking of a hearty breakfast, Robert and the village constable matured their plans
of operation. As a well-dressed city young gentleman might occasion some curiosity in the village,
and as young Edwards might take alarm at the unexpected appearance of a stranger in that retired
locality, it was decided to make some change in Robert's apparel. The constable therefore very
kindly offered him a suit of his clothing, which as the two men were nearly of the same size,
and the articles slightly worn, answered the purpose admirably, and in a few moments Robert
was transformed into a good-looking countryman, who was enjoying a short holiday after the
labors of harvesting, which were now over.

In company with Mr. Bascom, the constable, Robert sauntered into the village. It was a beautiful
morning; the air was delightfully fresh and cool, and the rays of the sun danced and glistened
upon the dew-drops which sparkled upon every tree and flower. The feathered songsters filled
the air with their sweet melodies, and nature with all its gladsome beauty was spread before
him. Such a feeling of rest and thorough enjoyment came over him, that it was with an effort,
he was able to shake off the pleasures of the hour, and bring himself to the disagreeable business
in hand. After a short walk they approached the general store of the little village, which
was the lounging-place of all the farmers for miles around. When they arrived they found a
motley gathering assembled to witness the great event of the day in this town, the departure
of the stage-coach, and Robert was speedily introduced as a relative of Mr. Bascom, who had
came to McDonald to spend a few days.

The mail coach was an important institution in McDonald, and was regarded as the great medium
of communication between that place and the great world outside. Every morning at precisely
the same hour the coach departed, and every evening with the same regard for punctuality the
old time-worn vehicle rolled up before the platform in front of the store, to the intense delight
and admiration of the assembled crowd.

For nearly forty years had this identical old coach performed this journey, and the same old
driver had drawn the reins and cracked his whip over the flanks--I was about to say, of the
same old horses. This, however, could not have been so, although the sleepy-looking, antiquated
animals that were now attached to the lumbering old yellow coach, looked as if they might have
done duty for fully that length of time.

Two young men were already seated in the stage, and their luggage was securely stowed away
in the boot. The postmaster--the village storekeeper filled that responsible position--was
busily engaged in making up the mail, and old Jerry, the fat good-natured old driver, was laughing
and joking with the by-standers, as he awaited the hour for departure. As Robert stepped upon
the platform he bestowed a hasty, though searching glance at the two men in the coach, and
to his relief found that neither of them was the man he wanted, and he quietly stepped back
and watched the proceedings that were going on around him.

The postmaster appeared at last, mail-sack in hand, which he consigned to Jerry's care, and
that burly individual clambered up to his place as gracefully as his big body and exceedingly
short legs would permit. Seating himself upon his box, he gathered up his reins and shouted
a good-natured farewell to the crowd. A quick and vigorous application of the whip awakened
the dozing horses so suddenly that they started up with a spasmodic jerk which nearly threw
the old fellow from his perch. By a desperate effort, however, he maintained his seat, but
his broad-brimmed hat went flying from his bald head and rolled to the ground, scattering in
its fall his snuff-box, spectacles and a monstrous red bandanna handkerchief. This little episode
called forth a peal of laughter from the by-standers, in which the old man heartily joined.

"Stick to 'em, Jerry!" cried one, "too much oats makes them animals frisky," while another
hastened to pick up the several articles and restore them to their owner.

Jerry wiped the great drops of perspiration from his bald, shining pate, as he replied:

"Them hosses are a leetle too high fed, I'll admit, but I'll take some of the vinegar out of
'em afore night, or my name ain't Jerry Hobson."

Everything being now in readiness, he again spoke to his steeds, and this time without mishap,
the lumbering old vehicle rattled away on its journey. The little crowd gradually dispersed
and soon left Robert and the constable alone with the store-keeper.

"I didn't see old Ben Ratcliffe around this morning," said Mr. Bascom to John Todd, the store-keeper.

"No," answered that individual; "he was here last evening, and said if the weather was fine
he was going with his nephew over to the lake, fishing."

"That accounts for it, then," said the constable; "I don't think he has ever missed a day for
ten years before."

"No, I don't think he has; but that young Mr. Amos, who is stopping here with him, is very
fond of fishing, and the old man promised to take him over to Pine Lake this morning, so 'Uncle
Ben' missed the mail for once."

After a short conversation with the store-keeper upon general matters, the two men took their
leave. It seemed very evident that as yet there was no suspicion on the part of Edwards, as
to the discovery of his hiding-place, and here in fancied safety, surrounded by nature in all
its beauty, with affectionate relatives, the young burglar was enjoying himself as heartily
as though no cares were oppressing him, and no thought of detection ever troubled his mind.

The uncle of young Edwards, it was learned, was a general favorite about the country. A good-natured,
honest old farmer, who had lived there from boyhood, and was known to all the farmers and their
families for miles around. Even in his old age, for he was long past sixty now, he cherished
his old love for gunning and fishing, and held his own right manfully among those who were
many years his junior.

It was decided, as a matter of precaution, that they should call at the house of Uncle Ben,
in order to ascertain whether he and his nephew had really gone fishing, and to that end the
constable harnessed up his horses, and in a few minutes they were on their way to the old farm-house,
which stood at the end of a long shady lane leading off from the main road.

Driving up to the gate, the constable alighted and approached the house, while Robert remained
seated in the buggy. In a few moments he returned, and stated that Mrs. Ratcliffe, the good
farmer's wife, had informed him that her husband and nephew had gone off before daylight to
a lake about five miles distant, and they would not return until late in the evening.

It was deemed advisable not to attempt to follow them, as their appearance at the lake might
give the young man alarm, and as they were not sure of any particular place to find them, they
concluded to quietly await their return. They accordingly drove back to the village, and Robert
returned to the constable's house to dinner. In the afternoon the two operatives whom I had
sent from Chicago arrived, having been driven over by private conveyance. Without publicly
acknowledging them, Robert gave them to understand that he would meet them at the house of
the constable, and upon repairing thither they were duly informed of what had taken place,
and instructed as to the plans proposed for that evening.

Nothing of any note transpired during the afternoon, and after sundown the party started out
upon their errand. Night soon came on, throwing its sable mantle over the earth, the sounds
of the busy day were hushed, and all the world seemed wrapped in the tranquil stillness of
a summer night. The stars, in countless numbers, were twinkling and sparkling in the blue heavens
above, while the new moon, like a silver crescent, shed its soft light upon a scene of rare
beauty and quiet loveliness.

Arriving within a short distance of the old farmer's house, the horses and buggy were secreted
in a little grove of trees that skirted the main road, and the men stationed themselves in
convenient hiding-places along the lane, to await the return of the farmer and his nephew.
From the appearance of the farm-house, it was evident that the fishing-party had not yet returned,
and they settled themselves down to a patient, silent waiting, which, as the hours wore on,
grew painfully tedious and tiresome. At last, long past midnight, and after they had begun
to despair of accomplishing the object of their visit, they heard a faint noise, as though
footsteps were approaching.

"Hist!" cried Robert, "some one is coming."

They listened intently, and gradually the noises grew louder and more distinct. As they came
nearer the constable distinctly recognized the voice of the old farmer, who was evidently relating
some humorous story to his companion, who was laughing heartily. The merry tones of this young
man's laugh were as clear and ringing as though he had not a care in the world, and had not
committed a crime against the laws of the state. No one, to have heard that hearty, melodious
burst of merriment, would have supposed for an instant that it came from the lips of a fugitive
from justice.

They were now nearly opposite to the crouching figures by the roadside. The old farmer had
evidently reached the climax of his story, for both of them broke out again into a fresh burst
of violent laughter that awoke the echoes round about them.

The laugh suddenly died away, the merriment ceased abruptly, as a dark form emerged from the
roadside, and the muzzle of a revolver was placed close to the cheek of the young man, while
Robert called out menacingly:

"Newton Edwards, I want you!"

With an exclamation of pain, the young man dropped his fishing-pole and the bucket of fish
he was carrying, while a chill ran through his frame, and he shivered like an aspen in the
grasp of the determined detective.

The others had now come forward, and as soon as he could recover from his astonishment, the
old farmer cried out:

"What does this mean?"

"It means," said Robert coolly, "that we have arrested your nephew for burglary, and that he
must go with us."

The moon just then came peeping from behind a cloud, and fell upon the haggard face and wild
eyes of the hapless prisoner, who until then had not uttered a word.

"It is all a mistake, Uncle Ben," faltered he; "but there is no use of making a denial here;
if the blow has fallen, I must meet it like a man."

The old man, with tears in his honest old eyes, gazed for a moment at his miserable relative,
and then, putting his sturdy old arms around him, he turned to the officers:

"Gentlemen, I suppose it is your duty. I have no fault to find. If the boy has done wrong,
he must suffer; but bring him to the house now, and in the morning you can go your way."

His offer was accepted, and directing the constable to return to his own home with his carriage,
the others walked slowly up the lane toward the house.

But few words were spoken during the night. The old farmer and his wife retired to their room,
and during the few hours that remained, their voices could be heard as they sorrowfully discussed
the painful situation.

Securing Edwards' effects, which consisted of a small portmanteau, they learned from the honest
old farmer, whose word was as true as gold, that nothing else belonging to the young man was
in the house. All attempts to induce the young man to speak were unavailing, and they finally
let him alone, and during the long hours he maintained a dogged silence. The detectives patiently
awaited the dawning of the morn. At last the eastern sky was tinged with red, and the faint
beams of a new day came streaming in through the windows of the old-farm house; and then Edwards,
after bidding a tearful adieu to his aged and stricken relatives, and accompanied by the officers,
left the house and proceeded on his way to McDonald, to commence his journey to Chicago.

It was in the gray dawn of the morning when the party arrived at the house of the constable,
Daniel Bascom. Here breakfast was prepared, and after full justice had been done to a bountiful
repast, an examination of the effects of Newton Edwards was commenced. Ever since his arrest
the young man had maintained a rigid silence, not deigning to notice the detectives in any
manner whatever. He partook of his breakfast in a dazed, dreamy fashion, scarcely eating anything,
and pushing back his plate as though unable to force himself to partake of food. In his satchel
was discovered a roll of bank-bills, which on being counted was found to contain a trifle over
three thousand five hundred dollars.

Edwards gazed at this money with a greedy, frightened look, like a wild beast at bay, but did
not utter a word, as Robert placed it in a large envelope and secured it about his person.

"Will you be kind enough to inform me," said Robert, when this was completed, "how you come
to have so much money about you?"

After a moment's hesitation, Edwards replied, doggedly:

"Yes, sir, I will. It is the proceeds of the sale of some property that I owned in the west."

"Very well," replied Robert, finding it useless, at present, to attempt to induce him to tell
the truth. "You will have ample opportunity to satisfy a court and jury upon that point in
a very short time."

Nothing farther was said to him until the time arrived for departing, and then the party, with
their prisoner, walked into the village in order to take the stage for the railroad station
at Birmingham.

Before leaving Mr. Bascom's, however, Robert handsomely remunerated the energetic constable
for his valuable assistance, and after thanking him warmly for his active and cordial aid in
our behalf, requested his company to the village.

As they approached the store, where the stage-coach was in waiting, they found an unusual crowd
awaiting their appearance. The news of the robbery and arrest had by some means become known,
and the eager faces of nearly three score of curiosity-seekers greeted them upon their arrival.

Old Jerry himself seemed to be impressed with an idea of additional importance, as though he
was about to be called upon to perform a noble service of great responsibility to his country,
in assisting to convey such a distinguished company in his old coach. The farmers gathered
in little groups about the platform, and conversed in low tones, as they furtively regarded
with sentiments almost approaching a respectful awe, the unwonted presence of the detectives
and their charge. There was an utter absence of the boisterous hilarity which had been manifested
on the preceding morning, and one might have thought that they had assembled for the purpose
of officiating at a funeral, so thoroughly subdued and solemn did they all appear.

The journey to the railway station was made in due time, and without accident, and the party
were speeding on their way to Chicago. Robert forbore to press the young man any further, and
let him severely alone during the entire day. During the night they all retired to their sleeping
berths, Edwards being securely handcuffed to one of my men, and occupying the same berth with him.

In the morning, Robert noticed a slight change in the demeanor of Edwards, and thought he detected
a disposition to converse. He did not encourage him, however, preferring by all means that
the advances should be made by the young man himself. Nor did he have long to wait. They procured
their breakfast in the dining car, and after the meal was concluded, Robert, without uttering
a word, handed Edwards a cigar, which he very gratefully accepted. After sitting quietly smoking
for a few moments, he turned to Robert and asked: "Mr. Pinkerton, how did you discover that
I was in McDonald?"

"In the same manner in which we have discovered many other things in connection with this robbery,"
replied Robert. "I may say, however, that the man we came for was William R. Amos; do you know
anything about such a person?"

As Robert spoke he gazed scrutinizingly at the face before him, and Edwards winced perceptibly
under his glance.

"I can explain that all right," he at length replied, with considerable embarrassment. "I got
into some trouble at home with a young lady, and thought it best to leave town for a short time."

"Edwards," said Robert sternly, "falsehood and impudence will not help you in this case, and
I wish to hear no more. I have only to say that we have evidence enough against you to insure
a conviction, and your only hope lies in making your sentence as light as possible."

"How so?" he asked.

"By telling all you know about this matter. One of your accomplices, we have got dead to rights,
and if you won't tell perhaps he will."

"Who have you got?" inquired Edwards, anxiously.

"That I cannot tell you now; our business is with you for the present. I want you to consider
this matter carefully. You are a young man yet, and though you have thrown away golden opportunities
in the past, you have yet an opportunity to reform your ways, and by assisting the officers
of justice in recovering the money which you and your companions have stolen, and in arresting
the rest of your associates, you may receive the clemency of the court, and perhaps benefit
yourself materially."

Edwards was silent for a long time after this, and it was evident that he was seriously considering
the matter. The words of the detective had made an impression upon him, but with the craftiness
of an old offender, he was debating a plan by which he might turn his admissions into account
for himself. At length he turned to Robert and asked:

"Will I be able to escape if I tell what I know?"

"I cannot promise that. But you are aware that the giving of information which leads to the
capture of your associates and the recovery of the balance of this money, will work to your
advantage very decidedly in the mind of the judge."

"Very well," said Edwards, with a dogged sullenness, "your advice is very good, but I have
no confession to make."

"Take your own course," said Robert, carelessly. "My advice was for your own good, and as you
don't seem willing to accept it, I have nothing more to say."

Although he had not accomplished very much as yet, Robert was still hopeful of inducing Edwards
to unburden himself; but he resolved to attempt nothing further with him until they arrived
in Chicago, where he could be managed more successfully by those who were more fully conversant
with the facts in the case. He well knew that we already possessed testimony amply sufficient
to convict Edwards of participating in the robbery, but what we most desired was to obtain
information concerning his partners in the deed. However, he decided to allow him ample time
for reflection and said no more to him upon the subject until they reached Chicago, when he
was at once conducted to the agency.

A consultation was immediately held in order to devise the best means to be pursued to induce
Edwards to reveal who his partners really were. William at once resolved upon a plan which
he was hopeful would lead to good and immediate results. Calling a carriage, he directed the
driver to take him to the residence of Edwards' sister, Mrs. Andrews, on Logan Place. On arriving
at the house, he found that lady and her daughter at home, and he was immediately ushered into
the parlor by the pretty servant, Mary Crilly. Without unnecessary preliminary, William informed
the lady that we had succeeded in arresting Edwards for the robbery of the Geneva Bank, and
that he was now in custody. He also stated that from information which he had obtained, he
was led to believe that his family were perfectly aware of his actions in this matter, if indeed
they had not aided him in accomplishing it.

At this point both mother and daughter burst into tears and sobbingly denied any knowledge
of Edwards' crime until after he had committed it, and then they could not act as his accusers.
Mrs. Andrews finally urged him to visit Edwards' brother, who resided on Freeman street, and
hinted that he could tell something about the matter, although she asserted he took no part
in it, and knew nothing about it until it had been completed.

Taking it for granted that they had told him all they knew about the robbery, William next
hurried to the place of business of Edwards' brother, whom he was fortunate enough to find
in his office, and disengaged. He at once stated who he was, and what he wanted to know. Mr.
Edwards was at first disposed to deny all knowledge of the matter, but on William's informing
him of his brother's arrest, and hinting that he had made a partial confession, he changed
his mind and became quite communicative.

The brother then stated that for years he had been troubled with Newton's bad habits and extravagances,
although he had never known him to commit a crime until the robbery of the bank at Geneva.
He remembered hearing his brother boast once when he was intoxicated, that he could get plenty
of money without work; but as Newton gambled a great deal, he imagined that he had alluded
to that means of obtaining his money.

"Well," said William abruptly, "I want to know what you know about this robbery."

"I will tell you all I know," answered Mr. Edwards. "Some three or four weeks before I heard
of this robbery, Newton was at my house, and was intoxicated. He boasted in his maudlin way
that he had an opportunity to rob a bank, and that the cashier was a party to the affair; but
I attributed all this to the wild utterances of a drunken man, and paid no further attention
to it. "We will hold up wheat, we will hold up meat, we will hold up munitions of war and we will
hold up the world's commerce," says Herr BALLIN. Meanwhile his countrymen on the Western front
are content to hold up their hands.

***

It is reported from German Headquarters that the KAISER intends to confer on Count BERNSTORFF
the Iron Cross with white ribbon. This has, we understand, caused consternation in official circles,
where it is felt that after all the Count has done his best for Germany.

***

"We

are at war," says the Berliner Tageblatt, a statement which only goes
to prove that there is nothing hidden from the great minds of Germany.

***

Mr. S.F. EDGE, the famous motorist, now on the FOOD CONTROLLER'S staff, has given it as his opinion
that a simple outdoor life is best for pigs.

We are ashamed to say that our own preference for excluding them from our drawing-room has hitherto
been dictated by purely selfish motives.

***

America is making every preparation for a possible war, and Mexico, not to be outdone, has decided
to hold a Presidential election.

***

It is true that Mr. GEORGE BERNARD SHAW has visited the Front, but
too little has, we think, been made of the fact that he wore khaki--just
like an ordinary person, in fact.

***

A sensational story reaches us to the effect that a new journalistic enterprise in Berlin is
being devoted to the "reliable reporting of news." We have always maintained that to be successful
in business you must strike out on original lines.

***

An exhibition of Zeppelin wreckage has been opened in the Middle Temple Gardens. The authorities
are said to be considering an offer confidentially communicated to them by the German Government
to add Count ZEPPELIN as an exhibit to the rest of the wreckage.

***

Members of the Honor Oak Golf Club are starting a piggery on their
course, and an elderly golfer who practises on a common near London
is about to write to The Spectator to state that on Saturday he started
a rabbit.

***

The American Association for the Advance of Science decided at a recent convocation that the ape
had descended from man. This statement has evoked a very strong protest in monkey circles.

***

The
tuck-shops of Harrow have been loyally placed out of bounds by the boys themselves, though
of course these establishments, like the playing fields of Eton, had their part in the winning
of Waterloo.

***

One of our large restaurants is printing on its menus the actual weight of meat used in each
dish. In others, fish is being put on the table accompanied by its own scales.

***

We are requested to carry home our own purchases, and one of the firms for whom we feel sorry is
Messrs. FURNESS, WITHY & COMPANY, of Liverpool, who have just purchased Passage Docks, Cork.

***

Australia
by organising her Commonwealth Loan Group, once again lives up to her motto, "Advance, Australia."

***

The
Coroner of East Essex having set the example of keeping pigs in his rose garden, it is rumoured
that The Daily Mail contemplates offering a huge prize for a Standard Rose-Scented Pig.

***

To be in line with many of our contemporaries we are able to state
definitely that the War is bound to come to an end, though we have
not yet fixed on the exact date.

* * * * *

* * * * *

AIR-CASTLES.

When I grow up to be a man and wear whate'er I please, Black-cloth and serge and Harris-tweed--I
will have none of these; For shaggy men wear Harris-tweed, so Harris-tweed won't do, And fat commercial
travellers are dressed in dingy blue; Lack-lustre black to lawyers
leave and sad souls in the City, But I'll wear Linsey-Woolsey because
it sounds so pretty.

I don't know what it looks like, I don't know how it feels, But Linsey-Woolsey to my fancy Prettily
appeals.

And when I find a lovely maid to settle all my cash on, She will be much too beautiful to need
the gauds of fashion. No tinted tulle or taffeta, no silk or crêpe-de-chine Will the maiden
of my fancy wear--no chiffon, no sateen, No muslin, no embroidery, no lace of costly price, But she'll
be clad in Dimity because it sounds so nice. I don't know what it looks like, I do not know its
feel, But a dimpled maid in Dimity Was ever my ideal.

* * * * *

THE LAST MENU CARD. Either she starves Great Britain or Great Britain starves her."

Mr. Curtin in "The Times."

Mr. CURTIN has lost a great chance for talking of "War to the knife-and-fork."

Possibly he was away in Germany at the time when this jeu d'esprit was invented.

* * * * *

"The Canadian papers are unanimous that the German peace proposals are premature, and will be refused
saskatoon."

Examiner (Launceston, Tasmania).

We had not heard before that Germany had asked for Saskatoon, but anyway we are glad she is
not going to get it.

* * * * *

From a schoolgirl's essay:--

"The Reconnaissance was the time when people began to wake up ... Friar Jelicoe was a very
great painter; he painted angles."

Probably an ancestor of the gallant gentleman who recently had a brush
with the enemy.

* * * * *

TACTLESS TACTICS.

Were I a burglar in the dock With every chance of doing time, With Justice sitting like a rock To
hear a record black with crime; If my conviction seemed a cert, Yet, by a show of late repentance,
I thought I might, with luck, avert A simply crushing sentence;--

I should adopt, by use of art, A pensive air of new-born grace, In hope to melt the Bench's heart
And mollify its awful face; I should not go and run amok, Nor in a fit of senseless fury Punch
the judicial nose or chuck An inkpot at the jury.

So with the Hun: you might assume He would exert his homely wits To mitigate the heavy doom
That else would break him all to bits; Yet he behaves as one possessed, Rampaging like a bull
of Bashan, Which, as I think, is not the best Means of conciliation.

For when the wild beast, held and bound, Ceases to plunge and rave and snort, The Bench, I hope,
will pass some sound Remarks on this contempt of court; The plea for mercy, urged too late,
Should prove a negligible cipher, And when the sentence seals his fate He'll get at least
a lifer.

O.S.

* * * * *

HEART-TO-HEART TALKS.

(The KAISER and Count BERNSTORFF.)

The Kaiser (concluding a tirade). And so, in spite of my superhuman forbearance, this is what it has
come to. Germany is smacked in the face in view of the whole world--yes, I repeat it, is smacked
in the face, and by a nation which is not a nation at all, but a sweeping together of the worst
elements in all the other nations, a country whose navy is ludicrous and whose army does not
exist; and you, Count, have the audacity to come here into my presence and tell me that, with
the careful instructions given to you by my Government and by myself,
you were not able to prevent such an end to the negotiations?

It is a thing that cannot be calmly contemplated.

Even I, who have learnt perhaps more thoroughly than other men to govern my temper--even I feel
strangely moved, for I know how deplorable will be the effect of
this on our Allies and on the other neutral Powers.

Our enemies, too, will be exalted by it and thus the War will be prolonged. No, Count, at such
a moment one does not appear before one's Emperor with a smiling face.

Count B. God knows, your Majesty, that it is not I who have a smiling
face.

At such a moment there could be no reason for it. But your Majesty will remember, in justice to
myself, that I have not ceased to warn your Majesty from the very beginning that unless something
actual and definite was conceded to the feeling of the United States trouble would surely come.
First there was the treatment of Belgium--

The Kaiser. Bah! Don't talk to me of Belgium and the Belgians. No more ungrateful race has ever
infested the earth. Besides, did I not say that my heart bled for Louvain?

Count B. The Americans, your Majesty, had the bad taste not to believe you. It was in vain that
I spread those gracious words of yours broadcast throughout the land.

     They only laughed at your Majesty.

The Kaiser. Yes, I know they did, curse them.

Count B. Then there came the deplorable sinking of the Lusitania.

The Kaiser. Oh, don't speak to me of the Lusitania. I'm sick to death
of the very name.

Besides, how do you dare to call her sinking deplorable? I authorised it; that ought to be
enough for you and for everybody else.

Count B. I beg your Majesty's pardon. When I said "deplorable" I was alluding not so much to
the act itself as to its effect on opinion in the United States. From that moment the Americans stiffened
in their attitude towards us and became definitely and strongly unfavourable. I warned your Majesty
of this over and over again, but your Majesty preferred to disregard what I said.

The Kaiser. And have you any complaint to make? Is your opinion of yourself so high that one
may not without sacrilege disregard your opinion?

Count B. Your Majesty is pleased to jest. I am not infallible, not being an Emperor, but I happen
in this case to have been right. And then on the top of all the other things comes the Note announcing
the new under-sea policy, and the ridiculous offer to allow the Americans to be safe in one ship
a week, provided she is painted in a certain way. No, really, with a proud nation--

The Kaiser. Proud! A race of huckstering money-grubbers.

Count B. With a proud nation--I must repeat it, your Majesty--such a course must lead straight to war.
But perhaps that was what your advisers wanted, though I cannot see why they should want it.
But for myself I must ask your Majesty to remember that I foretold what has come to pass.
There is perhaps yet time to undo the mischief.

The Kaiser. No, it is too late.

* * * * *

AS OTHERS SEE US.

The General Officer Commanding, as he appears to:

(1) His Chief of Staff.--The one insuperable obstacle to tactical triumphs such as CÆSAR and
NAPOLEON never knew.

(2) His youngest A.D.C.--A perpetual fountain of unsterilized language.

(3) Certain Subalterns.--The greatest man on earth.

(4) Tommy Atkins.--A benevolent old buffer in scarlet and gold who
periodically takes an inexplicable interest in Tommy's belt and brass
buttons.

An excuse for his sergeant's making him present arms.

(5) The British Public.--A name in the newspapers.

(6) Himself.--(a) Before dinner: An unfortunate, overworked and ill-used old man. (b) After
dinner: England's hope and Sir WILLIAM ROBERTSON'S right hand.

(7) His Wife.--A very lovable, but helpless, baby.

* * * * *

From an Indian teacher's report on the progress of his school:--

"A sad experience. Spirits for a time were very high. Our menials talked of exploits and masters
of glory in store. But soon the famines set in. The treachery of the elements ravished the hopes
of agriculturists, the major portion of the supporters of the ----
school.

The puffs of misery bleached white the flush of early and latter times; dinner-hours grew few
and far between; and with the Sun of Loaf sank all wakefulness to light and culture."

This last feature sounds a little like Berlin.

* * * * *

* * * * *

* * * * *

THE THREE DICTATORS.

(Being a tragedy of the moment and incidentally a guide to the art
of handing out correspondence to the typist.)

I.

There are, of course,
as many styles of dictating letters as there are of writing them;
but three stand out.

One is the Indignant Confidential; one the Hesitant Tactful; and one the No-Nonsense Efficient.
Bitter experience in three orderly London houses only a day or so ago chances to have led
to such complete examples of each of these styles that the reader has the felicity of acquiring
at the same time a valuable insight into business methods and a glimpse of what Nature in the person
of Jack Frost can do with even the best regulated of cities.
We will take first the Hesitant Tactful, where the typist is not
merely considered as a human being but invited to become an ally.
The dictator is Mr. Vernon Crombie.

"Oh, Miss Carruthers, there's
a letter I want to dictate and get off by hand at once, because my
house isn't fit to live in through burst pipes. The plumbers promised
to send yesterday, but didn't, and to-day they can't come, it seems,
and really it's most serious. Ceilings being ruined, you know. The
bore is that there aren't any other plumbers that I know of, and one
is so at the mercy of these people that we must go very delicately.
You understand. We mustn't say a word to set their backs up any higher
than they already are. Anger's no good in this case. Here we must
be tactful, and I want you to help me. I knew you would.

Now we'll
begin. To Messrs. Morrow & Hope. Dear Sirs,--I hate--no, that's a
little too strong, perhaps--I much dislike--that's better--I much
dislike to bother you at a time when I know you must be overworked
in every direction--you see the idea, don't you? What we've got to
do is to get on their soft side. It's no use bullyragging them; understanding
their difficulties is much better. You see that, don't you? Of course;
I knew you would. Now then. Where was I? Oh yes--overworked in every
direction; but if, as you promised yesterday, but unfortunately were
unable--I think that's good, don't you? Much better than saying that
they had broken their promise--to manage, you could spare a man to
attend to our pipes without further delay--I think you might underline
without further delay. Would that be safe, I wonder? Yes, I think
so--I should be more than grateful. And now there's a problem. What
I have been pondering is if it would be wise to offer to pay an increased
charge. I'd do anything to get the pipes mended, but, on the other
hand, it's not a sound precedent. A state of society in which everyone
bid against everyone else for the first services of the plumber would
be unbearable. Only the rich would ever be plumbed, and very soon
the plumbers would be the millionaires. Perhaps we had better let
the letter go as it is? You think so and I think so. Very well then,
just Believe me, yours faithfully, and I'll sign it."

And now the
Indignant and Confidential. Mr. Horace Bristowe is dictative: "Ah,
here you are, Miss Tappit. Now I've got trouble with the plumbers,
and I want to give the blighters--well, I can't say it to you, but
you know what I mean. There's my house dripping at every pore, or
rather pouring at every drip--I say, that's rather good; I must remember
that to tell them this evening. Just put that down on a separate piece
of paper, will you. Well, here's the place all soaked and not a man
can I get. They promised to send on Tuesday, they promised to send
yesterday, and this morning comes a note saying that they can't now
send till to-morrow. What do you think of that? And they have worked
for me for years. Years I've been employing them.

"Let's begin, anyway.
To Messrs. Tarry & Knott. Dear Sirs--No, I'm hanged if I'll call them
dear. Ridiculous convention! They're not dear--except in their charges.
I say, that's not bad. No, just put Gentlemen. But that's absurd too.
They're not gentlemen, the swine! They're anything but gentlemen,
they're blackguards, swindlers, liars. Seriously, Miss Tappit, I ask
you, isn't it monstrous? Here am I, an old customer, with burst pipes
doing endless damage, and they can't send anyone till to-morrow. Really,
you know, it's the limit. I know about the War and all that. I make
every allowance. But I still say it's the limit. Well, we must put
the thing in the third person, I suppose, if I'm not to call them
either 'dear' or 'gentlemen.' Mr. Horace Bristowe presents his comp--Good
Heavens! he does nothing of the kind--Mr. Horace Bristowe begs to--Begs!
Of course I don't beg. This really is becoming idiotic. Can't one
write a letter like an honest man, instead of all this flunkey business?
Begin again: To Messrs. Tarry & Nott. Mr. Horace Bristowe considers
that he has been treated with a lack of consideration--no, we can't
have 'considers' and 'consideration' so near together. What's another
word for 'consideration'?--treated with a lack of--a lack of--Well,
we'll keep 'consideration' and alter 'considers.' Begin again: Mr.
Horace Bristowe thinks--no, that's not strong enough--believes--no.
Ah, I've got it--Mr. Horace Bristowe holds that he has been treated
by you with a lack of consideration which--I wonder if 'which' is
better than 'that'--a lack of consideration that, considering his
long--no, we can't have 'considering' just after 'consideration'--that--no,
which--which--in view of his long record as--What I want to say is
that it's an infernal shame that after all these years, in which I've
put business in their way and paid them scores of pounds, they should
treat me in this scurvy fashion, that's what I mean. The swine! I
tell you, Miss Tappit, it's infamous. I--(and so on).

The No-Nonsense
Efficient businessman, so clear-headed and capable that it is his
continual surprise that he is not in the Cabinet without the preliminary
of an election, handles his correspondence very differently. He presses
a button for Miss Pether. She is really Miss Carmichael, but it is
a rule in this model office that the typist takes a dynastic name,
and Pether now goes with the typewriter, just as all office-boys are
William. Miss Pether arrives with her pad and pencil and glides swiftly
and noiselessly to her seat and looks up with a face in which mingle
eagerness, intelligence, loyalty and knowledge of her attainments.

"To
Messrs. Promises & Brake, says the business man,--Gentlemen comma
the pipes at my house were not properly mended by your man yesterday
comma and there is still a leakage comma which is causing both damage
and inconvenience full stop Please let me have comma in reply to this
comma an assurance that someone shall be sent round at once dash in
a taxi comma if necessary full stop. If such an assurance cannot be
given comma I shall call in another firm and refuse to pay your account
full stop. Since the new trouble is due to your employee's own negligence
comma I look to you to give this job priority over all others full
stop. My messenger waits full stop. I am comma yours faithfully comma.
Let me have it at once and tell the boy to get a taxi."

II.

None
of the plumbers sent any men.

* * * * *

* * * * *

"In some courts
the carrying of matches has been regarded as a light offence, but
this will not be the case in future."--Irish Times.

We note the implied
rebuke to the jester on the Bench.

* * * * *

SONGS OF FOOD-PRODUCTION.

II.

Mustard-and-Cress
in Mayfair, Belgravia's Winter Greens; None so nicely as they fare
Save Cox's Kidney Beans; Mustard-and-Cress in boxes, Greens in the
jardinière, And a trellis of Beans at Cox's, Facing Trafalgar Square.

Lady
Biffington's daughters Are mulching the Greens with Clay; Lady Smiffington
waters The Mustard-and-Cress all day; And Cox's cashiers (those oners!)
Are feeling extremely rash, For they're pinching the tips of the Runners
As they never would pinch your cash.

Mighty is Mayfair's Mustard,
The Cress is hardy and hale; Belgravia's housemaids dust hard To keep
the dust from the Kale; But Cox's cashiers look solemn, For their
Beans (which sell by the sack) Would cover the Nelson Column If they
didn't keep pinching them back.

* * * * *

"WEATHER AT HEALTH RESORTS.

Temp.
Sunshine. Max. Min. Weather. Felixstowe 0.0 22 29 Some snow."

Morning
Paper.

And some thermometer.

* * * * *

PETHERTON'S DONKEY;

OR,
PATRIOTISM AND PUBLICITY.

I hadn't had a letter-writing bout with
Petherton for some time, and, feeling in need of a little relaxation,
I seized the opportunity afforded by Petherton's installing a very
noisy donkey in his paddock adjoining my garden, and wrote to him
as follows:--

DEAR MR. PETHERTON,--I do not like making complaints
against a neighbour, as you know, but the new tenant of your field
does not seem to argue a good selection on your part, unless his braying
has a more soothing effect on you than it has on me.

Yours sincerely,
HARRY J. FORDYCE.

I was evidently in luck, as I drew Petherton's
literary fire at once.

SIR (he wrote),--I should have thought that
you would have been the last person in the world to object to this
particular noise. Allow me to inform you that I purchased the donkey
for several family and personal reasons which cannot possibly concern
you.

Faithfully yours, FREDERICK PETHERTON.

I translated this letter
rather freely for my own ends, and replied:--

DEAR PETHERTON,--I
apologise. I had no idea that the animal was in any way connected
with your family. If it is a poor relation I must say you are fortunate
in being able to fob him (or should it be her?) off so easily, as
he (or she) appears to live a life of comparative luxury, at little
cost, I should imagine, to yourself. I shall be glad to know whether
the animal, in exercising its extraordinary vocal powers, is calling
for his (or her) mate, or merely showing off for the amusement of
your fascinating poultry who share its pleasaunce.

Can't you possibly
fit the brute with a silencer, as the noise it makes is disturbing,
especially to me, my study window being very close to the hedge?

Yours
sincerely, HARRY FORDYCE.

P.S.--I am thinking of laying down a bed
of poisoned carrots for early use. Perhaps with your chemical knowledge
you can suggest an effective top-dressing for them.

Petherton rose
to the bait and wrote--the same night--as follows:--

SIR,--In your
unfortunate correspondence with me you have always shown yourself
better at rudeness than repartee.

As respectfully, but as firmly as possible William stated his determination to arrest the young
man, and informed them that every opportunity would be afforded him to defend himself, and
to remove the stain upon his character when the proper time arrived.

Eugene Pearson, the culprit, was the least disturbed of the party. His coolness was imperturbable.
He flatly denied all knowledge of the robbery, and in the strongest terms, assured his weeping
and grief-stricken relatives of his innocence.

The arrest, however, was quietly accomplished, and Pearson was soon confined beneath the same
roof which sheltered his associate in crime, Newton Edwards.

Early the next morning the town was alive with people and the greatest excitement prevailed.
The news of Eugene Pearson's arrest had spread far and wide, and a universal sentiment of indignation
pervaded the whole community. Angry men gathered at the corners of the street, and threats
of vengeance against the officers of my agency were loudly uttered. A lawless outrage had been
committed by us, and the righteous indignation of an injured community refused to be appeased.
The hotel where my men were stopping was besieged by the angry citizens, and our actions were
denounced in the most belligerent manner. Eugene Pearson, in their opinion, was above suspicion;
he was their ideal of a moral young man, his father was respected everywhere, and the base
and unwarranted invasion of their home by my officers was an indignity which they were resolved
they would not allow to pass unpunished. As the morning advanced the excitement increased,
and several of the boldest of the angry citizens approached William, and in no complimentary
terms expressed their contempt, not only for him individually, but for the methods which had
been used to ferret out and apprehend men who were innocent of any wrong.

Under ordinary circumstances William would have resented these insults, and that too in a manner
that would have convinced them that he was fully able to defend himself; but realizing the
importance of coolness and discretion at this critical juncture, he preserved his good humor,
and securing their attention for a few moments, he requested them not to be too hasty in their
actions. If Eugene Pearson was innocent, he stated, no serious harm had been done the young
man; and if he was guilty, as he could prove in a short time, they would deeply regret the
course they were now threatening to pursue.

In the meantime he had not been idle in his attempts upon the stoical firmness of Eugene Pearson
himself, and at length the young burglar was broken completely down; he confessed his guilt,
and promised to conduct the officers to the spot where he had hidden his share of the booty.
In company therefore with two of the officers, he repaired to the barn in the rear of his father's
house, and buried in the ground in the yard, they found a sack of coin amounting to the sum
of six thousand dollars.

So far, so good. We had now captured two of the robbers, and had secured nearly one-half of
the stolen money of the bank.

It is needless to say that immediately following the confession of Eugene Pearson and the finding
of the money he had stolen, the opinions of the previously enraged citizens underwent a decided
change. If William had desired any evidence of the overwhelming triumph which he had achieved,
the deportment of these disappointed men toward him would have fully satisfied him. No longer
regarded as a ruthless invader of the privacy of honest homes, and guilty of outraging the
finer feelings of humanity, he was everywhere received with the utmost respect and deference,
and many apologies were offered for their inconsiderate conduct of a few hours before. And
yet it must be recorded, that with this indisputable evidence of Eugene Pearson's guilty participation
in the robbery, there yet remained many, who, unable to refute the damning proofs against him,
were filled with a sympathetic sentiment of regard for their fallen idol, and their prevailing
feelings were those of sorrow and regret.

The majority of them, however, came up by scores, frankly acknowledged their mistake, and freely
apologized for their actions, which under the circumstances, were shown to be so hasty and
ill-timed.

In a day or two after this, Dr. Johnson made his appearance, under the escort of William Everman;
and the delectable trio were placed in separate cells to prevent any collusion between them
prior to their examination.

Johnson's arrest had been very easy of accomplishment. He was entirely unaware of what had
transpired with the other two, and having had no active participation in the robbery, had imagined
himself perfectly secure and had taken no means of escape.

Everman, on his arrival at St. Louis, had, in accordance with my instructions, obtained the
assistance of the chief of police of that city, who very cheerfully and cordially volunteered
all the aid in his power. Two men were therefore detailed to accompany Everman in searching
for Dr. Johnson, and it was nearly midnight before they succeeded in ascertaining definitely
where he lived. Shortly after that hour, however, the detectives ascended the stoop of the
doctor's residence and requested to see him. He appeared in a few minutes, and as he stood
in the doorway, Everman quickly placed his hand upon his shoulder, and informed him that he
was wanted at police headquarters. The doctor turned pale at this announcement, and requested
an explanation of such an unusual proceeding; but Everman informed him that all explanations
would be made in due time, and at the proper place. Trembling in every joint, the discomfited
doctor obeyed, and in a few minutes was conveyed to the office of the chief, where he was closely
examined, but refused to divulge anything in connection with the robbery of the Geneva bank,
and asserted boldly his entire innocence of the charge. Despite his pleadings for delay he
was brought to Geneva upon the next train, and in a short time three of the guilty parties
were safely in custody.

Our work had thus far been prompt and successful. We had captured the leaders of this gang,
and had recovered nearly half of the stolen money. Much more, however, remained to be accomplished,
and we determined that our efforts should not be relinquished until Duncan, the remaining member
of this burglarious band, had been secured, and some clew to the remainder of the money had
been obtained.

The days which followed the arrest of the three young bank robbers were eventful ones in the
history of Geneva. The three youthful offenders, now downcast and humiliated, were afforded
a speedy hearing, and when the facts already adduced by us had been received, they were remanded
to jail for trial at the next term of court.

It is needless to say that the good citizens of the little town were shocked beyond expression
at the unexpected results of our investigation. Both Pearson and Johnson had grown to manhood
in their midst, and until this time no taint of suspicion had ever been urged against them.
No thought of wrong-doing had ever attached to them, and no shadow had dimmed the luster of
their fair fame. Now all was changed, and the irreproachable reputations of days gone by were
shattered. Debased and self-convicted, they stood before the bar of justice, to answer for
their crimes. Instead of being the objects of admiration, they were now receiving the well-merited
scorn of those who had been their friends and neighbors. Scarcely past their majorities, and
just stepping over the threshold of life, the future bright with promises and fruitful of golden
experiences, they had recklessly thrown all to the winds, and now stood before their former
friends with the brand of the felon upon their brows. No sadder spectacle could have been presented,
and certainly none more full of warning to the careless youths who thronged the court-room,
than the presence of the aged parents of these young men on the day of the hearing. Their cup
of bitterness and sorrow was indeed full, and as they raised their tear-stained eyes to their
children, there was not one present whose heart did not throb in sympathy for their misfortunes.
More especially was this the case with the mother of Eugene Pearson. He was her idol; and until
the very moment of his arrest, she had never known him to be guilty of aught that would bring
the blush of shame to his cheek. Now, however, the awful revelation came, and the boy on whom
she had lavished all the wealth of her true heart's affection was proven, before all the world,
to be the blackest of ingrates, and a designing hypocrite and thief. Mr. Silby, too, was much
affected by the discovery of Pearson's guilt. His affection and regard were so sincere and
trustful, that, had he been his own son, he could not have been more painfully disappointed
at discovering his cupidity.

Another interview had been obtained with Edwards at Geneva, and he gave us some further particulars
about the course which he and Duncan had taken after having robbed the bank. Shortly after
leaving the city of Geneva, they made their way to the railroad, along the track of which they
journeyed for some distance. The day was exceedingly warm, and the valise in which they were
carrying the stolen money became very heavy and burdensome. Finding it impossible to proceed
any further with such a heavy load, they decided to take out all of the money but a few sacks
of silver, amounting altogether to about three hundred dollars. This they did, concealing the
money about their persons, and then hiding the valise in a corn field which skirted the railroad
track. Being furnished with a description of the locality, William proceeded, in company with
the officers of the bank, to the place designated, and after a short search, succeeded in finding
the satchel which they had discarded. Upon opening it, they found, as Edwards had said, three
small canvas sacks containing about three hundred dollars in silver coin. No trace, however,
was discovered of the sack supposed to contain the five thousand dollars whose disappearance
was still a mystery. Pearson indignantly denied having taken more than six thousand dollars
as his share, and this had been found in the yard of his father's house. Edwards was equally
positive that he had not seen this sack, and yet the fact remained that there were five thousand
dollars in gold coin which could not, as yet, be accounted for.

Numerous theories were now advanced to account for this mysterious disappearance. One was that
some outside party had found the valise, and finding the gold, had left the silver in order
to make it appear that the satchel had not been disturbed. This was discarded at once, as the
position and condition of the valise when found was such that it could not have been tampered
with, or even opened. This was a surprising thing to contemplate, for the ground for miles
around had been thoroughly searched by hundreds of people, and it was evident that no one had
discovered the hiding-place of this valise.

Another theory was that it was improbable that the two robbers would overlook a sack containing
that large amount of money. Its very weight would have betrayed its presence, and added nearly
nineteen pounds to the burden which they carried, and therefore there were still some grounds
for entertaining a belief that Pearson had taken more than his share of the booty. To this
belief I was not inclined to give much weight, as I felt convinced that Pearson had made a
full confession of what had taken place, and had made honest restitution of the money he had
taken. Under all the circumstances, therefore, I was inclined to think that Edwards and his
companion had taken the gold, and that the capture of the remaining robber would unravel the
seeming mystery.

I was further convinced of this by another incident which transpired in this connection. After
the valise had been found and returned to the bank, Edwards was taken into the building. The
silver coin which had been recovered was placed within the satchel, and handed to him. After
taking it in his hand, he immediately exclaimed:

"Why, that isn't nearly as heavy as it was when we left the bank!"

Mr. Silby then brought out a sack containing five thousand dollars in gold, and placed it in
the satchel. Again Edwards lifted it, and this time he at once said:

"That is more like it!"

This experience strengthened me in the belief of Eugene Pearson's innocence, and that Edwards
and his companion had either lost the gold in some manner, or had disposed of it in some other way.

Acting upon this theory, the ground in the vicinity of the spot where the valise was found
was thoroughly searched by both the bank officials and my operatives. All in vain, however;
no trace was obtained of the missing sack of gold, and the matter of its loss was as much a
mystery as ever.

After the preliminary hearing had been held, the prisoners were removed to the county town,
some miles distant, where they were placed in confinement, awaiting the day of trial, which
would not take place for some time to come.

While these events were transpiring, we had by no means been idle. Our primary success in arresting
the three men thus far secured, had been most gratifying to the officers of the bank as well
as to ourselves. Of course I was anxious to continue the search for the missing robber, but
no one possessed a better knowledge than myself of the expense and delay that would be contingent
upon such an undertaking. I therefore, as was my duty, fully informed the officers of the bank
of the difficulty to be encountered if our investigation was continued. More than thirty days
had elapsed since the robbery had been committed, the news of the burglary had been spread
far and wide, and the information of the capture of the three robbers would be equally disseminated.
This would probably place the fugitive upon his guard, and we could not pretend to fix a limit
to the time that would be necessary to effect his capture. All these facts were fully explained
to the bank officials, and with the assurance that we would achieve success if it were possible
to do so, the matter was left to their decision.

They were not long, however, in coming to a determination, and without hesitation, I was directed
to prosecute the search according to my own judgment, in which, they assured me, they placed
the utmost reliance.

Thus supported, we made immediate arrangements for a protracted and unceasing search for the
fleeing burglar, and before the hearing had taken place in Geneva, operative John Manning had
been despatched to Clinton, Iowa, at which point it was designed to commence operations.

The two operatives who had been detailed to look after the trunks of Thomas Duncan, in Chicago,
had also reported the result of their espionage. After waiting for more than two hours, they
noticed that an express wagon was driven up before the door, after which the trunks were brought
out, placed in the wagon, and rapidly driven away. The operatives followed as rapidly as they
were able to do, and ascertained that they were taken to the railroad station for shipment
to Des Moines.

As has already been detailed, Edwards and Duncan parted company at Clinton, Iowa, Duncan proceeding
west, while Edwards had come direct to Chicago, from which point he had made his way eastward
to the little village in New York, where he remained in fancied security until he was so unexpectedly
taken into custody.

Clinton, Iowa, was therefore the place from which to trace the flight of the bank robber, and
John Manning was dispatched to that place, with full authority to exercise his own judgment
about his future course of action.

Within a few hours after receiving his orders, John Manning, satchel in hand, stepped from
the train at Clinton, and proceeded to a hotel. It was nearly nightfall when he arrived, and
after hastily partaking of his evening meal, he started out to make some inquiries about the
man he was in search of. Having by some means gained a knowledge of Thomas Duncan's associates
in Clinton, he had no difficulty in finding them, and dropping into a saloon which they frequented,
he quietly introduced his name in a casual conversation with the proprietor.

"Do you know Tod?" asked that gentleman, with some surprise.

"Oh yes, very well," replied Manning. "I spent several days with him in Chicago, about a month
ago, and had quite a pleasant time."

"Oh, I remember; he stopped here after that, on his way to his home in Des Moines. You must
have had quite a time, for Tod looked very much broken up."

"Well, he was on quite a spree, I believe--and so he went to Des Moines, did he?"

"Yes, he started for that point; but I believe he intended stopping some time in Ames, where
he has a good many friends."

"Did he say what he intended doing there, or whether he was going on out to Denver?" asked Manning.

"No, I think he said he was going with a fishing-party from there and would be gone several
weeks." After stating that he was about to travel in that direction himself, and learning the
names of several of Duncan's friends in Ames, Manning left the saloon, and returned to his
hotel. Ascertaining that he could leave on a train that night, he hastened to the depot and
was soon speeding on his way.

He arrived at Ames in due season, and here he was fortunate enough to find a friend of Duncan's,
who informed him that instead of remaining in that city he had only lingered there one day,
when he left on a freight train for Des Moines, stating that he was to meet a friend in the
latter city and could not wait for the regular passenger train.

Manning without delay then started for Des Moines, and upon arriving there, telegraphed the
result of his investigation thus far. In reply he was informed that Duncan's baggage had been
sent to Des Moines, and directed to inquire at the office of the American express whether it
had been received or delivered.

Immediately on the receipt of these instructions Manning repaired to the express office, and
there to his intense delight, he discovered Duncan's trunks among the unclaimed baggage. Making
himself known to the express superintendent, who was friendly to our interests, he remained
around the office until late in the evening, when as the office was about to be closed, and
feeling confident that the trunks would not be called for that night, he repaired to his hotel
and sought his much-needed repose.

The following morning he was up betimes, and deferring his visit to Duncan's friends until
he had seen the trunks removed, he made his way again to the express office and took up his
position as a watcher.

Shortly before noon, a wagon was driven up before the door, and a man presented himself and
demanded the trunks in which the detective was so much interested. The wagon bore the name
of a grocer, John Miller, and was evidently used in delivering the wares dispensed by the merchant
whose name was painted upon its sides. After the trunks had been transferred to the wagon,
the driver mounted to the seat and slowly drove away. Manning followed on behind them, and
after a short journey, the driver drew up before a handsome residence, surrounded by a beautiful
lawn, adorned with numerous beds of bright blooming flowers. The building was a two-story one,
with a wide porch extending around three sides, and was evidently the abode of a gentleman
in fortunate circumstances. The trunks were removed from the wagon, and carried into the hall,
after which the driver returned and drove away. After waiting for some time in view of the
house, he saw the trunks taken in, and placed in a front room in the second story.

Having now traced Thomas Duncan's trunks to their destination, and feeling the need of additional
assistance, Manning repaired to the office of the chief of police and requested an interview
with that functionary. Upon being conducted into the private office of the chief, Manning at
once introduced himself, and stated the cause of his appearance in the city. He met with a
most cordial reception, and the chief, without hesitation, promised him all the assistance
in his power. He had heard of the robbery at the time of its occurrence, and had also read
of the capture of the three men, who were suspected of being implicated in that affair. Upon
being informed that Thomas Duncan was connected with the burglary, the chief evinced considerable
surprise, for he was well acquainted with the young man, and had been for several years, in
fact, almost since his boyhood. From the chief, Manning learned that Duncan's parents had lived
in the city for a long time, and that "Tod" was rather a wild, careless fellow, who was frequently
found in bad company. For a long time the young man and his father had been estranged, owing
to the son's persistent course of folly and dissipation. Long and patiently had the old gentleman
borne with his son, and had repeatedly opened his purse to liquidate debts which Tod had contracted;
but finally, finding it useless to attempt to induce him to change his mode of life, he had
forbidden him the house, and had not received him since.

It was barely possible that Duncan might be found in the city, but the chief was inclined to
a different belief. In any event, however, it would be useless to seek for him beneath his
father's roof. Manning described the house at which the trunks were left, and was informed
that it was occupied by a man named John Miller, a grocer, and an intimate friend of Duncan's.
Duncan always made Mr. Miller's house his home during his visits to Des Moines, and if any
one was acquainted with his movements, this John Miller ought to be the man.

Instead, however, of calling upon Mr. Miller at once, Manning proposed to shadow the house
during the day, in order to see if any one answering Duncan's description should enter or leave
the place. This was deemed particularly advisable, as if Mr. Miller was approached at once,
his suspicions might be excited, and if Duncan was in the city the alarm could be given, and
he could readily make his escape before we could reach him.

No one at all resembling Thomas Duncan, however, made his appearance during that day, and in
the evening Manning repaired to the chief's office, as that gentleman had promised to accompany
him on his visit to the friendly grocer.

John Miller and Mr. Wallace, the chief of police, were warm friends, and he felt confident
that Miller would not tell him an untruth; but it was deemed best to introduce Manning as a
friend of Duncan's, from Chicago, who wanted to see him upon a matter of business. Of course,
it had not yet reached the public ear that Thomas Duncan was suspected of complicity in the
robbery, as we had kept that fact entirely secret, fearing that a divulgence of Edwards' confession
would seriously interfere with our search for the missing burglar, and perhaps prevent us from
ever apprehending him.

The two men therefore repaired to the store of the grocer, and were fortunate enough to find
him at home. He greeted the chief warmly, and acknowledged the introduction of Manning with
good-natured heartiness and sincerity. Inviting them into his private office, Mr. Miller requested
to know the nature of their call, and Mr. Wallace at once explained to him what had already
been agreed upon. Manning further explained that when he left Duncan, that gentleman informed
him that he intended coming to Des Moines, and would probably stop with Mr. Miller.

"Has he been here recently?" asked Mr. Wallace.

"Well, I'll tell you," replied Mr. Miller. "More than three weeks ago he was here. It was about
midnight, and I had retired to bed. Suddenly I was awakened by a loud ringing at my door-bell.
Hastily dressing myself, I went down, and there, to my surprise, stood Tod Duncan. He was so
disguised, however, that I did not recognize him until he addressed me and told me who he was.
He was attired in a suit of coarse brown ducking, heavy boots, and a slouch hat; around his
neck he wore a large red handkerchief, and he looked more like a German tramp than like my
old friend. I felt at once that something was wrong, or that he was in some trouble; so I asked
him in, and we went to my room. My family were away at the time, and there was no one in the
house but myself, and as he looked tired and hungry, I produced what eatables I had in the
house, and he made a hearty meal. After he had finished, he turned to me, and laughingly said:

"'The devil himself wouldn't know me in this rig, would he?'

"I told him I thought not, and then asked him what was the cause of his strange disguise and
his unexpected appearance in Des Moines. He told me that he had got into some trouble about
a game of poker in Leadville, and that he had shot and perhaps killed a notorious gambler in
that city. He wished me to help him, as he was hiding from the officers who were after him,
until the affair blew over. He seemed particularly anxious that I should help him to get away.
Upon asking him how the affair happened he related the following incident to me. It happened
that he was playing a game of poker in Leadville, with a notorious and unscrupulous gambler,
and that at one time when there was a large amount of money on the table, this gambler deliberately
displayed four aces, when Duncan held an ace which had been dealt to him in the first hand.
Upon accusing the gambler of attempting to cheat him, that worthy drew a pistol and attempted
to intimidate him. He was too quick for his opponent, however, and quick as a flash, he had
fired upon him, and the man fell. Hastily gathering up the money that was upon the table, Duncan
succeeded in making good his escape from the house, amid a scene of confusion and uproar impossible
to describe. He showed me," continued Mr. Miller, "a considerable sum of money, in proof of
his assertion, and of course I have no reason to doubt his word. He further informed me that
his trunks were in Chicago and that he was desirous of obtaining them. I provided him with
pen and paper, and he wrote a letter which purported to be written in St. Louis and addressed
to myself, stating that he was in that city, without a dollar, and requesting me to send for
his trunks at Chicago, promising to repay me at an early day. I did not understand this proceeding,
particularly as after writing this letter, he gave me twenty dollars, to pay for having his
trunks sent to Des Moines, and requested me to allow them to remain in my house until he should
send for them. That this letter was intended to mislead some one, I have no doubt; but I was
at a loss to understand how it could succeed in its purpose if I retained possession of it.
At his request then I inclosed his letter to me to the landlady at Chicago, and I know nothing
further about it except that Duncan's trunks arrived to-day and are now in my house, awaiting
his disposition."

"How long did Duncan remain in town at that time?" asked Manning.

"I think he left the next day," replied Mr. Miller. "He left my house on the following morning
at any rate, and I learned afterward that he went away with an old friend of his, who is a
brakeman on one of the roads here, on the same day that he left my house."

"Do you know who the man was that he went away with?" now asked Mr. Wallace.

"Yes; his name is Bob King, and if I am not mistaken, King obtained a leave of absence from
the railroad company for a few days in order to go with Duncan. They hired a horse and carriage
and started off in the direction of Grand Junction. King was absent several days, and then
returned with the team, stating that Duncan had gone west. I thought this very strange, as,
if he had ran away from Leadville, it would certainly be very unwise for him to return. However,
I heard no more about him, but I have seen Bob King frequently. He comes in several times a
week, and you can most likely find him about some of the boarding-houses around the Union Depot."

This was all that could be gained from Mr. Miller, and after receiving that gentleman's promise
to inform Mr. Wallace, in case he should hear anything of Duncan, the two men took their leave
of the accommodating and loquacious grocer.

Leaving the chief at his office, Manning resolved to pay a visit to the residence of Duncan's
parents. Not, however, to make himself known or to institute any inquiries; but to quietly
watch from the outside whatever was transpiring within. He found the house to be a large frame
dwelling, with extensive grounds surrounding it; everything evinced the utmost refinement and
good taste, and it was evidently the abode of respectability and wealth. The lights were gleaming
through the windows of a room upon the lower floor, and Manning quietly opened the gate, and
screened himself behind some tall bushes that were growing upon the lawn. Here he was effectually
hidden, both from the inmates of the house, and the passers-by upon the street. The scene that
greeted his vision was so peaceful and homelike, that Manning was convinced that Duncan's family
were entirely ignorant of his movements or his crime. The father, a hale old gentleman with
a smiling face, was reading aloud to the assembled members of his family, his wife and two
daughters, who were busily engaged in some species of fancy work, so popular with ladies at
the present time, and their evident enjoyment of the narrative was unmixed with any thought
of wrong-doing or danger to one of their family.

"How strange are the workings of circumstances," thought the detective. "Here is a happy home,
a family surrounded by wealth, refinement and luxury, peaceful and contented, while a beloved
member of it is now an outcast from the world, a fugitive from justice, hiding from the officers
of the law, and vainly seeking to elude the grasp that sooner or later will be laid upon his
shoulder."

Silently maintaining his watch until the family retired, the detective slowly made his way
to his hotel, and as he tossed upon his pillow, his dreams were peopled alternately with happy
home-scenes of domestic comfort and content, and a weary, travel-stained criminal, hungry and
foot-sore, who was lurking in the darkness, endeavoring to escape from the consequences of
his crime.

The most important object now to be accomplished was to secure an interview with Bob King,
the brakeman, who had accompanied Duncan when he left Des Moines. Manning was convinced that
King was fully aware by this time of the crime which Duncan had committed, and perhaps for
a share of the proceeds, had assisted him in his flight from justice.

Early on the following morning, therefore, he left the hotel, and started off in the direction
of the depot, resolved to make a tour of the numerous boarding-houses before calling upon the
chief of police. He had already obtained an accurate description of the man he was in search
of, and had no doubt of recognizing him, should he be fortunate enough to meet him. Passing
quietly along, he came to the large switch-yards, and here he was almost deafened by the rumble
and noise of the trains, and the screeching and puffing of the engines. Here Manning paused
awhile in the hope of seeing his man among the number of brakemen engaged about the yard; but
finding no one that answered his description, he approached a party of men standing near, and
inquired:

"Can you tell me where I will find Bob King?"

"Bob is not working to-day, and you will probably find him at the Union House, yonder," was
the reply, as the man stretched his dirty finger in the direction indicated. Thanking the man,
he passed through the yard to the street upon the opposite side. Here he found a long row of
houses of various descriptions, but all of them apparently occupied as eating-saloons, boarding-houses
and hotels. On the corner of the street, and directly opposite from where the detective stood,
was a low, dingy-looking frame building, with the name of Union House painted across the front.

"Here we are," said Manning to himself, "and we will soon ascertain if Mr. King is about."

So saying he crossed the street and entered the office or waiting-room of the hostelry. An
old settee, a half-dozen or more well-whittled wooden arm-chairs, a rusty stove set in a square
box filled with saw-dust, were about all the movable furniture which the room contained. In
the corner, however, was a short counter behind which, arranged on long rows of hooks, were
suspended a number of hats, caps and coats of a decidedly miscellaneous character.

An ancient-looking register, filled with blots and hieroglyphics, lay upon the counter, and
as the room was empty, Manning walked toward the open volume and examined the names inscribed
thereon. Under the date of the preceding evening, he found the name he was looking for, and
a cabalistic sign on the margin designated that he had lodged there the night before and indicated
that he might still be in the house.

While he was thus standing, a frowsy-headed young man, whose face was still shining from the
severe friction of a coarse roller-towel, which hung behind the door, entered the room, and
saluting the detective familiarly, proceeded to comb his hair before a cracked mirror that
hung behind the desk. After he had hastily finished this operation, he turned again to Manning,
who had been smilingly observing his movements.

"Have you had breakfast, sir? last table just ready."

"Thank you," replied Manning, "I have already had my breakfast. I am looking for a man who
is stopping here, by the name of King."

"What's his first name--Bob?"

"Yes, that's his name. He is a brakeman on the road."

"Oh, yes, Bob's here. He's eating his breakfast now. Just sit down, he'll be here directly."

After waiting a few minutes, a tall, broad-shouldered young man, of rather good-natured and
intelligent appearance, entered the room, and taking a cap from one of the hooks upon the wall,
placed it upon his head.

It did not require the rather officious indication of the young clerk to induce the detective
to recognize the new-comer as the man whom he was most desirous of seeing; his appearance tallied
precisely with the description of him which he had previously obtained.

Stepping quietly up to the young man, the detective said, carelessly:

"Your name is Bob King, I believe?"

Somewhat confused by the abrupt salutation, the young fellow replied, rather awkwardly:

"Yes, that's my name; but you've got the brakes on me, for I don't remember that I ever saw
you before."

"Perhaps not," answered Manning, "but I want to have a little private conversation with you
for a few minutes. Can we go somewhere where we will not be interrupted?"

"Why, yes," responded the other, still evidently ill at ease, "come in here." And turning about,
he led the way through a door across the hall, and entered a small and plainly furnished sitting-room.

"Wait," said Manning, as if suddenly conceiving an idea. "The morning is pleasant, and I have
a good cigar here; suppose we take a short walk together. We can talk as we stroll along."

"All right," said King, as he took the proffered cigar, and lighting it, they went out of the
hotel into the street.

Mr. Robert King eyed the detective furtively ever and anon, and seemed to be impatient for
him to begin the conversation, and inform him what it was all about. There was, however, such
a perfect air of ease and unconcern about Manning, that the young brakeman felt impelled to
accompany him whether he would or not. Manning led the way in the direction of the office of
the chief of police, and after they had fairly started, he turned to his companion, and good-naturedly
said:

"Mr. King, I suppose you are quite anxious to know who I am, and what is the nature of my business
with you?"

"Well, yes," answered King, smilingly, for the sang froid of Manning had quite won his heart.
"I would like to know both of those things."

"Well," said the detective, "my name is John Manning, and I am a native of Chicago. I am an
intimate friend of 'Tod' Duncan's, and want to know where to find him."

"You will have to ask somebody that can tell you, then," answered King, who had now fully recovered
his composure, "for I don't know anything about him."

"Why," ejaculated Manning, as though quite surprised at the information, "I thought that you
and Tod went off on a hunting or fishing party a few weeks ago, and that you came home, leaving
Tod to continue his journey alone."

"That's a mistake," said King, "and whoever informed you to that effect was as much mistaken
as you are."

Mr. King was evidently trying the good-natured game of bluff, and Manning noticed with some
satisfaction that they were now approaching very near to the office of Mr. Wallace.

"See here," said he, suddenly turning on his companion. "Mr. King, this won't do. Duncan is
wanted for the Geneva bank robbery. He was here three weeks ago, and you were with him. You
got him out of town, and if you are not disposed to be communicative, I have simply got to
place you under arrest."

The change in King's manner was very complete. He was utterly surprised and nonplused, and
before he could answer a word Manning placed his hand on his shoulder and said, peremptorily:
"Come in here, Mr. King; perhaps Mr. Wallace can loosen your tongue."

They were now directly in front of the office of the chief, and King knew that any attempt
at resistance would be futile, and decidedly unwise, so he deemed it best to submit at once.

"Don't be too hard on a fellow," said he at last. "I have a good position and I can't afford
to lose it. If you will give me a chance, I will tell you all I know."

"Very well, come right in here," said Manning, "and if you tell me the truth, I promise you
no harm will come to you."

In a few minutes they were closeted with the chief, who knew King very well, and who added
his assurances to those of Manning, that if he would unburden himself fully, no danger need
be apprehended.

"I want to say first," said King, at last convinced that it would be better to make a clean
breast of the whole matter, "that what I did, was done in good faith, and I only thought I
was helping a friend who had got into trouble through acting in self-defense."

"Very well," said Manning, "we will admit all that, but tell us what you know."

"Well," answered King, after a pause in which to collect himself, "It was about three weeks
ago, that Duncan came to the city, and knowing where I stopped, he came to see me. I happened
to be in from my run when he called, and he wanted to know if I could get a leave of absence
for a week, as he wanted to go on a fishing trip and would pay all the expenses. I went to
the master of transportation and found no difficulty in obtaining my leave, and then I saw
Tod and told him I was at his service. We then procured a team, guns, fishing-tackle and provisions,
not forgetting a good supply of smoking and drinking articles, and the next day started off
in the direction of Grand Junction. Before we started, Duncan told me about getting into a
scrape over a game of cards at Leadville, and that he had shot two gamblers and was keeping
out of the way until the excitement over the affair had died out."

"Duncan has raised one man, I see," laughed Manning. "When I heard this story first, he had
only killed one gambler in his fight over the cards."

"Well, I am telling you what Duncan told me," answered King.

"That's all right," said Manning quietly, "but suppose you go ahead and tell us what he told
you about robbing the Geneva bank."

The cool assurance of the detective, and the easy assumption with which he stated his conclusions,
so disconcerted King, that he was speechless for a few moments. Recovering himself quickly,
however, he answered doggedly:

"Well, I intended to tell you the whole story, and I was simply telling it in my own way."

"Go on, Mr. King," said Manning, "all I want is the truth, but the card story won't do."

"I guess it won't do me any good to tell you anything else but the truth," rejoined King. "Well,
Tod told me about this shooting business before we started, and of course I believed it. I
noticed, though, before we were away from the city very long, that there was something else
on his mind, that made him very uneasy, and gave him a great deal of trouble. He was moody
and silent for hours, and it was only when he drank a great deal that he was at all lively,
or seemed like his old natural self. Finally, on the morning of the third day, I put the question
fairly to him, and he then told me what he had done. He said he and two others had robbed a
bank, and that he was making his way westward. He was resolved not to be captured, and said
that no two men should take him alive. He then told me that he wanted me to take the team back
to Des Moines, and that he would take the train at Grand Junction, and try to make his way
to Manitoba. We parted company at the Junction, where Tod took the train for Sioux City. He
paid all the expenses of the trip and offered to give me some of the money, but I refused to
accept any, and told him what I had done was done simply for friendship."

"How much money did Duncan have at that time?" asked Manning.

"He had nearly four thousand dollars, I should judge," answered King.

"Did he say who assisted him in this robbery?"

"Yes; he told me that a man by the name of Edwards was one, and that the assistant cashier
of the bank was the prime mover in the whole affair. He also said that the cashier had not
played fair, but had taken out twelve thousand dollars in gold instead of six thousand. He
was very bitter against this man, and said he believed that he would give them all away to
save his own neck, if it came to the pinch."

After some further conversation, which convinced Manning that King was telling the truth and
that he was entirely ignorant of Duncan's hiding-place, the young brakeman was allowed to go
his way, with the understanding that they were to meet again in the evening.

Manning now hastened to the telegraph office, and a cipher message, containing in brief all
he had thus far learned, was soon upon its way to me.

My reply was to the effect that he should again see King, and inquire if Duncan had mentioned
anything about the valise which they had carried away from Geneva. Then to endeavor to obtain
a photograph of Duncan, and finally thereafter to lose no time in starting out for Sioux City.

I was considerably exercised about this missing package of gold. I could not believe that Pearson
had taken it, although both Edwards and Duncan appeared to be positive of it. The young cashier
now seemed to be too utterly crushed down and humiliated to permit me to believe that he had
lied still further, and that he was still keeping back a portion of the plunder he had secured.
Still, however much I was desirous of discarding such a belief, I was resolved to leave no
stone unturned in order to explain the mystery. I felt positive that some explanation would
yet be made that would account for this package, and in a manner that would not connect Eugene
Pearson with its disappearance. Up to this time, however, we were as far from the truth in
this connection as when we commenced, and I could do no more than await the arrest of Duncan,
before the matter could be definitely settled. I came to this conclusion on the assumption
that all the parties thus far had told the truth, and it seemed to me that one or the other
of them must certainly be mistaken in their original impressions.

This theory, however, yet remained. Edwards and Duncan might have obtained the money, and being
still under the influence of the liquor they had drank, and excited over what had transpired,
had thrown away the valise, and at that time it might still have contained the gold.

In accordance with my instructions, Manning remained in Des Moines two days succeeding this,
but was unable to learn from King that Duncan had mentioned the valise in any manner whatever.

In his attempt to obtain a photograph of Duncan, however, he was more successful, and with
the assistance of Capt. Wallace, he was fortunate enough to be placed in possession of a very
excellent picture of young Duncan, which had but recently been taken. This accession to his
stock of knowledge was destined to play an important part in his continued search after the
fugitive burglar. Finding that nothing more could be learned in Des Moines, and receiving assurances
from the friendly chief that any information would be forwarded to him at once, Manning departed
from the home of the youthful law-breaker and started for Sioux City.

August, with its hot, sweltering days, when the very skies seemed to be a canopy of lurid,
quivering heat; and when every breeze seemed freighted with a depressing warmth that almost
rendered labor impossible, had passed away, and we were now in the enjoyment of the clear,
cool days of September. The skies were bluer, the air was purer, and the beautiful, golden
autumn was welcomed with a grateful sense of pleasure and relief. Nearly a month had now elapsed
since the robbery of the Geneva Bank, and, although we had accomplished much, our work was
not yet completed. Thomas Duncan was still at liberty, and our task was yet unfinished. I have
already, as briefly as I could, related the various events which had transpired since the robbery,
and detailed the efforts which we had thus far made toward accomplishing the capture of the
perpetrators of this crime. Of Thomas Duncan, however, I had learned comparatively little,
and of his movements still less; and yet, at times, I found myself indulging in feelings of
sympathy for the young man, who had so recklessly and inconsiderately thrown away the best
chances of his life. Of a careless disposition and inclined to folly, I was convinced that
until this time he had never stooped to commit a crime. This was his first flagrant violation
of the law, and when I thought of him a hunted fugitive, seeking to hide himself from the vigilant
eyes of the officers of the law, and of the quiet, peaceful and happy home of his parents,
I could not repress a feeling of regret and sorrow for the wayward youth in this, the hour
of his humiliation and trial. Far different from Eugene Pearson, who had no cares and no temptations
to commit crimes, and who had practiced a scheme of vile deception and ingratitude for years,
Thomas Duncan had been found in a moment of weakness and desperation, and under the influence
of wily tempters, had yielded himself up to their blandishments, and had done that which had
made him a felon. As to Eugene Pearson, the trusted, honored and respected official of the
bank, who had deliberately planned and assisted in this robbery of his best friends, I had
no words of palliation for his offenses; but for "Tod" Duncan, the weak and tempted victim
of designing men and adverse circumstances, I experienced a sense of sympathy which I could
not easily shake off.

Where was he now? Perhaps hiding in the forests of the far west, amid the barbaric scenes of
savage life; perhaps giving himself up to a reckless life of dissipation, seeking in the delirium
of intoxication a forgetfulness of the deed he had committed, and of the consequences which
must befall him. How many long, weary nights since he fled from Geneva, with his ill-gotten
booty, had he, even in the midst of a bacchanalian revel, started suddenly, as if in fear of
the officer he so much dreaded, and then with a boastful laugh drank deeper to drown the agonies
that oppressed him? Perhaps, on the other hand, the first step taken, the rest had come easy
and without effort, and he had already become hardened and reckless. Whatever might be the
case, we were as yet uninformed, and operative John Manning arrived in Sioux City with no definite
clew to the missing man.

Seeking, as before, the assistance of the police authorities, Manning proposed to make a tour
of the so-called houses of pleasure, which infest all cities, deeming it most likely that he
would obtain some traces of Duncan by that means. This proved successful in a comparative degree,
for in one of these places Manning found a gay young cyprian, who recognized Duncan's picture
immediately. A bottle of very inferior wine at an exorbitant price was ordered, and under its
influence the girl informed the detective that Duncan had come there alone one evening about
two weeks prior to this time, and that she had accompanied him upon a drive. They had become
quite familiar during their short acquaintance, and Duncan drank a great deal. On the following
morning he had left the house, and stated that he was going to leave the city that day. Further
than this, the girl could not say, and Manning must needs be content with even that trifling
amount of encouragement for the present.

Manning had also been provided with a facsimile of Duncan's handwriting and signature, and
he carefully examined the registers of the several hotels, in order to discover whether he
had stopped at any of them under his own or any fictitious name which resembled in any manner
the one he bore, but without any success whatever.

On returning to the hotel, he occupied himself debating as to the best movement to make next.
He was surprised on arriving there to find a telegram from Capt. Wallace awaiting him. On removing
the inclosure he found a message informing him that Duncan had an acquaintance in Sioux City
whose name was Griswold, and who was engaged in the tailoring business at that place.

Aided by this important piece of intelligence, the detective was not long in finding the establishment
presided over by Mr. Griswold. That gentleman was located in the business section of the city,
and his neatly arranged store was well stocked with goods of excellent quality and apparently
of recent style. On entering the shop, Mr. Griswold was found perched on a table in the rear,
his legs crossed, and with nimble fingers was engaged in the manufacture of some of the articles
of his trade. He was a small, sharp-featured man, about forty, with a shrewd though not unpleasant
face, and as he came briskly forward to greet a prospective customer, his countenance was wreathed
in a smile that was almost irresistible.

"Can I do anything for you this morning?" was the polite salutation of the little tailor.

"Yes," replied the detective. "I want to look at some goods that will make a good suit of clothes."

"Certainly," replied the knight of the shears. "I have some excellent styles here, and I am
sure I can give you your full satisfaction."

"I have no doubt of that," said Manning pleasantly. "I have been recommended here by my friend
Tod Duncan, and he speaks very highly of you."

The face of the little tailor was again wreathed in smiles, as he delightedly inquired:

"Do you mean Duncan, the traveling man from Des Moines?"

"Yes," replied Manning, "that's the man; I am a traveling man myself, but in a different line,
and I expected to meet him in this city, but I was disappointed. I guess he must have got ahead
of me."

"Let me see," said Mr. Griswold, with his needle-pricked finger pressed against his nose. "He
was here about two weeks ago, I guess."

"Do you know which way he was going?"

"I think he said he was going to St. Paul. I made a suit of clothes for him in a great hurry,
as he was very anxious to get away."

"What kind of a suit did he get?" asked Manning, now anxious to learn the clothing of the man,
in order that he might the more accurately describe him.

"It was from this piece," said Mr. Griswold, throwing on the table a roll of dark green cassimere.
"That is one of the latest importations, and as fine a piece of goods as I have in the house."

"I like that myself," said the detective. "Would you object to giving me a small piece of it
as a sample? I want to show it to a friend of mine at the hotel, who has pretty good taste
in such matters."

"Of course not," replied Mr. Griswold, as he clipped off a piece of the cloth, little dreaming
of the use to which the detective would put it.

Declining to make a selection until he had sought the advice of an imaginary friend, and stating
that he would probably call again in the evening, Manning took his leave of the little tailor.
The detective then repaired to the railroad ticket office, where he had a friend of long standing,
from whom he hoped to derive some material information.

At the railroad station he found his friend on duty, and after the usual friendly salutations,
he requested a few moments' private conversation. Being admitted to an inner office, Manning
at once displayed the photograph of Duncan, and asked:

"Harry, have you seen that face about here, say within about two weeks?"

Taking the picture, and regarding it intently for a moment, he said:

"Why, yes--that's Duncan from Des Moines. I know him very well. He has been here often."

"Well, has he been here within two weeks?"

"Yes, he was here about two weeks ago on a spree, and he bought a ticket for St. Paul."

"Are you quite sure about that?"

"Perfectly sure," answered the ticket agent. "I remember it distinctly, and what impressed
it the more forcibly upon my mind is the fact that he wanted to know if I could give him a
ticket on the Northern Pacific road from here, and I told him he would have to go to St. Paul
for that."

"Did he mention any particular point on the railroad that he wanted a ticket for?" asked Manning.

"No, I think not. He simply said he was making for Dakota."

Ascertaining that a train would leave for St. Paul in an hour, the detective purchased a ticket
for that city, and thanking the agent for his information, he returned to the hotel to make
arrangements for continuing his journey. Before leaving, however, he telegraphed me his destination,
and what he had been able to learn.

From this information it was evident that Duncan was endeavoring to reach the far west, and
there seek a refuge among some of the numerous mining camps which abound in that section of
the country, hoping by that means to successfully elude pursuit, should any be made for him.
It was plainly evident to me that he was entirely unaware of being followed, and, in fact,
of anything that had taken place since the robbery, and that he was simply following his own
blind inclinations to hide himself as effectually as he could.

The first task performed by Manning after reaching St. Paul, was to examine all the hotel registers,
in the hope of discovering some traces of an entry resembling the peculiar handwriting of Duncan.
He also took the precaution to quietly display the photograph of the young man to all the clerks
of the various hostelries, trusting that some one would recognize him as one who had been their
guest on some previous occasion. In this, too, he was disappointed. Among the many to whom
he displayed Duncan's picture, not one of them had any recollection of such an individual.

Feeling somewhat disheartened at this non-success, Manning next sought the chief of police,
and enlisted his services in our behalf. That evening, in company with an officer, he made
a tour among the houses of ill repute, and here, too, disappointment awaited him. Not one among
the number whom he approached had any knowledge of the man, and therefore could give him no
information.

Tired and puzzled and vexed, he at length was compelled to return to the hotel, and seek his
much-needed repose.

His experience in St. Paul had thus far been far from satisfactory, and yet the thought of
abandoning his investigations in that city never occurred to him. He had too frequently been
compelled to battle with unpromising circumstances in the past, to allow a temporary discomfiture
to dishearten him now. He felt that he was upon the right track, that Duncan had certainly
come from Sioux City to St. Paul, but whether he had remained here any length of time, or had
pushed on without stopping, was the question that bothered him immensely. Resolving, therefore,
to renew his efforts in the morning, he soon fell asleep.

On the morrow, when he descended to the office of the hotel, preparatory to partaking of his
morning repast, he noticed with some little surprise that a new face was behind the counter.

Surmising that this might be the night clerk, yet unrelieved from his duties, and that Duncan
might have arrived during the time he officiated, Manning approached him, and propounded the
usual question. When he brought forth the photograph, to his intense delight, the clerk recognized
it at once. Turning to the register and hastily running over the leaves, he pointed to a name
inscribed thereon.

"That's the man," said he confidently.

Manning looked at the name indicated, and found scrawled in a very uncertain hand:

     "John Tracy, Denver, Col."

"He came in on a night train," continued the clerk. "He only remained to breakfast and went
away shortly afterward."

"Have you any idea which way he went?" inquired Manning.

"No, I cannot tell you that. He left the hotel shortly after breakfast in a hack. He did not
return after that, but sent the hackman here to pay his bill and to obtain his valise. He acted
very strange while he was here, and I felt somewhat suspicious of him."

"Can you tell me the name of this hackman?" now asked Manning.

"I think his name is Davids," answered the clerk, "but I will ask the baggage-man about him;
he can, no doubt, tell me who he is."

The baggage-man was summoned and he distinctly remembered the occurrence, and that the driver's
name was Billy Davids, who was well-known throughout the city, particularly among the sporting
fraternity.

Thanking both of these men for the information which they had given him, the detective, forgetting
all about his breakfast, hastened to the office of the chief of police, and acquainting him
with what he had heard, expressed his desire to see this hackman at once.

The chief, who knew the man, at once volunteered to accompany him, and they left the office
together in search of the important cab-driver. It being yet quite early in the morning, they
went directly to the stable, and here they found Billy Davids in the act of harnessing his
horses and preparing for his day's work.

"Good morning, Billy," said the chief, good-naturedly. "You are making an early start, I see;
are you busy?"

"No, sir," answered Mr. Davids; "I can take you gentlemen wherever you want to go."

"Not to-day, Billy; but I have a friend here who wants to talk to you, and you may find it
to your interest to tell him what he wishes to know."

Manning stepped forward and stated, in as few words as possible, what he desired, and at length
displayed the inevitable photograph.

Davids recognized it at once, as a "party" who had engaged him to take himself and a woman
from the hotel, to a resort some distance from the city, known as the "Half-way House." He
performed this duty, and later in the day, after waiting several hours, the man had given him
ten dollars and sent him back to the hotel to pay his bill and to obtain his valise. After
performing this service, he returned to the Half-way House, and waited there until dark, when
Duncan came out alone, and was driven to the Northern Pacific depot. Arriving here, he paid
the hackman quite liberally and dismissed him, saying that he was going to leave town on the
next train westward.

"Have you any idea where he was going?" asked Manning.

"I think he went to Minneapolis, for he asked me if that road would take him there, and I saw
him get aboard the train for that city;" answered the driver.

This was all that Davids could tell; and after remunerating him for his trouble, Manning left
him to finish his preparations for the day.

Here was the very information he wanted, and he had struck the trail again. Anxious to pursue
his journey, Manning invited the chief to breakfast with him; after which, finding he could
leave in a very short time, he bade the courteous and valuable officer good-by, and was soon
on his way to Minneapolis, there to commence again the trail of the fleeing burglar.

On arriving in Minneapolis, Manning was able to discover without serious difficulty that Duncan,
after remaining in that city two days, had purchased a ticket over the Northern Pacific railroad
for Bismarck, a thriving town in Dakota. This information he had been able to gain by a resort
to his old method of visiting the houses of ill-fame, and then carelessly exposing Duncan's
photograph to the various inmates, in such a manner as to excite no suspicion of his real errand.
His experience thus far had been that Duncan, either to evade pursuit, to gratify bestial passion,
or to endeavor by such excitements to drive away the haunting fear that oppressed him, had
invariably sought the companionship of the harlot and the profligate. Being possessed of plenty
of money, it may be imagined that he experienced no difficulty in finding associates willing
to minister to his appetites, and to assist him in forgetting the dangers that threatened him,
by dissipation and debauchery. All along his path were strewn these evidences of reckless abandonment,
which, while they temporarily enabled him to drown the remembrances of his crime, yet, at the
same time, they served most powerfully to point out to his pursuer the road he was traveling.

It appeared, therefore, that my first theories were correct, and that Thomas Duncan was making
his way to the far western country, where, beyond the easy and expeditious mode of communication
by railroad and telegraph, he would be safe from pursuit. He was evidently seeking to reach
the mining district, where, among men as reckless as himself, he hoped to evade the officers
of law.

Manning lost no time in following up the clew he had obtained in Minneapolis, and so, purchasing
a ticket for Bismarck, he was soon thundering on his way to the Missouri river. At Brainerd,
at Fargo in Minnesota, and at Jamestown in Dakota, during the time when the train had stopped
for some necessary purpose, he had made inquiries, and at each place was rewarded by gleaning
some information, however fragmentary, of the fugitive. He was therefore assured that he was
upon the trail, and that unless something unforeseen occurred, he would sooner or later overtake
the object of his pursuit.

On the following day Manning arrived at Bismarck, a thrifty and growing little town on the
banks of the muddy Missouri. As the train left the more thickly populated country and emerged
into the region of this as yet comparatively undeveloped west, the detective was surprised
to witness the rapid advancements that had been made within a few years. The spirit of American
energy and enterprise was reaching out into this vast region, and already the influences of
modern civilization and thrift were manifesting themselves. No longer a trackless waste, abandoned
to the roaming bands of Indians and the wild beasts of the forest, and plain, the western continent
was fast yielding to the plowshare of the husbandman, and to the powerful agencies of education
and improvement.

Bismarck itself was a wonderfully active town, and during the season of navigation a large
commercial business was transacted with the various towns upon the river, both above and below
it. Before the advent of the Northern Pacific railroad, Bismarck had an existence, but simply
as a sleepy river station, with its periodical bursts of life and animation during the months
when the river was navigable and when trade along its waters was possible. When winter came,
however, with its chilling blasts, and the river was frozen, trade almost ceased entirely,
and Bismarck remained in sluggish inactivity until spring with its refreshing showers and balmy
breezes awakened it to new life and being. Now, however, all was changed. The railroad with
its facilities, had opened the way to emigration; the pioneers had penetrated the solitudes,
and Bismarck had grown with that wonderful rapidity so characteristic of the western town.
The advent of the iron horse had opened up new and hitherto undreamed of possibilities. Real
estate, which had previously no fixed value whatever, was now in demand at almost fabulous
prices. Stores and dwellings sprang into being, hotels and churches were built, school houses
and even banking institutions flourished with a vigor that seemed almost miraculous.

Sauntering about the town on the morning after his arrival, Manning was surprised at the activity
and bustle, the thrift and energy which greeted him on every hand. His past experiences had
taught him many things which he found of use to him in making his inquiries in Bismarck, and
it was not long before he succeeded in learning definite particulars of Duncan's stay in this
place. From reliable sources he ascertained that the young man had arrived in the town about
two weeks prior to this, and had remained several days, enjoying himself in much the same manner
that had marked his residence in the other cities along his route, except that in Bismarck
he had exposed himself to a greater extent than at any other place. It seemed that as he got
further west, his fears of pursuit and detection grew less, and he became more bold and open
in his actions. Here he had not attempted concealment at all, except as to his name, which
he gave as Tom Moore, of Chicago; his carousals were publicly known, and the lavish expenditure
of his stolen money was commented upon by many.

In a conversation with the proprietor of the hotel at which Duncan had stopped, the detective
learned that his stay in the city had been marked by the most reckless dissipation and extravagance.
So careless did he appear in the display of his money, of which he appeared to have a large
amount, that the proprietor had taken it upon himself to warn him against the danger to which
such a course would expose him. The town was infested with a gang of roughs and thieves, and
he feared that if once they became aware of Duncan's wealth, his life would be of comparatively
little value. Several of these characters had been seen about the hotel, and the landlord had
remonstrated seriously with Duncan about his folly. To this Duncan had impudently replied that
he could take care of himself, and needed no advice. Finding it of no use, therefore, to advise
him, the landlord desisted in his efforts, and left him to follow his own inclinations.

Manning also learned from his host that Duncan had associated quite intimately while in the
city, with a Jew clothing merchant, who was a resident here, and who seemed to be an old acquaintance.
The name of this man was Jacob Gross, and ascertaining where his place of business was located,
Manning determined to give him a call.

When he entered the store of Mr. Gross, that gentleman was engaged in waiting upon a customer.
He was a perfect type of the Israelite--sharp-featured, with prominent nose, keen, glittering
eyes and curly black hair. If any doubt of his race remained, the manner in which he conducted
his bargain with his unsuspecting customer would have convinced any one of the presence of
the veritable Jew.

Manning watched, with amused interest, the tact with which the Hebrew clothier endeavored to
convince his customer that a coat, much too large for him, was "yust a fit and no mistake,"
and that the price which he asked was not half as much as the garment was worth.

After the customer had departed, the clothier advanced, bowing and smiling, toward the detective,
as if anticipating another sale as profitable as the last one. Manning informed him in a few
words that he was looking for Duncan, and was a friend of his, who was desirous of gaining
some information of his present whereabouts, as unless he saw him, Duncan might be getting
into more trouble.

It appeared that Duncan had told the same gambling story to Mr. Gross, who seemed to be dreadfully
shocked at the affair.

"Py gracious," said he excitedly, "I hafe knowed dot boy ven I sold cloding in Des Moines,
more as fife years ago, and so help me Moses I did nefer belief he vud do such a ting loike dot."

After further conversation, he learned that Duncan had spent a great deal of his time at this
store, and when he left, had stated that he intended to go on to Miles City, and perhaps to
Butte City, Montana. It appeared that Duncan had an uncle who was engaged in the clothing business
at Butte City, and that it was possible he might eventually get there.

"If you find him," said Mr. Gross, after he had given the above information, "you musn't told
him where you heard this, because he told me, I should say nothing about him to anybody."

"All right," replied Manning, "if I find him, it won't make much difference to him who told
me about him."

As he uttered these words a peculiar look came into the shrewd face of the Jew, a look which
was partly of quick suspicion and of fear, and he eyed the imperturbable detective for a few
moments as though seriously in doubt about the whole affair. Manning, however, had nothing
further to say, and bidding the clothier a pleasant farewell he left the store.

On returning to the hotel, he found that he had several hours to wait, as no train would leave
Bismarck until evening, and he therefore employed his time in writing up his reports and mailing
them to me.

After partaking of an early tea, he returned to the railroad station, where he discovered that
he had yet some time to wait before the arrival of the train, which was belated. As he was
standing on the rude platform, musing over the events which had taken place in his journey
thus far, and speculating as to the probable result of his chase after an individual who had
seemed, phantom-like, to have eluded his grasp at every point.

He knew full well the desperation of the man he was following, and the threat that "no two
men should take him alive," was, he realized, no idle one. He had no doubt that unless he could
circumvent him in some way, his capture might be no easy task, and that in this undeveloped
country he was taking his life in his hands in the journey he was now making. He never faltered
for an instant, however; he was determined to capture this criminal, if possible, and he quietly
murmured to himself: "Well, let the worst come, a quick eye and a steady hand are good things
to have in a meeting like this may be, and I'll take care that Thomas Duncan does not catch
me napping."

His meditations were suddenly interrupted by the unexpected appearance of the little Jewish
tailor, who, breathless and panting, now came scrambling up on the platform and exclaimed:

"Py gracious, Mr. Manning! I vas afraid you vas gone, and I hafe somedings on my mindt dot
bodders me like de dickens!"

"What is it that troubles you, Mr. Gross?" inquired the detective, laughing in spite of himself
at the little fellow's distress.

"Vell, I'll told you," he answered, mopping the perspiration which was streaming from his face.
"I was tinkin' dot may be if you git dot fellow, you vould be vantin' me for a vitness, and
s'help me Moses I vould not do dot--not for dwo hundred tollar."

"Oh, you need not give yourself any uneasiness on that score, Mr. Gross," said Manning; "you
will not be wanted in any case whatever."

"My gootness, I vas glad of dot. If I vas to leaf my bisness I vould be ruined. Dot's all right,
dough. Let's go und take a glass of peer."

At this juncture, the shrill whistle of the approaching train was heard, and this fact enabled
the detective to decline the proffered beverage. After a hearty hand-shake from the nervous
little clothier, Manning sprang upon the train and in a few moments later he was on his way
to Miles City.

The distance from Bismarck to Miles City is about three hundred miles, and as Manning left
the former place early in the evening, he secured a couch in the comfortable sleeping car,
and shortly afterward retired to rest. It seemed almost incredible the giant strides which
had been made in a few years in the process of civilization in our western country. But yesterday
the ground which our operative was now traveling in comfort, was overrun by the Indian and
the wild beasts of the forest, and to-day along his entire route were rising up substantial
towns and villages, bringing in their wake the enlightening influences of education and morality.
The railroad, that mighty agent of civilization, is rapidly forging a chain of communication
between the two great oceans, and travel in the western wilds, formerly fraught with hardships
and dangers unspeakable, is now performed with rapidity, comfort and safety. In the morning
the train stopped at Little Missouri, where the passengers were refreshed with breakfast, then
on again past Sentinel Butte, they left the boundaries of Dakota and entered the great territory
of Montana. On again like the rush of the wind, until about five o'clock in the afternoon,
they arrived at Miles City, where the train was to remain nearly two hours, before continuing
their journey.

Miles City was another striking illustration of the wonderful growth of American towns. Less
than a year ago, a barren waste marked the spot where now was growing a thriving city. The
railroad, as in other localities, had played an important part in awakening this uninhabited
region to life and activity. The trackless, boundless prairie had been reclaimed, and was now
a flourishing city, full of bustle and vigor. Making his way to a neat and comfortable hotel,
which bore the rather euphonious title of St. Cloud, Manning partook of a substantial meal
and then set about his investigations. He soon found news of the object of his inquiries. From
the proprietor of the St. Cloud, he learned that Duncan had remained here two days, and upon
the register he saw the now well-known signature of Tom Moore of Chicago. He had informed the
inn-keeper of his intention of going to Bozeman, a town lying to the north of the Crow Reservation.

Manning resolved, therefore, to press right on, and he returned to the railroad station, where
the train was still waiting. Purchasing a ticket for Billings, he started again on his way,
and at nearly midnight he arrived at his destination, where he secured quarters for the night.

Billings was, at this time, the terminal point of the Northern Pacific railroad, and as the
detective sought the open air on the following morning, he was amazed at the scenes that were
presented to his view. The place was literally swarming with people. Prospectors, land-buyers,
traders, merchants, and a miscellaneous army of railroad men were everywhere. No time had been
afforded in which to build suitable structures for housing the ever-increasing population,
and the town presented the appearance of a huge encampment; nearly one-half of the city being
composed of canvas tents. In the hotels, on the corners of the streets, and in the places of
business, the universal topic of conversation was the phenomenal growth of the city, and the
grand prospects which the future had in store for this embryotic western metropolis. Along
the railroad, a perfect army of workmen were assembled, awaiting their orders for the day.
Graders, tie-men, track-layers and construction corps, were already on the spot, and they too
seemed imbued with the same spirit of enthusiasm which filled their more wealthy and ambitious
neighbors in the city. As may readily be imagined, crime and immorality followed hand in hand
with the march of improvement. The gambler and the harlot plied their vocations in the full
light of day, and as yet unrebuked by the ruling powers of a community, too newly located to
assume the dignity of enacting laws.

The detective made his way through the streets, mentally noting these things, while his efforts
were directed to finding some trace of Thomas Duncan. He made a systematic tour of the hotels,
or more properly speaking, the boarding-houses with which the town was filled, and after numerous
disappointments, was at last successful in learning something definite of the movements of
his man. At a hotel called the "Windsor," he found the unmistakable signature he was looking
for, and was convinced that Tom Moore of Chicago had preceded him but a few days. Exhibiting
his talismanic photograph to the proprietor, he was informed that Duncan had been there some
ten days before, and after remaining a day or two, had gone over to the military cantonments,
some four or five miles distant, where a detachment of United States soldiers were quartered.

Procuring a horse, Manning started for the cantonment, where he was kindly received by Major
Bell, the officer in charge, who informed him that Duncan had been there some days before,
and that he had remained about the camp for several days, playing cards with the soldiers and
enjoying himself generally. During his stay he had purchased a pony from a Crow Indian, and
while he was at the cantonment he rode into Billings and bought a Sharp's repeating rifle,
after which he had mounted his horse and rode off in the direction of Fort Custer. He had remained
away several days when he again returned to the cantonment, and after remaining there one night,
he had started on horseback for Bozeman and Helena.

This was authentic and gratifying intelligence. Manning had received not only reliable information
as to the movements of Duncan, but the distance between them had been materially lessened by
the fugitive's long detention at the cantonment. The burglar was now but a few days ahead of
him, and if nothing transpired to delay him, he would soon overtake the man, who, from all
indications, was entirely unsuspicious of the fact that a detective was upon his track who
had followed his trail as closely and as unerringly as the Indian follows the track of the
beast through forest and stream. As an additional means of identification, Manning secured
a full description of the horse purchased by Duncan, and with this increased fund of information,
Manning returned to Billings. On the following morning, seated beside the driver on the top
of the stage-coach, and behind four dashing bay horses, Manning rattled out of the pushing
little town of Billings on his way to Bozeman.

He now indulged in high hopes of soon overhauling Duncan, and all along their way, whenever
the stage stopped to change horses, he was gratified to receive the information that the man
and the pony which he described had passed over the same route a few days in advance of him.

The road from Billings to Bozeman led them part of the distance along the Yellowstone river,
and through a country wild and picturesque in the extreme. Sometimes winding around the sides
of a huge mountain, from which they obtained a magnificent view of the rugged and beautiful
scenery below, and again descending to the valleys, they swept along between the mountains
which towered aloft on either hand, their rugged sides forming a marked contrast with the emerald-hued
verdure skirting their base. Occasional ranches presented the evidences of cultivation and
profitable stock-raising. Broad fields and luxuriant pastures were spread before the view,
and hundreds of sleek cattle were scattered over the country, either sleeping quietly in the
sun or browsing upon the rich, tender herbage which abounds. At these ranches the horses were
frequently changed, and the mail was delivered, much to the gratification of these hardy pioneers,
who were otherwise shut out from the busy actions of the world beyond them.

The country through which they passed was exceedingly rich in an agricultural point of view,
the resources of which cannot be overestimated, and the atmosphere was dry and pure. Inhaling
the invigorating air as they rode along, Manning suffered none of the discomforts which are
naturally consequent upon a journey by stage of more than one hundred and fifty miles. At noon,
they stopped at a ranch station, and here they were regaled with a repast which would have
tickled the palate of an epicure. Broiled trout from a mountain stream near by, roast fowl
and a variety of dishes, made up a feast well worthy of the lusty appetites of the travelers.
Here, too, Manning received tidings of the fleeing burglar. His horse, which was a fine one,
and peculiarly marked, had been noticed particularly by the ranchmen, so there was no doubt
that he was upon the right road to overtake him.

After the dinner, and a good resting spell, they resumed their journey. Now their road ran
along the fertile valley, and again passing through a sharp defile in the mountains, and finally
winding its way along a narrow ledge of rock, where the slightest turn to left or right, a
single misstep of the sure-footed animals, or an awkward move of their driver, would have hurled
them into an abyss hundreds of feet below, where instant and horrible death awaited them.

No accident befell them, however, and just as the sun was going down in a blaze of glory, behind
the towering mountains into the west, they arrived at a ranch for supper and rest.

In the evening the moon came out, illuminating the landscape with a soft enchanting beauty,
as its beams fell upon the tall mountain and the level plain, lighting up tree and flower,
and flashing upon the river like a myriad of polished gems. As they rode along, song and story
enlivened the journey, and a draught or two from a wicker-covered flask which the detective
carried, soon produced an era of good feeling between the outside passengers and the burly,
good-natured driver.

"Have you ever been bothered with robbers or highwaymen along this route?" asked Manning of
their driver during a lull in the conversation.

"Well, we used to be," answered the fat fellow, with a quiet chuckle, as he cracked his whip
unpleasantly near to the flank of the off leader, who was lagging a little; "but of late we
haven't seen anything of the kind."

"Ever had any adventure with them yourself?" asked Manning in a coaxing tone, as he fancied
he could see that the old fellow had a story which he could be induced to relate.

"Yes," he answered, puffing quietly away at a cigar which Manning had given him. "About a year
ago I had a little experience up near Thompson's place, which we will reach about ten o'clock,
if we have no bad luck."

"Let us hear it, won't you?" asked one of the other passengers, now becoming interested.

"Well," answered the driver, evidently pleased at finding himself an object of interest, "wait
until we round this spur here, and then we'll have a tolerable straight road ahead. I don't
suppose, though, that you'll find it very interesting."

In a few moments they passed around the spur of the mountain, and the whole landscape was lighted
up with a blaze of moonlight that flooded the scene with a radiance beautiful to behold. No
living habitation was within sight, and the rumble of the coach was the only sound that broke
the stillness that brooded over the scene.

The driver settled himself back in his seat, and after a few preparatory coughs, and a swallow
of brandy, to clear his throat, began his narration.

CHAPTER XX.

The Stage Driver's Story.

"Well," said the driver, as he set his long-lashed whip into its socket, and gathered up his
reins in his left hand, in order to afford him an opportunity to declaim more freely with his
right, "you must know that I've been drivin' on this line more than two years, and consequently
I know every inch of the route like a book. I must own, though, that I didn't know quite as
much at the time I speak of. The driver whose place I took when I came on to the road, had
been pretty badly used up in a scrimmage with the bandits about a week before, and I didn't
like the prospects, you may be sure; but as I was out of a job, I took this, and I made up
my mind when I I commenced, never to put my head in the way of a robber's bullet, if I could
help it."

"That's the case with most of you, isn't it?" said Manning, good-naturedly.

"What makes you think so?" inquired the driver, quizzically.

"Why, the ease and success with which stage coaches have usually been robbed," was the reply.

"Well, I'll tell you," he answered, good-humoredly, and not the least disturbed by Manning's
quiet reflection on the bravery of stage drivers in general. "When a fellow has to manage four
tolerably skittish horses with both hands full of leather, he haint much time to fool around
huntin' shootin' irons, 'specially when he's got to look down into the muzzle of a repeater
which is likely to go off and hurt somebody."

"Do you think these stage robbers, as a rule, are disposed to kill anybody?" asked Manning.

"Why, sir," answered the driver, "they would just as soon kill a stage driver as eat their
breakfast, and they know how to handle a rifle, too, let me tell you."

"There's something in that reasoning," replied Manning, laughingly. "But go on with your story."

"Well," continued the driver, "I had made several trips and had met with no trouble or accident,
so I began to think the gang had gone away from these parts, and that there was no danger to
be feared. However, I still carried a brace of good revolvers in a handy place, just to make
sure I was safe; though, Lord bless you, I knew I couldn't get at them in time to do any good,
if the robbers did attack us.

"Well, one morning--it was a cold, raw day in April--I left Billings with my coach full of
people, most of whom were goin' through to Helena, although I only drove as far as Bozeman,
just as I do now. I had nine passengers, all told, and among the number was an old ranchman
named Kyle Barton, and his handsome daughter. I tell you, she was a stunner; her hair was as
black as a crow, and her bright black eyes sparkled like diamonds. I knew 'em both pretty well,
for the old man owned a ranch out near Bozeman, and was as fine a man as ever stood six feet
in his boots. The young woman was a fiery little beauty, and as hard to manage as a three-year-old
colt. The old man and his daughter had been on a trip to the East, and were now returning home
again, after bein' away several months. Well, the young woman, as I have said, for all she
was as pretty as a picture, had a devilish wicked look in her flashing black eyes, that made
a fellow kind 'o wilt when she looked him square in the face.

"The young woman took her seat on the inside, while the old man, who was hardy and tough as
a pine knot, took his place on the outside, right where you are sittin' now. It was pretty
cold, and we had to bundle up pretty well, but the old man didn't mind it a bit. He smoked
his pipe and passed his bottle--thankee', yes, sir, I don't care if I do--and we were enjoying
of ourselves amazin'.

"We journeyed along all day," continued the driver, as he handed the bottle back, and wiped
his lips with the sleeve of his coat, "and nothin' happened to hinder or delay us in the least.
Instead of gittin' warmer as the day wore on, it kept gittin' a dern sight colder, until along
about four o'clock in the afternoon, when it began to snow, and by early dark, it was hard
at it, a regular December snow-storm, with a drivin' wind that cut our faces tremendous. This
bothered us a good deal, for the snow being wet and sticky, would ball up on the horses' feet
so that they could hardly stand, and we just poked along our way at a gait not a bit faster
than a slow walk. We couldn't get along any faster, and it was no use a-beatin' the poor critters,
for they was a-doin' all in their power, and a-strainin' every nerve to keep a-movin'.

"The old ranchman was a good-hearted, sociable old fellow, and he didn't seem to mind the storm
a bit. As we plodded along he talked about his cattle ranch, the price of cattle, and what
profit he had made that year. It was along after dinner, and we had both been strikin' the
bottle pretty regular, although the cold was so great we could hardly feel it, when he fell
to talkin' about himself and his daughter. We were the only two outside, and he became quite
confidential like, and I pitied the old man, for he'd had a deal of trouble with the young
spitfire inside.

"Among other things, he told me that she had almost broken his old heart lately by fallin'
in love, or imaginin' she had, with one of his herdsmen, a handsome, dashing, devil-may-care
sort of a fellow he had picked up at Bozeman and taken out to his ranch about a year before.
When the old man found out that the gal was gone on the fellow, and that he was a-meetin' her
after dark, he ups and discharges him instanter, and gives him a piece of his mind about his
takin' a mean advantage of the confidence which had been placed in him.

"His daughter, Stella, as he called her, fought against his dischargin' of the young man, and
had been sullen and ill-tempered ever since her lover left. He had caught them correspondin'
with each other after that, and on one occasion he was certain they had a clandestine meetin'.
On findin' out that his daughter was determined not to give up this worthless young cuss, the
old man made up his mind to take her away, and he had accordin'ly packed up and gone on a long
journey to the East, where he had stayed several months, and they were now just gettin' back
to their home again. The old man had hoped that absence from her lover and meetin' with other
people in different scenes, would induce her to forget her old passion, and to realize the
folly she had committed in seekin' to marry such a worthless fellow against her father's wishes."

"I don't see what this has got to do with the bandits, though," now said the detective, who
was getting a little anxious to find out what all this was leading to.

"I was afraid it wouldn't interest you much," replied the driver; "but you'll soon see the
point to my story and what this young girl had to do with it."

"I beg your pardon," said Manning, "I am interested in it, only I was anxious to hear where
the bandits came in. Let's take a little drop of brandy, and I promise you I won't interrupt
you again until you have finished."

Here he handed the flask over to the old man, who took it with the remark that it "looked for
all the world like the one carried by the old ranchman," and after a hearty pull at it, passed
it back again, and resumed his story.

"As the darkness increased, the old ranchman, who it seemed had heard of the recent robberies,
began to grow a little nervous, although he didn't appear to be a dern bit scared. He looked
carefully to the condition of his pistols, and also advised me to have mine handy in case of
need; nothin' would satisfy him but I had to get mine out of the box, and after he had looked
them all over, they were laid on the seat between us. Not content with this, he warned the
inside passengers that there was danger to be apprehended, and that there were bandits on the
road. He urged them to have their weapons in readiness, so that in case the robbers did come,
we could give them a red-hot reception. The people inside caught the old man's spirit, and
they all resolved that if an attack did come they would meet it like men. To tell the truth,
I didn't fear any danger, and I thought the old man was excitin' everybody without cause; but
I didn't say anything, cause it wouldn't do any harm anyhow, even if we were not molested.

"However, I had reckoned without my host, for just as we reached this place, and were a-turnin'
around this bend in the road, two men sprang out from the bushes and grabbed the lead horses
by the bits. Two more jumped out on one side of the coach, and two more on the other, while
one man stepped up to me and demanded me to come down. Of course the coach was stopped, and
just as the robber spoke to me, the old man reached over in front of me and fired. The robber
fell at once without a sound. Barton then fired at the man at the horse's head nearest him,
and brought him down. These shots were both fired as quick as a flash, but his aim had been
unerring. 'Duck down, Davy, duck down,' he cried to me as he swung himself from the coach,
and a volley of bullets passed over our heads.

"I followed his example, and in a hurry, too, and escaped unhurt. Just then we heard two reports
from the passengers inside, and in less time that it has taken me to tell it the scrimmage
was over and the robbers who were unhurt had fled, leaving three of their number on the ground,
two of them seriously wounded, and the other one as dead as a post, with a bullet hole plum
through his forehead.

"As soon as they could the passengers clambered out of the coach, and by the aid of our lanterns,
we found the robbers as I have just told you. We all congratulated ourselves on our fortunate
escape, and the old man was warmly commended for his forethought and for the gallant service
he had rendered.

"I saw the old man did not seem disposed to say much, but I also noticed a look of grim satisfaction
on his face as he looked down at the dead bandit. He then looked anxiously toward the coach,
and seemed relieved to find that his daughter still remained inside.

"We bound up as well as we could the wounds of the other two, and lifted them to the top of
the coach. When it came to the dead one, some of the passengers were in favor of lettin' him
lie where he was, but others objected and wanted to take him along with us, as we did not have
far to go."

"While we were discussin' the question, the young woman, who had got out of the coach while
we were talkin', and without her father observin' her, caught sight of the bandit's face, as
he lay on his back in the snow, and with a wild scream of anguish, she pushed the men aside
and flung herself upon the lifeless body. Her sobs were terrible to hear, and many a strong
man turned away to hide the tears that came to their eyes in spite of them. Her father approached
her and tried to draw her away, but all to no use, until at length her strength gave out, and
she fainted dead away.

"You see," continued the driver, "that dead man was her lover. He had been engaged in the business
of robbin' stage coaches for a long time, and only hired with the old man as a cover to hide
his real business, and to try and win the girl, whom he had frequently seen before.

"The old man was all broke up about the girl, but he was glad that things had happened as they
did, and he felt sure that after her grief was over, she would not fail to see the danger she
had escaped, and to thank her father for savin' her from a life of shame and disgrace.

"We lifted the girl into the coach, and put the dead man along with the others on the top.
He had been the terror of the neighborhood, although no one knew, until this time, who had
been the leader of this murderous gang. We buried him at Bozeman, and since that time we have
had no trouble with anything like bandits or robbers along the route."

"What became of the other two?" asked the detective.

"They were put under arrest, but somehow they managed to escape before they were brought to
trial, and that was the last we ever heard of them."

"And the girl," asked Manning, "what became of her?"

"Oh, she is all right now; as pert as a cricket, and prettier than ever," answered the driver.
"She was married some time ago to a young fellow who is the sheriff of the county here, and
is as happy as the day is long. You wouldn't know that she ever had an experience like this,
and I don't believe she ever thinks of her bandit lover, while she hangs around her old father
with all the affection of a child, and the old ranchman is as happy and contented a man as
you will find in the whole county."

As the driver concluded his narrative, the stage rolled into Bozeman, and at sharp midnight
they drew up before the door of the inn. The moon was still shining, and lights were flashing
from the windows when they arrived. Tired and hungry, the passengers alighted, and after a
light lunch, Manning procured a bed and retired to rest.

Traveling by coach is far from being as comfortable and pleasant as a journey by rail. The
time occupied in going comparatively short distances is very great, besides the rough jolting
over uneven roads which is a natural concomitant of stage coach travel. It is true that by
the easy locomotion of a journey of this kind, a much better view of the surrounding country
is afforded, and the traveler finds ample opportunities to admire the beauty of nature everywhere
spread before him; but even that palls upon the eye when the journey is protracted from early
morn until midnight, and the traveler is cramped up in an uncomfortable position upon the driver's
box. Under such circumstances, after a time, there is but little compensation for the trials
and fatigues of a journey such as Manning had just completed when he arrived at Bozeman on
the night before. The road through which they had come led them through a country so varied
in its grand and imposing beauty, towering rocks and fertile valleys, winding streams and gentle
elevations, that for a time fatigue was forgotten in the enjoyment of the scenes about him,
and it was not until the journey had been completed that he realized how utterly wearied and
tired out he was. His limbs were sore and stiffened from his cramped position, and being unable
to sleep at all on the journey, he was completely exhausted when he sought his couch at the
hotel at Bozeman. Being of a strong and healthy physique, however, and upheld by an ambition
to succeed in the mission he had undertaken, Manning arose in the morning, and after a refreshing
bath and an excellent breakfast, was quite rested and fully prepared to continue his efforts.

Bozeman, unlike the other towns which he had passed through upon his journey, was remotely
situated as yet from railroad communication, and yet in spite of that fact was a busy and well-populated
little town. It is the county seat of Gallatin county, and contained at this time several pretentious
stores, a hotel, a national bank, and a goodly number of substantial dwellings. As may naturally
be inferred, there was the usual complement of saloons, in which drinking and gambling were
indulged in without license, and with no fear of restraint from the prohibitory influences
of the law.

Failing to find any trace of Thomas Duncan, or "Tom Moore," at the hotel, Manning began his
usual systematic tour of these houses of public entertainment. House after house was visited,
and the day waned without his making the slightest discovery that would avail him at all in
his pursuit. At length, however, as night was falling, he encountered a saloon-keeper, who
in answer to his inquiries gruffly informed him, that a person answering Duncan's description
and mounted upon a pony resembling his, had stopped in his saloon a few days before, and had
gone away in the direction of the Yellowstone Park.

This was rather disappointing intelligence, for it required him to retrace his steps, and go
back over ground which he had already traveled. However, if the information was reliable, no
time was to be lost, and he started from the saloon to commence his preparations at once.

While at the bar, he had noticed a sturdy, honest-looking miner, who was taking a drink, and
who had stopped and looked intently at him while the proprietor had given him the information
above mentioned. As Manning left the saloon, the man followed him a short distance, and when
out of sight of the saloon called after him; Manning stopped and the man came toward him.

"Mister," said he, as he approached the detective, "ef ye go to the park, you won't find the
man yer arter, that's a dead sure thing."

"What do you mean?" asked Manning with some surprise.

"I means as how the boss of the saloon yonder has lied to ye, that's all."

"What makes you think so?"

"Bekase I passed the man ye wor askin' about three days ago, on the road to Helena."

"Are you sure about this?"

"Well, I reckon I am. I couldn't make much of a mistake about that white-faced pony he wor
a-ridin'."

Requesting the miner to accompany him to the hotel, Manning interrogated him closely about
the appearance of the man, and found that he was giving him the correct information, as his
description of Duncan tallied precisely with what he himself had already learned. After carefully
weighing the matter, Manning decided to act upon this latter information, and to start for
Helena that evening. The saloon-keeper evidently mistrusted some danger to Duncan, from the
detective's inquiries, and Manning was inclined to believe that the fugitive had stopped there
during his stay in Bozeman, and that the proprietor of the saloon had attempted to deceive
him and turn him off from the tracks of the unfortunate burglar.

Thus far, from all that could be learned of Duncan's movements, the young man was traveling
entirely alone. From point to point across the western continent Manning had traced him, and
no tidings of a companion had been as yet received. Alone and friendless, cut off from all
the old associations of his past life, this unfortunate man was flying from a fate which he
felt must be impending. Through the long summer days and under the starry skies during the
weary nights, this fleeing outcast was working his way to fancied freedom and security. I wonder
if, during the long watches of the night, when he sought the needed slumber which his weary
brain and body demanded, whether the accuser's voice was not sounding in his ears, whether
he did not start with affright at fancied dangers, and find his lonely life a burden, heavy
and sorrowful!

It was now nearly eight o'clock, and the stage would not leave for Helena until midnight, and
Manning, having nothing else to do, sought a few hours' sleep in order to be better prepared
for the long journey before him. The distance from Bozeman to Helena was about ninety-five
miles, and from what he had heard the roads were in a terrible condition. Heavy rains had fallen
recently, and the mud in some places along his journey was said to be nearly axle deep. Undaunted
by the gloomy prospect before him, however, Manning rested quietly, and, when the time for
starting arrived, he was fully refreshed and eager for the long ride before him.

Profiting by his past experience, he now secured an inside seat, as he would be better protected
from the chilling night winds so prevalent in this mountainous country, and would perhaps,
be able to sleep at intervals during the hours which would ensue before daylight.

The other passengers in the coach were three men who were interested in mining in the neighborhood
of Helena, and who, like himself, were bound for that place. They were all, however, rather
wearied with their journey from Billings, and very much disposed to sleep. Manning, therefore,
stowed himself away in one corner of the coach, as comfortably as he was able to do, and nodded
and dozed fitfully until they arrived at the breakfast station at Gallatin, a little town on
the river.

After an hour's rest and a change of horses, they pushed on again. From this point onward they
found the reports about the condition of the roads fully verified. The stage lumbered along
through the deep, muddy roads, and ever and anon the passengers would be required to alight,
and assist in lifting the wheels from a particularly soft spot, where they were threatened
with being inextricably mired. As may be imagined, a journey under such circumstances was far
from being a pleasant one, but they all submitted with good nature to a state of affairs which
was beyond their power to remedy. As it was, they fared much better than a party of travelers
whom they met upon the road. They were returning from Helena, and when crossing a narrow bridge
over one of the mountain streams, had the misfortune to have their coach overturned, and themselves
precipitated violently to the ground, thereby sustaining serious injury. Upon meeting this
forlorn party of travelers, Manning and his companions all turned out again, and by herculean
efforts succeeded in righting the overturned coach, and in repairing, as far as in their power,
the damage that had been done. With such laborious experiences as these, the party traveled
on, and by the time they had arrived at the supper station they were almost exhausted.

After this, however, the roads gradually improved, and as darkness came on, they again essayed
to sleep. On they went, and the night was passed in uncomfortable slumber, broken and disturbed
by the lurching and uneasy jolting of the coach over the rough mountain roads, and the curses
of the driver, administered without stint to the struggling and jaded horses. The night, however,
brought neither danger nor mishap, and at four o'clock in the morning they arrived at Helena,
very much demoralized and worn out, but with whole bodies and ravenous appetites. Manning went
to bed immediately on his arrival, and did not awake until the sun was high in the heavens,
when he arose, feeling considerably refreshed and strengthened by his repose.

Helena, the capital of Montana, he found to be a pushing and energetic city of about ten thousand
inhabitants. Here were mills and factories, a handsome court-house, graded schools, several
newspapers, charitable institutions and public hospitals, in fact, all the progressive elements
of a thriving and well-settled city of modern times. All this had been accomplished in less
than twenty years, and without the assistance of the railroad or the energizing influence of
river navigation. The railroad had not yet penetrated into this mountainous region, and the
Missouri river was fourteen miles distant. To the adventurous spirit of gold-hunting Americans
had Helena owed its origin and growth, and its resources were unknown until 1864, when a party
of prospecting miners discovered unmistakable evidences of rich yielding gold and silver mines
in the immediate vicinity of what is now the thriving city of Helena. Following this discovery,
thousands of gold-hunters sought this new "Eldorado," and in a few months a populous community
had taken possession of the ground. Within a year after this the territory of Montana was formed,
and from its central location and large population, Helena was chosen as the capital. From
this time the success of the city was assured, emigration continued, the mines showed no signs
of diminution, and the town soon aspired to the dignity of a city, despite its remoteness from
the river, the railroad and the telegraph. Exceeding even California in the richness of its
gold mines, Montana shows a wonderful yield of silver, which is obtained with an ease which
makes mining a pleasurable and sure source of incalculable profit. In addition to the precious
metals, copper is also found in abundance, and forms an important feature of the mineral wealth
of this territory.

Montana is easily reached during the season of navigation by steamboats on the Missouri river
from St. Louis, from which point, without obstruction or transshipment, the river is navigable
to Fort Benton, situated almost in the center of the territory, a distance of more than twenty-five
hundred miles. Here, too, there is a large and constant supply of water, a matter of great
difficulty and scarcity in other mining districts. As the range of the Rocky Mountains in this
vicinity does not present that broken and rugged character which marks the other ranges, the
land is especially adapted for agricultural purposes, and timber of all kinds abounds in sufficient
quantities for all the purposes of home consumption. Possessing these manifold and important
advantages, it is not strange that the country is not materially dependent upon the railroads
for its growth and present development.

These facts Manning gleaned in a conversation with the proprietor of the hotel, while he was
making his preparations to commence his search for the man whose crime had led him such a long
chase, and whose detection now seemed hopefully imminent.

After obtaining much valuable information with reference to the various localities of the city,
from the landlord of the hotel, Manning sallied forth upon his quest. With untiring energy
he prosecuted his inquiries, only to meet with repeated disappointments and rebuffs; all day
long he labored assiduously, visiting a hundred brothels, saloons and hotels, and yet without
discovering a trace of Duncan or his white-faced quadruped. Could it be possible that the honest-faced
miner had played him false, and designedly thrown him off the scent? He replied only by pointing his
finger to his father, who was smoking his pipe on the door-step. A moment later she was closeted
with Jeremiah Brohl.

She at once proposed to him to buy his son; he dropped his arms in astonishment, then felt delighted
and charmed. He declared, at first, that his son was not for sale; and then he insinuated that
if ever he did sell him he would sell him dear; he was, according
to his opinion, merchandise of the best quality, a rich and rare article.
 An officer, well tried and trusted,
a man of considerable experience, and who was the very ideal of a discreet and intelligent
official, was delegated to accompany him during the evening. For a long time these two men
devoted their combined energies to the task before them; but as had been the case with Manning
during the day, no success attended their efforts.

At length the officer turned to Manning and said:

"There is only one more place where we can possibly hope to hear from your friend, and I have
left that until the last, because I scarcely hope to learn anything even there."

"Let us go at once," said the detective; "drowning men, they say, catch at straws. I am determined
that no possible point shall be lost and we may only be disappointed again; but let us try."

"Come along, then," replied the officer; "but keep your revolver where you can find it, for
you may have occasion to use it."

"Where are we going?" asked Manning.

"To Jerry Taylor's ranche," answered the officer, "as hard a dive as you ever saw."

"Very well," said Manning, "we will go. I have no fear for myself, and perhaps this is the
turning-point in our search."

So saying they started off, and after half an hour's walk found themselves in the extreme northern
part of the city, and in a locality which presented anything but an inviting appearance.

Although but a short distance from one of the main thoroughfares, the houses were of the most
wretched character, and the people who were congregated about the doorways were villainous
looking men and low-browed, brazen-faced women. Lights shone from many windows, and from within
came the sound of loud laughter and ribald song. They were evidently in a quarter of the city
where vice reigned supreme and where poverty, crime and immorality held full sway.

Passing through this neighborhood without molestation, for Manning's companion seemed to be
well known and universally feared, they reached a long, rambling frame building, which was
gayly painted and brightly illuminated. Men and women of all ages were entering and leaving
the place, and crowds of people were gathered about the entrance. Above the noise of the clinking
of glasses and the loud orders of the waiters, could be heard the sounds of music, and a general
confusion of voices that bespoke a large assembly.

The detective had frequently heard of the character of a dance-house in the far west, and here
was an opportunity to view one in full blast. Elbowing their way through the crowd, Manning
and his companion soon found themselves in a large, brilliantly lighted room, almost entirely
bereft of furniture. At one end was a raised platform, on which were seated the orchestra,
consisting of a piano, sadly out of tune, a cracked violin, and a cornet which effectually
drowned out the music of the other two instruments. Around the sides of the room were ranged
rows of tables and wooden chairs, which were occupied by men and women, all busily occupied
in disposing of the villainous liquids which were dispensed to them by so-called pretty waiter
girls, who had evidently long since become strangers to modesty and morality. The band was
playing a waltz, and the floor was filled with a motley gathering of both sexes, who were whirling
about the room, with the greatest abandonment, dancing madly to the harsh and discordant music.
The scene was a perfect pandemonium, while boisterous laughter and loud curses mingled with
and intensified the general excitement and confusion. Both the men and women were drinking
freely, and some of them were in a wild state of intoxication, while others had long since
passed the stage of excitement and were now dozing stupidly in the corners of the room.

Manning and his companion stood for some time gazing at the scenes around them. The detective's
mind was busy with somber meditations upon the human degradation that was here presented. Here
were women, many of them still youthful and with marks of beauty still remaining, in spite
of their life of dissipation. Their eyes were flashing under the influence of intoxication,
and from their pretty lips were issuing blasphemies which made him shudder. Old women, with
a long record of shame and immorality behind them, and with their bold faces covered with cosmetics
to hide the ravages of time. Rough men, with their flannel shirts and their trousers tucked
into their high, mud-covered boots. Young men of the city, dressed well and apparently respectable,
yet all yielding to their passion for strong drink and the charms of lewdness and indecency.
A strange, wild gathering of all grades and conditions, mingling in a disgraceful orgie which
the pen refuses to depict. How many stories of happy homes wrecked and broken could be related
by these painted lizards who now were swimming in this whirlpool of licentious gratification!
How many men, whose past careers of honor and reputation had been thrown away, were here gathered
in this brothel, participating in so-called amusements, which a few years ago would have appalled
them! Ah, humanity is a strange study, and debased humanity the strangest and saddest of them all.

The detective was aroused from his reflections by the voice of his companion.

"What do you think of this?"

"I scarcely know," answered Manning, sadly. "I have seen much of the under-current of social
life, but this exceeds anything I have ever before experienced."

"Oh, this is comparatively nothing," said the other. "Pleasure is the ruling spirit now. You
should be here some time when there is a fight, and then you would think that hell was a reality,
and these people devils incarnate."

While they were thus conversing, the proprietor of the establishment, Jerry Taylor, approached
them, and respectfully saluting the officer, whom he knew, said smilingly:

"Seein' the sights of the city, are you, lieutenant?"

"Well, yes, Jerry; that's part of our business. But we are looking for a young man who was
here a few days ago, and perhaps you can help us?"

"Well, if I can do anything for you I will," answered Jerry, who was a tall, broad-shouldered,
black-haired man, with flashing black eyes and a somber mustache, which trailed below his chin.
"Come over into the wine-room, where we can talk. We can't do it here for the noise."

Accepting the suggestion, the three men walked across the room, and entering a narrow doorway
in one corner, were ushered into an apartment which was designated as the "wine-room." This
room was occupied by the better dressed portion of the habitues of the place, and their deportment
was much more circumspect than those in the larger room outside. Leading the way to a table
in a retired corner of the room, the proprietor requested them to be seated, while Manning
called for the services of one of the waiter girls in providing for their liquid nourishment.

The officer, who had obtained possession of Duncan's photograph, now produced it, and handing
it over to Mr. Taylor, said:

"Jerry, that is the fellow we are looking for. Do you know anything about him?"

Taylor looked at the picture a moment, and then answered:

"Certainly, I know something about him. He was here two or three days ago, and was as flush
with his money as a nobby aristocrat."

Manning's heart leaped with joy as he heard these words. He was no longer doubtful of results,
and was satisfied that he was upon the right track.

"How long did he stay here?" asked the officer.

"Let me see," said Taylor, meditatingly. "He had a white-faced pony with him, and I took care
of the animal in my stable. He was here, I guess, a day and two nights."

"Do you know which way he went?" now inquired Manning.

"Wait a moment, gentlemen," said Taylor, rising to his feet, "I think I can find some one who
can tell you all about it."

Walking to the door, he disappeared, and after an absence of a few minutes he returned, accompanied
by a rather handsome young woman of about twenty years of age, and who appeared to be far superior
to the balance of the females whom Manning had noticed since his entrance into the bagnio.

The young woman came smilingly forward, and seating herself at the table, deliberately poured
out a glass of wine, and tossed it off with an air of good humor that proved her to be no novice
in the art.

Jerry Taylor introduced the gay cyprian to the officers, and the nature of their business was
soon made known to her.

Without hesitation or the faintest evidence of a blush, she informed the officers that Duncan
had been her companion during his stay in Helena, and that they had enjoyed each other's company
immensely. He had lots of money, the girl said, and she had assisted him in spending some of
it. In reply to their questions, the girl stated that Duncan had left Helena two days ago,
and that he intended going to Butte City, where he had relatives in business. Further than
this she could not say, and they were compelled to be satisfied with what information she had
been able to give them.

This was reliable and satisfactory news to Manning, and after lingering in the place a few
minutes longer, and compensating the girl for her revelations, the two men took their departure
and returned to the hotel, well pleased with the result of the evening's experience.

Upon making inquiries, Manning learned, to his intense disappointment, that he would be obliged
to wait until noon on the following day before he could secure a passage in the stage for Butte
City. As no time was to be lost, now that he was approaching so near to what he hoped would
be the termination of his journey, Manning determined not to delay his departure until the
starting of the coach. The nights were moonlight now, and requesting the further services of
the officer in assisting him to procure a good saddle horse and a guide, Manning resolved to
start at once for Butte City.

A horse was soon secured, and a trusty man was found who was well acquainted with the road,
and who was willing to accompany him. Bidding farewell to the officer, whom he amply remunerated
for his trouble, Manning, at ten o'clock that night, leaped into his saddle and set out on
his journey. He rode hard all that night, and at sunrise reached Boulder, having traveled considerably
more than half the distance. Here they stopped for breakfast, to feed their horses and take
some rest. His guide left him at Boulder City and returned to Helena, and about nine o'clock,
Manning set off alone for Butte. He pushed on without delay or accident, and about four o'clock
in the afternoon arrived at his destination.

His first care was to provide quarters for his horse, and to make arrangements for his return
to Helena by the stage next day, after which he sought the hotel for rest, and refreshment
for himself.

How near he was to the object of his long search he did not know, but tired and hungry from
his long ride, he mentally breathed a prayer that success would speedily crown his efforts,
and that the weary chase would soon be ended.

Butte City is a rich mining village in Deer Lodge county in the territory of Montana, and is
surrounded by high hills, which contain rich deposits of gold and silver which are taken from
the quartz rock, and in the city are situated the furnaces and other appliances for extracting
the precious metals from the rocks in which they are found. The population, although largely
of a transient and adventurous character, is composed of a respectable, well-ordered community,
many of whom have located permanently, and have labored for the advancement and success of
the village. There are several stores, numerous hotels, many very handsome private dwellings,
and a newspaper. Though not so large as Helena, by any means, it bids fair in time to rival
her more successful neighbor, and the elements of success are found within her domain. The
local government consists of a mayor and a city marshal, while the deputies of the latter official
constitute the police force who maintain order in the city and protect the persons and property
of the citizens. A substantial jail looks frowningly down upon one of the main thoroughfares,
and altogether Butte City is as well-conducted and carefully managed a town as is to be found
west of the Mississippi river. Within a few months a railroad, a branch of the Union Pacific
road, had been completed, which placed the city in communication, both by rail and telegraph,
with the larger towns and cities located in the South and East.

After a hearty dinner and a refreshing bath, Manning left the hotel and sought the office of
the city marshal. Here, as elsewhere, he was received with the utmost courtesy and kindness,
and with a warm proffer of assistance, which the detective most gladly accepted. He detailed
the circumstances of the robbery and his long pursuit of the escaping burglar, and also his
strong belief that Duncan was now hiding in the city. The marshal fully coincided with his
views, and promised to aid him to the utmost of his ability. He then furnished Manning with
the address of Duncan's relative, and the detective started out to find the locality to which
he had been directed.

He soon discovered the place he was looking for, located on the second floor of one of the
larger buildings in the city, and over the entrance was suspended the sign:

     GEORGE DUNCAN, CLOTHIER.

Mounting the stairs without hesitation, the detective entered the store, where he found to
his intense satisfaction the merchant at home. He was assured of this fact from the striking
resemblance which the man bore to his fugitive relation. On the pretense of ordering a suit
of clothing, the detective engaged him in conversation for some time, and after satisfying
himself that Duncan was not about the premises he took his leave, promising to call again and
effect his purchase. Arriving on the outside, Manning took up a position where he could watch
the entrance unobserved, and where anyone entering or leaving the place could be readily seen
by him. Maintaining his watch for several hours, he was gratified, about nine o'clock, to see
the clothier making preparations to close his store, and a few moments afterwards he appeared
upon the street. As the merchant walked along the streets, the detective followed him closely,
never losing sight of him for a moment. For a time the man strolled about, apparently with
no definite object in view, and Manning began to fear that his hopes of finding Duncan were
futile, and that this relative was entirely unaware of his relative's movements. The night
was dark and it was with difficulty that he could keep his man in sight, without approaching
so close as to excite suspicion. At last, however, the merchant came out of a saloon which
he had entered a short time before, and this time he was accompanied by another man whom Manning
could not obtain a fair view of. Taking a circuitous route, they at length gained the main
street in the vicinity of the merchant's store. Here they entered a doorway leading from the
street and ascending a stairway were soon lost to sight. The detective at once surmised that
the clothier occupied sleeping apartments in the building, and that the two men had probably
retired for the night.

His first impulse was to follow them up stairs and demand admittance, and should Duncan prove
to be one of the parties, to make the arrest then and there. A little reflection, however,
convinced him that such a proceeding would be not only unwise but hazardous in the extreme.
He was not sure that the companion of the merchant was Duncan, as he had been unable to get
close enough to recognize him, and a precipitate entry now would, in case he was not the man,
only serve to put them all upon their guard against future surprises.

Manning therefore rapidly made his way to the marshal's office, and finding him within, at
once acquainted him with what he had discovered, and requested his advice and assistance. The
marshal selected one of his most trusty assistants and the three men repaired to the place
where Manning had seen the merchant and his companion enter. The marshal, who was intimately
acquainted with the clothing merchant, informed Manning that the gentleman occupied apartments
in the building, and suggested that he would be the best man to go up, as in case their man
was not there, he could invent some pretext for his visit which would not excite undue suspicion.

This proposition was agreed to, and the marshal ascended the stairs. He found the room unoccupied
by the merchant and knocked at the door. All was dark and silent within, and no response came
to his summons. After again knocking and making a careful examination of the place, the marshal
was convinced that the room was empty and that the men, whoever they were, had departed.

Returning to the sidewalk, a hurried consultation was held, and it was determined to leave
the deputy to watch the room, while Manning and the marshal went to the various livery stables
in the town, in order to ascertain if Duncan had arrived and had quartered his horse at any
of them. This old knave is right. Accursed be the day when the genius of invention thrilled your
sublime brain! A grand discovery you have made, forsooth! What have
I gained from it?

Grand illusions, grand discomfitures! What hath it availed me that I passed whole nights discussing
with you breech-loaders, screw-plates, tumbrels, sockets, bridges, ovoid balls, and spring-locks?
What fruits have I gained from these refreshing conversations? You foresaw everything, my
great man, except that one little thing which great men so often fail to see, that mysterious
something, I know not what, which makes success. When you spoke to me, in your slow, monotonous
tones, when you fixed upon me your melancholy gaze, I should have been able to read in your eyes
that you were only a fool. The devil take thee and thy gun, thy gun and thee; hollow head,
head full of chimeras, true Pole, true Larinski!"

To whom was Count Abel speaking? To a phantom? To his double? He alone knew. When he had uttered
the last words, he resumed the perusal of his letter, which ended thus:

"Will you permit me to give you a piece of advice, M. le Comte, a good little piece of advice?
I have known you for three years, and have taken much interest in your welfare. You invent
guns, which, when they are strong, lack lightness. I beg your pardon, but I do not comprehend
you, M. le Comte.

The name you bear is excellent; the head you carry on your shoulders is superb, and it is the general
opinion that you resemble Faust; but neither name nor head does you any good. Leave the guns
as they are, and bestow your attention upon women; they, and they alone, can draw you out of
the deep waters where you are now floundering. There is no time to lose. I beg your pardon,
but you must be thirty years old, and perhaps a little more. This
diable of a gun has made you lose three valuable years.

"It pains
me, M. le Comte, to be compelled to remind you that the little note
falls due shortly. Slowly the morning waned away
and as yet no sign of the man for whom he was waiting. How many times he had fancied he heard
the longed-for footstep, and peered anxiously out, only to be disappointed, it would be impossible
to tell. At length, however, just as he was about to despair of success, he heard footsteps
at the door, and peeping through the opening in the stall, he saw the figure of the man for
whose appearance he had watched so long, and whose face had haunted him day and night since
he had started in pursuit of him. There he stood, not a dozen feet away from him, and as the
detective gazed at the unsuspecting thief, a thrill of pleasurable excitement filled his being.
In a moment, however, he had controlled himself; and perfectly calm and collected, he watched
the man before him. There was no doubt that Duncan was contemplating a renewal of his journey.
He was dressed in a hunting suit of heavy brown ducking, with high top boots and a wide brimmed
sombrero, while across his shoulders was slung a leather bag, which was filled probably with
clothing and provisions. In his hand he carried a splendid repeating rifle, and a brace of
pistols were in his belt.

All this the detective was able to note in the brief moment that Duncan paused at the door,
as if looking for some one to whom he could give orders for the saddling of his horse. Seeing
no one about the place, however, he set his rifle down in a corner by the door, and walked
slowly down the passage until he reached the stall where his pony was standing.

He was now directly in front of the spot where the detective was concealed, but with his back
toward the operative. As he turned to go into the stall, Manning stopped quickly forward, with
his revolver in his hand, and grasping Duncan firmly by the shoulder, he said:

"Thomas Duncan, I have caught you at last."

Duncan started as though he had been shot, as these words rang in his ears, and he felt the
grasp of the detective's strong arm. In an instant he recovered himself, and his hand quickly
sought one of the revolvers in his belt. The detective, however, was too quick for him, and
placing the muzzle of his pistol against the burglar's cheek, he said, determinedly:

"If you attempt to draw your pistol, I'll blow your brains out!"

Duncan felt that it was useless to attempt to trifle with the resolute man before him, and
his arms dropped to his side.

"It's no use, Tod," said Manning, with a quiet smile. "I've got the drop on you, and you might
as well cave. Throw your pistols on the ground."

Mechanically Duncan did as he was directed, and then turning to Manning, he inquired in a low,
suppressed tone:

"What do you want me for?"

"For the Geneva bank robbery," answered Manning. "You have led me a pretty long chase, but
you see I have caught you at last."

"If you had been one hour later," said the other, doggedly, "you never would have taken me.
Once on my horse, I would have defied you, and I would have killed you like a dog."

"Well, well," answered Manning, "we won't talk about what you might have done. I've got you,
and that's enough for me."

At this juncture the marshal made his appearance, and offering his assistance, the crestfallen
young burglar was quietly led away to the jail, where he was searched, and fifteen hundred
dollars in money was found upon his person, besides an excellent and valuable gold watch. Without
waiting for any further results, Manning rushed to the telegraph office, in order to apprise
me of his success. He could not repress a pardonable feeling of pride in the victory he had
accomplished. His search was ended, his man was a prisoner, and shortly afterward there came
clicking over the wires to Chicago, the following message:

     "I have him, fifteen hundred dollars in money, a gold watch,
     horse and rifle. Will sell horse for what I can get, and leave
     here, with prisoner, for Chicago, in the morning."

As I had received no tidings of John Manning since his departure from Minneapolis, it may be
imagined that I was considerably relieved when his brief but comprehensive telegram from Butte
City was received. So long a time had elapsed since he had been able to transmit me any definite
information about his movements, that I had begun to grow alarmed, not only for the successful
termination of his pursuit, but for his personal safety. Now, however, all my fears were set
at rest; the daring and ambitious detective was safe and well, and in addition to this he had
succeeded in capturing the fugitive, who was now in his custody. The chase had been a long
and fatiguing one, but victory had crowned our efforts, and the entire quartette of criminals
were now in the hands of the officers of the law, and would be held to answer for their crimes.
The pursuit of Duncan had been most admirably carried out by my trusted operative, and Manning
was deserving of unstinted credit for the sagacious mind and untiring spirit he displayed.
So thoroughly determined had he been to secure his prisoner, that no consideration of personal
comfort, or even necessary rest, had been allowed to interfere with his movements. With more
than a month elapsing between the commission of the crime and the commencement of the chase,
and traveling over a country thinly settled and semi-barbarous, I regarded the victory which
he had achieved as one deserving of the highest encomiums, and reflecting great credit upon
his skill, determination and pertinacity.

Mr. Silby and the bank officials were immediately notified of Duncan's capture, and their satisfaction
was unbounded; their congratulations were unsparingly uttered, and their words of commendation
were of the heartiest and warmest character. They were now fully satisfied that the vexing
problem of the missing five thousand dollars in coin would be solved, and earnestly hoped that
the solution would inure to their advantage. However, nothing could be done in the matter until
the arrival of Duncan, and we impatiently awaited his appearance.

The next morning after his arrest Duncan was placed on the train, and in company with John
Manning started for Chicago. The detective had experienced no difficulty in disposing of the
horse owned by the young prisoner, and Mr. Livermore, the stable-man, became his purchaser
for a fair price. Having experienced quite as much of the discomforts and fatigues of traveling
by stage coach and on horseback as he desired, Manning resolved to return to Chicago by rail,
and he accordingly took passage on the Idaho division of the Union Pacific railroad, which
would be both a more expeditious and comfortable mode of traveling, besides being a safe method
of conducting a prisoner.

Ever since his arrest Duncan had been sullen and uncommunicative. He was evidently crushed
by the sudden and surprising turn which affairs had taken. In the moment of his triumph he
had fallen, and when he fancied himself the most secure, defeat and detection had overtaken
him. It was not long, however, after they had started upon their return journey, ere Manning
succeeded in breaking through his reserve, and in inducing him to talk freely. To the young
man's credit be it said, that the first inquiry he made was in regard to the recovery of Miss
Patton, the young lady whom he had assaulted in the bank, and when he learned of her speedy
and complete recovery, he seemed quite relieved. He expressed the most intense regret at having
been compelled, as he put it, to treat her so roughly, and he added, "I tell you she was a
plucky little woman, and had Eugene Pearson been an honest man and fought as well as she did,
we never could have got that money."

"She is certainly a brave girl," replied Manning.

"Why, look here," exclaimed Duncan, extending his left hand toward him, upon two fingers of
which the detective noticed several dark-looking and freshly-healed scars. "I was compelled
to strike her. She fastened her teeth into my hand, and bit me to the bone. I never could have
got loose without that; as it was, my hand bled terribly, and was a long time in healing, besides
being excessively painful."

By degrees the detective led him to speak of his connection with the robbery, and after a momentary
hesitation he revealed the whole story, which in every particular coincided with that already
told by Newton Edwards. He stated that being in Chicago without money, and without a friend
except Edwards, he had requested a loan from him, which was readily granted. Then followed
another drinking spree in company with his friend, and during its continuance Edwards proposed
the robbery, and explained how easily and safely it might be accomplished. Lured by the glittering
prospect and intoxicated as he was, he gave a ready consent to enter into the scheme, and almost
before he was aware of it, and certainly before he became thoroughly sober, the burglary had
been committed, and with his ill-gotten gains he was on the road, seeking to escape from the
consequences of his crime. He professed sincere repentance for what he had done, and stated
that this was his first offense, which would now have to be atoned for by a long term of imprisonment.

As they progressed upon their way, and when about fifty miles out, Duncan informed the detective
that he had met a noted rough in Butte City who was known as Texas Jack, and that this man
had told his cousin that, if he desired it, a party could be raised, who would waylay the train
and effect his rescue.

"What would you have done if they had made the attempt?" asked Duncan, jocularly.

"Well," answered Manning coolly, and with determination, "they might have taken you, but it
would have been after I had put a bullet through your brain."

The quiet and resolute tone in which this was said, caused the robber's cheek to turn pale,
as he saw the determined spirit of the man with whom he had to deal. It is needless to say
that no attempt was made to effect a rescue, nor had Manning any fears that such an effort
would be made, but he deemed it wise to give his prisoner a quiet but firm hint as to what
the consequences would be if a rescue was attempted.

During the remainder of the journey Duncan was as cheerful and pleasant in his manner as though
no thought of a prison entered his mind, and the detective experienced no trouble or annoyance
with him whatever.

Two days later they arrived at Council Bluffs, where they changed cars, and, taking the Rock
Island route, they were not long in reaching Chicago. Manning brought his prisoner to my agency,
where he was taken care of until arrangements could be made for his transportation to Geneva.

I cannot express the satisfaction I experienced when I realized at last that our chase was
over, and that a full and satisfying victory had attended our efforts in this matter. All of
the prisoners were now taken, and, except for the solution of the question of the missing five
thousand dollars, our work had been successfully accomplished. 

Monk and Dean stationed themselves again at the mouth of the Texel, and blocked up the Dutch in
their own ports with eighty sail; but hearing that Van Trump was at Goree, with one hundred
and twenty men of war, they ordered all ships of force in the river and ports to repair to
them.

On June the 3rd, the two fleets came to an engagement, in the beginning of which Dean was carried
off by a cannon-ball; yet the fight continued from about twelve to
six in the afternoon, when the Dutch gave way, and retreated fighting.

On the 4th, in the afternoon, Blake came up with eighteen fresh ships,
and procured the English a complete victory; nor could the Dutch any
otherwise preserve their ships than by retiring, once more, into the
flats and shallows, where the largest of the English vessels could
not approach.

In this battle Van Trump boarded viceadmiral Penn; but was beaten off, and himself boarded, and
reduced to blow up his decks, of which the English had got possession. He was then entered,
at once, by Penn and another; nor could possibly have escaped, had not De Ruyter and De Witt arrived
at that instant, and rescued him.

However the Dutch may endeavour to extenuate their loss in this battle, by admitting no more than eight
ships to have been taken or destroyed, it is evident that they must
have received much greater damages, not only by the accounts of more
impartial historians, but by the remonstrances and exclamations of
their admirals themselves; Van Trump declaring before the states,
that "without a numerous reinforcement of large men of war, he could
serve them no more;" and De Witt crying out before them, with the
natural warmth of his character: "Why should I be silent before my
lords and masters?

 He fully corroborated the statement of Newton Edwards about their disappointment in
not obtaining, within five thousand dollars, as much money as they expected, and he expressed
the belief that Eugene Pearson had taken this additional sum, and had thus deceived both his
companions and the bank.

He fully explained the disposition they made of the valise, which contained the silver, by
hiding it in the corn-field by the road-side; after which they continued their journey unincumbered
by the weight of the coin, which they did not consider valuable enough to burden themselves with.

After he had finished, William inquired:

"Was there no other sack or sacks than those you have mentioned as being in the valise when
you threw it away? Did you not dispose of some before you parted with the satchel? Think carefully
now; there is a mystery about that sack of gold which we want to solve, if possible."

"Eugene Pearson declares," added Mr. Silby, the bank president, "that he has given up everything,
and is positive that you took away from the bank nearly fifteen thousand dollars in currency
and coin."

Again, as in the case of Edwards, the valise was brought out, and the amount of money which
was supposed to have been taken at the time of the robbery, less five thousand dollars in gold,
was handed to Duncan to lift. Duncan raised it in his hand, and at once pronounced it lighter
than when they carried it away from the bank. A sack containing five thousand dollars in gold
was then added, and when he again took it in his hands, he exclaimed:

"That's more like it; when we left the bank the valise was fully that heavy."

"Now, Mr. Duncan," said Mr. Silby, "this test satisfies me that Eugene Pearson is innocent
of having taken more money than he has restored to us, and that when you left the bank, you
carried away the amount he states."

While Mr. Silby was speaking, Duncan had been recalling all the events which had transpired
during their flight, and endeavoring to trace, step by step, all that they had done.

"I remember now," he said slowly, after a few moments, "that before we concluded to throw away
the valise, we sat down by the railroad track to rest. We then opened the valise, to see what
it contained. Among the contents, I noticed a small, dingy sack, which was marked 'silver--$100,'
and that being pretty heavy, and only a small amount, I took it and hid it in the weeds that
were growing around us. I suppose it is there yet, provided no one has found and removed it."

At this juncture, Mr. Welton, the cashier, who had been listening quietly, jumped to his feet
and excitedly exclaimed:

"That solves the mystery! I remember distinctly having placed that gold in a sack marked silver,
as it was the only one we could find at the time." Then turning to Duncan, he added: "You,
therefore, instead of throwing away one hundred dollars in silver, as you supposed, actually
disposed of five thousand dollars in as good gold as ever came from the mint."

This explanation appeared to be as plain as the sun at noonday, and it was evident that, mistaking
the contents of the sack to be silver, and of a small amount, Duncan had thrown it away, not
deeming it worth the trouble of taking.

"Can you tell the spot where you disposed of this sack?" asked William, who still indulged
in the hope of recovering the missing money.

"I think I could find it," answered Duncan. "And if you gentlemen will accompany me, I think
I can point it out to you."

Without delay, a carriage was procured, and Mr. Silby, Mr. Welton, Duncan and my son William,
started off. They proceeded in the direction which Duncan said they had traveled after leaving
the bank, and without difficulty he found the spot where he said they had stopped to rest.

Alighting from the carriage, Duncan pointed out the place where they had seated themselves,
and he sat down in what he claimed was the exact spot. It was at the foot of a little bank,
which rose abruptly from the roadside, and was covered thickly with heavy grass and weeds,
now dry and withered, and closely packed together. The three men who accompanied Duncan grew
exceedingly anxious at this point, for a few moments would decide the question of the recovery
of a large amount of money, or its unquestionable loss. Silently they waited, as Duncan thrust
his hand under this growth of dry grass and weeds, where he said he had put the gold, and with
surprise and joy they saw him draw forth the identical dingy-looking canvas bag. Exultantly
he held it aloft, and then placed it in the hands of Mr. Welton, who, on opening it, found
the shining gold pieces, and the mystery of the missing money was solved at last.

During all the weeks that had elapsed since the robbery, that gold had lain there undisturbed.
Hundreds and thousands of people had tramped over the ground in the hope of finding some traces
of the burglars, and no one had discovered the snug little sum which lay so temptingly near
them, and which might have been theirs for the simple trouble of taking it.

As for the bank officials and ourselves, our gratification at this profitable discovery was
only exceeded by our astonishment at the singular manner in which it had been at last accomplished.
Then, too, it set at rest all doubts as to the truthfulness of young Pearson's story, and proved
conclusively that he was honestly regretful and penitent for the crime he had committed, and
had given up all he had taken. At the same time it relieved his companions from any suspicion
of having made away with or concealed it for future use.

As for Duncan, to his credit it must be added, that he seemed as much pleased and relieved
at this restoration of the stolen money as did any of the others, and this action impressed
the officers of the bank with a feeling of profound sympathy for the unfortunate young man,
and convinced them that although he had been guilty of a serious crime, he was not really bad
at heart, and that this was his first offense, into which he had been led by his thoughtless
folly and reckless dissipation. At his request, he was allowed to see Miss Patton, and to her
he frankly and feelingly expressed his regrets for having so roughly treated her, and her forgiving
words were received as gratefully as could have been desired.

Our work was nearly finished. Out of twenty thousand dollars which had been taken, we had succeeded
in recovering nearly eighteen thousand dollars; the balance, having been squandered by Edwards
and Duncan, was, of course, irretrievably gone. But this was good enough as it was, and the
officers of the bank were satisfied and delighted at this most satisfactory conclusion of an
operation which, at its commencement, promised so little, and out of which such great results
had flowed.

The party returned to Geneva, and the next day Duncan was formally arraigned. He waived an
examination, and in default of bail was removed to the county prison, where his confederates
were already confined, anxiously awaiting their trial.

CHAPTER XXVI.

Conclusion--Retribution.

A few days later, and the last act in this sad drama of crime was performed. The four youthful
criminals were arraigned for trial before a conscientious judge, and by a jury composed of
gentlemen, many of whom were intimately acquainted with two of the accused, Eugene Pearson
and Dr. Johnson, both of whom, it will be remembered, were born and reared in the little town
of Geneva. As may be imagined, the trial attracted universal attention in that section of the
country, and on the day that the court was convened, the town was filled with people from all
the surrounding districts, who came to witness the important proceedings. Long before the hour
fixed for the commencement of the trial, the court-room was crowded to suffocation by the eager
multitude, who had come from far and near, for the purpose of being present at this unusual
judicial investigation. Many were actuated only by the promptings of idle curiosity, and regarded
the trial somewhat in the light of a diverting exhibition, for which no admission fee was charged;
others, from a stern sense of justice, came to view a trial in which crime was to be punished,
and the law in all its majesty was to be invoked for the protection of the honor of society,
and the property of the individual. There was yet another class, who came from the impulses
of love and sympathy and friendship--some who were linked to the unfortunate criminals by the
ties of family and blood, and some who had known and esteemed them ere their hearts had been
hardened, and before the wiles of the tempter had lured them from the paths of honor and virtue.
There were present also the gray-haired father and mother of Eugene Pearson, broken and bowed
with the grief and shame which had been brought upon them by the crimes of their beloved son;
the aged parents of Dr. Johnson, who had come to witness, with saddened hearts, the doom of
their darling boy; the young wife of Newton Edwards, who in the moment of her husband's ruin
had, with true womanly devotion, forgotten his past acts of cruelty and harshness, and now,
with aching heart and tear-stained eyes, was waiting, with fear and trembling, to hear the
dreaded judgment pronounced upon the man whom she had sworn to "love and cherish" through "good
and evil report."

Since his incarceration she had been a constant visitor to his cell, and by her love and sympathy
had sought to uphold the fallen man in the dark hours of his shame and disgrace. Here also
was the aged father of Thomas Duncan, the only friend whom the young man had in all that vast
assembly. Though his face was stern and immovable, yet the quivering of the lips and the nervous
trembling of the wrinkled hands told too plainly that he too was suffering beyond expression
in the sorrow that had been wrought by the boy who in his early years had been his pride and joy.

When the judge had taken his seat, and the door opened to admit the four youthful prisoners,
all eyes were turned upon them. Slowly and with downcast eyes they entered the chamber of justice,
and amid an awe-like stillness that pervaded the room, took their seats in the prisoners' dock.
In spite of all that had transpired, and with the full conviction that these youthful offenders
richly merited whatever judgment they were to receive, there was not one in that entire audience,
whose heart did not throb with sympathy for the aged parents and relatives of the accused,
and even for the culprits themselves in this, the dreadful hour of their humiliation and grief.

The trial was not a protracted one. A jury was speedily empaneled, the low, stern tones of
the judge were heard in timely admonition, and the prosecution was commenced. Upon the prisoners
being asked to plead to the indictments which had been prepared against them, Mr. Kirkman,
a prominent attorney of Geneva, who had been retained to defend the unfortunate young men,
arose, and in impressive tones entered a plea of guilty. With the keen perceptions of a true
lawyer, he felt that the proofs were too strong to be overcome, and that to attempt to set
up any technical defense would only result in greater hardships to his clients. He, however,
made an eloquent and touching appeal for the exercise of judicial clemency. He referred in
feeling terms to the youth of the prisoners, to the groups of weeping and stricken relatives,
whose prayerful hearts were echoing his appeals. He urged that the evidences of sincere repentance
had been manifested by all of the prisoners, and that, as this had been their first offense,
the exercise of gentle mercy would be both grand and productive of good results.

His words were not lost even upon the prosecuting attorney, and when Mr. Kirkman had concluded,
that gentleman arose, and in a few words echoed the sentiments of the attorney for the defense.
He also expressed the conviction that, while justice called loudly for sentence, yet there
were elements in this case in which the wisest judgment would be that which partook of the
qualities of mercy.

At the conclusion of this request, the judge, with a delicate regard for the tender feelings
of the assembled relatives, ordered an adjournment of the court, in order that he might take
the merits of the case under advisement, and to enable him to administer such sentence, as,
in his best judgment, was demanded under the circumstances. Slowly the immense audience dispersed,
and for a few moments the prisoners were allowed to converse with their weeping friends, after
which they were again conducted to their cells to await the action of the court.

A few days later they were brought quietly before the judge and their sentences were pronounced.
Dr. Johnson, owing to the existence of a doubt as to his complicity in the robbery, was condemned
to four years' imprisonment on the charge of forgery, while Newton Edwards, Eugene Pearson,
and Thomas Duncan were each sentenced to an imprisonment of six years on the indictment for
burglary.

Thus ended this important case, and the action of the court received the almost universal approbation
of the community, while the relatives and nearest friends of the prisoners were compelled to
acknowledge its fairness and justice.

But little remains to be told. The prisoners were soon conducted to the state prison, and a
short time afterward, having occasion to visit that institution, I saw them again. They all
bore evidences of the most acute remorse and contrition, and their life in prison had produced
serious effects upon their robust persons. Far different was their lot now, to the free and
happy existence which had once been theirs. Eugene Pearson, the dapper young gentleman, was
put at hard labor in the stone-cutting department; Johnson, the dentist, was assigned to the
machine shop, while Edwards and Duncan were working in the shoe-making department. Day after
day the weary labor was performed, and night after night the gloom of the prison cell enshrouds
them. Weeks will roll into months and the months will stretch into weary years, ere they will
breathe the sweet air of liberty again. Within the frowning walls of the prison, they are paying
the heavy penalty for their crime, and here we must leave them, in the earnest and sincere
hope that true repentance may come to them, and that when their term of servitude is ended,
they may come forth, filled with resolves to live down the stain upon their characters, and
by upright and honorable lives to redeem and obliterate the dark and painful past. That "judgment
overcometh crime," has been fully proven in the lives of these men, and trusting in the future
to redeem the past, we leave them to the burdens and the solitude to which they have brought
themselves.

THE END.

1883. 1883.          $1 50 English Orphans.                 1 50  Hugh Worthington.       
1 50 Homestead on the Hillside.       1 50  Cameron Pride.                   1 50 'Lena Rivers.
1 50  Rose Mather.                     1 50 Meadow Brook.                    1 50  Ethelyn's
Mistake.               1 50 Dora Deane.                      1 50  Millbank.              
1 50 Cousin Maude.                    1 50  Edna Browning.                   1 50 Marian Grey.
1 50  West Lawn.                       1 50 Edith Lyle.                      1 50  Mildred.
1 50 Daisy Thornton.                  1 50  Forrest House.                      $1 50 Hidden
Path.                     1 50  Husbands and Homes.              1 50 Moss Side.          
1 50  Ruby's Husband.                  1 50 Nemesis.                         1 50  Phemie's
Temptation.             1 50 Miriam.                          1 50  The Empty Heart. Mr. LAW
paid no attention to the interruption. He cordially thanked Mr. ASQUITH for his speech, "the best
possible testimony to the unity of this country," and assured him that the Imperial Conference
would be primarily concerned with the successful prosecution of the War. The GERMAN EMPEROR had
proved himself a great Empire-builder, but it was not his own empire that he was building.

Later
on Mr. PRINGLE reverted to the absence of the PRIME MINISTER, which he, as a person of taste,
interpreted as "studied disrespect of the House of Commons."               1 50  Lost for a Woman.                1 50 A Mad Marriage.
1 50  A Wife's Tragedy.                1 50 Norine's Revenge.                1 50  A Changed
Heart.                 1 50 One Night's Mystery.             1 50  Pride and Passion.     
1 50 Kate Danton.                     1 50  Sharing Her Crime.               1 50 Silent and
True.                 1 50  A Wronged Wife. (New).           1 50

Allan Pinkerton's Works.

Expressmen and Detectives.    1 50 Somnambulists and Detectives.    1 50  Model Town and Detectives.
1 50 Bank Robbers and Detectives.     1 50

Bertha Clay's Novels.

Thrown on the World.            $1 50  A Woman's Temptation.            1 50 A Bitter Atonement.
1 50  Repented at Leisure.             1 50 Love Works Wonders.              1 50  Between
Two Loves. (New).           1 50  A Struggle for a Ring. (New).    1 50

"New York Weekly" Series.

Brownie's Triumph--Sheldon      $1 50  Curse of Everleigh--Pierce.     $1 50 The Forsaken Bride.
do.      1 50  Peerless Cathleen--Agnew.        1 50 Earle Wayne's Nobility. do.      1 50
Faithful Margaret--Ashmore.      1 50 Lost, A Pearle--      do. (New)  1 50  Nick Whiffles--Robinson.
1 50 A New Book.             do.      1 50  Grinder Papers--Dallas.          1 50 His Other
Wife--Ashleigh.        1 50  Lady Leonora--Conklin.           1 50

Miriam Coles Harris' Novels.

Rutledge.                       $1 50  The Sutherlands.                $1 50 Frank Warrington.
1 50  St. Philips.       1 50 A Perfect Adonis.                1 50  Richard Vandermarck. 
1 50 Missy. (New).                    1 50  Happy-Go-Lucky.              $1 50 The Star and
the Cloud.          1 50  I've Been Thinking.              1 50 How Could He Help it?     
1 50  To Love and to be Loved.                    $1 50 Chris and Otho.                  1
50  The Married Belle.               1 50 Ten Old Maids.                   1 50  Courting and
Farming.            1 50 His Young Wife.                  1 50  Kiss and be Friends.      
1 50 Lucy.                            1 50  Blossom Bud. (New).                         $1
50 Broken Dreams.      do.          1 50  Rich Medway.                     1 50 Compensation.
do.          1 50  Terrace Roses.                   1 50

Captain Mayne Reid's Works.

Child's History of England--With Historical Illustrations for
  School use                                                           $  75
Parlor Table Album of Dickens' Illustrations--With descriptive text     2 50
Lord Bateman Ballad--Notes by Dickens;  Pictures by Cruikshank            25

Annie Edwardes' Novels. Transl.   $1 75 Lives of the Apostles Do.

Sense. A serious book           $1 50  Nonsense. (A comic book)        $1 50 Gold Dust. Do. The
name "study" suggests literary efforts. Is it in your case merely a room devoted to the penning of
senseless and impertinent letters to unoffending neighbours, who
have something better to do than waste their time reading and answering
them?

 Do. Do. Do. Do.            1 50  Arabian Nights--Do. 
1 00 French Love Songs--Translated      50  Robinson Crusoe  Do              1 00 A Bad Boy's
First Reader           10  Swiss Family Robinson--Illus.    1 00 Lion Jack--By P.T. Barnum
1 50  Debatable Land--R. Dale Owen     2 00 Jack in the Jungle--Do.          1 50  Threading
My Way. Do.            1 50 Cats, Cooks, Etc--By Edw.T. Ely.   50  Spiritualism--By D. D. Home
2 00 Drumming as a Fine Art             50  Fanny Fern Memorials             2 00 How to Win
in Wall Street          50  Orpheus C. Kerr--4 vol. in one   2 00 The Life of Sarah Bernhardt
25  Northern Ballads--E.L. Anderson  1 00 Arctic Travels--Isaac I. Hayes   1 50  Offenbach's
Tour in America      1 50 College Tramps--Fred. A. Stokes  1 50  Stories about Doctors--Jeffreson
1 50 Gospels in Poetry--E.H. Kimball  1 50  Stories about Lawyers Do.

Doctor Antonio--By Ruffini       $1 50  Saint Leger--R.B. Kimball      $1 75 Beatrice Cenci--From
the Italian  1 50  Was He Successful?  Do.         1 75 Madame--By Frank Lee Benedict     1
50  Undercurrents of Wall St.  Do.  1 75 A Late Remorse  Do.               1 50  Romance of
Student Life.  Do.   1 75 Hammer and Anvil  Do.             1 50  To-day.  Do.            
1 75 Her Friend Laurence  Do.          1 50  Life in San Domingo  Do.        1 75 Prairie Flower--Emerson
Bennett   1 50  Henry Powers, Banker  Do.       1 75 Among the Thorns--Dickinson       1 50
Led Astray--Octave Feuillet     1 50 Women of To-day-Mrs. W. H. White  1 50  She Loved Him
Madly--Borys      1 50 Braxton's Bar--R. M. Daggett      1 50  Thick and Thin--Mery       
1 50 Miss Beck--Tilbury Holt           1 50  So Fair yet False--Chavette     1 50 Sub Rosa--Chas.
Do.  Do.              1 50 Wild Oats--Florence Marryatt      1 50  Out of the Foam.  Do.  
1 50 Widow Cherry--B.L. Farjeon          25  Hammer and Rapier.  Do.         1 50 Solomon Isaacs.
Do.                50  Warwick--By M. T. Walworth      1 75 Edith Murray--Joanna Mathews  
1 50  Lulu.  Do.                      1 75 Doctor Mortimer--Fannie Bean      1 50  Hotspur.
Do.                   1 75 Outwitted at Last--S.A. Gardner   1 50  Stormcliff.  Do.       
1 75 Vesta Vane--L. King, R.           1 50  Delaplaine.  Do.                1 75 Louise and
I--C.R. Dodge          1 50  Beverly.  Do.  Do. 1 50  John Maribel.  Do.              1 50
For Each Other.  Do.              1 50  Conquered--By a New Author      1 50 The Baroness--Joaquin
Miller      1 50  Janet--An English novel         1 50 One Fair Woman.  Do. 13.--BANK ROBBERS
AND DETECTIVES.

