Such a change of condition appeared very sweet to this spirit so haughty and so ulcerated,
and marvellously inflated the Cardinal's courage.  He recompensed his dear hosts by discourses,
which were the most agreeable to them, upon the misery of France (which his frequent journeys
through the provinces had placed before his eyes), upon its powerlessness to sustain the war;
upon the discontent which reigned among the people; upon the exhaustion of the finances; in
fine, he spared nothing that perfidy or ingratitude could suggest to flatter them and gain
their favour.

No sooner had the Cardinal had time to turn round among his new friends than he wrote a letter
to the King announcing his flight--a letter which was such a monstrous production of insolence,
of madness, of felony, and which was written in a style so extravagant and confused that it
deserves to be thus specially alluded to.  In this letter, as full of absurdities, impudence,
and of madness, as of words, the Cardinal, while pretending much devotion for the King, and
much submission to the Church, plainly intimated that he cared for neither.  Although this
was as the sting of a gnat upon an elephant, the King was horribly piqued at it.  He received
the letter on the 24th of May, gave it the next day to D'Aguesseau, attorney-general, and ordered
him to commence a suit against Cardinal de Bouillon, as guilty of felony.  At the same time
the King wrote to Rome, enclosing a copy of Bouillon's letter, so that it might be laid before
the Pope.  This letter received little approbation.  People considered that the King had forgotten
his dignity in writing it, it seemed so much like a justification and so little worthy, of
a great monarch.  As for the Cardinal de Bouillon, he grew more haughty than ever.  He wrote
a letter upon the subject of this trial with which he was threatened, even more violent than
his previous letter, and proclaimed that cardinals were not in any way amenable to secular
justice, and could not be judged except by the Pope and all the sacred college.

So in fact it seemed to, be; for although the Parliament commenced the trial, and issued an
order of arrest against the Cardinal, they soon found themselves stopped by difficulties which
arose, and by this immunity of the cardinals, which was supported by many examples.  After
all the fuss made, therefore, this cause fell by its own weakness, and exhaled itself, so to
speak, in insensible perspiration.  A fine lesson this for the most powerful princes, and calculated
to teach them that if they want to be served by Rome they should favour those that are there,
instead of raising their own subjects, who, out of Rome, can be of no service to the State;
and who are good only to seize three or four hundred thousand livres a year in benefices, with
the quarter of which an Italian would be more than recompensed.  A French cardinal in France
is the friend of the Pope, but the enemy of the King, the Church, and the State; a tyrant very
often to the clergy and the ministers, at liberty to do what he likes without ever being punished
for anything.

As nothing could be done in this way against the Cardinal, other steps were taken.  The fraudulent
"Genealogical History of the House of Auvergne," which I have previously alluded to, was suppressed
by royal edict, and orders given that all the copies of it should be seized. Baluze, who had
written it, was deprived of his chair of Professor of the Royal College, and driven out of
the realm.  A large quantity of copies of this edict were printed and publicly distributed.
The little patrimony that Cardinal de Bouillon had not been able to carry away, was immediately
confiscated: the temporality of his benefices had been already seized, and on the 7th of July
appeared a declaration from the King, which, depriving the Cardinal of all his advowsons, distributed
them to the bishops of the dioceses in which those advowsons were situated.

These blows were very sensibly felt by the other Bouillons, but it was no time for complaint.
The Cardinal himself became more enraged than ever. Even up to this time he had kept so little
within bounds that he had pontifically officiated in the church of Tournai at the Te Deum for
the taking of Douai (by the enemies); and from that town (Tournai), where he had fixed his
residence, he wrote a long letter to M. de Beauvais,-- bishop of the place, when it yielded,
and who would not sing the Te Deum, exhorting him to return to Tournai and submit to the new
rule.  Some time after this, that is to say, towards the end of the year, he was guilty of
even greater presumption.  The Abbey of Saint-Arnaud, in Flanders, had just been given by the
King to Cardinal La Tremoille, who had been confirmed in his possession by bulls from the Pope.
Since then the abbey had fallen into the power of the enemy.  Upon this, Cardinal de Bouillon
caused himself to be elected Abbot by a minority of the monks and in spite of the opposition
of the others.  It was curious to see this dutiful son of Rome, who had declared in his letter
to the King, that he thought of nothing except the dignity of the King, and how he could best.
serve God and the Church, thus elect him self in spite of the bull of the Pope, in spite of
the orders of the King, and enjoy by force the revenues of the abbey, protected solely by heretics!

But I have in the above recital alluded to the taking of Douai: this reminds me that I have
got to speak of our military movements, our losses, and our victories, of this year.  In Flanders
and in Spain they were of some importance, and had better, perhaps, have a chapter or more
to themselves.

CHAPTER LIII

The King, who had made numberless promotions, appointed this year the same generals to the
same armies.  Villars was chosen for Flanders, as before.  Having, arrived at the very summit
of favour, he thought he might venture, for the first time in his life, to bring a few truths
before the King.  He did nothing then but represent to the ministers, nay, even to the King
and Madame de Maintenon themselves, the wretched state of our magazines and our garrisons;
the utter absence of all provision for the campaign, and the piteous condition of the troops
and their officers, without money and without pay.  This was new language in the mouth of Villars,
who hitherto had owed all his success to the smiling, rose-tinted account he had given of everything.
It was the frequency and the hardihood of his falsehoods in this respect that made the King
and Madame de Maintenon look upon him as their sole resource; for he never said anything disagreeable,
and never found difficulties anywhere.  Now that he had raised this fatal curtain, the aspect
appeared so hideous to them, that they found it easier to fly into a rage than to reply.  From
that moment they began to regard Villars with other eyes. Finding that he spoke now the language
which everybody spoke, they began to look upon him as the world had always looked upon him,
to find him ridiculous, silly, impudent, lying, insupportable; to reproach themselves with
having elevated him from nothing, so rapidly and so enormously; they began to shun him, to
put him aside, to make him perceive what they thought, and to let others perceive it also.

