Thus, a sensation which embraces within its range the whole spiritual being agitates in the
same measure the whole framework of the organic body,--heart, veins and blood, muscles and
nerves, all, from those mighty nerves that give to the heart its living impulse of motion down
to the tiny and unimportant nerves by which hairs are attached to the skin, share equally its
influence. Everything tends to a more violent motion. If the sensation be an agreeable one,
all these parts will acquire a higher degree of harmonious activity; the heart's beat will
be free, lively, uniform, the blood will flow unchecked, gently or with fiery speed, according
as the affection is of a gentle or violent description; digestion, secretion, and excretion
will follow their natural course; the excitable membranes will pliantly play in a gentle vapor-bath,
and excitability as well as sensitiveness will increase. Therefore the condition of the greatest
momentary mental pleasure is at the same time the condition of the greatest bodily well-being.

As many as there may be of these partial activities (and is not every beat of the pulse the
result perhaps of thousands?) so many will be the obscure sensations crowding upon the soul,
each one of which indicates perfection. Out of this confused complexity arises entire sensation
of the animal harmonies, that is, the highest possible combined sensation of animal pleasure,
which ranges itself, as it were, alongside of the original intellectual or moral sensation,
which this addition infinitely increases. Thus is every agreeable affection the source of countless
bodily pleasures.

This is most evidently confirmed by the examples of sick persons who have been cured by joy.
Let one whom a terrible home-sickness has wasted to a skeleton be brought back to his native
land, and the bloom of health will soon be his again; or let us enter a prison in which miserable
men have for ten or twenty years inhabited filthy dungeons and possess at last barely strength
to move,--and let us tell them suddenly they are free; the single word of freedom will endow
their limbs with the strength of youth, and cause dead eyes to sparkle with life. Sailors,
whom thirst and famine have made their prey during a long voyage, are half cured by the steersman's
cry of "Land!" and he would certainly greatly err who ascribed the whole result to a prospect
of fresh food. The sight of a dear one, whom the sufferer has long desired to see, sustains
the life that was about to go, and imparts strength and health. It is a fact, that joy can
quicken the nervous system more effectually than all the cordials of the apothecary, and can
do wonders in the case of inveterate internal disorders denied to the action of rhubarb and
even mercury. Who then does not perceive that the constitution of the soul which knows how
to derive pleasure from every event and can dissipate every ache in the perfection of the universe,
must be the most beneficial to the whole organism? and this constitution of the soul is--virtue.

S 14.--Mental pain undermines the Welfare of the Whole Organisms.

