"You are quite right," said the Wizard. "Your lands will be desolate unless you help build
the invisible wall."

At that all the courtiers whose eyelids had been drooping with the summer heat and with dreams
of romance, looked up, and the Princess Myrtle withdrew her gaze from Prince Merlin, and fastened
her sweet eyes upon the Wizard. "You must not care what the minstrels sing," she said. "We
are all so happy here, that we love songs of sorrow."

"Sweet Princess," said the Wizard, "King Theophile intends to make war upon you, and I have
come to tell you that already your subjects have built a fine invisible wall of good deeds
and sacrifices; but they must not perform all the labor and have all the pain while the nobles
jest and feast. For the wall must have a stone in it from every kind of man, rich or poor,
high or low, else it will not endure. And you, the Princess, must put in the strongest stone
of all, since the ruler of a country must be its protector."

All the courtiers smiled at this, but the Princess did not smile, because she was as wise as
she was fair. She looked down at her peach-colored robe of satin and her little slippers embroidered
with seed-pearls, and she drew a long-stemmed rose from the jade bowl near her throne to pass
back and forth across her lips, as was her manner when thinking.

"Prince Merlin," she said at last, "if this strange tale be true, what stone wilt thou place
in the invisible wall?"

"I will go for a month to the Council Chamber instead of lingering near thee while the minstrels
sing," replied her husband.

"Spoken like a prince!" cried the Wizard. "And what wilt thou do, Princess?"

"I will go to the Council Chamber with milord," she answered. "And read most heavy papers of
State; for if he shares my play I must share his work."

"To attend to the duties of sovereignty instead of listening to minstrels in a scented room
is a fitting stone for the Princess to place in the invisible wall," commented the Wizard;
then he looked around at the courtiers.

Now after the manner of courtiers they wanted to imitate their Prince and Princess, but they
thought this invisible wall a great joke not worth making sacrifices for. The Wizard read their
thoughts and said to them: "If the ruler works alone, he is like a bird with a crippled wing.
He can only rule wisely and well if all the wisest and best help him. You are placed high that
you may serve. Give me each his vow of sacrifice that the wall may be strong!"

The knights and nobles looked at each other, then at the Princess Myrtle; and she bowed her
head and thus addressed them:

"If our weapons against an enemy must be our unity, our mutual love and service, instead of
roaring guns and flaming cannon, surely it is easy to provide them. Nevertheless," she added,
turning to the military commander, "see that the army is made ready."

The Wizard smiled. "Well and good, if you remember, dear Princess, that an army can never be
greater or stronger than the nation back of it. For every gun manufactured there must be a
noble desire forged, or a high ideal realized; or else the weapons will be but a mask of courage
on a weak face."

The military commander shrugged his shoulders. "I'll go and see if the gunpowder is dry," he
commented, "as my contribution to yon stranger's invisible wall."

Then one by one the nobles at the command of the Princess Myrtle came forward to register each
his vow of sacrifice. One said that he would write no more poetry for a year; another that
he would eat no truffles for a fortnight; a third proclaimed that he would sell his jeweled
sword to buy bread for the poor.

The Wizard listened and shook his head. "This layer of stones is going to be very weak," he
said. "Why don't you all stop and think, while the ladies make their vows?"

The maids-of-honor crowded forward like a nose-gay of sweet-scented flowers, eager to do better
than the knights in the construction of this invisible wall; for being women they were quicker
than their brothers and husbands to understand what the Wizard meant. Yet they, too, were not
quite clear in their minds, for one said she would wear linen instead of satin; another that
she would give up perfumes for six months; another that she would read no novels for that time.

The Wizard began to look discouraged. At last a beautiful young girl came forward to register
her vow. "I don't care enough about jewels and scents and satins to give them up, Sir Stranger,"
she said; "but I should like to win the love of the poor; so I will visit them, and be as one
of them."

At this the Wizard clapped his hands. "This stone is most strong," he said. "Now, Sir Knights,
return and make new vows."

Then the knights came forward. "I will be reconciled with my brother," said one. "I will build
a new cottage for an aged tenant," proclaimed another; while a third, who was in love with
the beautiful girl who wanted the love of the poor, said, "I will make a great supper for the
hungry and will feast with them."

"Ah," cried the Wizard, "that will be, indeed, a great feast! The bread of charity chokes the
receiver because the hand that gives it will not break it with him. We must have communion,
not patronage; or the invisible wall will never be built."

The Princess Myrtle listened as one who hears a new gospel; and she remembered that she had
never broken bread with the poor, but only bestowed benefits upon them, which is no way to
become acquainted. And she sighed--a little sigh of love and regret and hope of doing better,
which the Wizard said afterwards became one of the strongest stones in the invisible wall.

Such a change in the kingdom! People making up quarrels that had withered hearts for generations.
Court ladies running with warm loaves to the cottages and staying to eat some of the bread.
Knights helping old men with the harvest; minstrels sent to sing to the bedridden instead of
to an assemblage of bored ladies and gentlemen in a tapestried gallery. The prophet, in the language
of our quotation, "The soul that sinneth it shall die," is grappling with the system of things
which we are endeavoring to overthrow. By this proverb they understood
that the son was to bear the iniquity of the father.

The Wizard was everywhere, for the wall was beginning to be a real defense, and he spared no
pains to see that every stone was strong.

Now the fame of this wall reached King Theophile--for this was in the days of his warring--and
he laughed on his throne and said, "Oh, little Nation, I will make mincemeat of thee, for I
have every kind of weapon that is made, and many officials who do nothing all day but spy on
other people and brandish their swords. What have you to oppose to such strength? Little kingdom,
you will be but a road to my glory."

So he made great preparations for war, and gathered together all the weapons that shed blood.
There were many of these and he prided himself upon them, but in all his arsenal was not one
instrument that could put shed blood back again into the veins of a man, which shows that ironworkers
do not know everything.

One fine day the King and all his armies came across the rocking waves and drove their boats
upon the shores of The Kingdom of the Dark Wood which lay fair before them like a green and
purple map edged with white where the breakers drove high. The land wind brought to their senses
the odors of grapes, and the scent of apples and ripe grain. And the soldiers said to each
other, "We will kill, then we will feast."

