OTHER WORLDS

by

GARRETT P. SERVISS.

     *     *     *     *     *     *

OTHER WORLDS.

     Their Nature and Possibilities in the Light of the Latest
     Discoveries. Illustrated. 12mo. Cloth, $1.20 net; postage
     additional.

     No science has ever equaled astronomy in its appeal to the
     imagination, and recently popular interest in the wonders of the
     starry heavens has been stimulated by surprising discoveries and
     imaginary discoveries, as well as by a marked tendency of writers
     of fiction to include other worlds and their possible inhabitants
     within the field of romance.

     Mr. Serviss's new book on "Other Worlds, their Nature and
     Possibilities in the Light of the Latest Discoveries," summarizes
     what is known. With helpful illustrations, the most interesting
     facts about the planets Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, etc., as well
     as about the nearest of all other worlds, the moon, are presented
     in a popular manner, and always from the point of view of human
     interest--a point that is too seldom taken by writers on science.

ASTRONOMY WITH AN OPERA-GLASS.

     A Popular Introduction to the Study of the Starry Heavens with the
     simplest of Optical Instruments. Illustrated. 8vo. Cloth, $1.50.

     "By its aid thousands of people who have resigned themselves to the
     ignorance in which they were left at school, by our wretched system
     of teaching by the book only, will thank Mr. Serviss for the
     suggestions he has so well carried out."--New York Times.

PLEASURES OF THE TELESCOPE.

     A Descriptive Guide to Amateur Astronomers and All Lovers of the
     Stars. Illustrated. 8vo. Cloth, $1.50.

     "The volume will be found interesting by those for whom it is
     written, and will inspire many with a love for the study of
     astronomy, one of the most far-reaching of the
     sciences."--Milwaukee Journal.

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK.

     *     *     *     *     *     *

OTHER WORLDS

Their Nature, Possibilities and Habitability in the Light of the Latest Discoveries.

by

GARRETT P. SERVISS

Author of "Astronomy with an Opera-glass" and "Pleasures of the Telescope"

With Charts and Illustrations

     "Shall we measure the councils of heaven by the narrow impotence of
     human faculties, or conceive that silence and solitude reign
     throughout the mighty empire of nature?"

     --DR. THOMAS CHALMERS.

New York D. Appleton and Company 1901 Copyright, 1901, by D. Appleton and Company.

TO THE MEMORY OF WILLIAM JAY YOUMANS.

PREFACE

The point of view of this book is human interest in the other worlds around us. It presents
the latest discoveries among the planets of the solar system, and shows their bearing upon
the question of life in those planets. It points out the resemblances and the differences between
the earth and the other worlds that share with it in the light of the sun. It shows what we
should see and experience if we could visit those worlds.

While basing itself upon facts, it does not exclude the discussion of interesting probabilities
and theories that have commanded wide popular attention. It points out, for instance, what
is to be thought of the idea of interplanetary communication. It indicates what must be the
outlook of the possible inhabitants of some of the other planets toward the earth. As far as
may be, it traces the origin and development of the other worlds of our system, and presents
a graphic picture of their present condition as individuals, and of their wonderful contrasts
as members of a common family.

In short, the aim of the author has been to show how wide, and how rich, is the field of interest
opened to the human mind by man's discoveries concerning worlds, which, though inaccessible
to him in a physical sense, offer intellectual conquests of the noblest description.

And, finally, in order to assist those who may wish to recognize for themselves these other
worlds in the sky, this book presents a special series of charts to illustrate a method of
finding the planets which requires no observatory and no instruments, and only such knowledge
of the starry heavens as anybody can easily acquire.

G.P.S.

BOROUGH OF BROOKLYN, NEW YORK CITY, September, 1901.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY                                                1

     Remarkable popular interest in questions concerning
     other worlds and their inhabitants--Theories of
     interplanetary communication--The plurality of worlds in
     literature--Romances of foreign planets--Scientific interest
     in the subject--Opposing views based on telescopic and
     spectroscopic revelations--Changes of opinion--Desirability
     of a popular presentation of the latest facts--The natural
     tendency to regard other planets as habitable--Some of the
     conditions and limitations of the problem--The solar system
     viewed from outer space--The resemblances and contrasts of
     its various planets--Three planetary groups recognized--The
     family character of the solar system

CHAPTER II

MERCURY, A WORLD OF TWO FACES AND MANY CONTRASTS           18

     Grotesqueness of Mercury considered as a world--Its
     dimensions, mass, and movements--The question of an
     atmosphere--Mercury's visibility from the earth--Its
     eccentric orbit, and rapid changes of distance from the
     sun--Momentous consequences of these peculiarities--A
     virtual fall of fourteen million miles toward the sun
     in six weeks--The tremendous heat poured upon Mercury
     and its great variations--The little planet's singular
     manner of rotation on its axis--Schiaparelli's astonishing
     discovery--A day side and a night side--Interesting effects
     of libration--The heavens as viewed from Mercury--Can it
     support life?

CHAPTER III

VENUS, THE TWIN OF THE EARTH                               46

     A planet that matches ours in size--Its beauty in the
     sky--Remarkable circularity of its orbit--Probable
     absence of seasons and stable conditions of temperature
     and weather on Venus--Its dense and abundant atmosphere--Seeing
     the atmosphere of Venus from the earth--Is the real face of the
     planet hidden under an atmospheric veil?--Conditions of
     habitability--All planetary life need not be of the terrestrial
     type--The limit fixed by destructive temperature--Importance of
     air and water in the problem--Reasons why Venus may be a
     more agreeable abode than the earth--Splendor of our globe
     as seen from Venus--What astronomers on Venus might learn
     about the earth--A serious question raised--Does Venus, like
     Mercury, rotate but once in the course of a revolution about
     the sun?--Reasons for and against that view

CHAPTER IV

MARS, A WORLD MORE ADVANCED THAN OURS                      85

     Resemblances between Mars and the earth--Its seasons and its
     white polar caps--Peculiar surface markings--Schiaparelli's
     discovery of the canals--His description of their appearance
     and of their duplication--Influence of the seasons on the
     aspect of the canals--What are the canals?--Mr. Lowell's
     observations--The theory of irrigation--How the inhabitants
     of Mars are supposed to have taken advantage of the annual
     accession of water supplied by the melting of the polar
     caps--Wonderful details shown in charts of Mars--Curious
     effects that may follow from the small force of gravity
     on Mars--Imaginary giants--Reasons for thinking that
     Mars may be, in an evolutionary sense, older than the
     earth--Speculations about interplanetary signals from
     Mars, and their origin--Mars's atmosphere--The question of
     water--The problem of temperature--Eccentricities of Mars's
     moons

CHAPTER V

THE ASTEROIDS, A FAMILY OF DWARF WORLDS                   129

     Only four asteroids large enough to be measured--Remarkable
     differences in their brightness irrespective of size--Their
     widely scattered and intermixed orbits--Eccentric orbit of
     Eros--the nearest celestial body to the earth except the
     moon--Its existence recorded by photography before it was
     discovered--Its great and rapid fluctuations in light, and
     the curious hypotheses based upon them--Is it a fragment of
     an exploded planet?--The startling theory of Olbers as to
     the origin of the asteroids revived--Curious results of the
     slight force of gravity on an asteroid--An imaginary visit
     to a world only twelve miles in diameter

CHAPTER VI

JUPITER, THE GREATEST OF KNOWN WORLDS                     160

     Jupiter compared with our globe--His swift rotation on his
     axis--Remarkable lack of density--The force of gravity on
     Jupiter--Wonderful clouds--Strange phenomena of the great
     belts--Brilliant display of colors--The great red spot
     and the many theories it has given rise to--Curious facts
     about the varying rates of rotation of the huge planet's
     surface--The theory of a hidden world in Jupiter--When
     Jupiter was a companion star to the sun--The miracle of
     world-making before our eyes--Are Jupiter's satellites
     habitable?--Magnificent spectacles in the Jovian system

CHAPTER VII

SATURN, A PRODIGY AMONG PLANETS                           185

     The wonder of the great rings--Saturn's great distance and
     long year--The least dense of all the planets--It would
     float in water--What kind of a world is it?--Sir Humphry
     Davy's imaginary inhabitants of Saturn--Facts about the
     rings, which are a phenomenon unparalleled in the visible
     universe--The surprising nature of the rings, as revealed
     by mathematics and the spectroscope--The question of their
     origin and ultimate fate--Dr. Dick's idea of their
     habitability--Swedenborg's curious description of the
     appearance of the rings from Saturn--Is Saturn a globe of
     vapor, or of dust?--The nine satellites and "Roche's
     limit"--The play of spectacular shadows in the Saturnian
     system--Uranus and Neptune--Is there a yet undiscovered
     planet greater than Jupiter?

CHAPTER VIII

THE MOON, CHILD OF THE EARTH AND THE SUN                  212

     The moon a favorite subject for intellectual speculation--Its
     nearness to the earth graphically illustrated--Ideas of the
     ancients--Galileo's discoveries--What first raised a serious
     question as to its habitability--Singularity of the moon's
     motions--Appearance of its surface to the naked eye and with
     the telescope--The "seas" and the wonderful mountains and
     craters--A terrible abyss described--Tycho's mysterious
     rays--Difference between lunar and terrestrial
     volcanoes--Mountain-ringed valleys--Gigantic cracks in the
     lunar globe--Slight force of gravity of the moon and some
     interesting deductions--The moon a world of giantism--What
     kind of atmospheric gases can the moon contain--The question
     of water and of former oceans--The great volcanic cataclysm
     in the moon's history--Evidence of volcanic and other
     changes now occurring--Is there vegetation on the
     moon?--Lunar day and night--The earth as seen from the
     moon--Discoveries yet to be made

CHAPTER IX

HOW TO FIND THE PLANETS                                   256

     It is easy to make acquaintance with the planets and to
     follow them among the stars--The first step a knowledge of
     the constellations--How this is to be acquired--How to use
     the Nautical Almanac in connection with the charts in this
     book--The visibility of Mercury and Venus--The oppositions
     of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn

INDEX                                                       277

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                                   PAGE
Chart of Mars                                             Frontispiece

Diagram showing causes of day and night on portions of Mercury       35

Regions of day and night on Mercury                                  38

Venus's atmosphere seen as a ring of light                           56

View of Jupiter                                            facing 168

Three views of Saturn                                      facing 186

Diagram showing the moon's path through space                       217

The lunar Alps, Apennines, and Caucasus                    facing 222

The moon at first and last quarter                         facing 226

Phases and rotation of the moon                                     250

Charts showing the zodiacal constellations:
  1. From right ascension 0 hours to 4 hours                        259
  2.    "           "     4   "   "  8   "                          261
  3.    "           "     8   "   "  2   "                          263
  4.    "           "    12   "   " 16   "                          265
  5.    "           "    16   "   " 20   "                          267
  6.    "           "    20   "   " 24   "                          269

OTHER WORLDS

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY

Other worlds and their inhabitants are remarkably popular subjects of speculation at the present
time. Every day we hear people asking one another if it is true that we shall soon be able
to communicate with some of the far-off globes, such as Mars, that circle in company with our
earth about the sun. One of the masters of practical electrical science in our time has suggested
that the principle of wireless telegraphy may be extended to the transmission of messages across
space from planet to planet. The existence of intelligent inhabitants in some of the other
planets has become, with many, a matter of conviction, and for everybody it presents a question
of fascinating interest, which has deeply stirred the popular imagination.

The importance of this subject as an intellectual phenomenon of the opening century is clearly
indicated by the extent to which it has entered into recent literature. Poets feel its inspiration,
and novelists and romancers freely select other planets as the scenes of their stories. One
tells us of a visit paid by men to the moon, and of the wonderful things seen, and adventures
had, there. Lucian, it is true, did the same thing eighteen hundred years ago, but he had not
the aid of hints from modern science to guide his speculations and lend verisimilitude to his
narrative.

Another startles us from our sense of planetary security with a realistic account of the invasion
of the earth by the terrible sons of warlike Mars, seeking to extend their empire by the conquest
of foreign globes.

Sometimes it is a trip from world to world, a kind of celestial pleasure yachting, with depictions
of creatures more wonderful than--

    "The anthropophagi and men whose heads
    Do grow beneath their shoulders"--

that is presented to our imagination; and sometimes we are informed of the visions beheld by
the temporarily disembodied spirits of trance mediums, or other modern thaumaturgists, flitting
about among the planets.

Then, to vary the theme, we find charming inhabitants of other worlds represented as coming
down to the earth and sojourning for a time on our dull planet, to the delight of susceptible
successors of father Adam, who become, henceforth, ready to follow their captivating visitors
to the ends of the universe.

In short, writers of fiction have already established interplanetary communication to their
entire satisfaction, thus vastly and indefinitely enlarging the bounds of romance, and making
us so familiar with the peculiarities of our remarkable brothers and sisters of Mars, Venus,
and the moon, that we can not help feeling, notwithstanding the many divergences in the descriptions,
that we should certainly recognize them on sight wherever we might meet them.

But the subject is by no means abandoned to the tellers of tales and the dreamers of dreams.
Men of science, also, eagerly enter into the discussion of the possibilities of other worlds,
and become warm over it.

Around Mars, in particular, a lively war of opinions rages. Not all astronomers have joined
in the dispute--some have not imagination enough, and some are waiting for more light before
choosing sides--but those who have entered the arena are divided between two opposed camps.
One side holds that Mars is not only a world capable of having inhabitants, but that it actually
has them, and that they have given visual proof of their existence and their intelligence through
the changes they have produced upon its surface. The other side maintains that Mars is neither
inhabited nor habitable, and that what are taken for vast public works and engineering marvels
wrought by its industrious inhabitants, are nothing but illusions of the telescope, or delusions
of the observer's mind. Both adduce numerous observations, telescopic and spectroscopic, and
many arguments, scientific and theoretic, to support their respective contentions, but neither
side has yet been able to convince or silence the other, although both have made themselves
and their views intensely interesting to the world at large, which would very much like to
know what the truth really is.

And not only Mars, but Venus--the beauteous twin sister of the earth, who, when she glows in
the evening sky, makes everybody a lover of the stars--and even Mercury, the Moor among the
planets, wearing "the shadowed livery of the burnished sun," to whom he is "a neighbor and
near bred," and Jupiter, Saturn, and the moon itself--all these have their advocates, who refuse
to believe that they are lifeless globes, mere reflectors of useless sunshine.

The case of the moon is, in this respect, especially interesting, on account of the change
that has occurred in the opinions held concerning its physical condition. For a very long time
our satellite was confidently, and almost universally, regarded as an airless, waterless, lifeless
desert, a completely "dead world," a bare, desiccated skull of rock, circling about the living
earth.

But within a few years there has been a reaction from this extreme view of the lifelessness
of the moon. Observers tell us of clouds suddenly appearing and then melting to invisibility
over volcanic craters; of evidences of an atmosphere, rare as compared with ours, yet manifest
in its effects; of variations of color witnessed in certain places as the sunlight drifts over
them at changing angles of incidence; of what seem to be immense fields of vegetation covering
level ground, and of appearances indicating the existence of clouds of ice crystals and deposits
of snow among the mountainous lunar landscapes. Thus, in a manner, the moon is rehabilitated,
and we are invited to regard its silvery beams not as the reflections of the surface of a desert,
but as sent back to our eyes from the face of a world that yet has some slight remnants of
life to brighten it.

The suggestion that there is an atmosphere lying close upon the shell of the lunar globe, filling
the deep cavities that pit its face and penetrating to an unknown depth in its interior, recalls
a speculation of the ingenious and entertaining Fontenelle, in the seventeenth century--recently
revived and enlarged upon by the author of one of our modern romances of adventure in the moon--to
the effect that the lunar inhabitants dwell beneath the surface of their globe instead of on
the top of it.

Now, because of this widespread and continually increasing interest in the subject of other
worlds, and on account of the many curious revelations that we owe to modern telescopes and
other improved means of investigation, it is certainly to be desired that the most important
and interesting discoveries that have lately been made concerning the various globes which
together with the earth constitute the sun's family, should be assembled in a convenient and
popular form--and that is the object of this book. Fact is admittedly often stranger and more
wonderful than fiction, and there are no facts that appeal more powerfully to the imagination
than do those of astronomy. Technical books on astronomy usually either ignore the subject
of the habitability of the planets, or dismiss it with scarcely any recognition of the overpowering
human interest that it possesses. Hence, a book written specially from the point of view of
that subject would appear calculated to meet a popular want; and this the more, because, since
Mr. Proctor wrote his Other Worlds than Ours and M. Flammarion his Pluralité des Mondes Habités,
many most important and significant discoveries have been made that, in several notable instances,
have completely altered the aspect in which the planets present themselves for our judgment
as to their conditions of habitability.

No doubt the natural tendency of the mind is to regard all the planets as habitable worlds,
for there seems to be deeply implanted in human nature a consciousness of the universality
of life, giving rise to a conviction that one world, even in the material sense, is not enough
for it, but that every planet must belong to its kingdom. We are apt to say to ourselves: "The
earth is one of a number of planets, all similarly circumstanced; the earth is inhabited, why
should not the others also be inhabited?"

What has been learned of the unity in chemical constitution and mechanical operation prevailing
throughout the solar system, together with the continually accumulating evidence of the common
origin of its various members, and the identity of the evolutionary processes that have brought
them into being, all tends to strengthen the a priori hypothesis that life is a phenomenon
general to the entire system, and only absent where its essential and fundamental conditions,
for special and local, and perhaps temporary, reasons, do not exist.

If we look for life in the sun, for instance, while accepting the prevalent conception of the
sun as a center of intense thermal action, we must abandon all our ideas of the physical organization
of life formed upon what we know of it from experimental evidence. We can not imagine any form
of life that has ever been presented to our senses as existing in the sun.

But this is not generally true of the planets. Life, in our sense of it, is a planetary, not
a solar, phenomenon, and while we may find reasons for believing that on some of the planets
the conditions are such that creatures organized like ourselves could not survive, yet we can
not positively say that every form of living organism must necessarily be excluded from a world
whose environment would be unsuited for us and our contemporaries in terrestrial life.

Although our sole knowledge of animated nature is confined to what we learn by experience on
the earth, yet it is a most entertaining, and by no means unedifying, occupation, to seek to
apply to the exceedingly diversified conditions prevailing in the other planets, as astronomical
observations reveal them to us, the principles, types, and limitations that govern the living
creatures of our world, and to judge, as best we can, how far those types and limits may be
modified or extended so that those other planets may reasonably be included among the probable
abodes of life.

In order to form such judgments each planet must be examined by itself, but first it is desirable
to glance at the planetary system as a whole. To do this we may throw off, in imagination,
the dominance of the sun, and suppose ourselves to be in the midst of open space, far removed
both from the sun and the other stars. In this situation it is only by chance, or through foreknowledge,
that we can distinguish our sun at all, for it is lost among the stars; and when we discover
it we find that it is only one of the smaller and less conspicuous members of the sparkling host.

We rapidly approach, and when we have arrived within a distance comparable with that of its
planets, we see that the sun has increased in apparent magnitude, until now it enormously outshines
all the other stars, and its rays begin to produce the effect of daylight upon the orbs that
they reach. But we are in no danger of mistaking its apparent superiority to its fellow stars
for a real one, because we clearly perceive that our nearness alone makes it seem so great
and overpowering.

And now we observe that this star that we have drawn near to has attending it a number of minute
satellites, faintly shining specks, that circle about it as if charmed, like night-wandering
insects, by its splendor. It is manifest to us at the first glance that without the sun these
obedient little planets would not exist; it is his attraction that binds them together in a
system, and his rays that make them visible to one another in the abyss of space. Although
they vary in relative size, yet we observe a striking similarity among them. They are all globular
bodies, they all turn upon their axes, they all travel about the sun in the same direction,
and their paths all lie very nearly in one plane. Some of them have one or more moons, or satellites,
circling about them in imitation of their own revolution about the sun. Their family relationship
to one another and to the sun is so evident that it colors our judgment about them as individuals;
and when we happen to find, upon closer approach, that one of them, the earth, is covered with
vegetation and water and filled with thousands of species of animated creatures, we are disposed
to believe, without further examination, that they are all alike in this respect, just as they
are all alike in receiving light and heat from the sun.

This preliminary judgment, arising from the evident unity of the planetary system, can only
be varied by an examination of its members in detail.

One striking fact that commands our attention as soon as we have entered the narrow precincts
of the solar system is the isolation of the sun and its attendants in space. The solar system
occupies a disk-shaped, or flat circular, expanse, about 5,580,000,000 miles across and relatively
very thin, the sun being in the center. From the sun to the nearest star, or other sun, the
distance is approximately five thousand times the entire diameter of the solar system. But
the vast majority of the stars are probably a hundred times yet more remote. In other words,
if the Solar system be represented by a circular flower-bed ten feet across, the nearest star
must be placed at a distance of nine and a half miles, and the great multitude of the stars
at a distance of nine hundred miles!

Or, to put it in another way, let us suppose the sun and his planets to be represented by a
fleet of ships at sea, all included within a space about half a mile across; then, in order
that there might be no shore relatively nearer than the nearest fixed star is to the sun, we
should have to place our fleet in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, while the distance of the
main shore of the starry universe would be so immense that the whole surface of the earth would
be far too small to hold the expanse of ocean needed to represent it!

From these general considerations we next proceed to recall some of the details of the system
of worlds amid which we dwell. Besides the earth, the sun has seven other principal planets
in attendance. These eight planets fall into two classes--the terrestrial planets and the major,
or jovian, planets. I have named them all in the order of their distance from the sun, beginning
with the nearest.

The terrestrial planets, taking their class name from terra, the earth, are relatively close
to the sun and comparatively small. The major planets--or the jovian planets, if we give them
a common title based upon the name of their chief, Jupiter or Jove--are relatively distant
from the sun and are characterized both by great comparative size and slight mean density.
The terrestrial planets are all included within a circle, having the sun for a center, about
140,000,000 miles in radius. The space, or gap, between the outermost of them, Mars, and the
innermost of the jovian planets, Jupiter, is nearly two and a half times as broad as the entire
radius of the circle within which they are included. And not only is the jovian group of planets
widely separated from the terrestrial group, but the distances between the orbits of its four
members are likewise very great and progressively increasing. Between Jupiter and Saturn is
a gap 400,000,000 miles across, and this becomes 900,000,000 miles between Saturn and Uranus,
and more than 1,000,000,000 miles between Uranus and Neptune. All of these distances are given
in round numbers.

Finally, we come to some very extraordinary worlds--if we can call them worlds at all--the
asteroids. They form a third group, characterized by the extreme smallness of its individual
members, their astonishing number, and the unusual eccentricities and inclinations of their
orbits. They are situated in the gap between the terrestrial and the jovian planets, and about
500 of them have been discovered, while there is reason to think that their real number may
be many thousands. The largest of them is less than 500 miles in diameter, and many of those
recently discovered may be not more than ten or twenty miles in diameter. What marvelous places
of abode such little planets would be if it were possible to believe them inhabited, we shall
see more clearly when we come to consider them in their turn. But without regard to the question
of habitability, the asteroids will be found extremely interesting.

In the next chapter we proceed to take up the planets for study as individuals, beginning with
Mercury, the one nearest the sun.

CHAPTER II

MERCURY, A WORLD OF TWO FACES AND MANY CONTRASTS

Mercury, the first of the other worlds that we are going to consider, fascinates by its grotesqueness,
like a piece of Chinese ivory carving, so small is it for its kind and so finished in its eccentric
details. In a little while we shall see how singular Mercury is in many of the particulars
of planetary existence, but first of all let us endeavor to obtain a clear idea of the actual
size and mass of this strange little planet. Compared with the earth it is so diminutive that
it looks as if it had been cut out on the pattern of a satellite rather than that of an independent
planet. Its diameter, 3,000 miles, only exceeds the moon's by less than one half, while both
Jupiter and Saturn, among their remarkable collections of moons, have each at least one that
is considerably larger than the planet Mercury. But, insignificant though it be in size, it
holds the place of honor, nearest to the sun.

It was formerly thought that Mercury possessed a mass greatly in excess of that which its size
would seem to imply, and some estimates, based upon the apparent effect of its attraction on
comets, made it equal in mean density to lead, or even to the metal mercury. This led to curious
speculations concerning its probable metallic composition, and the possible existence of vast
quantities of such heavy elements as gold in the frame of the planet. But more recent, and
probably more correct, computations place Mercury third in the order of density among the members
of the solar system, the earth ranking as first and Venus as second. Mercury's density is now
believed to be less than the earth's in the ratio of 85 to 100. Accepting this estimate, we
find that the force of gravity upon the surface of Mercury is only one third as great as upon
the surface of the earth--i.e., a body weighing 300 pounds on the earth would weigh only 100
pounds on Mercury.

This is an important matter, because not only the weight of bodies, but the density of the
atmosphere and even the nature of its gaseous constituents, are affected by the force of gravity,
and if we could journey from world to world, in our bodily form, it would make a great difference
to us to find gravity considerably greater or less upon other planets than it is upon our own.
This alone might suffice to render some of the planets impossible places of abode for us, unless
a decided change were effected in our present physical organization.

One of the first questions that we should ask about a foreign world to which we proposed to
pay a visit, would relate to its atmosphere. We should wish to know in advance if it had air
and water, and in what proportions and quantities. However its own peculiar inhabitants might
be supposed able to dispense with these things, to us their presence would be essential, and
if we did not find them, even a planet that blazed with gold and diamonds only waiting to be
seized would remain perfectly safe from our invasion. Now, in the case of Mercury, some doubt
on this point exists.

Messrs. Huggins, Vogel, and others have believed that they found spectroscopic proof of the
existence of both air and the vapor of water on Mercury. But the necessary observations are
of a very delicate nature, and difficult to make, and some astronomers doubt whether we possess
sufficient proof that Mercury has an atmosphere. At any rate, its atmosphere is very rare as
compared with the earth's, but we need not, on that account, conclude that Mercury is lifeless.
Possibly, in view of certain other peculiarities soon to be explained, a rare atmosphere would
be decidedly advantageous.

Being much nearer the sun than the earth is, Mercury can be seen by us only in the same quarter
of the sky where the sun itself appears. As it revolves in its orbit about the sun it is visible,
alternately, in the evening for a short time after sunset and in the morning for a short time
before sunrise, but it can never be seen, as the outer planets are seen, in the mid-heaven
or late at night. When seen low in the twilight, at evening or morning, it glows with the brilliance
of a bright first-magnitude star, and is a beautiful object, though few casual watchers of
the stars ever catch sight of it. When it is nearest the earth and is about to pass between
the earth and the sun, it temporarily disappears in the glare of the sunlight; and likewise,
when it it is farthest from the earth and passing around in its orbit on the opposite side
of the sun, it is concealed by the blinding solar rays. Consequently, except with the instruments
of an observatory, which are able to show it in broad day, Mercury is never visible save during
the comparatively brief periods of time when it is near its greatest apparent distance east
or west from the sun.

The nearer a planet is to the sun the more rapidly it is compelled to move in its orbit, and
Mercury, being the nearest to the sun of all the planets, is by far the swiftest footed among
them. But its velocity is subject to remarkable variation, owing to the peculiar form of the
orbit in which the planet travels. This is more eccentric than the orbit of any other planet,
except some of the asteroids. The sun being situated in one focus of the elliptical orbit,
when Mercury is at perihelion, or nearest to the sun, its distance from that body is 28,500,000
miles, but when it is at aphelion, or farthest from the sun, its distance is 43,500,000 miles.
The difference is no less than 14,000,000 miles! When nearest the sun Mercury darts forward
in its orbit at the rate of twenty-nine miles in a second, while when farthest from the sun
the speed is reduced to twenty-three miles.

Now, let us return for a moment to the consideration of the wonderful variations in Mercury's
distance from the sun, for we shall find that their effects are absolutely startling, and that
they alone suffice to mark a wide difference between Mercury and the earth, considered as the
abodes of sentient creatures. The total change of distance amounts, as already remarked, to
14,000,000 miles, which is almost half the entire distance separating the planet from the sun
at perihelion. This immense variation of distance is emphasized by the rapidity with which
it takes place. Mercury's periodic time, i.e., the period required for it to make a single
revolution about the sun--or, in other words, the length of its year--is eighty-eight of our
days. In just one half of that time, or in about six weeks, it passes from aphelion to perihelion;
that is to say, in six weeks the whole change in its distance from the sun takes place. In
six weeks Mercury falls 14,000,000 miles--for it is a fall, though in a curve instead of a
straight line--falls 14,000,000 miles toward the sun! And, as it falls, like any other falling
body it gains in speed, until, having reached the perihelion point, its terrific velocity counteracts
its approach and it begins to recede. At the end of the next six weeks it once more attains
its greatest distance, and turns again to plunge sunward.

Of course it may be said of every planet having an elliptical orbit that between aphelion and
perihelion it is falling toward the sun, but no other planet than Mercury travels in an orbit
sufficiently eccentric, and approaches sufficiently near to the sun, to give to the mind so
vivid an impression of an actual, stupendous fall!

Next let us consider the effects of this rapid fall, or approach, toward the sun, which is
so foreign to our terrestrial experience, and so appalling to the imagination.

First, we must remember that the nearer a planet is to the sun the greater is the amount of
heat and light that it receives, the variation being proportional to the inverse square of
the distance. The earth's distance from the sun being 93,000,000 miles, while Mercury's is
only 36,000,000, it follows, to begin with, that Mercury gets, on the average, more than six
and a half times as much heat from the sun as the earth does. That alone is enough to make
it seem impossible that Mercury can be the home of living forms resembling those of the earth,
for imagine the heat of the sun in the middle of a summer's day increased six or seven fold!
If there were no mitigating influences, the face of the earth would shrivel as in the blast
of a furnace, the very stones would become incandescent, and the oceans would turn into steam.

Still, notwithstanding the tremendous heat poured upon Mercury as compared with that which
our planet receives, we can possibly, and for the sake of a clearer understanding of the effects
of the varying distance, which is the object of our present inquiry, find a loophole to admit
the chance that yet there may be living beings there. We might, for instance, suppose that,
owing to the rarity of its atmosphere, the excessive heat was quickly radiated away, or that
there was something in the constitution of the atmosphere that greatly modified the effective
temperature of the sun's rays. But, having satisfied our imagination on this point, and placed
our supposititious inhabitants in the hot world of Mercury, how are we going to meet the conditions
imposed by the rapid changes of distance--the swift fall of the planet toward the sun, followed
by the equally swift rush away from it? For change of distance implies change of heat and temperature.

It is true that we have a slight effect of this kind on the earth. Between midsummer (of the
northern hemisphere) and midwinter our planet draws 3,000,000 miles nearer the sun, but the
change occupies six months, and, at the earth's great average distance, the effect of this
change is too slight to be ordinarily observable, and only the astronomer is aware of the consequent
increase in the apparent size of the sun. It is not to this variation of the sun's distance,
but rather to the changes of the seasons, depending on the inclination of the earth's axis,
that we owe the differences of temperature that we experience. In other words, the total supply
of heat from the sun is not far from uniform at all times of the year, and the variations of
temperature depend upon the distribution of that supply between the northern and southern hemispheres,
which are alternately inclined sunward.

But on Mercury the supply of solar heat is itself variable to an enormous extent. In six weeks,
as we have seen, Mercury diminishes its distance from the sun about one third, which is proportionally
ten times as great a change of distance as the earth experiences in six months. The inhabitants
of Mercury in those six pregnant weeks see the sun expand in the sky to more than two and a
half times its former magnitude, while the solar heat poured upon them swiftly augments from
something more than four and a half times to above eleven times the amount received upon the
earth! Then, immediately, the retreat of the planet begins, the sun visibly shrinks, as a receding
balloon becomes smaller in the eyes of its watchers, the heat falls off as rapidly as it had
previously increased, until, the aphelion point being reached, the process is again reversed.
And thus it goes on unceasingly, the sun growing and diminishing in the sky, and the heat increasing
and decreasing by enormous amounts with astonishing rapidity. It is difficult to imagine any
way in which atmospheric influences could equalize the effects of such violent changes, or
any adjustments in the physical organization of living beings that could make such changes
endurable.

But we have only just begun the story of Mercury's peculiarities. We come next to an even more
remarkable contrast between that planet and our own. During the Paris Exposition of 1889 a
little company of astronomers was assembled at the Juvisy observatory of M. Flammarion, near
the French capital, listening to one of the most surprising disclosures of a secret of nature
that any savant ever confided to a few trustworthy friends while awaiting a suitable time to
make it public. It was a secret as full of significance as that which Galileo concealed for
a time in his celebrated anagram, which, when at length he furnished the key, still remained
a riddle, for then it read: "The Mother of the Loves imitates the Shapes of Cynthia," meaning
that the planet Venus, when viewed with a telescope, shows phases like those of the moon. The
secret imparted in confidence to the knot of astronomers at Juvisy came from a countryman of
Galileo's, Signor G. V. Schiaparelli, the Director of the Observatory of Milan, and its purport
was that the planet Mercury always keeps the same face directed toward the sun. Schiaparelli
had satisfied himself, by a careful series of observations, of the truth of his strange announcement,
but before giving it to the world he determined to make doubly sure. Early in 1890 he withdrew
the pledge of secrecy from his friends and published his discovery.

No one can wonder that the statement was generally received with incredulity, for it was in
direct contradiction to the conclusions of other astronomers, who had long believed that Mercury
rotated on its axis in a period closely corresponding with that of the earth's rotation--that
is to say, once every twenty-four hours. Schiaparelli's discovery, if it were received as correct,
would put Mercury, as a planet, in a class by itself, and would distinguish it by a peculiarity
which had always been recognized as a special feature of the moon, viz., that of rotating on
its axis in the same period of time required to perform a revolution in its orbit, and, while
this seemed natural enough for a satellite, almost nobody was prepared for the ascription of
such eccentric conduct to a planet.

The Italian astronomer based his discovery upon the observation that certain markings visible
on the disk of Mercury remained in such a position with reference to the direction of the sun
as to prove that the planet's rotation was extremely slow, and he finally satisfied himself
that there was but one rotation in the course of a revolution about the sun. That, of course,
means that one side of Mercury always faces toward the sun while the opposite side always faces
away from it, and neither side experiences the alternation of day and night, one having perpetual
day and the other perpetual night. The older observations, from which had been deduced the
long accepted opinion that Mercury rotated, like the earth, once in about twenty-four hours,
had also been made upon the markings on the planet's disk, but these are not easily seen, and
their appearances had evidently been misinterpreted.

The very fact of the difficulty of seeing any details on Mercury tended to prevent or delay
corroboration of Schiaparelli's discovery. But there were two circumstances that contributed
to the final acceptance of his results. One of these was his well-known experience as an observer
and the high reputation that he enjoyed among astronomers, and the other was the development
by Prof. George Darwin of the theory of tidal friction in its application to planetary evolution,
for this furnished a satisfactory explanation of the manner in which a body, situated as near
the sun as Mercury is, could have its axial rotation gradually reduced by the tidal attraction
of the sun until it coincided in period with its orbital revolution.

Accepting the accuracy of Schiaparelli's discovery, which was corroborated in every particular
in 1896 by Percival Lowell in a special series of observations on Mercury made with his 24-inch
telescope at Flagstaff, Arizona, and which has also been corroborated by others, we see at
once how important is its bearing on the habitability of the planet. It adds another difficulty
to that offered by the remarkable changes of distance from the sun, and consequent variations
of heat, which we have already discussed. In order to bring the situation home to our experience,
let us, for a moment, imagine the earth fallen into Mercury's dilemma. There would then be
no succession of day and night, such as we at present enjoy, and upon which not alone our comfort
but perhaps our very existence depends, but, instead, one side of our globe--it might be the
Asiatic or the American half--would be continually in the sunlight, and the other side would
lie buried in endless night. And this condition, so suggestive of the play of pure imagination,
this plight of being a two-faced world, like the god Janus, one face light and the other face
dark, must be the actual state of things on Mercury.

There is one interesting qualification. In the case just imagined for the earth, supposing
it to retain the present inclination of its axis while parting with its differential rotation,
there would be an interchange of day and night once a year in the polar regions. On Mercury,
whose axis appears to be perpendicular, a similar phenomenon, affecting not the polar regions
but the eastern and western sides of the planet, is produced by the extraordinary eccentricity
of its orbit. As the planet alternately approaches and recedes from the sun its orbital velocity,
as we have already remarked, varies between the limits of twenty-three and thirty-five miles
per second, being most rapid at the point nearest the sun. But this variation in the speed
of its revolution about the sun does not, in any manner, affect the rate of rotation on its
axis. The latter is perfectly uniform and just fast enough to complete one axial turn in the
course of a single revolution about the sun. The accompanying figure may assist the explanation.

Let us start with Mercury in perihelion at the point A. The little cross on the planet stands
exactly under the sun and in the center of the illuminated hemisphere. The large arrows show
the direction in which the planet travels in its revolution about the sun, and the small curved
arrows the direction in which it rotates on its axis. Now, in moving along its orbit from A
to B the planet, partly because of its swifter motion when near the sun, and partly because
of the elliptical nature of the orbit, traverses a greater angular interval with reference
to the sun than the cross, moving with the uniform rotation of the planet on its axis, is able
to traverse in the same time. As drawn in the diagram, the cross has moved through exactly
ninety degrees, or one right angle, while the planet in its orbit has moved through considerably
more than a right angle. In consequence of this gain of the angle of revolution upon the angle
of rotation, the cross at B is no longer exactly under the sun, nor in the center of the illuminated
hemisphere. It appears to have shifted its position toward the west, while the hemispherical
cap of sunshine has slipped eastward over the globe of the planet.

In the next following section of the orbit the planet rotates through another right angle,
but, owing to increased distance from the sun, the motion in the orbit now becomes slower until,
when the planet arrives at aphelion, C, the angular difference disappears and the cross is
once more just under the sun. On returning from aphelion to perihelion the same phenomena recur
in reverse order and the line between day and night on the planet first shifts westward, attaining
its limit in that respect at D, and then, at perihelion, returns to its original position.

Now, if we could stand on the sunward hemisphere of Mercury what, to our eyes, would be the
effect of this shifting of the sun's position with regard to a fixed point on the planet's
surface? Manifestly it would cause the sun to describe a great arc in the sky, swinging to
and fro, in an east and west line, like a pendulum bob, the angular extent of the swing being
a little more than forty-seven degrees, and the time required for the sun to pass from its
extreme eastern to its extreme western position and back again being eighty-eight days. But,
owing to the eccentricity of the orbit, the sun swings much faster toward the east than toward
the west, the eastward motion occupying about thirty-seven days and the westward motion about
fifty-one days.

Another effect of the libratory motion of the sun as seen from Mercury is represented in the
next figure, where we have a view of the planet showing both the day and the night hemisphere,
and where we see that between the two there is a region upon which the sun rises and sets once
every eighty-eight days. There are, in reality, two of these lune-shaped regions, one at the
east and the other at the west, each between 1,200 and 1,300 miles broad at the equator. At
the sunward edge of these regions, once in eighty-eight days, or once in a Mercurial year,
the sun rises to an elevation of forty-seven degrees, and then descends again straight to the
horizon from which it rose; at the nightward edge, once in eighty-eight days, the sun peeps
above the horizon and quickly sinks from sight again. The result is that, neglecting the effects
of atmospheric refraction, which would tend to expand the borders of the domain of sunlight,
about one quarter of the entire surface of Mercury is, with regard to day and night, in a condition
resembling that of our polar regions, where there is but one day and one night in the course
of a year--and on Mercury a year is eighty-eight days. One half of the remaining three quarters
of the planet's surface is bathed in perpetual sunshine and the other half is a region of eternal
night.

And now again, what of life in such a world as that? On the night side, where no sunshine ever
penetrates, the temperature must be extremely low, hardly greater than the fearful cold of
open space, unless modifying influences beyond our ken exist. It is certain that if life flourishes
there, it must be in such forms as can endure continual darkness and excessive cold. Some heat
would be carried around by atmospheric circulation from the sunward side, but not enough, it
would seem, to keep water from being perpetually frozen, or the ground from being baked with
unrelaxing frost. It is for the imagination to picture underground dwellings, artificial sources
of heat, and living forms suited to unearthlike environment.

What would be the mental effects of perpetual night upon a race of intelligent creatures doomed
to that condition? Perhaps not quite so grievous as we are apt to think. The constellations
in all their splendor would circle before their eyes with the revolution of their planet about
the sun, and with the exception of the sun itself--which they could see by making a journey
to the opposite hemisphere--all the members of the solar system would pass in succession through
their mid-heaven, and two of them would present themselves with a magnificence of planetary
display unknown on the earth. Venus, when in opposition under the most favorable circumstances,
is scarcely more than 24,000,000 miles from Mercury, and, showing herself at such times with
a fully illuminated disk--as, owing to her position within the orbit of the earth, she never
can do when at her least distance from us--she must be a phenomenon of unparalleled beauty,
at least four times brighter than we ever see her, and capable, of course, of casting a strong
shadow.

The earth, also, is a splendid star in the midnight sky of Mercury, and the moon may be visible
to the naked eye as a little attendant circling about its brilliant master. The outer planets
are slightly less conspicuous than they are to us, owing to increase of distance.

The revolution of the heavens as seen from the night side of Mercury is quite different in
period from that which we are accustomed to, although the apparent motion is in the same direction,
viz., from east to west. The same constellations remain above the horizon for weeks at a time,
slowly moving westward, with the planets drifting yet more slowly, but at different rates,
among them; the nearer planets, Venus and the earth, showing the most decided tendency to loiter
behind the stars.

On the side where eternal sunlight shines the sky of Mercury contains no stars. Forever the
pitiless blaze of day; forever,

    "All in a hot and copper sky
    The bloody sun at noon."

As it is difficult to understand how water can exist on the night hemisphere, except in the
shape of perpetual snow and ice, so it is hard to imagine that on the day hemisphere water
can ever be precipitated from the vaporous form. In truth, there can be very little water on
Mercury even in the form of vapor, else the spectroscope would have given unquestionable evidence
of its presence. Those who think that Mercury is entirely waterless and almost, if not quite,
airless may be right. In these respects it would then resemble the moon, and, according to
some observers, it possesses another characteristic lunar feature in the roughening of its
surface by what seem to be innumerable volcanic craters.

But if we suppose Mercury to possess an atmosphere much rarer than that of the earth, we may
perceive therein a possible provision against the excessive solar heat to which it is subjected,
since, as we see on high mountains, a light air permits a ready radiation of heat, which does
not become stored up as in a denser atmosphere.

As the sun pours its heat without cessation upon the day hemisphere the warmed air must rise
and flow off on all sides into the night hemisphere, while cold air rushes in below, to take
its place, from the region of frost and darkness. The intermediate areas, which see the sun
part of the time, as explained above, are perhaps the scene of contending winds and tempests,
where the moisture, if there be any, is precipitated, through the rapid cooling of the air,
in whelming floods and wild snow-storms driven by hurrying blasts from the realm of endless night.

Enough seems now to have been said to indicate clearly the hopelessness of looking for any
analogies between Mercury and the earth which would warrant the conclusion that the former
planet is capable of supporting inhabitants or forms of life resembling those that swarm upon
the latter. If we would still believe that Mercury is a habitable globe we must depend entirely
upon the imagination for pictures of creatures able to endure its extremes of heat and cold,
of light and darkness, of instability, swift vicissitude, and violent contrast.

In the next chapter we shall study a more peaceful and even-going world, yet one of great brilliancy,
which possesses some remarkable resemblances to the earth, as well as some surprising divergences
from it. 

Then took place one of the most abominable performances that can be
imagined.

Mannouri held in his hand a probe, with a hollow handle, into which
the needle slipped when a spring was touched: when Mannouri applied
the probe to those parts of Grandier's body which, according to the
superior, were insensible, he touched the spring, and the needle,
while seeming to bury itself in the flesh, really retreated into the
handle, thus causing no pain; but when he touched one of the marks
said to be vulnerable, he left the needle fixed, and drove it in to
the depth of several inches.

The first time he did this it drew from poor Grandier, who was taken unprepared, such a piercing
cry that it was heard in the street by the crowd which had gathered round the door. From the
mark on the shoulder-blade with which he had commenced, Mannouri passed to that on the thigh,
but though he plunged the needle in to its full depth Grandier uttered neither cry nor groan,
but went on quietly repeating a prayer, and notwithstanding that Mannouri stabbed him twice more
through each of the two marks, he could draw nothing from his victim but prayers for his tormentors.

M.
de Laubardemont was present at this scene.

The next day the devil was addressed in such forcible terms that an acknowledgment was wrung
from him that Grandier's body bore, not five, but two marks only;
and also, to the vast admiration of the spectators, he was able this
time to indicate their precise situation.

Unfortunately for the demon, a joke in which he indulged on this occasion detracted from the
effect of the above proof of cleverness. Having been asked why he had refused to speak on the
preceding Saturday, he said he had not been at Loudun on that day, as the whole morning he
had been occupied in accompanying the soul of a certain Le Proust,
attorney to the Parliament of Paris, to hell.

This answer awoke such doubts in the breasts of some of the laymen present that they took
the trouble to examine the register of deaths, and found that no one of the name of Le Proust,
belonging to any profession whatever, had died on that date. This discovery rendered the devil
less terrible, and perhaps less amusing.

Meantime the progress of the other exorcisms met with like interruptions. Pere Pierre de Saint
Thomas, who conducted the operations in the Carmelite church, asked one of the possessed sisters
where Grandier's books of magic were; she replied that they were kept at the house of a certain
young girl, whose name she gave, and who was the same to whom Adam had been forced to apologise.
De Laubardemont, Moussant, Herve, and Meunau hastened at once to the house indicated, searched
the rooms and the presses, opened the chests and the wardrobes and
all the secret places in the house, but in vain.

On their return to the church, they reproached the devil for having deceived them, but he explained
that a niece of the young woman had removed the books. Upon this, they hurried to the niece's
dwelling, but unluckily she was not at home, having spent the whole day at a certain church making
her devotions, and when they went thither, the priests and attendants averred that she had not
gone out all day; so notwithstanding the desire of the exorcists to oblige Adam they were forced
to let the matter drop.

These two false statements increased the number of unbelievers; but it was announced that a most
interesting performance would take place on May 4th; indeed, the programme when issued was
varied enough to arouse general curiosity.

Asmodeus was to raise the superior two feet from the ground, and the fiends Eazas and Cerberus,
in emulation of their leader, would do as much for two other nuns; while a fourth devil, named
Beherit, would go farther still, and, greatly daring, would attack M. de Laubardemont himself,
and, having spirited his councillor's cap from his head, would hold it suspended in the air for
the space of a Misereye. Furthermore, the exorcists announced that six of the strongest men
in the town would try to prevent the contortions of the weakest of
the convulsed nuns, and would fail.

It need hardly be said that the prospect of such an entertainment filled the church on the appointed
day to overflowing. Pere Lactance began by calling on Asmodeus to fulfil his promise of raising
the superior from the ground. She began, hereupon, to perform various evolutions on her mattress,
and at one moment it seemed as if she were really suspended in the air; but one of the spectators
lifted her dress and showed that she was only standing on tiptoe, which, though it might be
clever, was not miraculous.

Shouts of laughter rent the air, which had such an intimidating effect on Eazas and Cerberus
that not all the adjurations of the exorcists could extract the slightest response. Beherit
was their last hope, and he replied that he was prepared to lift up M. de Laubardemont's cap,
and would do so before the expiration of a quarter of an hour.

We must here remark that this time the exorcisms took place in the evening, instead of in the
morning as hitherto; and it was now growing dark, and darkness is favourable to illusions. Several of
the unbelieving ones present, therefore, began to call attention to the fact that the quarter
of an hour's delay would necessitate the employment of artificial light during the next scene.
They also noticed that M. de Laubardemont had seated himself apart and immediately beneath one
of the arches in the vaulted roof, through which a hole had been drilled for the passage of the
bell-rope. They therefore slipped out of the church, and up into the belfry, where they hid.
In a few moments a man appeared who began to work at something. They sprang on him and seized his wrists,
and found in one of his hands a thin line of horsehair, to one end of which a hook was attached.
The holder being frightened, dropped the line and fled, and although
M. de Laubardemont, the exorcists, and the spectators waited, expecting
every moment that the cap would rise into the air, it remained quite
firm on the owner's head, to the no small confusion of Pere Lactance,
who, all unwitting of the fiasco, continued to adjure Beherit to keep
his word--of course without the least effect.

Altogether, this performance of May 4th, went anything but smoothly. Till now no trick had succeeded;
never before had the demons been such bunglers. But the exorcists were sure that the last trick
would go off without a hitch. This was, that a nun, held by six men chosen for their strength,
would succeed in extricating herself from their grasp, despite their utmost efforts. Two Carmelites
and two Capuchins went through the audience and selected six giants from among the porters and
messengers of the town.

This time the devil answered expectations by showing that if he was
not clever he was strong, for although the six men tried to hold her
down upon her mattress, the superior was seized with such terrible
convulsions that she escaped from their hands, throwing down one of
those who tried to detain her.

This experiment, thrice renewed, succeeded thrice, and belief seemed about to return to the assembly,
when a physician of Saumur named Duncan, suspecting trickery, entered the choir, and, ordering
the six men to retire, said he was going to try and hold the superior down unaided, and if
she escaped from his hands he would make a public apology for his
unbelief.

M. de Laubardemont tried to prevent this test, by objecting to Duncan as an atheist, but as
Duncan was greatly respected on account of his skill and probity, there was such an outcry at this
interference from the entire audience that the commissioner was forced to let him have his
way. The six porters were therefore dismissed, but instead of resuming their places among the
spectators they left the church by the sacristy, while Duncan approaching the bed on which the superior
had again lain down, seized her by the wrist, and making certain that he had a firm hold, he told the exorcists
to begin.

Never up to that time had it been so clearly shown that the conflict going on was between public
opinion and the private aims of a few. A hush fell on the church;
everyone stood motionless in silent expectancy.

The moment Pere Lactance uttered the sacred words the convulsions
of the superior recommenced; but it seemed as if Duncan had more strength
than his six predecessors together, for twist and writhe and struggle
as she would, the superior's wrist remained none the less firmly clasped
in Duncan's hand.

At length she fell back on her bed exhausted, exclaiming!

"It's no use, it's no use! He's holding me!"

"Release her arm!" shouted Pere Lactance in a rage. "How can the convulsions take place if you
hold her that way?"

"If she is really possessed by a demon," answered Duncan aloud, "he
should be stronger than I; for it is stated in the ritual that among
the symptoms of possession is strength beyond one's years, beyond
one's condition, and beyond what is natural."

"That is badly argued," said Lactance sharply: "a demon outside the
body is indeed stronger than you, but when enclosed in a weak frame
such as this it cannot show such strength, for its efforts are proportioned
to the strength of the body it possesses."

"Enough!" said M. de Laubardemont; "we did not come here to argue with philosophers, but to
build up the faith of Christians."

With that he rose up from his chair amidst a terrible uproar, and the assembly dispersed in the
utmost disorder, as if they were leaving a theatre rather than a church.

The ill success of this exhibition caused a cessation of events of interest for some days.
The result was that a great number of noblemen and other people of quality who had come to Loudun
expecting to see wonders and had been shown only commonplace transparent tricks, began to think
it was not worth while remaining any longer, and went their several ways--a defection much bewailed
by Pere Tranquille in a little work which he published on this affair.

"Many," he says, "came to see miracles at Loudun, but finding the devils did not give them
the signs they expected, they went away dissatisfied, and swelled the numbers of the unbelieving."

It
was determined, therefore, in order to keep the town full, to predict some great event which would
revive curiosity and increase faith. Pere Lactance therefore announced that on the 20th of May three
of the seven devils dwelling in the superior would come out, leaving three wounds in her left side,
with corresponding holes in her chemise, bodice, and dress. The three parting devils were Asmodeus, Gresil
des Trones, and Aman des Puissances. He added that the superior's hands would be bound behind
her back at the time the wounds were given.

On the appointed day the church of Sainte-Croix was filled to overflowing with sightseers curious
to know if the devils would keep their promises better this time than the last. Physicians were
invited to examine the superior's side and her clothes; and amongst those who came forward
was Duncan, whose presence guaranteed the public against deception; but none of the exorcists
ventured to exclude him, despite the hatred in which they held him--a hatred which they would
have made him feel if he had not been under the special protection of Marshal Breze. The physicians
having completed their examination, gave the following certificate:--

"We have found no wound in the patient's side, no rent in her vestments, and our search revealed no
sharp instrument hidden in the folds of her dress."

These preliminaries having been got through, Pere Lactance questioned her in French for nearly two
hours, her answers being in the same language. Then he passed from questions to adjurations:
on this, Duncan came forward, and said a promise had been given that the superior's hands should
be tied behind her back, in order that there might be no room for suspicion of fraud, and that
the moment had now arrived to keep that promise. Pere Lactance admitted the justice of the demand,
but said as there were many present who had never seen the superior
in convulsions such as afflicted the possessed, it would be only fair
that she should be exorcised for their satisfaction before binding
her.

Accordingly he began to repeat the form of exorcism, and the superior was immediately attacked
by frightful convulsions, which in a few minutes produced complete exhaustion, so that she fell
on her face to the ground, and turning on her left arm and side, remained motionless some instants,
after which she uttered a low cry, followed by a groan. The physicians approached her, and
Duncan seeing her take away her hand from her left side, seized her arm, and found that the
tips of her fingers were stained with blood. They then examined her clothing and body, and found
her dress, bodice, and chemise cut through in three places, the cuts
being less than an inch long.

There were also three scratches beneath the left breast, so slight as to be scarcely more
than skin deep, the middle one being a barleycorn in length; still, from all three a sufficient
quantity of blood had oozed to stain the chemise above them.

This time the fraud was so glaring that even de Laubardemont exhibited some signs of confusion
because of the number and quality of the spectators. He would not, however, allow the doctors
to include in their report their opinion as to the manner in which the wounds were inflicted;
but Grandier protested against this in a Statement of Facts, which he drew up during the night,
and which was distributed next day.

It was as follows:

"That if the superior had not groaned the physicians would not have
removed her clothes, and would have suffered her to be bound, without
having the least idea that the wounds were already made; that then
the exorcists would have commanded the devils to come forth, leaving
the traces they had promised; that the superior would then have gone
through the most extraordinary contortions of which she was capable,
and have had a long fit of, convulsions, at the end of which she would
have been delivered from the three demons, and the wounds would have
been found in her body; that her groans, which had betrayed her, had
by God's will thwarted the best-laid plans of men and devils.

Why do you suppose," he went on to ask, "that clean incised wounds, such as a sharp blade would
make, 'were chosen for a token, seeing that the wounds left by devils resemble burns? Was it
not because it was easier for the superior to conceal a lancet with which to wound herself slightly,
than to conceal any instrument sufficiently heated to burn her? Why do you think the left side was
chosen rather than the forehead and nose, if not because she could
not give herself a wound in either of those places without being seen
by all the spectators?

Why was the left side rather than the right chosen, if it were not that it was easier for the
superior to wound herself with her right hand, which she habitually used, in the left side than in the
right? Why did she turn on her left side and arm and remain so long in that position, if it
were not to hide from the bystanders the instrument with which she wounded herself? What do you
think caused her to groan, in spite of all her resolution, if it were not the pain of the wound
she gave herself? for the most courageous cannot repress a shudder when the surgeon opens a vein. Why
were her finger-tips stained with blood, if it were not that the
secreted blade was so small that the fingers which held it could not
escape being reddened by the blood it caused to flow?

How came it that the wounds were so superficial that they barely went deeper than the cuticle, while
devils are known to rend and tear demoniacs when leaving them, if it were not that the superior
did not hate herself enough to inflict deep and dangerous wounds?"

Despite this logical protest from Grandier and the barefaced knavery of the exorcist, M. de
Laubardemont prepared a report of the expulsion of the three devils, Asmodeus, Gresil, and Aman,
from the body of sister Jeanne des Anges, through three wounds below the region of the heart;
a report which was afterwards shamelessly used against Grandier, and of which the memorandum still
exists, a monument, not so much of credulity and superstition, as of hatred and revenge. Pere
Lactance, in order to allay the suspicions which the pretended miracle had aroused among the
eye-witnesses, asked Balaam, one of the four demons who still remained
in the superior's body, the following day, why Asmodeus and his two
companions had gone out against their promise, while the superior's
face and hands were hidden from the people.

"To lengthen the incredulity of certain people," answered Balaam.

As for Pere Tranquille, he published a little volume describing the whole affair, in which, with
the irresponsible frivolity of a true Capuchin, he poked fun at those
who could not swallow the miracles wholesale.

"They had every reason to feel vexed," he said, "at the small courtesy or civility shown by
the demons to persons of their merit and station; but if they had examined their consciences,
perhaps they would have found the real reason of their discontent, and, turning their anger
against themselves, would have done penance for having come to the exorcisms led by a depraved
moral sense and a prying spirit."

Nothing remarkable happened from the 20th May till the 13th June, a day which became noteworthy by
reason of the superior's vomiting a quill a finger long. It was doubtless this last miracle which
brought the Bishop of Poitiers to Loudun, "not," as he said to those who came to pay their respects
to him, "to examine into the genuineness of the possession, but to
force those to believe who still doubted, and to discover the classes
which Urbain had founded to teach the black art to pupils of both
sexes."

Thereupon the opinion began to prevail among the people that it would be prudent to believe
in the possession, since the king, the cardinal-duke, and the bishop believed in it, and that
continued doubt would lay them open to the charges of disloyalty to their king and their Church, and
of complicity in the crimes of Grandier, and thus draw down upon them the ruthless punishment
of Laubardemont.

"The reason we feel so certain that our work is pleasing to God is
that it is also pleasing to the king," wrote Pere Lactance.

The arrival of the bishop was followed by a new exorcism; and of this an eye-witness, who was
a good Catholic and a firm believer in possession, has left us a written description, more interesting
than any we could give. We shall present it to our readers, word for word, as it stands:--

"On Friday, 23rd June 1634, on the Eve of Saint John, about 3 p.m., the Lord Bishop of Poitiers and
M. de Laubardemont being present in the church of Sainte-Croix of Loudun, to continue the
exorcisms of the Ursuline nuns, by order of M, de Laubardemont, commissioner, Urbain Grandier,
priest-in-charge, accused and denounced as a magician by the said
possessed nuns, was brought from his prison to the said church.

"There were produced by the said commissioner to the said Urbain Grandier four pacts mentioned several
times by the said possessed nuns at the preceding exorcisms, which the devils who possessed the nuns
declared they had made with the said Grandier on several occasions: there was one in especial
which Leviathan gave up on Saturday the 17th inst., composed of an infant's heart procured at
a witches' sabbath, held in Orleans in 1631; the ashes of a consecrated wafer, blood, etc.,
of the said Grandier, whereby Leviathan asserted he had entered the body of the sister, Jeanne
des Anges, the superior of the said nuns, and took possession of her with his coadjutors Beherit,
Eazas, and Balaam, on December 8th, 1632. Another such pact was composed
of the pips of Grenada oranges, and was given up by Asmodeus and a
number of other devils. It had been made to hinder Beherit from keeping
his promise to lift the commissioner's hat two inches from his head
and to hold it there the length of a Miseyere, as a sign that he had
come out of the nun. On all these pacts being shown to the said Grandier,
he said, without astonishment, but with much firmness and resolution,
that he had no knowledge of them whatever, that he had never made
them, and had not the skill by which to make them, that he had held
no communication with devils, and knew nothing of what they were talking
about. A report of all this being made and shown to him, he signed
it.

"This done, they brought all the possessed nuns, to the number
of eleven or twelve, including three lay sisters, also possessed,
into the choir of the said church, accompanied by a great many monks,
Carmelites, Capuchins, and Franciscans; and by three physicians and
a surgeon. The sisters on entering made some wanton remarks, calling
Grandier their master, and exhibiting great delight at seeing him.

After all, why should the intensity of the solar radiation upon Venus be regarded as inimical
to life? The sunbeams awaken life.

It is not impossible that relative nearness to the sun may be an advantage to Venus from the
biologic point of view. She gets less than one third as much heat as Mercury receives on the
average, and she gets it with almost absolute uniformity. At aphelion Mercury is about two
and four tenths times hotter than Venus; then it rushes sunward, and within forty-four days
becomes six times hotter than Venus. In the meantime the temperature of the latter, while high
as compared with the earth's, remains practically unchanged. Not only may Mercury's temperature
reach the destructive point, and thus be too high for organic life, but Mercury gets nothing
with either moderation or constancy. It is a world both of excessive heat and of violent contrasts
of temperature. Venus, on the other hand, presents an unparalleled instance of invariableness
and uniformity. She may well be called the favorite of the sun, and, through the advantages
of her situation, may be stimulated by him to more intense vitality than falls to the lot of
the earth.

It is open, at least to the writers of the interplanetary romances now so popular, to imagine
that on Venus, life, while encompassed with the serenity that results from the circular form
of her orbit, and the unchangeableness of her climates, is richer, warmer, more passionate,
more exquisite in its forms and more fascinating in its experiences, keener of sense, capable
of more delicious joys, than is possible to it amid the manifold inclemencies of the colder earth.

We have seen that there is excellent authority for saying that Venus's atmosphere is from one
and a half to two times as dense and as extensive as ours. Here is an interesting suggestion
of aerial possibilities for her inhabitants. If man could but fly, how would he take to himself
wings and widen his horizons along with the birds! Give him an atmosphere the double in density
of that which now envelopes him, take off a little of his weight, thereby increasing the ratio
of his strength and activity, put into his nervous system a more puissant stimulus from the
life-giving sun, and perchance he would fly.

Well, on Venus, apparently, these very conditions actually exist. How, then, do intellectual
creatures in the world of Venus take wing when they choose? Upon what spectacle of fluttering
pinions afloat in iridescent air, like a Raphael dream of heaven and its angels, might we not
look down if we could get near enough to our brilliant evening star to behold the intimate
splendors of its life?

As Venus herself would be the most brilliant member of the celestial host to an observer stationed
on the night side of Mercury, so the earth takes precedence in the midnight sky of Venus. For
the inhabitants of Venus Mercury is a splendid evening and morning star only, while the earth,
being an outer planet, is visible at times in that part of the sky which is directly opposite
to the place of the sun. The light reflected from our planet is probably less dazzling than
that which Venus sends to us, both because, at our greater distance, the sunlight is less intense,
and because our rarer atmosphere reflects a smaller proportion of the rays incident upon it.
But the earth is, after all, a more brilliant phenomenon seen from Venus than the latter is
seen from the earth, for the reason that the entire illuminated disk of the earth is presented
toward our sister planet when the two are at their nearest point of approach, whereas, at that
time, the larger part of the surface of Venus that is turned earthward has no illumination,
while the illuminated portion is a mere crescent.

Owing, again, to the comparative rarity of the terrestrial atmosphere, it is probable that
the inhabitants of Venus--assuming their existence--enjoy a superb view of the continents,
oceans, polar snows, and passing clouds that color and variegate the face of the earth. Our
astronomers can study the full disk of Venus only when she is at her greatest distance, and
on the opposite side of the sun from us, where she is half concealed in the glare. The astronomers
of Venus, on the other hand, can study the earth under the most favorable conditions of observation--that
is to say, when it is nearest to them and when, being in opposition to the sun, its whole disk
is fully illuminated. In fact, there is no planet in the entire system which enjoys an outlook
toward a sister world comparable with that which Venus enjoys with regard to the earth. If
there be astronomers upon Venus, armed with telescopes, it is safe to guess that they possess
a knowledge of the surface of the earth far exceeding in minuteness and accuracy the knowledge
that we possess of the features of any heavenly body except the moon. They must long ago have
been able to form definite conclusions concerning the meteorology and the probable habitability
of our planet.

It certainly tends to increase our interest in Venus when, granting that she is inhabited,
we reflect upon the penetrating scrutiny of which the earth may be the object whenever Venus--as
happens once every 584 days--passes between us and the sun. The spectacle of our great planet,
glowing in its fullest splendor in the midnight sky, pied and streaked with water, land, cloud,
and snow, is one that might well excite among the astronomers of another world, so fortunately
placed to observe it, an interest even greater than that which the recurrence of total solar
eclipses occasions upon the earth. For the inhabitants of Venus the study of the earth must
be the most absorbing branch of observational astronomy, and the subject, we may imagine, of
numberless volumes of learned memoirs, far exceeding in the definiteness of their conclusions
the books that we have written about the physical characteristics of other members of the solar
system. And, if we are to look for attempts on the part of the inhabitants of other worlds
to communicate with us by signals across the ether, it would certainly seem that Venus is the
most likely source of such efforts, for from no other planet can those features of the earth
that give evidence of its habitability be so clearly discerned. Of one thing it would seem
we may be certain: if Venus has intellectual inhabitants they possess far more convincing evidence
of our existence than we are likely ever to have of theirs.

In referring to the view of the earth from Mercury it was remarked that the moon is probably
visible to the naked eye. From Venus the moon is not only visible, but conspicuous, to the
naked eye, circling about the earth, and appearing at times to recede from it to a distance
of about half a degree--equal to the diameter of the full moon as we see it. The disk of the
earth is not quite four times greater in diameter than that of the moon, and nowhere else in
the solar system is there an instance in which two bodies, no more widely different in size
than are the moon and the earth, are closely linked together. The moons of the other planets
that possess satellites are relatively so small that they appear in the telescope as mere specks
beside their primaries, but the moon is so large as compared with the earth that the two must
appear, as viewed from Venus, like a double planet. To the naked eye they may look like a very
wide and brilliant double star, probably of contrasted colors, the moon being silvery white
and the earth, perhaps, now of a golden or reddish tinge and now green or blue, according to
the part of its surface turned toward Venus, and according, also, to the season that chances
to be reigning over that part.

Such a spectacle could not fail to be of absorbing interest, and we can not admit the possibility
of intelligent inhabitants on Venus without supposing them to watch the motions of the moon
and the earth with the utmost intentness. The passage of the moon behind and in front of the
earth, and its eclipses when it goes into the earth's shadow, could be seen without the aid
of telescopes, while, with such instruments, these phenomena would possess the highest scientific
interest and importance.

Because the earth has a satellite so easily observable, the astronomers of Venus could not
remain ignorant of the exact mass of our planet, and in that respect they would outstrip us
in the race for knowledge, since, on account of the lack of a satellite attending Venus, we
have been able to do no more than make an approximate estimate of her mass.

With telescopes, too, in the case of a solar eclipse occurring at the time of the earth's opposition,
they could see the black spot formed by the shadow of the moon, where the end of its cone moved
across the earth like the point of an invisible pencil, and could watch it traversing continents
and oceans, or thrown out in bold contrast upon the white background of a great area of clouds.
Indeed, the phenomena which our globe and its satellite present to Venus must be so varied
and wonderful that one might well wish to visit that planet merely for the sake of beholding them.

Thus far we have found so much of brilliant promise in the earth's twin sister that I almost
hesitate to approach another phase of the subject which may tend to weaken the faith of some
readers in the habitability of Venus. It may have been observed that heretofore nothing has
been said as to the planet's rotation period, but, without specifically mentioning it, I have
tacitly assumed the correctness of the generally accepted period of about twenty-four hours,
determined by De Vico and other observers. This period, closely accordant with the earth's,
is, as far as it goes, another argument for the habitability of Venus.

But now it must be stated that no less eminent an authority than Schiaparelli holds that Venus,
as well as Mercury, makes but a single turn on its axis in the course of a revolution about
the sun, and, consequently, is a two-faced world, one side staring eternally at the sun and
the other side wearing the black mask of endless night.

Schiaparelli made this announcement concerning Venus but a few weeks after publishing his discovery
of Mercury's peculiar rotation. He himself appears to be equally confident in both cases of
the correctness of his conclusions and the certainty of his observation. As with Mercury, several
other observers have corroborated him, and particularly Percival Lowell in this country. Mr.
Lowell, indeed, seems unwilling to admit that any doubt can be entertained. Nevertheless, very
grave doubt is entertained, and that by many, and probably by the majority, of the leading
professional astronomers and observers. In fact, some observers of great ability, equipped
with powerful instruments, have directly contradicted the results of Schiaparelli and his supporters.

The reader may ask: "Why so readily accept Schiaparelli's conclusions with regard to Mercury
while rejecting them in the case of Venus?"

The reply is twofold. In the first place the markings on Venus, although Mr. Lowell sketched
them with perfect confidence in 1896, are, by the almost unanimous testimony of those who have
searched for them with telescopes, both large and small, extremely difficult to see, indistinct
in outline, and perhaps evanescent in character. The sketches of no two observers agree, and
often they are remarkably unlike. The fact has already been mentioned that Mr. Lowell noticed
a kind of veil partially obscuring the markings, and which he ascribed, no doubt correctly,
to the planet's atmosphere. But he thinks that, notwithstanding the atmospheric veil, the markings
noted by him were unquestionably permanent features of the planet's real surface. Inasmuch,
however, as his drawings represent things entirely different from what others have seen, there
seems to be weight in the suggestion that the radiating bands and shadings noticed by him were
in some manner illusory, and perhaps of atmospheric origin.

If the markings were evidently of a permanent nature and attached to the solid shell of the
planet, and if they were of sufficient distinctness to be seen in substantially the same form
by all observers armed with competent instruments, then whatever conclusion was drawn from
their apparent motion as to the period of the planet's rotation would have to be accepted.
In the case of Mercury the markings, while not easily seen, appear to be sufficiently distinct
to afford confidence in the result of observations based upon them, but Venus's markings have
been represented in so many different ways that it seems advisable to await more light before
accepting any extraordinary, and in itself improbable, conclusion based upon them.

It should also be added that in 1900 spectroscopic observations by Belopolski at Pulkova gave
evidence that Venus really rotates rapidly on her axis, in a period probably approximating
to the twenty-four hours of the earth's rotation, thus corroborating the older conclusions.

Belopolski's observation, it may be remarked, was based upon what is known as the Doppler principle,
which is employed in measuring the motion of stars in the line of sight, and in other cases
of rapidly moving sources of light. According to this principle, when a source of light, either
original or reflected, is approaching the observer, the characteristic lines in its spectrum
are shifted toward the blue end, and when it is retreating from the observer the lines are
shifted toward the red end. Now, in the case of a planet rotating rapidly on its axis, it is
clear that if the observer is situated in, or nearly in, the plane of the planet's equator,
one edge of its disk will be approaching his eye while the opposite edge is retreating, and
the lines in the spectrum of a beam of light from the advancing edge will be shifted toward
the blue, while those in the spectrum of the light coming from the retreating edge will be
shifted toward the red. And, by carefully noting the amount of the shifting, the velocity of
the planet's rotation can be computed. This is what was done by Belopolski in the case of Venus,
with the result above noted.

Secondly, the theory that Venus rotates but once in the course of a revolution finds but slight
support from the doctrine of tidal friction, as compared with that which it receives when applied
to Mercury. The effectiveness of the sun's attraction in slowing down the rotation of a planet
through the braking action of the tides raised in the body of the planet while it is yet molten
or plastic, varies inversely as the sixth power of the planet's distance. For Mercury this
effectiveness is nearly three hundred times as great as it is for the earth, while for Venus
it is only seven times as great. While we may admit, then, that Mercury, being relatively close
to the sun and subject to an enormous braking action, lost rotation until--as occurred for
a similar reason to the moon under the tidal attraction of the earth--it ended by keeping one
face always toward its master, we are not prepared to make the same admission in the case of
Venus, where the effective force concerned is comparatively so slight.

It should be added, however, that no certain evidence of polar compression in the outline of
Venus's disk has ever been obtained, and this fact would favor the theory of a very slow rotation
because a plastic globe in swift rotation has its equatorial diameter increased and its polar
diameter diminished. If Venus were as much flattened at the poles as the earth is, it would
seem that the fact could not escape detection, yet the necessary observations are very difficult,
and Venus is so brilliant that her light increases the difficulty, while her transits across
the sun, when she can be seen as a round black disk, are very rare phenomena, the latest having
occurred in 1874 and 1882, and the next not being due until 2004.

Upon the whole, probably the best method of settling the question of Venus's rotation is the
spectroscopic method, and that, as we saw, has already given evidence for the short period.

Even if it were established that Venus keeps always the same face to the sun, it might not
be necessary to abandon altogether the belief that she is habitable, although, of course, the
obstacles to that belief would be increased. Venus's orbit being so nearly circular, and her
orbital motion so nearly invariable, she has but a very slight libration with reference to
the sun, and the east and west lunes on her surface, where day and night would alternate once
in her year of 225 days, would be so narrow as to be practically negligible.

But, owing to her extensive atmosphere, there would be a very broad band of twilight on Venus,
running entirely around the planet at the inner edge of the light hemisphere. What the meteorological
conditions within this zone would be is purely a matter of conjecture. As in the case of Mercury,
we should expect an interchange of atmospheric currents between the light and dark sides of
the planet, the heated air rising under the influence of the unsetting sun in one hemisphere,
and being replaced by an indraught of cold air from the other. The twilight band would probably
be the scene of atmospheric conflicts and storms, and of immense precipitation, if there were
oceans on the light hemisphere to charge the air with moisture.

It has been suggested that ice and snow might be piled in a vast circle of glaciers, belting
the planet along the line between perpetual day and night, and that where the sunbeams touched
these icy deposits near the edge of the light hemisphere a marvelous spectacle of prismatic
hills of crystal would be presented!

It may be remarked that it would be the inhabitants of the dark hemisphere who would enjoy
the beautiful scene of the earth and the moon in opposition.

CHAPTER IV

MARS, A WORLD MORE ADVANCED THAN OURS

Mars is the fourth planet in the order of distance from the sun, and the outermost member of
the terrestrial group. Its mean distance is 141,500,000 miles, variable, through the eccentricity
of its orbit, to the extent of about 13,000,000 miles. It will be observed that this is only
a million miles less than the variation in Mercury's distance from the sun, from which, in
a previous chapter, were deduced most momentous consequences; but, in the case of Mars, the
ratio of the variation to the mean distance is far smaller than with Mercury, so that the effect
upon the temperature of the planet is relatively insignificant.

Mars gets a little less than half as much solar light and heat as the earth receives, its situation
in this respect being just the opposite to that of Venus. Its period of orbital revolution,
or the length of its year, is 687 of our days. The diameter of Mars is 4,200 miles, and its
density is 73 per cent of the earth's density. Gravity on its surface is only 38 per cent of
terrestrial gravity--i.e., a one hundred-pound weight removed from the earth to Mars would
there weigh but thirty-eight pounds. Mars evidently has an atmosphere, the details of which
we shall discuss later.

The poles of the planet are inclined from a perpendicular to the plane of its orbit at very
nearly the same angle as that of the earth's poles, viz., 24° 50´. Its rotation on its axis
is also effected in almost the same period as the earth's, viz., 24 hours, 37 minutes.

When in opposition to the sun, Mars may be only about 35,000,000 miles from the earth, but
its average distance when in that position is more than 48,000,000 miles, and may be more than
60,000,000. These differences arise from the eccentricities of the orbits of the two planets.
When on the farther side of the sun--i.e., in conjunction with the sun as seen from the earth--Mars's
average distance from us is about 235,000,000 miles. In consequence of these great changes
in its distance, Mars is sometimes a very conspicuous object in the sky, and at other times
inconspicuous.

The similarity in the inclination of the axis of the two planets results in a close resemblance
between the seasons on Mars and on the earth, although, owing to the greater length of its
year, Mars's seasons are much longer than ours. Winter and summer visit in succession its northern
and southern hemispheres just as occurs on the planet that we inhabit, and the torrid, temperate,
and frigid zones on its surface have nearly the same angular width as on the earth. In this
respect Mars is the first of the foreign planets we have studied to resemble the earth.

Around each of its poles appears a circular white patch, which visibly expands when winter
prevails upon it, and rapidly contracts, sometimes almost completely disappearing, under a
summer sun. From the time of Sir William Herschel the almost universal belief among astronomers
has been that these gleaming polar patches on Mars are composed of snow and ice, like the similar
glacial caps of the earth, and no one can look at them with a telescope and not feel the liveliest
interest in the planet to which they belong, for they impart to it an appearance of likeness
to our globe which at first glance is all but irresistible.

To watch one of them apparently melting, becoming perceptibly smaller week after week, while
the general surface of the corresponding hemisphere of the planet deepens in color, and displays
a constantly increasing wealth of details as summer advances across it, is an experience of
the most memorable kind, whose effect upon the mind of the observer is indescribable.

Early in the history of the telescope it became known that, in addition to the polar caps,
Mars presented a number of distinct surface features, and gradually, as instruments increased
in power and observers in skill, charts of the planet were produced showing a surface diversified
somewhat in the manner that characterizes the face of the earth, although the permanent forms
do not closely resemble those of our planet.

Two principal colors exist on the disk of Mars--dark, bluish gray or greenish gray, characterizing
areas which have generally been regarded as seas, and light yellowish red, overspreading broad
regions looked upon as continents. It was early observed that if the dark regions really are
seas, the proportion of water to land upon Mars is much smaller than upon the earth.

For two especial reasons Mars has generally been regarded as an older or more advanced planet
than the earth. The first reason is that, accepting Laplace's theory of the origin of the planetary
system from a series of rings left off at the periphery of the contracting solar nebula, Mars
must have come into existence earlier than the earth, because, being more distant from the
center of the system, the ring from which it was formed would have been separated sooner than
the terrestrial ring. The second reason is that Mars being smaller and less massive than the
earth has run through its developments a cooling globe more rapidly. The bearing of these things
upon the problems of life on Mars will be considered hereafter.

And now, once more, Schiaparelli appears as the discoverer of surprising facts about one of
the most interesting worlds of the solar system. During the exceptionally favorable opposition
of Mars in 1877, when an American astronomer, Asaph Hall, discovered the planet's two minute
satellites, and again during the opposition of 1879, the Italian observer caught sight of an
astonishing network of narrow dark lines intersecting the so-called continental regions of
the planet and crossing one another in every direction. Schiaparelli did not see the little
moons that Hall discovered, and Hall did not perceive the enigmatical lines that Schiaparelli
detected. Hall had by far the larger and more powerful telescope; Schiaparelli had much the
more steady and favorable atmosphere for astronomical observation. Yet these differences in
equipment and circumstances do not clearly explain why each observer should have seen what
the other did not.

There may be a partial explanation in the fact that an observer having made a remarkable discovery
is naturally inclined to confine his attention to it, to the neglect of other things. But it
was soon found that Schiaparelli's lines--to which he gave the name "canals," merely on account
of their shape and appearance, and without any intention to define their real nature--were
excessively difficult telescopic objects. Eight or nine years elapsed before any other observer
corroborated Schiaparelli's observations, and notwithstanding the "sensation" which the discovery
of the canals produced they were for many years regarded by the majority of astronomers as
an illusion.

But they were no illusion, and in 1881 Schiaparelli added to the astonishment created by his
original discovery, and furnished additional grounds for skepticism, by announcing that, at
certain times, many of the canals geminated, or became double! He continued his observations
at each subsequent opposition, adding to the number of the canals observed, and charting them
with classical names upon a detailed map of the planet's surface.

At length in 1886 Perrotin, at Nice, detected many of Schiaparelli's canals, and later they
were seen by others. In 1888 Schiaparelli greatly extended his observations, and in 1892 and
1894 some of the canals were studied with the 36-inch telescope of the Lick Observatory, and
in the last-named year a very elaborate series of observations upon them was made by Percival
Lowell and his associates, Prof. William C. Pickering and Mr. A.E. Douglass, at Flagstaff,
Arizona. Mr. Lowell's charts of the planet are the most complete yet produced, containing 184
canals to which separate names have been given, besides more than a hundred other markings
also designated by individual appellations.

It should not be inferred from the fact that Schiaparelli's discovery in 1877 excited so much
surprise and incredulity that no glimpse of the peculiar canal-like markings on Mars had been
obtained earlier than that. At least as long ago as 1864 Mr. Dawes, in England, had seen and
sketched half a dozen of the larger canals, or at least the broader parts of them, especially
where they connect with the dark regions known as seas, but Dawes did not see them in their
full extent, did not recognize their peculiar character, and entirely failed to catch sight
of the narrower and more numerous ones which constitute the wonderful network discovered by
the Italian astronomer. Schiaparelli found no less than sixty canals during his first series
of observations in 1877.

Let us note some of the more striking facts about the canals which Schiaparelli has described.
We can not do better than quote his own words:

"There are on this planet, traversing the continents, long dark lines which may be designated
as canals, although we do not yet know what they are. These lines run from one to another of
the somber spots that are regarded as seas, and form, over the lighter, or continental, regions
a well-defined network. Their arrangement appears to be invariable and permanent; at least,
as far as I can judge from four and a half years of observation. Nevertheless, their aspect
and their degree of visibility are not always the same, and depend upon circumstances which
the present state of our knowledge does not yet permit us to explain with certainty. In 1879
a great number were seen which were not visible in 1877, and in 1882 all those which had been
seen at former oppositions were found again, together with new ones. Sometimes these canals
present themselves in the form of shadowy and vague lines, while on other occasions they are
clear and precise, like a trace drawn with a pen. In general they are traced upon the sphere
like the lines of great circles; a few show a sensible lateral curvature. They cross one another
obliquely, or at right angles. They have a breadth of two degrees, or 120 kilometres [74 miles],
and several extend over a length of eighty degrees, or 4,800 kilometres [nearly 3,000 miles].
Their tint is very nearly the same as that of the seas, usually a little lighter. Every canal
terminates at both its extremities in a sea, or in another canal; there is not a single example
of one coming to an end in the midst of dry land.

"This is not all. In certain seasons these canals become double. This phenomenon seems to appear
at a determinate epoch, and to be produced simultaneously over the entire surface of the planet's
continents. There was no indication of it in 1877, during the weeks that preceded and followed
the summer solstice of that world. A single isolated case presented itself in 1879. On the
26th of December, this year--a little before the spring equinox, which occurred on Mars on
the 21st of January, 1880--I noticed the doubling of the Nile [a canal thus named] between
the Lakes of the Moon and the Ceraunic Gulf. These two regular, equal, and parallel lines caused
me, I confess, a profound surprise, the more so because a few days earlier, on the 23d and
the 24th of December, I had carefully observed that very region without discovering anything
of the kind.

"I awaited with curiosity the return of the planet in 1881, to see if an analogous phenomenon
would present itself in the same place, and I saw the same thing reappear on the 11th of January,
1882, one month after the spring equinox--which occurred on the 8th of December, 1881. The
duplication was still more evident at the end of February. On this same date, the 11th of January,
another duplication had already taken place, that of the middle portion of the canal of the
Cyclops, adjoining Elysium. [Elysium is a part of one of the continental areas.]

"Yet greater was my astonishment when, on the 19th of January, I saw the canal Jamuna, which
was then in the center of the disk, formed very rigidly of two parallel straight lines, crossing
the space which separates the Niliac Lake from the Gulf of Aurora. At first sight I believed
it was an illusion, caused by fatigue of the eye and some new kind of strabismus, but I had
to yield to the evidence. After the 19th of January I simply passed from wonder to wonder;
successively the Orontes, the Euphrates, the Phison, the Ganges, and the larger part of the
other canals, displayed themselves very clearly and indisputably duplicated. There were not
less than twenty examples of duplication, of which seventeen were observed in the space of
a month, from the 19th of January to the 19th of February.

"In certain cases it was possible to observe precursory symptoms which are not lacking in interest.
Thus, on the 13th of January, a light, ill-defined shade extended alongside the Ganges; on
the 18th and the 19th one could only distinguish a series of white spots; on the 20th the shadow
was still indecisive, but on the 21st the duplication was perfectly clear, such as I observed
it until the 23d of February. The duplication of the Euphrates, of the canal of the Titans,
and of the Pyriphlegethon also began in an uncertain and nebulous form.

"These duplications are not an optical effect depending on increase of visual power, as happens
in the observation of double stars, and it is not the canal itself splitting in two longitudinally.
Here is what is seen: To the right or left of a pre-existing line, without any change in the
course and position of that line, one sees another line produce itself, equal and parallel
to the first, at a distance generally varying from six to twelve degrees--i.e., from 350 to
700 kilometres (217 to 434 miles); even closer ones seem to be produced, but the telescope
is not powerful enough to distinguish them with certainty. Their tint appears to be a quite
deep reddish brown. The parallelism is sometimes rigorously exact. There is nothing analogous
in terrestrial geography. Everything indicates that here there is an organization special to
the planet Mars, probably connected with the course of its seasons."[1]

[Footnote 1: L'Astronomie, vol. i, 1882, pp. 217 et seq.]

Schiaparelli adds that he took every precaution to avoid the least suspicion of illusion. "I
am absolutely sure," he says, "of what I have observed."

I have quoted his statement, especially about the duplication of the canals, at so much length,
both on account of its intrinsic interest and because it has many times been argued that this
particular phenomenon must be illusory even though the canals are real.

One of the most significant facts that came out in the early observations was the evident connection
between the appearance of the canals and the seasonal changes on Mars. It was about the time
of the spring equinox, when the white polar caps had begun to melt, that Schiaparelli first
noticed the phenomenon of duplication. As the season advanced the doubling of the canals increased
in frequency and the lines became more distinct. In the meantime the polar caps were becoming
smaller. Broadly speaking, Schiaparelli's observation showed that the doubling of the canals
occurred principally a little after the spring equinox and a little before the autumn equinox;
that the phenomenon disappeared in large part at the epoch of the winter solstice, and disappeared
altogether at the epoch of the summer solstice. Moreover, he observed that many of the canals,
without regard to duplication, were invisible at times, and reappeared gradually; faint, scarcely
visible lines and shadows, deepened and became more distinct until they were clearly and sharply
defined, and these changes, likewise, were evidently seasonal.

The invariable connection of the canals at their terminations with the regions called seas,
the fact that as the polar caps disappeared the sealike expanses surrounding the polar regions
deepened in color, and other similar considerations soon led to the suggestion that there existed
on Mars a wonderful system of water circulation, whereby the melting of the polar snows, as
summer passed alternately from one hemisphere to the other, served to reenforce the supply
of water in the seas, and, through the seas, in the canals traversing the broad expanses of
dry land that occupy the equatorial regions of the planet. The thought naturally occurred that
the canals might be of artificial origin, and might indicate the existence of a gigantic system
of irrigation serving to maintain life upon the globe of Mars. The geometrical perfection of
the lines, their straightness, their absolute parallelism when doubled, their remarkable tendency
to radiate from definite centers, lent strength to the hypothesis of an artificial origin.
But their enormous size, length, and number tended to stagger belief in the ability of the
inhabitants of any world to achieve a work so stupendous.

After a time a change of view occurred concerning the nature of the expanses called seas, and
Mr. Lowell, following his observations of 1894, developed the theory of the water circulation
and irrigation of Mars in a new form. He and others observed that occasionally canals were
visible cutting straight across some of the greenish, or bluish-gray, areas that had been regarded
as seas. This fact suggested that, instead of seas, these dark expanses may rather be areas
of marshy ground covered with vegetation which flourishes and dies away according as the supply
of water alternately increases and diminishes, while the reddish areas known as continents
are barren deserts, intersected by canals; and as the water released by the melting of the
polar snows begins to fill the canals, vegetation springs up along their sides and becomes
visible in the form of long narrow bands.

According to this theory, the phenomena called canals are simply lines of vegetation, the real
canals being individually too small to be detected. It may be supposed that from a central
supply canal irrigation ditches are extended for a distance of twenty or thirty miles on each
side, thus producing a strip of fertile soil from forty to sixty miles wide, and hundreds,
or in some cases two or three thousands, of miles in length.

The water supply being limited, the inhabitants can not undertake to irrigate the entire surface
of the thirsty land, and convenience of circulation induces them to extend the irrigated areas
in the form of long lines. The surface of Mars, according to Lowell's observation, is remarkably
flat and level, so that no serious obstacle exists to the extension of the canal system in
straight bands as undeviating as arcs of great circles.

Wherever two or more canals meet, or cross, a rounded dark spot from a hundred miles, or less,
to three hundred miles in diameter, is seen. An astonishing number of these appear on Mr. Lowell's
charts. Occasionally, as occurs at the singular spot named Lacus Solis, several canals converging
from all points of the compass meet at a central point like the spokes of a wheel; in other
cases, as, for instance, that of the long canal named Eumenides, with its continuation Orcus,
a single conspicuous line is seen threading a large number of round dark spots, which present
the appearance of a row of beads upon a string. These circular spots, which some have regarded
as lakes, Mr. Lowell believes are rather oases in the great deserts, and granting the correctness
of his theory of the canals the aptness of this designation is apparent.[2]

[Footnote 2: The reader can find many of these "canals" and "oases," as well as some of the
other regions on Mars that have received names, in the frontispiece.]

Wherever several canals, that is to say, several bands of vegetation or bands of life, meet,
it is reasonable to assume that an irrigated and habitable area of considerable extent will
be developed, and in such places the imagination may picture the location of the chief centers
of population, perhaps in the form of large cities, or perhaps in groups of smaller towns and
villages. The so-called Lacus Solis is one of these localities.

So, likewise, it seems but natural that along the course of a broad, well-irrigated band a
number of expansions should occur, driving back the bounds of the desert, forming rounded areas
of vegetation, and thus affording a footing for population. Wherever two bands cross such areas
would be sure to exist, and in almost every instance of crossing the telescope actually shows them.

As to the gemination or duplication of many of the lines which, at the beginning of the season,
appear single, it may be suggested that, in the course of the development of the vast irrigation
system of the planet parallel bands of cultivation have been established, one receiving its
water supply from the canals of the other, and consequently lagging a little behind in visibility
as the water slowly percolates through the soil and awakens the vegetation. Or else, the character
of the vegetation itself may differ as between two such parallel bands, one being supplied
with plants that spring up and mature quickly when the soil about their roots is moistened,
while the plants in the twin band respond more slowly to stimulation.

Objection has been made to the theory of the artificial origin of the canals of Mars on the
ground, already mentioned, that the work required to construct them would be beyond the capacity
of any race of creatures resembling man. The reply that has been made to this is twofold. In
the first place, it should be remembered that the theory, as Mr. Lowell presents it, does not
assert that the visible lines are the actual canals, but only that they are strips of territory
intersected, like Holland or the center of the plain of Lombardy, by innumerable irrigation
canals and ditches. To construct such works is clearly not an impossible undertaking, although
it does imply great industry and concentration of effort.

In the second place, since the force of gravity on Mars is in the ratio of only 38 to 100 compared
with the earth's, it is evident that the diminished weight of all bodies to be handled would
give the inhabitants of Mars an advantage over those of the earth in the performance of manual
labor, provided that they possess physical strength and activity as great as ours. But, in
consequence of this very fact of the slighter force of gravity, a man upon Mars could attain
a much greater size, and consequently much greater muscular strength, than his fellows upon
the earth possess without being oppressed by his own weight. In other words, as far as the
force of gravity may be considered as the decisive factor, Mars could be inhabited by giants
fifteen feet tall, who would be relatively just as active, and just as little impeded in their
movements by the weight of their bodies, as a six-footer is upon the earth. But they would
possess far more physical strength than we do, while, in doing work, they would have much lighter
materials to deal with.

Whether the theory that the canals of Mars really are canals is true or not, at any rate there
can now be no doubt as to the existence of the strange lines which bear that designation. The
suggestion has been offered that their builders may no longer be in existence, Mars having
already passed the point in its history where life must cease upon its surface. This brings
us to consider again the statement, made near the beginning of this chapter, that Mars is,
perhaps, at a more advanced stage of development than the earth. If we accept this view, then,
provided there was originally some resemblance between Mars's life forms and those of the earth,
the inhabitants of that planet would, at every step, probably be in front of their terrestrial
rivals, so that at the present time they should stand well in advance. Mr. Lowell has, perhaps,
put this view of the relative advancement in evolution of Mars and its inhabitants as picturesquely
as anybody.

"In Mars," he says, "we have before us the spectacle of a world relatively well on in years,
a world much older than the earth. To so much about his age Mars bears witness on his face.
He shows unmistakable signs of being old. Advancing planetary years have left their mark legible
there. His continents are all smoothed down; his oceans have all dried up.... Mars being thus
old himself, we know that evolution on his surface must be similarly advanced. This only informs
us of its condition relative to the planet's capabilities. Of its actual state our data are
not definite enough to furnish much deduction. But from the fact that our own development has
been comparatively a recent thing, and that a long time would be needed to bring even Mars
to his present geological condition, we may judge any life he may support to be not only relatively,
but really older than our own. From the little we can see such appears to be the case. The
evidence of handicraft, if such it be, points to a highly intelligent mind behind it. Irrigation,
unscientifically conducted, would not give us such truly wonderful mathematical fitness in
the several parts to the whole as we there behold.... Quite possibly such Martian folk are
possessed of inventions of which we have not dreamed, and with them electrophones and kinetoscopes
are things of a bygone past, preserved with veneration in museums as relics of the clumsy contrivances
of the simple childhood of the race. Certainly what we see hints at the existence of beings
who are in advance of, not behind us, in the journey of life."[3]

[Footnote 3: Mars, by Percival Lowell, p. 207 et seq.]

Granted the existence of such a race as is thus described, and to them it might not seem a
too appalling enterprise, when their planet had become decrepit, with its atmosphere thinned
out and its supply of water depleted, to grapple with the destroying hand of nature and to
prolong the career of their world by feats of chemistry and engineering as yet beyond the compass
of human knowledge.

It is confidence, bred from considerations like these, in the superhuman powers of the supposed
inhabitants of Mars that has led to the popular idea that they are trying to communicate by
signals with the earth. Certain enigmatical spots of light, seen at the edge of the illuminated
disk of Mars, and projecting into the unilluminated part--for Mars, although an outer planet,
shows at particular times a gibbous phase resembling that of the moon just before or just after
the period of full moon--have been interpreted by some, but without any scientific evidence,
as of artificial origin.

Upon the assumption that these bright points, and others occasionally seen elsewhere on the
planet's disk, are intended by the Martians for signals to the earth, entertaining calculations
have been made as to the quantity of light that would be required in the form of a "flash signal"
to be visible across the distance separating the two planets. The results of the calculations
have hardly been encouraging to possible investors in interplanetary telegraphy, since it appears
that heliographic mirrors with reflecting surfaces measured by square miles, instead of square
inches, would be required to send a visible beam from the earth to Mars or vice versa.

The projections of light on Mars can be explained much more simply and reasonably. Various
suggestions have been made about them; among others, that they are masses of cloud reflecting
the sunshine; that they are areas of snow; and that they are the summits of mountains crowned
with ice and encircled with clouds. In fact, a huge mountain mass lying on the terminator,
or the line between day and night, would produce the effect of a tongue of light projecting
into the darkness without assuming that it was snow-covered or capped with clouds, as any one
may convince himself by studying the moon with a telescope when the terminator lies across
some of its most mountainous regions. To be sure, there is reason to think that the surface
of Mars is remarkably flat; yet even so the planet may have some mountains, and on a globe
the greater part of whose shell is smooth any projections would be conspicuous, particularly
where the sunlight fell at a low angle across them.

Another form in which the suggestion of interplanetary communication has been urged is plainly
an outgrowth of the invention and surprising developments of wireless telegraphy. The human
mind is so constituted that whenever it obtains any new glimpse into the arcana of nature it
immediately imagines an indefinite and all but unlimited extension of its view in that direction.
So to many it has not appeared unreasonable to assume that, since it is possible to transmit
electric impulses for considerable distances over the earth's surface by the simple propagation
of a series of waves, or undulations, without connecting wires, it may also be possible to
send such impulses through the ether from planet to planet.

The fact that the electric undulations employed in wireless telegraphy pass between stations
connected by the crust of the earth itself, and immersed in a common atmospheric envelope,
is not deemed by the supporters of the theory in question as a very serious objection, for,
they contend, electric waves are a phenomenon of the ether, which extends throughout space,
and, given sufficient energy, such waves could cross the gap between world and world.

But nobody has shown how much energy would be needed for such a purpose, and much less has
anybody indicated a way in which the required energy could be artificially developed, or cunningly
filched from the stores of nature. It is, then, purely an assumption, an interesting figment
of the mind, that certain curious disturbances in the electrical state of the air and the earth,
affecting delicate electric instruments, possessing a marked periodicity in brief intervals
of time, and not yet otherwise accounted for, are due to the throbbing, in the all-enveloping
ether, of impulses transmitted from instruments controlled by the savants of Mars, whose insatiable
thirst for knowledge, and presumably burning desire to learn whether there is not within reach
some more fortunate world than their half-dried-up globe, has led them into a desperate attempt
to "call up" the earth on their interplanetary telephone, with the hope that we are wise and
skilful enough to understand and answer them.

In what language they intend to converse no one has yet undertaken to tell, but the suggestion
has sapiently been made that, mathematical facts being invariable, the eternal equality of
two plus two with four might serve as a basis of understanding, and that a statement of that
truth sent by electric taps across the ocean of ether would be a convincing assurance that
the inhabitants of the planet from which the message came at least enjoyed the advantages of
a common-school education.

But, while speculation upon this subject rests on unverified, and at present unverifiable,
assumptions, of course everybody would rejoice if such a thing were possible, for consider
what zest and charm would be added to human life if messages, even of the simplest description,
could be sent to and received from intelligent beings inhabiting other planets! It is because
of this hold that it possesses upon the imagination, and the pleasing pictures that it conjures
up, that the idea of interplanetary communication, once broached, has become so popular a topic,
even though everybody sees that it should not be taken too seriously.

The subject of the atmosphere of Mars can not be dismissed without further consideration than
we have yet given it, because those who think the planet uninhabitable base their opinion largely
upon the assumed absence of sufficient air to support life. It was long ago recognized that,
other things being equal, a planet of small mass must possess a less dense atmosphere than
one of large mass. Assuming that each planet originally drew from a common stock, and that
the amount and density of its atmosphere is measured by its force of gravity, it can be shown
that Mars should have an atmosphere less than one fifth as dense as the earth's.

Dr. Johnstone Stoney has attacked the problem of planetary atmospheres in another way. Knowing
the force of gravity on a planet, it is easy to calculate the velocity with which a body, or
a particle, would have to start radially from the planet in order to escape from its gravitational
control. For the earth this critical velocity is about seven miles per second; for Mars about
three miles per second. Estimating the velocity of the molecules of the various atmospheric
gases, according to the kinetic theory, Dr. Stoney finds that some of the smaller planets,
and the moon, are gravitationally incapable of retaining all of these gases in the form of
an atmosphere. Among the atmospheric constituents that, according to this view, Mars would
be unable permanently to retain is water vapor. Indeed, he supposes that even the earth is
slowly losing its water by evaporation into space, and on Mars, owing to the slight force of
gravity there, this process would go on much more rapidly, so that, in this way, we have a
means of accounting for the apparent drying up of that planet, while we may be led to anticipate
that at some time in the remote future the earth also will begin to suffer from lack of water,
and that eventually the chasms of the sea will yawn empty and desolate under a cloudless sky.

But it is not certain that the original supply of atmospheric elements was in every case proportional
to the respective force of gravity of a planet. The fact that Venus appears to have an atmosphere
more extensive and denser than the earth's, although its force of gravity is a little less
than that of our globe, indicates at once a variation as between these two planets in the amount
of atmospheric material at their disposal. This may be a detail depending upon differences
in the mode, or in the stage, of their evolution. Thus, after all, Dr. Stoney's theory may
be substantially correct and yet Mars may retain sufficient water to form clouds, to be precipitated
in snow, and to fill its canals after each annual melting of the polar caps, because the original
supply was abundant, and its escape is a gradual process, only to be completed by age-long steps.

Even though the evidence of the spectroscope, as far as it goes, seems to lend support to the
theory that there is no water vapor in the atmosphere of Mars, we can not disregard the visual
evidence that, nevertheless, water vapor exists there.

What are the polar caps if they are not snow? Frozen carbon dioxide, it has been suggested;
but this is hardly satisfactory, for it offers no explanation of the fact that when the polar
caps diminish, and in proportion as they diminish, the "seas" and the canals darken and expand,
whereas a reasonable explanation of the correlation of these phenomena is offered if we accept
the view that the polar caps consist of snow.

Then there are many observations on record indicating the existence of clouds in Mars's atmosphere.
Sometimes a considerable area of its surface has been observed to be temporarily obscured,
not by dense masses of cloud such as accompany the progress of great cyclonic storms across
the continents and oceans of the earth, but by comparatively thin veils of vapor such as would
be expected to form in an atmosphere so comparatively rare as that of Mars. And these clouds,
in some instances at least, appear, like the cirrus streaks and dapples in our own air, to
float at a great elevation. Mr. Douglass, one of Mr. Lowell's associates in the observations
of 1894 at Flagstaff, Arizona, observed what he believed to be a cloud over the unilluminated
part of Mars's disk, which, by micrometric measurement and estimate, was drifting at an elevation
of about fifteen miles above the surface of the planet. This was seen on two successive days,
November 25th and November 26th, and it underwent curious fluctuations in visibility, besides
moving in a northerly direction at the rate of some thirteen miles an hour. But, upon the whole,
as Mr. Lowell remarks, the atmosphere of Mars is remarkably free of clouds.

The reader will remember that Mars gets a little less than half as much heat from the sun as
the earth gets. This fact also has been used as an argument against the habitability of the
planet. In truth, those who think that life in the solar system is confined to the earth alone
insist upon an almost exact reproduction of terrestrial conditions as a sine qua non to the
habitability of any other planet. Venus, they think, is too hot, and Mars too cold, as if life
were rather a happy accident than the result of the operation of general laws applicable under
a wide variety of conditions. All that we are really justified in asserting is that Venus may
be too hot and Mars too cold for us. Of course, if we adopt the opinion held by some that the
temperature on Mars is constantly so low that water would remain perpetually frozen, it does
throw the question of the kind of life that could be maintained there into the realm of pure
conjecture.

The argument in favor of an extremely low temperature on Mars is based on the law of the diminution
of radiant energy inversely as the square of the distance, together with the assumption that
no qualifying circumstances, or no modification of that law, can enter into the problem. According
to this view, it could be shown that the temperature on Mars never rises above -200° F. But
it is a view that seems to be directly opposed to the evidence of the telescope, for all who
have studied Mars under favorable conditions of observation have been impressed by the rapid
and extensive changes that the appearance of its surface undergoes coincidently with the variation
of the planet's seasons. At the end of the mass a Te Deum was sung.

He who had just rendered thanks to God for his own victory with all the solemn ceremonial usually
reserved for the triumphs of kings was the priest Urbain Grandier.

Two days before, he had been acquitted, in virtue of a decision pronounced by M. d'Escoubleau
de Sourdis, Archbishop of Bordeaux, of an accusation brought against him of which he had been
declared guilty by a magistrate, and in punishment of which he had been condemned to fast on
bread and water every Friday for three months, and forbidden to exercise his priestly functions in
the diocese of Poitiers for five years and in the town of Loudun for ever.

These are the circumstances under which the sentence had been passed and the judgment reversed.

Urbain
Grandier was born at Rovere, a village near Sable, a little town of Bas-Maine. Having studied the
sciences with his father Pierre and his uncle Claude Grandier, who were learned astrologers and
alchemists, he entered, at the age of twelve, the Jesuit college at Bordeaux, having already received
the ordinary education of a young man. The professors soon found that besides his considerable
attainments he had great natural gifts for languages and oratory; they therefore made of him
a thorough classical scholar, and in order to develop his oratorical
talent encouraged him to practise preaching.

They soon grew very fond of a pupil who was likely to bring them
so much credit, and as soon as he was old enough to take holy orders
they gave him the cure of souls in the parish of Saint-Pierre in Loudun,
which was in the gift of the college.

When he had been some months installed there as a priest-in-charge, he received a prebendal stall,
thanks to the same patrons, in the collegiate church of Sainte-Croix.

It is easy to understand that the bestowal of these two positions on so young a man, who did
not even belong to the province, made him seem in some sort a usurper of rights and privileges
belonging to the people of the country, and drew upon him the envy of his brother-ecclesiastics.
There were, in fact, many other reasons why Urbain should be an object of jealousy to these:
first, as we have already said, he was very handsome, then the instruction which he had received
from his father had opened the world of science to him and given
him the key to a thousand things which were mysteries to the ignorant,
but which he fathomed with the greatest ease.

Furthermore, the comprehensive course of study which he had followed at the Jesuit college had
raised him above a crowd of prejudices, which are sacred to the vulgar, but for which he made
no secret of his contempt; and lastly, the eloquence of his sermons had drawn to his church
the greater part of the regular congregations of the other religious communities, especially
of the mendicant orders, who had till then, in what concerned preaching, borne away the palm
at Loudun. As we have said, all this was more than enough to excite, first jealousy, and then
hatred. And both were excited in no ordinary degree.

We all know how easily the ill-natured gossip of a small town can rouse the angry contempt of
the masses for everything which is beyond or above them.

In a wider sphere Urbain would have shone by his many gifts, but, cooped up as he was within
the walls of a little town and deprived of air and space, all that might have conduced to his success
in Paris led to his destruction at Loudun.

It was also unfortunate for Urbain that his character, far from winning pardon for his genius,
augmented the hatred which the latter inspired. Urbain, who in his intercourse with his friends
was cordial and agreeable, was sarcastic, cold, and haughty to his enemies. When he had once
resolved on a course, he pursued it unflinchingly; he jealously exacted all the honour due to
the rank at which he had arrived, defending it as though it were a conquest; he also insisted
on enforcing all his legal rights, and he resented the opposition and angry words of casual opponents
with a harshness which made them his lifelong enemies.

The first example which Urbain gave of this inflexibility was in 1620, when he gained a lawsuit
against a priest named Meunier. He caused the sentence to be carried out with such rigour that he
awoke an inextinguishable hatred in Meunier's mind, which ever after burst forth on the slightest
provocation.

A second lawsuit, which he likewise gained; was one which he undertook against the chapter of
Sainte-Croix with regard to a house, his claim to which the chapter, disputed. Here again
he displayed the same determination to exact his strict legal rights to the last iota, and
unfortunately Mignon, the attorney of the unsuccessful chapter, was a revengeful, vindictive,
and ambitious man; too commonplace ever to arrive at a high position, and yet too much above
his surroundings to be content with the secondary position which he occupied. This man, who
was a canon of the collegiate church of Sainte-Croix and director of the Ursuline convent, will
have an important part to play in the following narrative. Being as hypocritical as Urbain was
straightforward, his ambition was to gain wherever his name was known a reputation for exalted
piety; he therefore affected in his life the asceticism of an anchorite and the self-denial
of a saint. As he had much experience in ecclesiastical lawsuits, he looked on the chapter's
loss of this one, of which he had in some sort guaranteed the success,
as a personal humiliation, so that when Urbain gave himself airs of
triumph and exacted the last letter of his bond, as in the case of
Meunier, he turned Mignon into an enemy who was not only more relentless
but more dangerous than the former.

In the meantime, and in consequence of this lawsuit, a certain Barot, an uncle of Mignon and
his partner as well, got up a dispute with Urbain, but as he was a man below mediocrity, Urbain
required in order to crush him only to let fall from the height of his superiority a few of
those disdainful words which brand as deeply as a red-hot iron. This man, though totally wanting
in parts, was very rich, and having no children was always surrounded by a horde of relatives,
every one of whom was absorbed in the attempt to make himself so agreeable that his name would
appear in Barot's will. This being so, the mocking words which were rained down on Barot spattered
not only himself but also all those who had sided with him in the quarrel, and thus added considerably to
the tale of Urbain's enemies.

About this epoch a still graver event took place. Amongst the most assiduous frequenters of the
confessional in his church was a young and pretty girl, Julie by name, the daughter of the king's
attorney, Trinquant--Trinquant being, as well as Barot, an uncle
of Mignon.

Now it happened that this young girl fell into such a state of debility that she was obliged
to keep her room. One of her friends, named Marthe Pelletier, giving up society, of which
she was very fond, undertook to nurse the patient, and carried her devotion so far as to shut
herself up in the same room with her.

When Julie Trinquant had recovered and was able again to take her place in the world, it came
out that Marthe Pelletier, during her weeks of retirement, had given
birth to a child, which had been baptized and then put out to nurse.

Now, by one of those odd whims which so often take possession of
the public mind, everyone in Loudun persisted in asserting that the
real mother of the infant was not she who had acknowledged herself
as such--that, in short, Marthe Pelletier had sold her good name to
her friend Julie for a sum of money; and of course it followed as
a matter about which there could be no possible doubt, that Urbain
was the father.

Trinquant hearing of the reports about his daughter, took upon himself as king's attorney to have
Marthe Pelletier arrested and imprisoned. Being questioned about the child, she insisted that
she was its mother, and would take its maintenance upon herself. To have brought a child into
the world under such circumstances was a sin, but not a crime; Trinquant was therefore obliged
to set Marthe at liberty, and the abuse of justice of which he was guilty served only to spread
the scandal farther and to strengthen the public in the belief it had taken up.

Hitherto, whether through the intervention of the heavenly powers, or by means of his own cleverness,
Urbain Grandier had come out victor in every struggle in which he had engaged, but each victor
had added to the number of his enemies, and these were now so numerous that any other than he
would have been alarmed, and have tried either to conciliate them or to take precautions against
their malice; but Urbain, wrapped in his pride, and perhaps conscious of his innocence, paid
no attention to the counsels of his most faithful followers, but
went on his way unheeding.

All the opponents whom till now Urbain had encountered had been entirely unconnected with each
other, and had each struggled for his own individual ends. Urbain's enemies, believing that
the cause of his success was to be found in the want of cooperation among themselves, now determined
to unite in order to crush him. In consequence, a conference was held at Barot's, at which, besides
Barot himself, Meunier, Trinquant, and Mignon took part, and the latter had also brought with
him one Menuau, a king's counsel and his own most intimate friend,
who was, however, influenced by other motives than friendship in joining
the conspiracy.

The fact was, that Menuau was in love with a woman who had steadfastly refused to show him any
favour, and he had got firmly fixed in his head that the reason for her else inexplicable
indifference and disdain was that Urbain had been beforehand with him in finding an entrance
to her heart. The object of the meeting was to agree as to the best means of driving the common
enemy out of Loudon and its neighbourhood.

Urbain's life was so well ordered that it presented little which his enemies could use as a handle
for their purpose.

His only foible seemed to be a predilection for female society; while in return all the wives
and daughters of the place, with the unerring instinct of their sex, seeing, that the new priest
was young, handsome, and eloquent, chose him, whenever it was possible,
as their spiritual director.

As this preference had already offended many husbands and fathers, the decision the conspirators
arrived at was that on this side alone was Grandier vulnerable, and that their only chance of success
was to attack him where he was weakest. Almost at once, therefore, the vague reports which had
been floating about began to attain a certain definiteness: there were allusions made, though no
name was mentioned, to a young girl in Loudun; who in spite of Grandier's frequent unfaithfulness
yet remained his mistress-in-chief; then it began to be whispered that the young girl, having had
conscientious scruples about her love for Urbain, he had allayed them by an act of sacrilege--that
is to say, he had, as priest, in the middle of the night, performed the service of marriage
between himself and his mistress.

The more absurd the reports, the more credence did they gain, and it was not long till everyone
in Loudun believed them true, although no one was able to name the mysterious heroine of the
tale who had had the courage to contract a marriage with a priest; and considering how small
Loudun was, this was most extraordinary.

Resolute and full of courage as was Grandier, at length he could not conceal from himself that
his path lay over quicksands: he felt that slander was secretly closing him round, and that
as soon as he was well entangled in her shiny folds, she would reveal herself by raising her
abhorred head, and that then a mortal combat between them would begin. But it was one of his convictions
that to draw back was to acknowledge one's guilt; besides, as far as he was concerned, it was probably
too late for him to retrace his steps. He therefore went on his way, as unyielding, as scornful,
and as haughty as ever.

Among those who were supposed to be most active in spreading the slanders relative to Urbain
was a man called Duthibaut, a person of importance in the province, who was supposed by the
townspeople to hold very advanced views, and who was a "Sir Oracle"
to whom the commonplace and vulgar turned for enlightenment.

Some of this man's strictures on Grandier were reported to the latter, especially some calumnies
to which Duthibaut had given vent at the Marquis de Bellay's; and one day, Grandier, arrayed
in priestly garments, was about to enter the church of Sainte-Croix to assist in the service, he
encountered Duthibaut at the entrance, and with his usual haughty disdain accused him of slander.
Duthibaut, who had got into the habit of saying and doing whatever came into his head without fear
of being called to account, partly because of his wealth and partly because of the influence
he had gained over the narrow-minded, who are so numerous in a small provincial town, and
who regarded him as being much above them, was so furious at this public reprimand, that he raised
his cane and struck Urbain.

The opportunity which this affront afforded Grandier of being revenged on all his enemies was
too precious to be neglected, but, convinced, with too much reason,
that he would never obtain justice from the local authorities, although
the respect due to the Church had been infringed, in his person he
decided to appeal to King Louis XIII, who deigned to receive him,
and deciding that the insult offered to a priest robed in the sacred
vestments should be expiated, sent the cause to the high court of
Parliament, with instructions that the case against Duthibaut should
be tried and decided there.

Hereupon Urbain's enemies saw they had no time to lose, and took advantage of his absence to make
counter accusations against him. Two worthies beings, named Cherbonneau and Bugrau, agreed to
become informers, and were brought before the ecclesiastical magistrate at Poitiers. They
accused Grandier of having corrupted women and girls, of indulging in blasphemy and profanity,
of neglecting to read his breviary daily, and of turning God's sanctuary into a place of debauchery
and prostitution. The information was taken down, and Louis Chauvet, the civil lieutenant,
and the archpriest of Saint-Marcel and the Loudenois, were appointed
to investigate the matter, so that, while Urbain was instituting proceedings
against Duthibaut in Paris, information was laid against himself in
Loudun.

This matter thus set going was pushed forward with all the acrimony so common in religious prosecutions;
Trinquant appeared as a witness, and drew many others after him, and whatever omissions were
found in the depositions were interpolated according to the needs of the prosecution. The
result was that the case when fully got up appeared to be so serious that it was sent to the
Bishop of Poitiers for trial. Now the bishop was not only surrounded by the friends of those
who were bringing the accusations against Grandier, but had himself a grudge against him. It
had happened some time before that Urbain, the case being urgent, had dispensed with the usual
notice of a marriage, and the bishop, knowing this, found in the papers laid before him, superficial
as they were, sufficient evidence against Urbain to justify him in issuing a warrant for his
apprehension, which was drawn up in the following words:

"Henri-Louis, Chataignier de la Rochepezai, by divine mercy Bishop of Poitiers, in view of the
charges and informations conveyed to us by the archpriest of Loudun
against Urbain Grandier, priest-in-charge of the Church of Saint-Pierre
in the Market-Place at Loudun, in virtue of a commission appointed
by us directed to the said archpriest, or in his absence to the Prior
of Chassaignes, in view also of the opinion given by our attorney
upon the said charges, have ordered and do hereby order that Urbain
Grandier, the accused, be quietly taken to the prison in our palace
in Poitiers, if it so be that he be taken and apprehended, and if
not, that he be summoned to appear at his domicile within three days,
by the first apparitor-priest, or tonsured clerk, and also by the
first royal sergeant, upon this warrant, and we request the aid of
the secular authorities, and to them, or to any one of them, we hereby
give power and authority to carry out this decree notwithstanding
any opposition or appeal, and the said Grandier having been heard,
such a decision will be given by our attorney as the facts may seem
to warrant.

"Given at Dissay the 22nd day of October 1629, and signed in the original as follows:

"HENRI-LOUIS, Bishop of Poitiers."

Grandier was, as we have said, at Paris when these proceedings were taken against him, conducting
before the Parliament his case against Duthibaut.
 Olbers, at the beginning of the last century, was of the opinion that Vesta's
variations were due to its being not a globe but an angular mass. So he was led by a similar
phenomenon to precisely the same opinion about Vesta that has lately been put forth concerning
Eros. The importance of this coincidence is that it tends to revive a remarkable theory of
the origin of the asteroids which has long been in abeyance, and, in the minds of many, perhaps
discredited.

This theory, which is due to Olbers, begins with the startling assumption that a planet, perhaps
as large as Mars, formerly revolving in an orbit situated between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter,
was destroyed by an explosion! Although, at first glance, such a catastrophe may appear too
wildly improbable for belief, yet it was not the improbability of a world's blowing up that
led to a temporary abandonment of Olbers's bold theory. The great French mathematician Lagrange
investigated the explosive force "which would be necessary to detach a fragment of matter from
a planet revolving at a given distance from the sun," and published the results in the Connaissance
des Temps for 1814.

"Applying his results to the earth, Lagrange found that if the velocity of the detached fragment
exceeded that of a cannon ball in the proportion of 121 to 1 the fragment would become a comet
with a direct motion; but if the velocity rose in the proportion of 156 to 1 the motion of
the comet would be retrograde. If the velocity was less than in either of these cases the fragment
would revolve as a planet in an elliptic orbit. For any other planet besides the earth the
velocity of explosion corresponding to the different cases would vary in the inverse ratio
of the square root of the mean distance. It would therefore manifestly be less as the planet
was more distant from the sun. In the case of each of the four smaller planets (only the four
asteroids, Ceres, Pallas, Juno, and Vesta, were known at that time), the velocity of explosion
indicated by their observed motion would be less than twenty times the velocity of a cannon
ball."[6]

[Footnote 6: Grant's History of Physical Astronomy, p. 241.]

Instead, then, of being discredited by its assumption of so strange a catastrophe, Olbers's
theory fell into desuetude because of its apparent failure to account for the position of the
orbits of many of the asteroids after a large number of those bodies had been discovered. He
calculated that the orbits of all the fragments of his exploded planet would have nearly equal
mean distances, and a common point of intersection in the heavens, through which every fragment
of the original mass would necessarily pass in each revolution. At first the orbits of the
asteroids discovered seemed to answer to these conditions, and Olbers was even able to use
his theory as a means of predicting the position of yet undetected asteroids. Only Ceres and
Pallas had been discovered when he put forth his theory, but when Juno and Vesta were found
they fell in with his predictions so well that the theory was generally regarded as being virtually
established; while the fluctuations in the light of Vesta, as we have before remarked, led
Olbers to assert that that body was of a fragmental shape, thus strongly supporting his explosion
hypothesis.

Afterward, when the orbits of many asteroids had been investigated, the soundness of Olbers's
theory began to be questioned. The fact that the orbits did not all intersect at a common point
could easily be disposed of, as Professor Newcomb has pointed out, by simply placing the date
of the explosion sufficiently far back, say millions of years ago, for the secular changes
produced by the attraction of the larger planets would effectively mix up the orbits. But when
the actual effects of these secular changes were calculated for particular asteroids the result
seemed to show that "the orbits could never have intersected unless some of them have in the
meantime been altered by the attraction of the small planets on each other. Such an action
is not impossible, but it is impossible to determine it, owing to the great number of these
bodies and our ignorance of their masses."[7]

[Footnote 7: Popular Astronomy, by Simon Newcomb, p. 335.]

Yet the theory has never been entirely thrown out, and now that the discovery of the light
fluctuations of Eros lends support to Olbers's assertion of the irregular shape of some of
the asteroids, it is very interesting to recall what so high an authority as Professor Young
said on the subject before the discovery of Eros:

"It is true, as has often been urged, that this theory in its original form, as presented by
Olbers, can not be correct. No single explosion of a planet could give rise to the present
assemblage of orbits, nor is it possible that even the perturbations of Jupiter could have
converted a set of orbits originally all crossing at one point (the point of explosion) into
the present tangle. The smaller orbits are so small that, however turned about, they lie wholly
inside the larger and can not be made to intersect them. If, however, we admit a series of
explosions, this difficulty is removed; and if we grant an explosion at all, there seems to
be nothing improbable in the hypothesis that the fragments formed by the bursting of the parent
mass would carry away within themselves the same forces and reactions which caused the original
bursting, so that they themselves would be likely enough to explode at some time in their later
history."[8]

[Footnote 8: General Astronomy, by Charles A. Young. Revised edition, 1898, p. 372.]

The rival theory of the origin of the asteroids is that which assumes that the planetary ring
originally left off from the contracting solar nebula between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter
was so violently perturbed by the attraction of the latter planet that, instead of being shaped
into a single globe, it was broken up into many fragments. Either hypothesis presents an attractive
picture; but that which presupposes the bursting asunder of a large planet, which might at
least have borne the germs of life, and the subsequent shattering of its parts into smaller
fragments, like the secondary explosions of the pieces of a pyrotechnic bomb, certainly is
by far the more impressive in its appeal to the imagination, and would seem to offer excellent
material for some of the extra-terrestrial romances now so popular. It is a startling thought
that a world can possibly carry within itself, like a dynamite cartridge, the means of its
own disruption; but the idea does not appear so extremely improbable when we recall the evidence
of collisions or explosions, happening on a tremendous scale, in the case of new or temporary
stars.[9]

[Footnote 9: "Since the discovery of Eros, the extraordinary position of its orbit has led
to the suggestion that possibly Mars itself, instead of being regarded as primarily a major
planet, belonging to the terrestrial group, ought rather to be considered as the greatest of
the asteroids, and a part of the original body from which the asteroidal system was formed."--J.
Bauschinger, Astronomische Nachrichten, No. 3542.]

Coming to the question of life upon the asteroids, it seems clear that they must be excluded
from the list of habitable worlds, whatever we may choose to think of the possible habitability
of the original planet through whose destruction they may have come into existence. The largest
of them possesses a force of gravity far too slight to enable it to retain any of the gases
or vapors that are recognized as constituting an atmosphere. But they afford a captivating
field for speculation, which need not be altogether avoided, for it offers some graphic illustrations
of the law of gravitation. A few years ago I wrote, for the entertainment of an audience which
preferred to meet science attired in a garb woven largely from the strands of fancy, an account
of some of the peculiarities of such minute globes as the asteroids, which I reproduce here
because it gives, perhaps, a livelier picture of those little bodies, from the point of view
of ordinary human interest, than could be presented in any other way.

A WAIF OF SPACE

One night as I was waiting, watch in hand, for an occultation, and striving hard to keep awake,
for it had been a hot and exhausting summer's day, while my wife--we were then in our honeymoon--sat
sympathetically by my side, I suddenly found myself withdrawn from the telescope, and standing
in a place that appeared entirely strange. It was a very smooth bit of ground, and, to my surprise,
there was no horizon in sight; that is to say, the surface of the ground disappeared on all
sides at a short distance off, and beyond nothing but sky was visible. I thought I must be
on the top of a stupendous mountain, and yet I was puzzled to understand how the face of the
earth could be so far withdrawn. Presently I became aware that there was some one by me whom
I could not see.

"You are not on a mountain," my companion said, and as he spoke a cold shiver ran along my
back-bone; "you are on an asteroid, one of those miniature planets, as you astronomers call
them, and of which you have discovered several hundred revolving between the orbits of Mars
and Jupiter. This is the little globe that you have glimpsed occasionally with your telescope,
and that you, or some of your fellows, have been kind enough to name Menippe."

Then I perceived that my companion, whose address had hardly been reassuring, was a gigantic
inhabitant of the little planet, towering up to a height of three quarters of a mile. For a
moment I was highly amused, standing by his foot, which swelled up like a hill, and straining
my neck backward to get a look up along the precipice of his leg, which, curiously enough,
I observed was clothed in rough homespun, the woolly knots of the cloth appearing of tremendous
size, while it bagged at the knee like any terrestrial trousers' leg. His great head and face
I could see far above me, as it were, in the clouds. Yet I was not at all astonished.

"This is all right," I said to myself. "Of course on Menippe the people must be as large as
this, for the little planet is only a dozen miles in diameter, and the force of gravity is
consequently so small that a man without loss of activity, or inconvenience, can grow three
quarters of a mile tall."

Suddenly an idea occurred to me. "Just to think what a jump I can make! Why, only the other
day I was figuring it out that a man could easily jump a thousand feet high from the surface
of Menippe, and now here I actually am on Menippe. I'll jump."

The sensation of that glorious rise skyward was delightful beyond expression. My legs seemed
to have become as powerful as the engines of a transatlantic liner, and with one spring I rose
smoothly and swiftly, and as straight as an arrow, surmounting the giant's foot, passing his
knee and attaining nearly to the level of his hip. Then I felt that the momentum of my leap
was exhausted, and despite my efforts I slowly turned head downward, glancing in affright at
the ground a quarter of a mile below me, on which I expected to be dashed to pieces. But a
moment's thought convinced me that I should get no hurt, for with so slight a force of gravity
it would be more like floating than falling. Just then the Menippean caught me with his monstrous
hand and lifted me to the level of his face.

"I should like to know," I said, "how you manage to live up here; you are so large and your
planet is so little."

"Now, you are altogether too inquisitive," replied the giant. "You go!"

He stooped down, placed me on the toe of his boot, and drew back his foot to kick me off.

It flashed into my mind that my situation had now become very serious. I knew well what the
effects of the small attractive force of these diminutive planets must be, for I had often
amused myself with calculations about them. In this moment of peril I did not forget my mathematics.
It was clear that if the giant propelled me with sufficient velocity I should be shot into
space, never to return. How great would that velocity have to be? My mind worked like lightning
on this problem. The diameter of Menippe I knew did not exceed twelve miles. Its mean density,
as near as I could judge, was about the same as that of the earth. Its attraction must therefore
be as its radius, or nearly 660 times less than that of the earth. A well-known formula enables
us to compute the velocity a body would acquire in falling from an infinite distance to the
earth or any other planet whose size and force of gravity are known. The same formula, taken
in the opposite sense, of course, shows how fast a body must start from a planet in order that
it may be freed from its control. The formula is V = square root of (2 gr.), in which "g" is
the acceleration of gravity, equal for the earth to 32 feet in a second, and "r" is the radius
of the attracting body. On Menippe I knew "g" must equal about one twentieth of a foot, and
"r" 31,680 feet. Like a flash I applied the formula while the giant's muscles were yet tightening
for the kick: 31,680 × 1/20 × 2 = 3,168, the square root of which is a fraction more than 56.
Fifty-six feet in a second, then, was the critical velocity with which I must be kicked off
in order that I might never return. I perceived at once that the giant would be able to accomplish
it. I turned and shouted up at him:

"Hold on, I have something to say to you!"

I dimly saw his mountainous face puckered into mighty wrinkles, out of which his eyes glared
fiercely, and the next moment I was sailing into space. I could no more have kept a balance
than the earth can stand still upon its axis. I had become a small planet myself, and, like
all planets, I rotated. Yet the motion did not dizzy me, and soon I became intensely interested
in the panorama of creation that was spread around me. For some time, whenever my face was
turned toward the little globe of Menippe, I saw the giant, partly in profile against the sky,
with his back bent and his hands upon his knees, watching me with an occasional approving nod
of his big head. He looked so funny standing there on his little seven-by-nine world, like
a clown on a performing ball, that, despite my terrible situation, I shook my sides with laughter.
There was no echo in the profundity of empty space.

Soon Menippe dwindled to a point, and I saw her inhospitable inhabitant no more. Then I watched
the sun and the blazing firmament around, for there was at the same time broad day and midnight
for me. The sunlight, being no longer diffused by an atmosphere, did not conceal the face of
the sky, and I could see the stars shining close to the orb of day. I recognized the various
planets much more easily than I had been accustomed to do, and, with a twinge at my heart,
saw the earth traveling along in its distant orbit, splendid in the sunshine. I thought of
my wife sitting alone by the telescope in the darkness and silence, wondering what had become
of me. I asked myself, "How in the world can I ever get back there again?" Then I smiled to
think of the ridiculous figure I cut, out here in space, exposed to the eyes of the universe,
a rotating, gyrating, circumambulating astronomer, an animated teetotum lost in the sky. I
saw no reason to hope that I should not go on thus forever, revolving around the sun until
my bones, whitening among the stars, might be revealed to the superlative powers of some future
telescope, and become a subject of absorbing interest, the topic of many a learned paper for
the astronomers of a future age. Afterward I was comforted by the reflection that in airless
space, although I might die and my body become desiccated, yet there could be no real decay;
even my garments would probably last forever. The savants, after all, should never speculate
on my bones.

I saw the ruddy disk of Mars, and the glinting of his icy poles, as the beautiful planet rolled
far below me. "If I could only get there," I thought, "I should know what those canals of Schiaparelli
are, and even if I could never return to the earth, I should doubtless meet with a warm welcome
among the Martians. What a lion I should be!" I looked longingly at the distant planet, the
outlines of whose continents and seas appeared most enticing, but when I tried to propel myself
in that direction I only kicked against nothingness. I groaned in desperation.

Suddenly something darted by me flying sunward; then another and another. In a minute I was
surrounded by strange projectiles. Every instant I expected to be dashed in pieces by them.
They sped with the velocity of lightning. Hundreds, thousands of them were all about me. My
chance of not being hit was not one in a million, and yet I escaped. The sweat of terror was
upon me, but I did not lose my head. "A comet has met me," I said. "These missiles are the
meteoric stones of which it is composed." And now I noticed that as they rushed along collisions
took place, and flashes of electricity darted from one to another. A pale luminosity dimmed
the stars. I did not doubt that, as seen from the earth, the comet was already flinging the
splendors of its train upon the bosom of the night.

While I was wondering at my immunity amid such a rain of death-threatening bolts, I became
aware that their velocity was sensibly diminishing. This fact I explained by supposing that
I was drawn along with them. Notwithstanding the absence of any collision with my body, the
overpowering attraction of the whole mass of meteors was overcoming my tangential force and
bearing me in their direction. At first I rejoiced at this circumstance, for at any rate the
comet would save me from the dreadful fate of becoming an asteroid. A little further reflection,
however, showed me that I had gone from the frying-pan into the fire. The direction of my expulsion
from Menippe had been such that I had fallen into an orbit that would have carried me around
the sun without passing very close to the solar body. Now, being swept along by the comet,
whose perihelion probably lay in the immediate neighborhood of the sun, I saw no way of escape
from the frightful fate of being broiled alive. Even where I was, the untempered rays of the
sun scorched me, and I knew that within two or three hundred thousand miles of the solar surface
the heat must be sufficient to melt the hardest rocks. I was aware that experiments with burning-glasses
had sufficiently demonstrated that fact.

But perforce I resigned myself to my fate. At any rate it would the sooner be all over. In
fact, I almost forgot my awful situation in the interest awakened by the phenomena of the comet.
I was in the midst of its very head. I was one of its component particles. I was a meteor among
a million millions of others. If I could only get back to the earth, what news could I not
carry to Signor Schiaparelli and Mr. Lockyer and Dr. Bredichin about the composition of comets!
But, alas! the world could never know what I now saw. Nobody on yonder gleaming earth, watching
the magnificent advance of this "specter of the skies," would ever dream that there was a lost
astronomer in its blazing head. I should be burned and rent to pieces amid the terrors of its
perihelion passage, and my fragments would be strewn along the comet's orbit, to become, in
course of time, particles in a swarm of aerolites. Perchance, through the effects of some unforeseen
perturbation, the earth might encounter that swarm. Thus only could I ever return to the bosom
of my mother planet. I took a positive pleasure in imagining that one of my calcined bones
might eventually flash for a moment, a falling star, in the atmosphere of the earth, leaving
its atoms to slowly settle through the air, until finally they rested in the soil from which
they had sprung.

From such reflections I was aroused by the approach of the crisis. The head of the comet had
become an exceedingly uncomfortable place. The collisions among the meteors were constantly
increasing in number and violence. How I escaped destruction I could not comprehend, but in
fact I was unconscious of danger from that source. I had become in spirit an actual component
of the clashing, roaring mass. Tremendous sparks of electricity, veritable lightning strokes,
darted about me in every direction, but I bore a charmed life. As the comet drew in nearer
to the sun, under the terrible stress of the solar attraction, the meteors seemed to crowd
closer, crashing and grinding together, while the whole mass swayed and shrieked with the uproar
of a million tormented devils. The heat had become terrific. I saw stone and iron melted like
snow and dissipated in steam. Stupendous jets of white-hot vapor shot upward, and, driven off
by the electrical repulsion of the sun, streamed backward into the tail.

Suddenly I myself became sensible of the awful heat. It seemed without warning to have penetrated
my vitals. With a yell I jerked my feet from a boiling rock and flung my arms despairingly
over my head.

"You had better be careful," said my wife, "or you'll knock over the telescope."

I rubbed my eyes, shook myself, and rose.

"I must have been dreaming," I said.

"I should think it was a very lively dream," she replied.

I responded after the manner of a young man newly wed.

At this moment the occultation began.

CHAPTER VI

JUPITER, THE GREATEST OF KNOWN WORLDS

When we are thinking of worlds, and trying to exalt the imagination with them, it is well to
turn to Jupiter, for there is a planet worth pondering upon! A world thirteen hundred times
as voluminous as the earth is a phenomenon calculated to make us feel somewhat as the inhabitant
of a rural village does when his amazed vision ranges across the million roofs of a metropolis.
Jupiter is the first of the outer and greater planets, the major, or Jovian, group. His mean
diameter is 86,500 miles, and his average girth more than 270,000 miles. An inhabitant of Jupiter,
in making a trip around his planet, along any great circle of the sphere, would have to travel
more than 30,000 miles farther than the distance between the earth and the moon. The polar
compression of Jupiter, owing to his rapid rotation, amounts in the aggregate to more than
5,000 miles, the equatorial diameter being 88,200 miles and the polar diameter 83,000 miles.

Jupiter's mean distance from the sun is 483,000,000 miles, and the eccentricity of his orbit
is sufficient to make this distance variable to the extent of 21,000,000 miles; but, in view
of his great average distance, the consequent variation in the amount of solar light and heat
received by the planet is not of serious importance.

When he is in opposition to the sun as seen from the earth Jupiter's mean distance from us
is about 390,000,000 miles. His year, or period of revolution about the sun, is somewhat less
than twelve of our years (11.86 years). His axis is very nearly upright to the plane of his
orbit, so that, as upon Venus, there is practically no variation of seasons. Gigantic though
he is in dimensions, Jupiter is the swiftest of all the planets in axial rotation. While the
earth requires twenty-four hours to make a complete turn, Jupiter takes less than ten hours
(nine hours fifty-five minutes), and a point on his equator moves, in consequence of axial
rotation, between 27,000 and 28,000 miles in an hour.

The density of the mighty planet is slight, only about one quarter of the mean density of the
earth and virtually the same as that of the sun. This fact at once calls attention to a contrast
between Jupiter and our globe that is even more significant than their immense difference in
size. The force of gravity upon Jupiter's surface is more than two and a half times greater
than upon the earth's surface (more accurately 2.65 times), so that a hundred-pound weight
removed from the planet on which we live to Jupiter would there weigh 265 pounds, and an average
man, similarly transported, would be oppressed with a weight of at least 400 pounds. But, as
a result of the rapid rotation of the great planet, and the ellipticity of its figure, the
unfortunate visitor could find a perceptible relief from his troublesome weight by seeking
the planet's equator, where the centrifugal tendency would remove about twenty pounds from
every one hundred as compared with his weight at the poles.

If we could go to the moon, or to Mercury, Venus, or Mars, we may be certain that upon reaching
any of those globes we should find ourselves upon a solid surface, probably composed of rock
not unlike the rocky crust of the earth; but with Jupiter the case would evidently be very
different. As already remarked, the mean density of that planet is only one quarter of the
earth's density, or only one third greater than the density of water.

The probability that nothing resembling a solid crust, nor, perhaps, even a liquid shell, would
be found at the visible surface of Jupiter, is increased by considering that the surface density
must be much less than the mean density of the planet taken as a whole, and since the latter
but little exceeds the density of water, it is likely that at the surface everything is in
a state resembling that of cloud or smoke. Our imaginary visitor upon reaching Jupiter would,
under the influence of the planet's strong force of gravity, drop out of sight, with the speed
of a shot, swallowed up in the vast atmosphere of probably hot, and perhaps partially incandescent,
gases. When he had sunk--supposing his identity could be preserved--to a depth of thousands
of miles he might not yet have found any solid part of the planet; and, perchance, there is
no solid nucleus even at the very center.

The cloudy aspect of Jupiter immediately strikes the telescopic observer. The huge planet is
filled with color, and with the animation of constant movement, but there is no appearance
of markings, like those on Mars, recalling the look of the earth. There are no white polar
caps, and no shadings that suggest the outlines of continents and oceans. What every observer,
even with the smallest telescope, perceives at once is a pair of strongly defined dark belts,
one on either side of, and both parallel to, the planet's equator. These belts are dark compared
with the equatorial band between them and with the general surface of the planet toward the
north and the south, but they are not of a gray or neutral shade. On the contrary, they show
decided, and, at times, brilliant colors, usually of a reddish tone. More delicate tints, sometimes
a fine pink, salmon, or even light green, are occasionally to be seen about the equatorial
zone, and the borders of the belts, while near the poles the surface is shadowed with bluish
gray, imperceptibly deepening from the lighter hues of the equator.

All this variety of tone and color makes of a telescopic view of Jupiter a picture that will
not quickly fade from the memory; while if an instrument of considerable power is used, so
that the wonderful details of the belts, with their scalloped edges, their diagonal filaments,
their many divisions, and their curious light and dark spots, are made plain, the observer
is deeply impressed with the strangeness of the spectacle, and the more so as he reflects upon
the enormous real magnitude of that which is spread before his eye. The whole earth flattened
out would be but a small blotch on that gigantic disk!

Then, the visible rotation of the great Jovian globe, whose effects become evident to a practised
eye after but a few minutes' watching, heightens the impression. And the presence of the four
satellites, whose motions in their orbits are also evident, through the change in their positions,
during the course of a single not prolonged observation, adds its influence to the effectiveness
of the scene. Indeed, color and motion are so conspicuous in the immense spectacle presented
by Jupiter that they impart to it a powerful suggestion of life, which the mind does not readily
divest itself of when compelled to face the evidence that Jupiter is as widely different from
the earth, and as diametrically opposed to lifelike conditions, as we comprehend them, as a
planet possibly could be.

The great belts lie in latitudes about corresponding to those in which the trade-winds blow
upon the earth, and it has often been suggested that their existence indicates a similarity
between the atmospheric circulation of Jupiter and that of the world in which we live. No doubt
there are times when the earth, seen with a telescope from a distant planet, would present
a belted appearance somewhat resembling that of Jupiter, but there would almost certainly be
no similar display of colors in the clouds, and the latter would exhibit no such persistence
in general form and position as characterizes those of Jupiter. Our clouds are formed by the
action of the sun, producing evaporation of water; on Jupiter, whose mean distance from the
sun is more than five times as great as ours, the intensity of the solar rays is reduced to
less than one twenty-fifth part of their intensity on the earth, so that the evaporation can
not be equally active there, and the tendency to form aerial currents and great systems of
winds must be proportionally slight. In brief, the clouds of Jupiter are probably of an entirely
different origin from that of terrestrial clouds, and rather resemble the chaotic masses of
vapor that enveloped the earth when it was still in a seminebulous condition, and before its
crust had formed.

Although the strongest features of the disk of Jupiter are the great cloud belts, and the white
or colored spots in the equatorial zone, yet the telescope shows many markings north and south
of the belts, including a number of narrower and fainter belts, and small light or dark spots.
None of them is absolutely fixed in position with reference to others. In other words, all
of the spots, belts, and markings shift their places to a perceptible extent, the changes being
generally very slow and regular, but occasionally quite rapid. The main belts never entirely
disappear, and never depart very far from their mean positions with respect to the equator,
but the smaller belts toward the north and south are more or less evanescent. Round or oblong
spots, as distinguished from belts, are still more variable and transient. The main belts themselves
show great internal commotion, frequently splitting up, through a considerable part of their
length, and sometimes apparently throwing out projections into the lighter equatorial zone,
which occasionally resemble bridges, diagonally spanning the broad space between the belts.

Perhaps the most puzzling phenomenon that has ever made its appearance on Jupiter is the celebrated
"great red spot," which was first noticed in 1878, although it has since been shown to be probably
identical with a similar spot seen in 1869, and possibly with one noticed in 1857. This spot,
soon after its discovery in 1878, became a clearly defined red oval, lying near the southern
edge of the south belt in latitude about 30°. Its length was nearly one third of the diameter
of the disk and its width almost one quarter as great as its length. Translated into terrestrial
measure, it was about 30,000 miles long and 7,000 miles broad.

In 1879 it seemed to deepen in color until it became a truly wonderful object, its redness
of hue irresistibly suggesting the idea that it was something hot and glowing. During the following
years it underwent various changes of appearance, now fading almost to invisibility and now
brightening again, but without ever completely vanishing, and it is still (1901) faintly visible.

Nobody has yet suggested an altogether probable and acceptable theory as to its nature. Some
have said that it might be a part of the red-hot crust of the planet elevated above the level
of the clouds; others that its appearance might be due to the clearing off of the clouds above
a heated region of the globe beneath, rendering the latter visible through the opening; others
that it was perhaps a mass of smoke and vapor ejected from a gigantic volcano, or from the
vents covering a broad area of volcanic action; others that it might be a vast incandescent
slag floating upon the molten globe of the planet and visible through, or above, the enveloping
clouds; and others have thought that it could be nothing but a cloud among clouds, differing,
for unknown reasons, in composition and cohesion from its surroundings. All of these hypotheses
except the last imply the existence, just beneath the visible cloud shell, of a more or less
stable and continuous surface, either solid or liquid.

When the red spot began to lose distinctness a kind of veil seemed to be drawn over it, as
if light clouds, floating at a superior elevation, had drifted across it. At times it has been
reduced in this manner to a faint oval ring, the rim remaining visible after the central part
has faded from sight.

One of the most remarkable phenomena connected with the mysterious spot is a great bend, or
scallop, in the southern edge of the south belt adjacent to the spot. This looks as if it were
produced by the spot, or by the same cause to which the spot owes its existence. If the spot
were an immense mountainous elevation, and the belt a current of liquid, or of clouds, flowing
past its base, one would expect to see some such bend in the stream. The visual evidence that
the belt is driven, or forced, away from the neighborhood of the spot seems complete. The appearance
of repulsion between them is very striking, and even when the spot fades nearly to invisibility
the curve remains equally distinct, so that in using a telescope too small to reveal the spot
itself one may discover its location by observing the bow in the south belt. The suggestion
of a resemblance to the flowing of a stream past the foot of an elevated promontory, or mountain,
is strengthened by the fact, which was observed early in the history of the spot, that markings
involved in the south belt have a quicker rate of rotation about the planet's axis than that
of the red spot, so that such markings, first seen in the rear of the red spot, gradually overtake
and pass it, and eventually leave it behind, as boats in a river drift past a rock lying in
the midst of the current.

This leads us to another significant fact concerning the peculiar condition of Jupiter's surface.
Not only does the south belt move perceptibly faster than the red spot, but, generally speaking,
the various markings on the surface of the planet move at different rates according as they
are nearer to or farther from the equator. Between the equator and latitude 30° or 40° there
is a difference of six minutes in the rotation period--i.e., the equatorial parts turn round
the axis so much faster than the parts north and south of them, that in one rotation they gain
six minutes of time. In other words, the clouds over Jupiter's equator flow past those in the
middle latitudes with a relative velocity of 270 miles per hour. But there are no sharp lines
of separation between the different velocities; on the contrary, the swiftness of rotation
gradually diminishes from the equator toward the poles, as it manifestly could not do if the
visible surface of Jupiter were solid.

In this respect Jupiter resembles the sun, whose surface also has different rates of rotation
diminishing from the equator. Measured by the motion of spots on or near the equator, Jupiter's
rotation period is about nine hours fifty minutes; measured by the motion of spots in the middle
latitudes, it is about nine hours fifty-six minutes. The red spot completes a rotation in a
little less than nine hours and fifty-six minutes, but its period can not be positively given
for the singular reason that it is variable. The variation amounts to only a few seconds in
the course of several years, but it is nevertheless certain. The phenomenon of variable motion
is not, however, peculiar to the red spot. Mr. W.F. Denning, who has studied Jupiter for a
quarter of a century, says:

"It is well known that in different latitudes of Jupiter there are currents, forming the belts
and zones, moving at various rates of speed. In many instances the velocity changes from year
to year. And it is a singular circumstance that in the same current a uniform motion is not
maintained in all parts of the circumference. Certain spots move faster than others, so that
if we would obtain a fair value for the rotation period of any current it is not sufficient
to derive it from one marking alone; we must follow a number of objects distributed in different
longitudes along the current and deduce a mean from the whole."[10]

[Footnote 10: The Observatory, No. 286, December, 1899.]

Nor is this all. Observation indicates that if we could look at a vertical section of Jupiter's
atmosphere we should behold an equally remarkable contrast and conflict of motions. There is
evidence that some of the visible spots, or clouds, lie at a greater elevation than others,
and it has been observed that the deeper ones move more rapidly. This fact has led some observers
to conclude that the deep-lying spots may be a part of the actual surface of the planet. But
if we could think that there is any solid nucleus, or core, in the body of Jupiter, it would
seem, on account of the slight mean density of the planet, that it can not lie so near the
visible surface, but must be at a depth of thousands, perhaps tens of thousands, of miles.
Since the telescope is unable to penetrate the cloudy envelope we can only guess at the actual
constitution of the interior of Jupiter's globe. In a spirit of mere speculative curiosity
it has been suggested that deep under the clouds of the great planet there may be a comparatively
small solid globe, even a habitable world, closed round by a firmament all its own, whose vault,
raised 30,000 or 40,000 miles above the surface of the imprisoned planet, appears only an unbroken
dome, too distant to reveal its real nature to watchers below, except, perhaps, under telescopic
scrutiny; enclosing, as in a shell, a transparent atmosphere, and deriving its illumination
partly from the sunlight that may filter through, but mainly from some luminous source within.

But is not Jupiter almost equally fascinating to the imagination, if we dismiss all attempts
to picture a humanly impossible world shut up within it, and turn rather to consider what its
future may be, guided by the not unreasonable hypothesis that, because of its immense size
and mass, it is still in a chaotic condition? Mention has been made of the resemblance of Jupiter
to the sun by virtue of their similar manner of rotation. This is not the only reason for looking
upon Jupiter as being, in some respects, almost as much a solar as a planetary body. Its exceptional
brightness rather favors the view that a small part of the light by which it shines comes from
its own incandescence. In size and mass it is half-way between the earth and the sun. Jupiter
is eleven times greater than the earth in diameter and thirteen hundred times greater in volume;
the sun is ten times greater than Jupiter in diameter and a thousand times greater in volume.
The mean density of Jupiter, as we have seen, is almost exactly the same as the sun's.

Now, the history of the solar system, according to the nebular hypothesis, is a history of
cooling and condensation. The sun, a thousand times larger than Jupiter, has not yet sufficiently
cooled and contracted to become incrusted, except with a shell of incandescent metallic clouds;
Jupiter, a thousand times smaller than the sun, has cooled and contracted until it is but slightly,
if at all, incandescent at its surface, while its thickening shell, although still composed
of vapor and smoke, and still probably hot, has grown so dense that it entirely cuts off the
luminous radiation from within; the earth, to carry the comparison one step further, being
more than a thousand times smaller than Jupiter, has progressed so far in the process of cooling
that its original shell of vapor has given place to one of solid rock.

A sudden outburst of light from Jupiter, such as occurs occasionally in a star that is losing
its radiance through the condensation of absorbing vapors around it, would furnish strong corroboration
of the theory that Jupiter is really an extinguished sun which is now on the way to become
a planet in the terrestrial sense.

Not very long ago, as time is reckoned in astronomy, our sun, viewed from the distance of the
nearer fixed stars, may have appeared as a binary star, the brighter component of the pair
being the sun itself and the fainter one the body now called the planet Jupiter. Supposing
the latter to have had the same intrinsic brilliance, surface for surface, as the sun, it would
have radiated one hundred times less light than the sun. A difference of one hundredfold between
the light of two stars means that they are six magnitudes apart; or, in other words, from a
point in space where the sun appeared as bright as what we call a first-magnitude star, its
companion, Jupiter, would have shone as a sixth-magnitude star. Many stars have companions
proportionally much fainter than that. The companion of Sirius, for instance, is at least ten
thousand times less bright than its great comrade.

Looking at Jupiter in this way, it interests us not as the probable abode of intelligent life,
but as a world in the making, a world, moreover, which, when it is completed--if it ever shall
be after the terrestrial pattern--will dwarf our globe into insignificance. That stupendous
miracle of world-making which is dimly painted in the grand figures employed by the writers
of Genesis, and the composers of other cosmogonic legends, is here actually going on before
our eyes. The telescope shows us in the cloudy face of Jupiter the moving of the spirit upon
the face of the great deep. What the final result will be we can not tell, but clearly the
end of the grand processes there in operation has not yet been reached. 

To begin with, ought there to be any such things? Ought we to accustom ourselves to having books
by our bedside? Ought not 'early to bed and early to rise' to be the motto of every well-conducted person,
and is not reading in bed calculated to render the carrying out of that axiom virtually impossible?
This is the problem we have first to solve, and it may be said at
once that this discourse does not apply virginibus puerisque.

Girls and boys, young men and young women, are hereby solemnly exhorted to abjure all nocturnal
or matutinal reading of the kind suggested. To them all the lines in the copybooks apply unreservedly.
Nay, even for those of mature years it may be allowed that bed is not the proper place for
intellectual study. Let the hours for reading and for repose be kept rigidly apart, if the reading
is to be systematic and prolonged. So far, everybody is agreed. To make a habit of perusing books
in bed is to encourage laziness, and to encourage laziness is (we all know) to sap the foundations
of the moral nature. That way destruction lies.

And I am bound to say that habitual, sustained reading in bed is quite
as uncomfortable for the human frame as it is dangerous to the human
character.

It cannot be undertaken with entire success. It looks easy to do, but it is not. If you are
sceptical, try it. You begin swimmingly enough. You lie down, say, on your back, settle your
head cosily on to the pillow, and perhaps, to start with, hold the
book before you in both hands: For a time all goes well, but not for
long.

The position of the arms becomes fatiguing. You withdraw one from the book and commence again.
But the utilized arm speedily grows weary, and the chances are that you drop the volume and
go off to sleep, leaving gas, lamp, or candle alight--which is not
very safe and not very healthy--nay, is positively unhealthy and unsafe.

Perchance you try the effect of reclining on one side, leaning on one arm, and holding the book
by means of the other. That, also, is charming for the moment, but has a similar tendency
to tire very readily. Your elbow--the one on which your weight is thrown--soon gives signs of
boredom. 'I don't like this at all,' it says virtually; and perhaps you turn round and try
the other for a spell. But in these matters one elbow is very like
its brother, and before long you are on the look-out for another attitude.

What

may be called the last infirmity of the determined reader in bed is his final decision to sit
up and read in that fashion. Nothing could be better--for a certain more or less brief period. At
the expiration of a few minutes, you realize that you are getting a sort of cramp in the knees;
moreover, there is a disagreeable strain on your head; you are stooping too much, and bending
your spine, and altogether making a toil of pleasure.

The situation, it need hardly be said, is still less attractive when the weather is cold, and
the effort to keep warm is added to the endeavour to read. You have wrapped yourself up, but
apparently not to much purpose. You are conscious of growing chillier and chillier every moment.
And, indeed, a very low temperature is usually fatal to the cultivation of bedside books. Even
if you lie down, and almost smother yourself in the clothes, you are bound to obtrude one hand
out of shelter, or how is the book to be held up? And how quickly that hand gets cold--and
how often one's two hands have to be alternated for the purpose in view--and what a nuisance it
is to have to make the continual change! One begins to think that, under the circumstances, reading
is not so pleasant as one fancied, and that sleep (as the poet says) is the only certain knot
of peace.

One thing is incontrovertible, and that is, that bedside books, if
they are to be acceptable, must be, in the first place, small in size
and, therefore, not very weighty.

The hand must be asked to hold as little as possible. Bed is not the place for heavy tomes; it
is the appropriate locale of the duodecimo. And yet the type must not be too small, or the
eyesight will suffer, unless the reader can command plenty of illumination--which is not always
the case. And the book must be not only fairly diminutive, but bound and stitched in such a way as
to allow the hand to clutch it and hold it with ease. There must be no unnecessary extension of
the palm and fingers, for it adds so much to the fatigue. Unhappily, every volume does not fulfil
this requirement, and the requisite selection must be made with care. Moreover, the ideal bedside
book should be not only small, and light, and agreeable to the touch, but distinguished by special
internal characteristics. Not only must the print be legible; the matter it furnishes must be in
brief instalments. What is wanted is a series of short somethings which the mind can readily
grasp and as easily retain. Sustained reading is for the library or the study; the last thing
at night and the first thing in the morning, what you desire is simply
a number of brevities, at any one of which you can glance with the
certainty of being interested.

Wherefore, such works as novels must be discouraged in the bedside library. There is nothing
to be gained by perusing a romance, by bits, in such fragments of time as the intending sleeper
is inclined or able to accord to it. Keep a novel beside you, if you like, to turn to if the night
should prove an obstinately sleepless one, and to that end let the tale be by 'Miss Braddon or Gaboriau'--one
which shall really fix your imagination fast, and finish, perhaps,
by sending you to rest.

But for ordinary uses let the book which you take up be one of 'Jewels, five words long,' or
thereabouts! Let it be a volume of short essays--let it be, for instance, Bacon's, or the 'Roundabout
Papers,' now accessible in a handy form. Let it be a volume of brief verse, such as Mr. Gilbert's
'Bab Ballads,' or Mr. Lang's 'Ballades in Blue China,' or Calverley's immortal 'Fly Leaves;'
or let it be a collection of more serious lyrics--say, Mr. Palgrave's
'Golden Treasury,' or the selections from Lord Tennyson and Mr. Matthew
Arnold.

Or, if you like, let it be a treasury of maxims, such as those by Vauvenargues or Chamfort;
or a series of select passages, such as those from the works of Lord Beaconsfield or Heine: or
let it be a casquet of choice anecdotes, of which happily the supply is large--that incomparable
volume of Dean Ramsay's, for example, or even the triter production by Mark Lemon. There is a whole
world from which to choose.

Only, take care that, whatever the literature is, it is not disturbing. The mission of the bedside
book is to soothe the mind, not irritate it. When one lies down after a hard day's work, one's
desire is not that the brain should be stimulated, but that it should be refreshed. It needs,
not exercise, but diversion.

It wants to be prepared for sleep. And if a book will effect that object, while at the same
time adding to the stock of one's ideas--humorous or sentimental, it does not matter which--that
volume is to be thanked and cherished. The difficulty of putting down one's book and extinguishing
the light before the exposition of sleep comes upon one, must be left to be dealt with by
the individual man. I have heard of a popular vocalist who was wont, when he had read sufficiently,
to extinguish the candle by plumping down upon it whatever book he happened to have in his
hand. But this is a rough and ready mode which cannot be generally recommended--at any rate,
not in those cases where the book is one's own! Some other means must be discovered. And let
them be efficacious, for when any element of danger or unhealthiness is allowed to attend the
use of bedside books, the sooner that use is discontinued the better.

THEIR MUCH SPEAKING.

The 'dreary drip of dilatory declamation' to which Lord Salisbury, in one of his happiest phrases,
once drew attention, shows no sign of exhaustion, or even of diminution; and the Conservative
chief has followed up his admirable epigram by picturing the time when, all rational discussion
and all beneficial legislation being out of the question, the House of Commons may become a
mere mechanical puppet-show, and may present the spectacle of 'a steam Irish Party, an electric
Ministry, and a clockwork Speaker.' It is certain that there never was so much talk in the Lower House
as at the present moment; but it is also certain that the complaint of 'much speaking' has before
now been frequently preferred against both Chambers. Politicians have always been a wordy race,
and many a sharp shaft has been aimed at their besetting weakness. A last-century satirist
once wrote:

'"Do this," cries one side of St. Stephen's great hall; "Do just the reverse," the minority bawl....
And what is the end of this mighty tongue-war? --Nothing's done for the State till the State
is done for!'

And, unfortunately, the quality of the talk has often been as poor as the quantity was considerable.
It was, we believe, a pre-Victorian pen which perpetrated this couplet on the House of Commons:

'To
wonder now at Balaam's ass were weak: Is there a night that asses do not speak?'

Fun has constantly been made of the typical drawbacks of political oratory--of the dull men,
of the heavy, of the shallow, of the unintelligible, and what not. We have been told how 'a
lord of senatorial fame' was known at once by his portrait, because
the painter had so 'play'd his game' that it 'made one even yawn at
sight.' It has been said of an M.P., that his speeches 'possessed
such remarkable weight' that it was 'really a trouble to bear them.'
Of a third it was written that his discourses had some resemblance
to an hour-glass, because, the longer time they ran, the shallower
they grew.

Of yet another orator we read that his reasoning was really deep, his argument profound, 'for
deuce a bit could anybody see the ground.' Nor have certain historical personages been able to
escape the lash. When Admiral Vernon was appointed to take charge of the herring fishery, Horace
Walpole wrote:

'Long in the Senate had brave Vernon rail'd, And all mankind with bitter tongue assail'd; Sick
of his noise, we wearied Heav'n with pray'r In his own element to place the tar. The gods at
length have yielded to our wish, And bade him rule o'er Billingsgate and fish.'

From which it will be gathered anew that a somewhat bitter style of debate is no novelty in this
country--that strong language has been heard in the House of Commons ante Agamemnona.

Within living memory a member has dared to suggest that certain of his opponents had come into
the House not wholly sober. Who does not remember the epigrams which were based on Pitt's addiction,
real or supposed, to intoxicating liquors? Porson is said to have composed one hundred such 'paper
pellets' in one night, as, for example:

'"Who's up?" inquired Burke of a friend at the door; "Oh, no one," said Paddy, "tho' Pitt's on the
floor."'

After this, most other insinuations become almost harmless; and the accusation of mere twaddling,
such as that which was brought against Mr. Urquhart in the following lines, seems, by comparison,
trivial:

'When Palmerston begins to speak, He moves the House--as facts can prove. Let Urquhart rise, with
accents weak, The House itself begins to move.'

By the side of twaddling, again, mere rambling grows venial. One of H. J. Byron's burlesque heroes
says of Cerberus:

'My dog, who picks up everything one teaches, Has got "three heads," like Mr. Gladstone's speeches.
But, as might naturally be expected, His are considerably more connected.'

But it is against Parliamentary long-windedness, in particular, that most sarcasm, whether in
verse or in prose, has been directed. Then, Brougham had the good sense to recognise his own
sins in respect to 'much speaking.' Punch made someone ask himself 'if Brougham thinks as much as
he talks;' but the Lord Chancellor removed the pungency from gibes of that sort by writing his
own epitaph, in which he declares that

'My fate a moral teaches, The ark in which my body lies Would not contain one-half my speeches.'

It
was asserted of Lord George Bentinck that true sportsmen 'loved his
prate,' because his speech recalled the 'four-mile course,' his arguments
the 'feather-weight.' One is reminded, in this connection, of the
preacher of whom it was observed that he 'so lengthily his subject
did pursue,' that it was feared 'he had, indeed, eternity in view.'
And, perhaps, a long discourse is none the more acceptable when it
is palpable to the hearers that the discourser has committed it to
memory, and is bound to go on to the bitter end.

Possibly this adds to the feeling of exasperation. Nevertheless, there are those who must learn
their speeches by heart, or else not speak at all. As Luttrell contended that Lord Dudley had said
of himself:

'In vain my affections the ladies are seeking; If I give up my heart, there's an end to my speaking.'

However,
it is, perhaps, scarcely fair of laymen to dwell too sternly on the joy which so many legislators
seem to feel in hearing their own voices. Man is a talking animal, and can 'hold forth' outside
the Houses of Parliament as well as in. And though in the term 'man' we may include woman, let us give
no countenance to the old calumny, that the fairer and weaker is also the more talkative sex. There
are some old lines to the effect that Nature wisely forbade a beard to grow on woman's chin,

'For
how could she be shaved, whate'er the skill, Whose tongue would never let her chin be still?'

There
is also a certain epitaph on an old maid,

'Who from her cradle talk'd till death, And ne'er before was out of
breath,'

and of whom it was opined that in heaven she'd be unblest,
because she loathed a place of rest.

But these flouts and sneers are as cheap as they are venerable. Let the ladies take heart. Men
have been censured for their 'much speaking' at least as frequently
as women.

Prior declared of one Lysander that he ought to possess the art of talk, if he did not, for he
practised 'full fourteen hours in four-and-twenty.' And we owe to a more recent writer this
paraphrase of an epigram by Macentinus:

'Black locks hath Gabriel, beard that's white-- The reason, sir, is plain: Gabriel works hard
from morn till night, More with his jaw than brain.'

It is well that satire should go that way for a change. All the talking is not done by women or
by Parliament. There is, at times, as much chatter in the smoking-room as in the boudoir and
the Senate. Tongues, as well as beards, 'wag all,' when we are 'merry in hall.'

PEERS AND POETRY.

The succession of the Hon. J. Leicester Warren to the barony of De Tabley was something more
than a change in the personnel of the House of Lords; it amounted to a conspicuous addition
to the Chamber's intellectual power, and especially to the number of its poetic votaries. The
author of 'Philoctetes' and 'Orestes,' of 'Rehearsals' and 'Searching the Net,' is no mere versifier.
He has felt the influence of the old Greek dramatists, and apparently also that of Mr. Swinburne;
but, for all that, his work has undoubted individuality, as well as solid interest.

It must be admitted that the House of Lords does not at this moment contain many hereditary peers
who are also poets. Lord Tennyson, of course, is an ennobled commoner, and the Bishop of Derry
(Dr. Alexander), who has written so much excellent verse, both in
the thoughtful and in the imaginative vein, is no longer one of the
spiritual lords.

But there is Lord Lytton, there is Lord Southesk, and there is Lord Rosslyn; and by all of these
Lord de Tabley will be welcomed as a brother in the literary art. What Lord Lytton has done in
poetry, need scarcely be recapitulated. He would be remembered as
'Owen Meredith' if, since his accession to the peerage, he had not
made a new reputation as the author of 'Fables in Song,' 'Glenaveril,'
and other performances. As 'Owen Meredith' he was, no doubt, more
fresh and spontaneous than he has ever been as Lord Lytton; but his
poetic work, as a whole, is of good quality, and some of it will find
its way down the stream of time. Equally certain may we be that the
'Jonas Fisher' of Lord Southesk, with its unquestionable vigour, both
of satire and of sentiment, will remain alive, whatever may be the
fate of the author's 'Greenwood's Farewell' and 'Meda Maiden.' Lord
Rosslyn, it will be remembered, was one of the most successful of
the Jubilee Laureates; but, even before that, he had made himself
esteemed by many trustworthy judges as the producer of numerous good
sonnets.

''Tis ridiculous,' says Selden, 'for a lord to print verses;
'tis well enough to make them to please himself, but to make them
public is foolish.' He goes on to add that

'If a man in his private
chamber twists his band-strings, or plays with a rush to please himself,
'tis well enough; but if he should go into Fleet Street, and sit upon
a stall, and twist a band-string, or play with a rush, then all the
boys in the street would laugh at him.'

No doubt they would have
done so in Selden's time; and much more readily would they do so now. In a telescope powerful enough to reveal them when in that situation they resemble
a thin, glowing needle run through the ball of the planet. The rings will be in this position
in 1907, and again in 1922.

The opacity of the rings is proved by the shadow which they cast upon the ball of the planet.
This is particularly manifest at the time when they are edgewise to the earth, for the sun
being situated slightly above or below the plane of the rings then throws their shadow across
Saturn close to its equator. When they are canted at a considerable angle to our line of sight
their shadow is seen on the planet, bordering their outer edge where they cross the ball.

The gauze ring, the detection of which as a faintly luminous phenomenon requires a powerful
telescope, can be seen with slighter telescopic power in the form of a light shade projected
against the planet at the inner edge of the broad bright ring. The explanation of the existence
of this peculiar object depends upon the nature of the entire system, which, instead of being,
as the earliest observers thought it, a solid ring or series of concentric rings, is composed
of innumerable small bodies, like meteorites, perhaps, in size, circulating independently but
in comparatively close juxtaposition to one another about Saturn, and presenting to our eyes,
because of their great number and of our enormous distance, the appearance of solid, uniform
rings. So a flock of ducks may look from afar like a continuous black line or band, although
if we were near them we should perceive that a considerable space separates each individual
from his neighbors.

The fact that this is the constitution of Saturn's rings can be confidently stated because
it has been mathematically proved that they could not exist if they were either solid or liquid
bodies in a continuous form, and because the late Prof. James E. Keeler demonstrated with the
spectroscope, by means of the Doppler principle, already explained in the chapter on Venus,
that the rings circulate about the planet with varying velocities according to their distance
from Saturn's center, exactly as independent satellites would do.

It might be said, then, that Saturn, instead of having nine satellites only, has untold millions
of them, traveling in orbits so closely contiguous that they form the appearance of a vast ring.

As to their origin, it may be supposed that they are a relic of a ring of matter left in suspension
during the contraction of the globe of Saturn from a nebulous mass, just as the rings from
which the various planets are supposed to have been formed were left off during the contraction
of the main body of the original solar nebula. Other similar rings originally surrounding Saturn
may have become satellites, but the matter composing the existing rings is so close to the
planet that it falls within the critical distance known as "Roche's limit," within which, owing
to the tidal effect of the planet's attraction, no body so large as a true satellite could
exist, and accordingly in the process of formation of the Saturnian system this matter, instead
of being aggregated into a single satellite, has remained spread out in the form of a ring,
although its substance long ago passed from the vaporous and liquid to the solid form. We have
spoken of the rings as being composed of meteorites, but perhaps their component particles
may be so small as to answer more closely to the definition of dust. In these rings of dust,
or meteorites, disturbances are produced by the attraction of the planet and that of the outer
satellites, and it is yet a question whether they are a stable and permanent feature of Saturn,
or will, in the course of time, be destroyed.[12]

[Footnote 12: For further details about Saturn's rings, see The Tides, by G.H. Darwin, chap. xx.]

It has been thought that the gauze ring is variable in brightness. This would tend to show
that it is composed of bodies which have been drawn in toward the planet from the principal
mass of the rings, and these bodies may end their career by falling upon the planet. This process,
indefinitely continued, would result in the total disappearance of the rings--Saturn would
finally swallow them, as the old god from whom the planet gets its name is fabled to have swallowed
his children.

Near the beginning of this chapter reference was made to the fact that Saturn's rings have
been regarded as habitable bodies. That, of course, was before the discovery that they were
not solid. Knowing what we now know about them, even Dr. Thomas Dick, the great Scotch popularizer
of astronomy in the first half of the nineteenth century, would have been compelled to abandon
his theory that Saturn's rings were crowded with inhabitants. At the rate of 280 to the square
mile he reckoned that they could easily contain 8,078,102,266,080 people.

He even seems to have regarded their edges--in his time their actual thinness was already well
known--as useful ground for the support of living creatures, for he carefully calculated the
aggregate area of these edges and found that it considerably exceeded the area of the entire
surface of the earth. Indeed, Dr. Dick found room for more inhabitants on Saturn's rings than
on Saturn itself, for, excluding the gauze ring, undiscovered in his day, the two surfaces
of the rings are greater in area than the surface of the globe of the planet. He did not attack
the problem of the weight of bodies on worlds in the form of broad, flat, thin, surfaces like
Saturn's rings, or indulge in any reflections on the interrelations of the inhabitants of the
opposite sides, although he described the wonderful appearance of Saturn and other celestial
objects as viewed from the rings.

But all these speculations fall to the ground in face of the simple fact that if we could reach
Saturn's rings we should find nothing to stand upon, except a cloud of swiftly flying dust
or a swarm of meteors, swayed by contending attractions. And, indeed, it is likely that upon
arriving in the immediate neighborhood of the rings they would virtually disappear! Seen close
at hand their component particles might be so widely separated that all appearance of connection
between them would vanish, and it has been estimated that from Saturn's surface the rings,
instead of presenting a gorgeous arch spanning the heavens, may be visible only as a faintly
gleaming band, like the Milky Way or the zodiacal light. In this respect the mystic Swedenborg
appears to have had a clearer conception of the true nature of Saturn's rings than did Dr.
Dick, for in his book on The Earths in the Universe he says--using the word "belt" to describe
the phenomenon of the rings:

"Being questioned concerning that great belt which appears from our earth to rise above the
horizon of that planet, and to vary its situations, they [the inhabitants of Saturn] said that
it does not appear to them as a belt, but only as somewhat whitish, like snow in the heaven,
in various directions."

In view of such observations as that of Prof. E.E. Barnard, in 1892, showing that a satellite
passing through the shadow of Saturn's rings does not entirely disappear--a fact which proves
that the rings are partially transparent to the sunlight--one might be tempted to ask whether
Saturn itself, considering its astonishing lack of density, is not composed, at least in its
outer parts, of separate particles of matter revolving independently about their center of
attraction, and presenting the appearance of a smooth, uniform shell reflecting the light of
the sun. In other words, may not Saturn be, exteriorly, a globe of dust instead of a globe
of vapor? Certainly the rings, incoherent and translucent though they be, reflect the sunlight
to our eyes, at least from the brighter part of their surface, with a brilliance comparable
with that of the globe of the planet itself.

As bearing on the question of the interior condition of Saturn and Jupiter, it should, perhaps,
be said that mathematical considerations, based on the figures of equilibrium of rotating liquid
masses, lead to the conclusion that those planets are comparatively very dense within. Professor
Darwin puts the statement very strongly, as follows: "In this way it is known with certainty
that the central portions of the planets Jupiter and Saturn are much denser, compared to their
superficial portions, than is the case with the earth."[13]

[Footnote 13: The Tides, by G.H. Darwin, p. 333.]

The globe and rings of Saturn witness an imposing spectacle of gigantic moving shadows. The
great ball stretches its vast shade across the full width of the rings at times, and the rings,
as we have seen, throw their shadow in a belt, whose position slowly changes, across the ball,
sweeping from the equator, now toward one pole and now toward the other. The sun shines alternately
on each side of the rings for a space of nearly fifteen years--a day fifteen years long! And
then, when that face of the ring is turned away from the sun, there ensues a night of fifteen
years' duration also.

Whatever appearance the rings may present from the equator and the middle latitudes on Saturn,
from the polar regions they would be totally invisible. As one passed toward the north, or
the south, pole he would see the upper part of the arch of the rings gradually sink toward
the horizon until at length, somewhere in the neighborhood of the polar circle, it would finally
disappear, hidden by the round shoulder of the great globe.

URANUS, NEPTUNE, AND THE SUSPECTED ULTRANEPTUNIAN PLANET

What has been said of Jupiter and Saturn applies also to the remaining members of the Jovian
group of planets, Uranus and Neptune, viz., that their density is so small that it seems probable
that they can not, at the present time, be in a habitable planetary condition. All four of
these outer, larger planets have, in comparatively recent times, been solar orbs, small companions
of the sun. The density of Uranus is about one fifth greater than that of water, and slightly
greater than that of Neptune. Uranus is 32,000 miles in diameter, and Neptune 35,000 miles.
Curiously enough, the force of gravity upon each of these two large planets is a little less
than upon the earth. This arises from the fact that in reckoning gravity on the surface of
a planet not only the mass of the planet, but its diameter or radius, must be considered. Gravity
varies directly as the mass, but inversely as the square of the radius, and for this reason
a large planet of small density may exercise a less force of gravity at its surface than does
a small planet of great density.

The mean distance of Uranus from the sun is about 1,780,000,000 miles, and its period of revolution
is eighty-four years; Neptune's mean distance is about 2,800,000,000 miles, and its period
of revolution is about 164 years.

Uranus has four satellites, and Neptune one. The remarkable thing about these satellites is
that they revolve backward, or contrary to the direction in which all the other satellites
belonging to the solar system revolve, and in which all the other planets rotate on their axis.
In the case of Uranus, the plane in which the satellites revolve is not far from a position
at right angles to the plane of the ecliptic; but in the case of Neptune, the plane of revolution
of the satellites is tipped much farther backward. Since in every other case the satellites
of a planet are situated nearly in the plane of the planet's equator, it may be assumed that
the same rule holds with Uranus and Neptune; and, that being so, we must conclude that those
planets rotate backward on their axes. This has an important bearing on the nebular hypothesis
of the origin of the solar system, and at one time was thought to furnish a convincing argument
against that hypothesis; but it has been shown that by a modification of Laplace's theory the
peculiar behavior of Uranus and Neptune can be reconciled with it.

Very little is known of the surfaces of Uranus and Neptune. Indications of the existence of
belts resembling those of Jupiter have been found in the case of both planets. There are similar
belts on Saturn, and as they seem to be characteristic of large, rapidly rotating bodies of
small density, it was to be expected that they would be found on Uranus and Neptune.

The very interesting opinion is entertained by some astronomers that there is at least one
other great planet beyond Neptune. The orbits of certain comets are relied upon as furnishing
evidence of the existence of such a body. Prof. George Forbes has estimated that this, as yet
undiscovered, planet may be even greater than Jupiter in mass, and may be situated at a distance
from the sun one hundred times as great as the earth's, where it revolves in an orbit a single
circuit of which requires a thousand years.

Whether this planet, with a year a thousand of our years in length, will ever be seen with
a telescope, or whether its existence will ever, in some other manner, be fully demonstrated,
can not yet be told. It will be remembered that Neptune was discovered by means of computations
based upon its disturbing attraction on Uranus before it had ever been recognized with the
telescope. But when the astronomers in the observatories were told by their mathematical brethren
where to look they found the planet within half an hour after the search began. So it is possible
the suspected great planet beyond Neptune may be within the range of telescopic vision, but
may not be detected until elaborate calculations have deduced its place in the heavens. As
a populous city is said to furnish the best hiding-place for a man who would escape the attention
of his fellow beings, so the star-sprinkled sky is able to conceal among its multitudes worlds
both great and small until the most painstaking detective methods bring them to recognition.

CHAPTER VIII

THE MOON, CHILD OF THE EARTH AND THE SUN

Very naturally the moon has always been a great favorite with those who, either in a scientific
or in a literary spirit, have speculated about the plurality of inhabited worlds. The reasons
for the preference accorded to the moon in this regard are evident. Unless a comet should brush
us--as a comet is suspected of having done already--no celestial body, of any pretensions to
size, can ever approach as near to the earth as the moon is, at least while the solar system
continues to obey the organic laws that now control it. It is only a step from the earth to
the moon. What are 240,000 miles in comparison with the distances of the stars, or even with
the distances of the planets? Jupiter, driving between the earth and the moon, would occupy
more than one third of the intervening space with the chariot of his mighty globe; Saturn,
with broad wings outspread, would span more than two thirds of the distance; and the sun, so
far from being able to get through at all, would overlap the way more than 300,000 miles on
each side.

In consequence, of course, of its nearness, the moon is the only member of the planetary system
whose principal features are visible to the naked eye. In truth, the naked eye perceives the
larger configurations of the lunar surface more clearly than the most powerful telescope shows
the details on the disk of Mars. Long before the time of Galileo and the invention of the telescope,
men had noticed that the face of the moon bears a resemblance to the appearance that the earth
would present if viewed from afar off. In remote antiquity there were philosophers who thought
that the moon was an inhabited world, and very early the romancers took up the theme. Lucian,
the Voltaire of the second century of our era, mercilessly scourged the pretenders of the earth
from an imaginary point of vantage on the moon, which enabled him to peer down into their secrets.
Lucian's description of the appearance of the earth from the moon shows how clearly defined
in his day had become the conception of our globe as only an atom in space.

"Especially did it occur to me to laugh at the men who were quarreling about the boundaries
of their land, and at those who were proud because they cultivated the Sikyonian plain, or
owned that part of Marathon around Oenoe, or held possession of a thousand acres at Acharnæ.
Of the whole of Greece, as it then appeared to me from above, being about the size of four
fingers, I think Attica was in proportion a mere speck. So that I wondered on what condition
it was left to these rich men to be proud."[14]

[Footnote 14: Ikaromenippus; or, Above the Clouds. Prof. D.C. Brown's translation.]

Such scenes as Lucian beheld, in imagination, upon the earth while looking from the moon, many
would fain behold, with telescopic aid, upon the moon while looking from the earth. Galileo
believed that the details of the lunar surface revealed by his telescope closely resembled
in their nature the features of the earth's surface, and for a long time, as the telescope
continued to be improved, observers were impressed with the belief that the moon possessed
not only mountains and plains, but seas and oceans also.

It was the discovery that the moon has no perceptible atmosphere that first seriously undermined
the theory of its habitability. Yet, as was remarked in the introductory chapter, there has
of late been some change of view concerning a lunar atmosphere; but the change has been not
so much in the ascertained facts as in the way of looking at those facts.

But before we discuss this matter, it will be well to state what is known beyond peradventure
about the moon.

Its mean distance from the earth is usually called, for the sake of a round number, 240,000
miles, but more accurately stated it is 238,840 miles. This is variable to the extent of more
than 31,000 miles, on account of the eccentricity of its orbit, and the eccentricity itself
is variable, in consequence of the perturbing attractions of the earth and the sun, so that
the distance of the moon from the earth is continually changing. It may be as far away as 253,000
miles and as near as 221,600 miles.

Although the orbit of the moon is generally represented, for convenience, as an ellipse about
the earth, it is, in reality, a varying curve, having the sun for its real focus, and always
concave toward the latter. This is a fact that can be more readily explained with the aid of
a diagram.

In the accompanying cut, when the earth is at A the moon is between it and the sun, in the
phase called new moon. At this point the earth's orbit about the sun is more curved than the
moon's, and the earth is moving relatively faster than the moon, so that when it arrives at
B it is ahead of the moon, and we see the latter to the right of the earth, in the phase called
first quarter. The earth being at this time ahead of the moon, the effect of its attraction,
combined with that of the sun, tends to hasten the moon onward in its orbit about the sun,
and the moon begins to travel more swiftly, until it overtakes the earth at C, and appears
on the side opposite the sun, in the phase called full moon. At this point the moon's orbit
about the sun has a shorter radius of curvature than the earth's. In traveling from C to D
the moon still moves more rapidly than the earth, and, having passed it, appears at D to the
left of the earth, in the phase called third quarter. Now, the earth being behind the moon,
the effect of its attraction combined with the sun's tends to retard the moon in its orbit
about the sun, with the result that the moon moves again less rapidly than the earth, and the
latter overtakes it, so that, upon reaching E, the two are once more in the same relative positions
that they occupied at A, and it is again new moon. Thus it will be seen that, although the
real orbit of the moon has the sun for its center of revolution, nevertheless, in consequence
of the attraction of the earth, combined in varying directions with that of the sun, the moon,
once every month, makes a complete circuit of our globe.

The above explanation should not be taken for a mathematical demonstration of the moon's motion,
but simply for a graphical illustration of how the moon appears to revolve about the earth
while really obeying the sun's attraction as completely as the earth does.

There is no other planet that has a moon relatively as large as ours. The moon's diameter is
2,163 miles. Its volume, compared with the earth's, is in the ratio of 1 to 49, and its density
is about six tenths of the earth's. This makes its mass to that of our globe about as 1 to
81. In other words, it would take eighty-one moons to counterbalance the earth. Before speaking
of the force of gravity on the moon we will examine the character of the lunar surface.

To the naked eye the moon's face appears variegated with dusky patches, while a few points
of superior brilliance shine amid the brighter portions, especially in the southern and eastern
quarters, where immense craters like Tycho and Copernicus are visible to a keen eye, gleaming
like polished buttons. With a telescope, even of moderate power, the surface of the moon presents
a scene of astonishing complexity, in which strangeness, beauty, and grandeur are all combined.
The half of the moon turned earthward contains an area of 7,300,000 square miles, a little
greater than the area of South America and a little less than that of North America. Of these
7,300,000 square miles, about 2,900,000 square miles are occupied by the gray, or dusky, expanses,
called in lunar geography, or selenography, maria--i.e., "seas." Whatever they may once have
been, they are not now seas, but dry plains, bordered in many places by precipitous cliffs
and mountains, varied in level by low ridges and regions of depression, intersected occasionally
by immense cracks, having the width and depth of our mightiest river cañons, and sprinkled
with bright points and crater pits. The remaining 4,400,000 square miles are mainly occupied
by mountains of the most extraordinary character. Owing partly to roughness of the surface
and partly to more brilliant reflective power, the mountainous regions of the moon appear bright
in comparison with the dull-colored plains.

Some of the lunar mountains lie in long, massive chains, with towering peaks, profound gorges,
narrow valleys, vast amphitheaters, and beetling precipices. Looking at them with a powerful
telescope, the observer might well fancy himself to be gazing down from an immense height into
the heart of the untraveled Himalayas. But these, imposing though they are, do not constitute
the most wonderful feature of the mountain scenery of the moon.

Appearing sometimes on the shores of the "seas," sometimes in the midst of broad plains, sometimes
along the course of mountain chains, and sometimes in magnificent rows, following for hundreds
of miles the meridians of the lunar globe, are tremendous, mountain-walled, circular chasms,
called craters. Frequently they have in the middle of their depressed interior floors a peak,
or a cluster of peaks. Their inner and outer walls are seamed with ridges, and what look like
gigantic streams of frozen lava surround them. The resemblance that they bear to the craters
of volcanoes is, at first sight, so striking that probably nobody would ever have thought of
questioning the truth of the statement that they are such craters but for their incredible
magnitude. Many of them exceed fifty miles in diameter, and some of them sink two, three, four,
and more miles below the loftiest points upon their walls! There is a chasm, 140 miles long
and 70 broad, named Newton, situated about 200 miles from the south pole of the moon, whose
floor lies 24,000 feet below the summit of a peak that towers just above it on the east! This
abyss is so profound that the shadows of its enclosing precipices never entirely quit it, and
the larger part of its bottom is buried in endless night.

One can not but shudder at the thought of standing on the broken walls of Newton, and gazing
down into a cavity of such stupendous depth that if Chimborazo were thrown into it, the head
of the mighty Andean peak would be thousands of feet beneath the observer.

A different example of the crater mountains of the moon is the celebrated Tycho, situated in
latitude about 43° south, corresponding with the latitude of southern New Zealand on the earth.
Tycho is nearly circular and a little more than 54 miles across. The highest point on its wall
is about 17,000 feet above the interior. In the middle of its floor is a mountain 5,000 or
6,000 feet high. Tycho is especially remarkable for the vast system of whitish streaks, or
rays, which starting from its outer walls, spread in all directions over the face of the moon,
many of them, running, without deviation, hundreds of miles across mountains, craters, and
plains. These rays are among the greatest of lunar mysteries, and we shall have more to say
of them.

Copernicus, a crater mountain situated about 10° north of the equator, in the eastern hemisphere
of the moon, is another wonderful object, 56 miles in diameter, a polygon appearing, when not
intently studied, as a circle, 11,000 or 12,000 feet deep, and having a group of relatively
low peaks in the center of its floor. Around Copernicus an extensive area of the moon's surface
is whitened with something resembling the rays of Tycho, but more irregular in appearance.
Copernicus lies within the edge of the great plain named the Oceanus Procellarum, or "Ocean
of Storms," and farther east, in the midst of the "ocean," is a smaller crater mountain, named
Kepler, which is also enveloped by a whitish area, covering the lunar surface as if it were
the result of extensive outflows of light-colored lava.

In one important particular the crater mountains of the moon differ from terrestrial volcanoes.
This difference is clearly described by Nasmyth and Carpenter in their book on The Moon:

"While the terrestrial crater is generally a hollow on a mountain top, with its flat bottom
high above the level of the surrounding country, those upon the moon have their lowest points
depressed more or less deeply below the general surface of the moon, the external height being
frequently only a half or one third of the internal depth."

It has been suggested that these gigantic rings are only "basal wrecks" of volcanic mountains,
whose conical summits have been blown away, leaving vast crateriform hollows where the mighty
peaks once stood; but the better opinion seems to be that which assumes that the rings were
formed by volcanic action very much as we now see them. If such a crater as Copernicus or the
still larger one named Theophilus, which is situated in the western hemisphere of the moon,
on the shore of the "Sea of Nectar," ever had a conical mountain rising from its rim, the height
attained by the peak, if the average slope were about 30°, would have been truly stupendous--fifteen
or eighteen miles!

There is a kind of ring mountains, found in many places on the moon, whose forms and surroundings
do not, as the craters heretofore described do, suggest at first sight a volcanic origin. These
are rather level plains of an oval or circular outline, enclosed by a wall of mountains. The
finest example is, perhaps, the dark-gray Plato, situated in 50° of north latitude, near an
immense mountain uplift named the Lunar Alps, and on the northern shore of the Mare Imbrium,
or "Sea of Showers." Plato appears as an oval plain, very smooth and level, about 60 miles
in length, and completely surrounded by mountains, quite precipitous on the inner side, and
rising in their highest peaks to an elevation of 6,000 to 7,000 feet. In a lyric by Beaumont and
Fletcher, we find the supposed speaker giving utterance to a series of such wishes. 'May I,'
he says, 'find a woman fair, And her mind as clear as air!'

'May I find a woman rich, And of not too high a pitch!... May I find a woman wise, And her falsehood
not disguise!... May I find a woman kind, And not wavering like the wind!...'

And, in truth, he talks throughout as if he did not expect to discover any such rarity. Everyone
knows the little poem in which Ben Jonson details his preferences in women's dress, declaring that
'a sweet disorder' does more bewitch him 'than when art Is too precise in every part.' But
elsewhere he paints for us, not a perfect feminine attire, but the faultless maid herself, as he
would have her:

'I would have her fair and witty, Favouring more of Court than City, A little proud, but full
of pity, Light and humorous in her toying, Oft building hopes and soon destroying... Neither
too easy nor too hard, All extremes I would have barr'd.'

That, it would seem, was rare Ben's ideal.

Carew, it is notorious, professed to despise 'lovely cheeks or lips or eyes,' if they were not
combined with 'A smooth and steadfast mind, Gentle thoughts, and calm desires.' A rosy cheek,
a coral lip, and even star-like eyes, as he sagely said, would waste away. And in this somewhat
priggish, and perhaps not wholly sincere, vein, he finds a rival
in the anonymous bard who declared that he did not demand

'A crystal
brow, the moon's despair, Nor the snow's daughter, a white hand, Nor
mermaid's yellow pride of hair,'

and so on, but instead,

'A tender
heart, a loyal mind, Which with temptation I would trust, Yet never
link'd with error find--

'One in whose gentle bosom I Could pour
my secret heart of woes, Like the care-burthen'd honey-fly That hides
his murmurs in the rose.'

So Bedingfield, conceding to friend Damon
'the nymph that sparkles in her dress,' avows his own fondness for
the maid 'whose cheeks the hand of Nature paints.' Of this young person
he says:

'No art she knows or seeks to know; No charm to wealthy
pride will owe; No gems, no gold she needs to wear; She shines intrinsically
fair.'

Cowley, it will be remembered, in sketching his notion of
true happiness, included in it the picture of

'A mistress moderately
fair, And good as guardian angels are, Only beloved and loving me!'

With
that 'one dear She'--and a few other things--he thought he could get
on pretty comfortably.

But probably at once the most obliging and most exigent of modern lovers was the sentimental
gentleman to whose feelings Mrs. Bowen-Graves ('Stella') gave appropriate
voice in the over-familiar 'My Queen.'

'I will not dream of her tall
and stately-- She that I love may be fairy light;'

nay, more:

'I
will not say she should walk sedately-- Whatever she does, it will
sure be right.

'And she may be humble or proud, my lady, Or that sweet calm which is just between'

(as if anyone could be a 'sweet calm'!); moreover:

'Whether her birth be noble or lowly, I care no more than the spirit above;'

but there is at least one point upon which this gentleman insists:

'She must be courteous, she must be holy, Pure in her spirit, that maiden I love'--

and, being that, she may depend upon the stars falling, and the angels
weeping, ere he ceases to love her, his Queen, his Queen!

Ah! the poets have much to answer for. Here is Mr. Longfellow assuring his readers that

'No one is so utterly desolate, But some heart, though unknown, Responds unto his own;'

and here is Sir Edwin Arnold declaring, with equal confidence, that

'Somewhere there waiteth in this world of ours For one lone soul another lonely soul'--

et cætera, et cætera. Is it any wonder that, in the face of such encouragement, young men go on
dreaming, each of the dimidium suæ animæ whom he is to meet by-and-by, and framing to that
end all sorts of beautiful ideals? It may be that the Shes thus dreamed of are 'not impossible'--they
may 'arrive;' but it is as well not to be too sanguine. And, above all, it is as well not to
draw too extravagant a picture, if only because you may not be worthy
of the original when you see it. Corydon is too disposed to expect
in Phyllis charms and virtues for which he might find it difficult
to show counterparts in himself. If the lady is to be the pattern
of beauty and of goodness, ought not the gentleman to bring an equal
amount of capital into the matrimonial firm? In other words, he could jump over a house, unless, indeed, the lunarians really
are giants, and live in houses proportioned to their own dimensions and to the size of their
mountains. In that case, our athlete would have to content himself with jumping over a lunarian,
whose head he could just clear--with the hat off.

These things are not only amusing, but important. There can be no question that the force of
gravity on the moon actually is as slight as it has just been described. So, even without calling
in imaginary inhabitants to lend it interest, the comparative inability of the moon to arrest
bodies in motion becomes a fact of much significance. It has led to the theory that meteorites
may have originally been shot out of the moon's great volcanoes, when those volcanoes were
active, and may have circulated about the sun until various perturbations have brought them
down upon the earth. A body shot radially from the surface of the moon would need to have a
velocity of only about a mile and a half in a second in order to escape from the moon's control,
and we can believe that a lunar volcano when in action could have imparted such a velocity,
all the more readily because with modern gunpowders we have been able to give to projectiles
a speed one half as great as that needed for liberation from lunar gravity.

Another consequence of the small gravitative power of the moon bears upon the all-important
question of atmosphere. According to the theory of Dr. Johnstone Stoney, heretofore referred
to, oxygen, nitrogen, and water vapor would all gradually escape from the moon, if originally
placed upon it, because, by the kinetic theory, the maximum velocities of their molecules are
greater than a mile and a half per second. The escape would not occur instantly, nor all at
once, for it would be only the molecules at the upper surface of the atmosphere which were
moving with their greatest velocity, and in a direction radial to the center of the moon, that
would get away; but in the course of time this gradual leakage would result in the escape of
all of those gases.[16]

[Footnote 16: The discovery of free hydrogen in the earth's atmosphere, by Professor Dewar,
1901, bears upon the theory of the escape of gases from a planet, and may modify the view above
expressed. Since hydrogen is theoretically incapable of being permanently retained in the free
state by the earth, its presence in the atmosphere indicates either that there is an influx
from space or that it emanates from the earth's crust. In a similar way it may be assumed that
atmospheric gases can be given off from the crust of the moon, thus, to a greater or less extent,
supplying the place of the molecules that escape.]

After it had been found that, to ordinary tests, the moon offered no evidence of the possession
of an atmosphere, and before Dr. Stoney's theory was broached, it was supposed by many that
the moon had lost its original supply of air by absorption into its interior. The oxygen was
supposed to have entered into combination with the cooling rocks and minerals, thus being withdrawn
from the atmosphere, and the nitrogen was imagined to have disappeared also within the lunar
crust. For it seems to have always been tacitly assumed that the phenomenon to be accounted
for was not so much the absence of a lunar atmosphere as its disappearance. But disappearance,
of course, implies previous existence. In like manner it has always been a commonly accepted
view that the moon probably once had enough water to form lakes and seas.

These, it has been calculated, could have been absorbed into the lunar globe as it cooled off.
But Johnstone Stoney's theory offers another method by which they could have escaped, through
evaporation and the gradual flight of the molecules into open space. Possibly both methods
have been in operation, a portion of the constituents of the former atmosphere and oceans having
entered into chemical combinations in the lunar crust, and the remainder having vanished in
consequence of the lack of sufficient gravitative force to retain them.

But why, it may be asked, should it be assumed that the moon ever had things which it does
not now possess? Perhaps no entirely satisfactory reply can be made. Some observers have believed
that they detected unmistakable indications of alluvial deposits on lunar plains, and of the
existence of beaches on the shores of the "seas." Messrs. Loewy and Puiseux, of the Paris Observatory,
whose photographs of the moon are perhaps the finest yet made, say on this subject:

"There exists, from the point of view of relief, a general similarity between the 'seas' of
the moon and the plateaux which are covered to-day by terrestrial oceans. In these convex surfaces
are more frequent than concave basins, thrown back usually toward the verge of the depressed
space. In the same way the 'seas' of the moon present, generally at the edges, rather pronounced
depressions. In one case, as in the other, we observe normal deformations of a shrinking globe
shielded from the erosive action of rain, which tends, on the contrary, in all the abundantly
watered parts of the earth to make the concave surfaces predominate. The explanation of this
structure, such as is admitted at present by geologists, seems to us equally valid for the
moon."[17]

[Footnote 17: Comptes Rendus, June 26, July 3, 1899.]

It might be urged that there is evidence of former volcanic activity on the moon of such a
nature that explosions of steam must have played a part in the phenomena, and if there was
steam, of course there was water.

But perhaps the most convincing argument tending to show that the moon once had a supply of
water, of which some remnant may yet remain below the surface of the lunar globe, is based
upon the probable similarity in composition of the earth and the moon. This similarity results
almost equally whether we regard the moon as having originated in a ring of matter left off
from the contracting mass that became the earth, or whether we accept the suggestion of Prof.
G.H. Darwin, that the moon is the veritable offspring of the earth, brought into being by the
assistance of the tidal influence of the sun. The latter hypothesis is the more picturesque
of the two, and, at present, is probably the more generally favored. It depends upon the theory
of tidal friction, which was referred to in Chapter III, as offering an explanation of the
manner in which the rotation of the planet Mercury has been slowed down until its rotary period
coincides with that of its revolution.

The gist of the hypothesis in question is that at a very early period in its history, when
the earth was probably yet in a fluid condition, it rotated with extreme rapidity on its axis,
and was, at the same time, greatly agitated by the tidal attraction of the sun, and finally
huge masses were detached from the earth which, ultimately uniting, became the moon.[18]

[Footnote 18: The Tides, by G.H. Darwin, chapter xvi.]

Born in this manner from the very substance of the earth, the moon would necessarily be composed,
in the main, of the same elements as the globe on which we dwell, and is it conceivable that
it should not have carried with it both air and water, or the gases from which they were to
be formed? If the moon ever had enough of these prime requisites to enable it to support forms
of life comparable with those of the earth, the disappearance of that life must have been a
direct consequence of the gradual vanishing of the lunar air and water. The secular drying
up of the oceans and wasting away of the atmosphere on our little neighbor world involved a
vast, all-embracing tragedy, some of the earlier scenes of which, if theories be correct, are
now reenacted on the half-desiccated planet Mars--a planet, by the way, which in size, mass,
and ability to retain vital gases stands about half-way between the earth and the moon.

One of the most interesting facts about the moon is that its surface affords evidence of a
cataclysm which has wiped out many, and perhaps nearly all, of the records of its earlier history,
that were once written upon its face. Even on the earth there have been geological catastrophes
destroying or burying the accumulated results of ages of undisturbed progress, but on the moon
these effects have been transcendent. The story of the tremendous disaster that overtook the
moon is partly written in its giant volcanoes. Although it may be true, as some maintain, that
there is yet volcanic action going on upon the lunar surface, it is evident that such action
must be insignificant in comparison with that which took place ages ago.

There is a spot in the western hemisphere of the moon, on the border of a placid bay or "sea,"
that I can never look at without a feeling of awe and almost of shrinking. There, within a
space about 250 miles in length by 100 in width, is an exhibition of the most terrifying effects
of volcanic energy that the eye of man can anywhere behold. Three immense craters--Theophilus,
64 miles across and 3-1/2 miles deep; Cyrillus, 60 miles across and 15,000 feet deep; and Catharina,
70 miles across and from 8,000 to 16,000 feet deep--form an interlinked chain of mountain rings,
ridges, precipices, chasms, and bottomless pits that take away one's breath.

But when the first impression of astonishment and dismay produced by this overwhelming spectacle
has somewhat abated, the thoughtful observer will note that here the moon is telling him a
part of her wonderful story, depicted in characters so plain that he needs no instruction in
order to decipher their meaning. He will observe that this ruin was not all wrought at once
or simultaneously. Theophilus, the crater-mountain at the northwestern end of the chain, whose
bottom lies deepest of all, is the youngest of these giants, though the most imposing. For
a distance of forty miles the lofty wall of Theophilus has piled itself upon the ruins of the
wall of Cyrillus, and the circumference of the circle of its tremendous crater has been forcibly
thrust within the original rim of the more ancient crater, which was thus rudely compelled
to make room for its more vigorous rival and successor.

The observer will also notice that Catharina, the huge pit at the southeastern end of the chain,
bears evidence of yet greater age. Its original walls, fragments of which still stand in broken
grandeur, towering to a height of 16,000 feet, have, throughout the greater part of their circuit,
been riddled by the outbreak of smaller craters, and torn asunder and thrown down on all sides. 

The Celebrated Frau Bettina von Arnim, who dared to translate into English and to print in Berlin
(apud Trowitzsch and Son, 1838), under the new title of Diary of a Child, her own untranslateable
letters to Göthe, had at least the very good excuse of her nationality for her peculiar English,
the choicest, funniest, maddest, and saddest English ever penned on this planet or in any other,
and of which I hope "N. & Q." will accept some small specimens, taken at random among thousands
such.

This is only one example among hundreds, scattered all over the moon, which show how the surface
of our satellite has suffered upheaval after upheaval. It is possible that some of the small
craters, not included within the walls of the greater ones, may represent an early stage in
the era of volcanic activity that wrecked the moon, but where larger and smaller are grouped
together a certain progression can be seen, tending finally to extinction. The internal energies
reached a maximum and then fell off in strength until they died out completely.

It can hardly be supposed that the life-bearing phase of lunar history--if there ever was one--could
survive the outbreak of the volcanic cataclysm. North America, or Europe, if subjected to such
an experience as the continental areas of the moon have passed through, would be, in proportion,
worse wrecked than the most fearfully battered steel victim of a modern sea fight, and one
can readily understand that, in such circumstances, those now beautiful and populous continents
would exhibit, from a distance, scarcely any token of their present topographical features,
to say nothing of any relics of their occupation by living creatures.

There are other interesting glimpses to be had of an older world in the moon than that whose
scarred face is now beautified for us by distance. Not far from Theophilus and the other great
crater-mountains just described, at the upper, or southern, end of the level expanse called
the "Sea of Nectar," is a broad, semicircular bay whose shores are formed by the walls of a
partially destroyed crater named Fracastorius. It is evident that this bay, and the larger
part of the "Sea of Nectar," have been created by an outwelling of liquid lavas, which formed
a smooth floor over a portion of the pre-existing surface of the moon, and broke down and submerged
a large part of the mountain ring of Fracastorius, leaving the more ancient walls standing
at the southern end, while, outlined by depressions and corrugations in the rocky blanket,
are certain half-defined forms belonging to the buried world beneath.

Near Copernicus, some years ago, as Dr. Edward S. Holden pointed out, photographs made with
the great Lick telescope, then under his direction, showed, in skeleton outline, a huge ring
buried beneath some vast outflow of molten matter and undiscerned by telescopic observers.
And Mr. Elger, who was a most industrious observer and careful interpreter of lunar scenery,
speaks of "the undoubted existence of the relics of an earlier lunar world beneath the smooth
superficies of the maria."

Although, as already remarked, it seems necessary to assume that any life existing in the moon
prior to its great volcanic outburst must have ceased at that time, yet the possibility may
be admitted that life could reappear upon the moon after its surface had again become quiet
and comparatively undisturbed. Germs of the earlier life might have survived, despite the terrible
nature of the catastrophe. But the conditions on the moon at present are such that even the
most confident advocates of the view that the lunar world is not entirely dead do not venture
to assume that anything beyond the lowest and simplest organic forms--mainly, if not wholly,
in the shape of vegetation--can exist there. The impression that even such life is possible
rests upon the accumulating evidence of the existence of a lunar atmosphere, and of visible
changes, some apparently of a volcanic character and some not, on the moon's surface.

Prof. William H. Pickering, who is, perhaps, more familiar with the telescopic and photographic
aspects of the moon than any other American astronomer, has recorded numberless instances of
change in minute details of the lunar landscapes. He regards some of his observations made
at Arequipa as "pointing very strongly to the existence of vegetation upon the surface of the
moon in large quantities at the present time." The mountain-ringed valley of Plato is one of
the places in the lunar world where the visible changes have been most frequently observed,
and more than one student of the moon has reached the conclusion that something very like the
appearances that vegetation would produce is to be seen in that valley.

Professor Pickering has thoroughly discussed the observations relating to a celebrated crater
named Linné in the Mare Serenitatis, and after reading his description of its changes of appearance
one can hardly reject his conclusion that Linné is an active volcanic vent, but variable in
its manifestations. This is only one of a number of similar instances among the smaller craters
of the moon. The giant ones are evidently entirely extinct, but some of the minor vents give
occasional signs of activity. Nor should it be assumed that these relatively slight manifestations
of volcanic action are really insignificant. As Professor Pickering shows, they may be regarded
as comparable with the greatest volcanic phenomena now witnessed on the earth, and, speaking
again of Plato, he says of its evidences of volcanic action:

"It is, I believe, more active than any area of similar size upon the earth. There seems to
be no evidences of lava, but the white streaks indicate apparently something analogous to snow
or clouds. This substance may be volcanic powder or snow, in the form of minute ice crystals.
Mr. Elger remarks of this theory that the "confused network of streaks" around Copernicus seems
to respond to it more happily than the rays of Tycho do, because of the lack of definiteness
of direction so manifest in the case of the rays.

As an encouragement to amateur observers who may be disposed to find out for themselves whether
or not changes now take place in the moon, the following sentence from the introduction to
Professor Pickering's chapter on Plato in the Harvard Observatory Annals, volume xxxii, will
prove useful and interesting:

"In reviewing the history of selenography, one must be impressed by the singular fact that,
while most of the astronomers who have made a special study of the moon, such as Schroeter,
Maedler, Schmidt, Webb, Neison, and Elger, have all believed that its surface was still subject
to changes readily visible from the earth, the great majority of astronomers who have paid
little attention to the subject have quite as strenuously denied the existence of such changes."

In regard to the lunar atmosphere, it may be said, in a word, that even those who advocate
the existence of vegetation and of clouds of dust or ice crystals on the moon do not predicate
any greater amount, or greater density, of atmosphere than do those who consider the moon to
be wholly dead and inert. Professor Pickering himself showed, from his observations, that the
horizontal refraction of the lunar atmosphere, instead of being less than 2´´, as formerly
stated, was less than 0.4´´. Yet he found visual evidence that on the sunlit side of the moon
this rare atmosphere was filled to a height of four miles with some absorbing medium which
was absent on the dark side, and which was apparently an emanation from the lunar crust, occurring
after sunrise. And Messrs. Loewy and Puiseux, of the Paris Observatory, say, after showing
reasons for thinking that the great volcanic eruptions belong to a recent period in the history
of the moon, that "the diffusion of cinders to great distances infers a gaseous envelope of
a certain density.... The resistance of the atmosphere must have been sufficient to retard
the fall of this dust [the reference is to the white trails, like those from Tycho], during
its transport over a distance of more than 1,000 kilometers [620 miles]."[20]

[Footnote 20: Comptes Rendus, June 23, July 3, 1899.]

We come now to a brief consideration of certain peculiarities in the motions of the moon, and
in the phenomena of day and night on its surface. The moon keeps the same side forever turned
toward the earth, behaving, in this respect, as Mercury does with regard to the sun. The consequence
is that the lunar globe makes but one rotation on its axis in the course of a month, or in
the course of one revolution about the earth. He says, in the end, that he is afraid he makes
but an odd sort of figure--that he has acted a little out of character, and a great deal below
the dignity of a philosopher. But, having the aforesaid disease, he has sought the remedy, and has
found it; for, in his view, 'Marriage is the surest cure of love.'

Georges Sand, in her 'Comme il Vous Plaira'--a comedy in three acts, 'tirée de Shakespeare,
et arrangée'--diverges still further from the original text. Her work is, even more markedly
than 'The Modern Receipt,' founded, only, on 'As You Like It.' 'In
dealing with this uncurbed genius, which owned no restraint,' she
thought herself justified in 'condensing, abstracting, and modifying'
his work.

But, as a matter of fact, her play is indebted to Shakespeare only in idea. Jaques is introduced
early in the piece as sent by the banished Duke with a message to Rosalind. Of course, he meets
Celia, and at first is brusquerie itself. But in the second act he comes to think there is something
in her name 'qui résonne autrement que dans tout nature. Est-ce une douceur qui charme l'oreille?'
Celia for a long time plays with him, but in the end they arrive at a mutual declaration of
affection.

'I have always tenderly loved Jaques,' says Georges Sand in her preface, and 'I have taken the great
liberty of bringing him back to love. Here is my own romance inserted in that of Shakespeare,
and, although romantic, it is not more improbable than the sudden conversion of Oliver.' That
may be; and yet one might have thought that Georges Sand, of all people, would not have set
herself the interesting but somewhat futile task of improving upon 'As You Like It.'

MOCKING AT MATRIMONY.

The world has reason to be grateful to the writer who lately demonstrated the possibility of
being happy 'though married.' Some exposition of the sort was sadly needed. Hitherto the estate
of matrimony has met with a long succession of jibes and sneers. It has had its apologists,
even its prophets and eulogists; but it has had many more detractors. There is, indeed, no subject
on which the satirists of the world, both great and small, have so
largely and so persistently made merry.

It has been a stock subject with them. It is as if they had said to themselves, 'When at a
loss, revile the connubial condition.' Married life has been the sport of every wit, and,
sorrowful to relate, society has been well content to join in the pastime. There is nothing so
common as sarcasm on matrimony, and nothing, apparently, so welcome, even to the married.

The
banter in question has been of all sorts--sometimes vague, sometimes particular, in its import.
A few censors have confined themselves to simple condemnation. 'A fellow that's married's a felo-de-se,'
wrote the late Shirley Brooks; and he had been anticipated in the
stricture.

An anonymous satirist had written:

'"Wedlock's the end of life," one cried; "Too true, alas!" said Jack,
and sigh'd-- "'Twill be the end of mine."'

And if matrimony was not
suicide, it was ruin.

Old Sir Thomas More had said of a student who had married that 'in knitting of himself so fast,
himself he had undone.' And a later rhymer, contrasting wedding with
hanging, had come to the conclusion that

'Hanging is better of the
twain-- Sooner done and shorter pain.'

To the suggestion that a youth
should not marry till he has more wisdom, the Italian epigrammatist
replies that if he waits till he has sense he will not wed at all.

Marriage, said the famous Marshal Saxe, in effect, is a state of penance; Rome declares there
are seven sacraments, but there are really only six, because penance and matrimony are one.

Hymen,
says Chamfort, comes after love, like smoke after flame. It is the high sea, observes Heine,
for which no compass has yet been invented. Its melancholy uncertainty is illustrated by the remark
of Samuel Rogers, that it does not matter whom you marry--she will
be quite another woman the next day.

It was Rogers, too, who, when he heard of a certain person's nuptials, declared that if his friends
were pleased his enemies were delighted. Selden's complaint against marriage was that it is 'a
desperate thing,' out of which it is impossible to extract one's self; but then he lived before the
era of Sir Cresswell Cresswell.
 This power was effectively
applied while the moon was yet a molten mass, so that it is probable that the moon has rotated
just as it does now for millions of years.

As was remarked a little while ago, the moon traveling in an elliptical orbit about the earth
has a libratory movement which, if represented in our picture, would cause the cross to swing
now a little one way and now a little the other, and thus produce an apparent pendulum motion
of the earth in the sky, similar to that of the sun as seen from Mercury. But it is not necessary
to go into the details of this phenomenon. The reader, if he chooses, can deduce them for himself.

But we may inquire a little into the effects of the long days and nights of the moon. In consequence
of the extreme rarity of the lunar atmosphere, it is believed that the heat of the sun falling
upon it during a day two weeks in length, is radiated away so rapidly that the surface of the
lunar rocks never rises above the freezing temperature of water. On the night side, with no
warm atmospheric blanket such as the earth enjoys, the temperature may fall far toward absolute
zero, the most merciful figure that has been suggested for it being 200° below the zero of
our ordinary thermometers! But there is much uncertainty about the actual temperature on the
moon, and different experiments, in the attempt to make a direct measurement of it, have yielded
discordant results. At one time, for instance, Lord Rosse believed he had demonstrated that
at lunar noon the temperature of the rocks rose above the boiling-point of water. But afterward
he changed his mind and favored the theory of a low temperature.

In this and in other respects much remains to be discovered concerning our interesting satellite,
and there is plenty of room, and an abundance of original occupation, for new observers of
the lunar world.

CHAPTER IX

HOW TO FIND THE PLANETS

There is no reason why everybody should not know the principal planets at sight nearly as well
as everybody knows the moon. It only requires a little intelligent application to become acquainted
with the other worlds that have been discussed in the foregoing chapters, and to be able to
follow their courses through the sky and recognize them wherever they appear. No telescope,
or any other instrument whatever, is required for the purpose. There is but one preliminary
requirement, just as every branch of human knowledge presupposes its A B C. This is an acquaintance
with the constellations and the principal stars--not a difficult thing to obtain.

Almost everybody knows the "Great Dipper" from childhood's days, except, perhaps, those who
have had the misfortune to spend their youth under the glare of city lights. Some know Orion
when he shines gloriously in the winter heavens. Many are able to point out the north star,
or pole star, as everybody should be able to do. All this forms a good beginning, and may serve
as the basis for the rapid acquirement of a general knowledge of the geography of the heavens.

If you are fortunate enough to number an astronomer among your acquaintance--an amateur will
do as well as a professor--you may, with his aid, make a short cut to a knowledge of the stars.
Otherwise you must depend upon books and charts. My Astronomy with an Opera-Glass was prepared
for this very purpose. For simply learning the constellations and the chief stars you need
no opera-glass or other instrument. With the aid of the charts, familiarize yourself with the
appearance of the constellations by noticing the characteristic arrangements of their chief
stars. You need pay no attention to any except the bright stars, and those that are conspicuous
enough to thrust themselves upon your attention.

Learn by observation at what seasons particular constellations are on, or near, the meridian--i.e.,
the north and south line through the middle of the heavens. Make yourself especially familiar
with the so-called zodiacal constellations, which are, in their order, running around the heavens
from west to east: Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius,
Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces. The importance of these particular constellations arises
from the fact that it is across them that the tracks of the planets lie, and when you are familiar
with the fixed stars belonging to them you will be able immediately to recognize a stranger
appearing among them, and will correctly conclude that it is one of the planets.[21] How to
tell which planet it may be, it is the object of this chapter to show you. As an indispensable
aid--unless you happen already to possess a complete star atlas on a larger scale--I have drawn
the six charts of the zodiacal constellations and their neighbors that are included in this
chapter.

[Footnote 21: In our latitudes, planets are never seen in the northern quarter of the sky.
When on the meridian, they are always somewhere between the zenith and the southern horizon.]

Having learned to recognize the constellations and their chief stars on sight, one other step,
an extremely easy one, remains to be taken before beginning your search for the planets--buy
the American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac for the current year. It is published under the
direction of the United States Naval Observatory at Washington, and can be purchased for one
dollar.

This book, which may appear to you rather bulky and formidable for an almanac, contains hundreds
of pages and scores of tables to which you need pay no attention. They are for navigators and
astronomers, and are much more innocent than they look. The plain citizen, seeking only an
introduction to the planets, can return their stare and pass by, without feeling in the least
humiliated.

In the front part of the book, after the long calendar, and the tables relating to the sun
and the moon, will be found about thirty pages of tables headed, in large black letters, with
the names of the planets--Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, etc. Two months are represented
on each page, and opposite the number of each successive day of the month the position of the
planet is given in hours, minutes, and seconds of right ascension, and degrees, minutes, and
seconds of north and south declination, the sign + meaning north, and the sign - south. Do
not trouble yourself with the seconds in either column, and take the minutes only when the
number is large. The hours of right ascension and the degrees of declination are the main things
to be noticed.

Right ascension, by the way, expresses the distance of a celestial body, such as a star or
a planet, east of the vernal equinox, or the first point of Aries, which is an arbitrary point
on the equator of the heavens, which serves, like the meridian of Greenwich on the earth, as
a starting-place for reckoning longitude. The entire circuit of the heavens along the equator
is divided into twenty-four hours of right ascension, each hour covering 15° of space. If a
planet then is in right ascension (usually printed for short R.A.) 0 h. 0 m. 0 s., it is on
the meridian of the vernal equinox, or the celestial Greenwich; if it is in R.A. 1 h., it will
be found 15° east of the vernal equinox, and so on.

Declination (printed D. or Dec.) expresses the distance of a celestial body north or south
of the equator of the heavens.

With these explanations we may proceed to find a planet by the aid of the Nautical Almanac
and our charts. I take, for example, the ephemeris for the year 1901, and I look under the
heading "Jupiter" on page 239, for the month of July. Opposite the 15th day of the month I
find the right ascension to be 18 h. 27 m., neglecting the seconds. Now 27 minutes are so near
to half an hour that, for our purposes, we may say Jupiter is in R.A. 18 h. 30 m. I set this
down on a slip of paper, and then examine the declination column, where I find that on July
15 Jupiter is in south declination (the sign - meaning south, as before explained) 23° 17´
52´´, which is almost 23° 18´, and, for our purposes, we may call this 23° 20´, which is what
I set down on my slip.

Next, I turn to Chart No. 5, in this chapter, where I find the meridian line of R.A. 18 h.
running through the center of the chart. I know that Jupiter is to be looked for about 30 m.
east, or to the left, of that line. At the bottom and top of the chart, every twenty minutes
of R.A. is indicated, so that it is easy, with the eye, or with the aid of a ruler, to place
the vertical line at some point of which Jupiter is to be found.

Then I consult my note of the declination of the planet. It is south 23° 20´. On the vertical
borders of the chart I find the figures of the declination, and I observe that 0° Dec., which
represents the equator of the heavens, is near the top of the chart, while each parallel horizontal
line across the chart indicates 10° north or south of its next neighbor. Next to the bottom
of the chart I find the parallel of 20°, and I see that every five degrees is indicated by
the figures at the sides. By the eye, or with the aid of a ruler, I easily estimate where the
horizontal line of 23° would fall, and since 20´ is the third of a degree I perceive that it
is, for the rough purpose of merely finding a conspicuous planet, negligible, although it,
too, can be included in the estimate, if thought desirable.

Having already found the vertical line on which Jupiter is placed and having now found the
horizontal line also, I have simply to regard their crossing point, which will be the situation
of the planet among the stars. I note that it is in the constellation Sagittarius in a certain
position with reference to a familiar group of stars in that constellation, and when I look
at the heavens, there, in the place thus indicated, Jupiter stands revealed.

The reader will readily perceive that, in a precisely similar manner, any planet can be located,
at any time of the year, and at any point in its course about the heavens. But it may turn
out that the place occupied by the planet is too near the sun to render it easily, or at all,
visible. Such a case can be recognized, either from a general knowledge of the location of
the constellations at various seasons, or with the aid of the Nautical Almanac, where at the
beginning of each set of monthly tables in the calendar the sun's right ascension and declination
will be found. In locating the sun, if you find that its right ascension differs by less than
an hour, one way or the other, from that of the planet sought, it is useless to look for the
latter. If the planet is situated west of the sun--to the right on the chart--then it is to
be looked for in the east before sunrise. But if it is east of the sun--to the left on the
chart--then you must seek it in the west after sunset.

For instance, I look for the planet Mercury on October 12, 1901. I find its R.A. to be 14 h.
40 m. and its Dec. 18° 36´. Looking at the sun's place for October 12th, I find it to be R.A.
13 h. 8 m. and Dec. 7° 14´. Placing them both on Chart No. 4, I discover that Mercury is well
to the east, or left hand of the sun, and will consequently be visible in the western sky after
sundown.

Additional guidance will be found by noting the following facts about the charts:

The meridian (the north and south line) runs through the middle of Chart No. 1 between 11 and
12 o'clock P.M. on November 1st, between 9 and 10 o'clock P.M. on December 1st, and between
7 and 8 o'clock P.M. on January 1st.

The meridian runs through the middle of Chart No. 2 between 11 and 12 o'clock P.M. on January
1st, between 9 and 10 o'clock P.M. on February 1st, and between 7 and 8 o'clock P.M. on March 1st.

The meridian runs through the middle of Chart No. 3 between 11 and 12 o'clock P.M. on March
1st, between 9 and 10 o'clock P.M. on April 1st, and between 7 and 8 o'clock P.M. on May 1st.

The meridian runs through the middle of Chart No. 4 between 11 and 12 o'clock P.M. on May 1st,
between 9 and 10 o'clock P.M. on June 1st, and between 7 and 8 o'clock P.M. on July 1st.

The meridian runs through the middle of Chart No. 5 between 11 and 12 o'clock P.M. on July
1st, between 9 and 10 o'clock P.M. on August 1st, and between 7 and 8 o'clock P.M. on September
1st.

The meridian runs through the middle of Chart No. 6 between 11 and 12 o'clock P.M. on September
1st, between 9 and 10 o'clock P.M. on October 1st, and between 7 and 8 o'clock P.M. on November
1st.

Note well, also, these particulars about the charts: Chart No. 1 includes the first four hours
of right ascension, from 0 h. to 4 h. inclusive; Chart No. 2 includes 4 h. to 8 h.; Chart No.
3, 8 h. to 12 h.; Chart No. 4, 12 h. to 16 h.; Chart No. 5, 16 h. to 20 h.; and Chart No. 6,
20 h. to 24 h., which completes the circuit. Charles Morden his cousin, was much his inferior in
every respect. Accustomed to excessive indulgence, he became fretful and idle, and often entered
into mischief, for the sake of having something to do; his parents so plentifully supplied him
with play-things, that he was consequently tired of every thing he possessed, and only desirous
of what was in expectation; nay, worse, for to obtain any particular gratification, he would not
scruple making use of falshood.

Such was the boy, now unfortunately the constant companion of George Elliot.

Mr. Elliot indulged his son in every innocent amusement proper for his age, but loved him too
well to suffer his faults to pass unnoticed. George had been long anxious for a poney, and
as soon as a proper one could be purchased, his father presented it to him, and often allowed
him to ride out, either accompanied by himself or a servant, but particularly forbade him from
ever mounting any other horse in the stables, telling him at the same time, the many fatal accidents
that had occurred, owing to boys attempting to ride horses they were unable to manage. George
promised obedience, and had strictly adhered to his word.

It was settled that Charles was to share the studies, as well as the
amusements of his cousin, and the gentleman to whose care George's
education was confided, paid equal attention to both, though he soon
perceived that Charles had little delight in useful occupations: and
he was always glad of some excuse that might save him the trouble
of attending Mr. Darford, and laughed at George for being always fagging
as he called it.

About two months after his son's return, Mr. Elliot was obliged by some business of importance,
to take a journey that he thought might detain him about a fortnight
from home.

He embraced the children at parting, desired them to behave well, and at his return they should
be rewarded.

For the first week after Mr. Elliot's departure, the boys were so good, and their tutor so well
pleased with their conduct, that one fine day he gave them a holiday, telling them, that provided
they avoided all mischievous amusements they were at liberty to spend the day in any manner
most agreeable to themselves.--During several hours, they were employed
in catching their balls, flying their kites, working in the garden,
&c. At length, Charles seeing a little boy going by on horseback,
said he should like nothing so well as a nice ride before dinner.

"Nor I neither," answered George, "but you know it is impossible, my father having expressly
forbidden us to ride out alone during his absence. Mr. Darford is not at home, and I know that
all the men are busy." "What does that signify?" returned Charles, "we are surely old enough
to take care of ourselves, and as to my uncle, he will never know any thing of the matter."

George
was at first quite shocked at the idea of disobeying his father, but he at last suffered himself
to be persuaded by the artful entreaties of his cousin, to do what he knew to be wrong. They
went to the stables, where George took out his own little poney,
and Charles one of his uncle's large horses, assuring his cousin that
he could manage it very well.

At their first setting out, they agreed not to go far from home, only just to ride round the paddock;
the pleasantness of the weather, however, soon tempted them to alter
their resolution, and they ventured into the high road.

They went on very well for some time, and were just thinking of returning, when Charles's horse
took fright at some object on the side of the road, and by a sudden start threw his rider; he
was not much hurt by the fall, but the horse galloped away, and they soon lost all trace of the way
he took: after wasting some time in fruitless endeavours to follow him, they were obliged to return
home.

George was very uneasy, and bitterly repented the fault he had committed. "O Charles," cried
he, "why did you ask me to disobey my father! Alas! I fear he will never forgive me."

"Don't cry so, pray," answered his cousin, "come, follow my advice, and this affair will never
be discovered."--"How can that be? you surely forget the horse is lost, and besides, I would
not upon any account tell an untruth."

"You are very foolish then, let me tell you; for as nobody saw us
go out, if we deny knowing any thing about the horse, we shall never
be suspected."

  "No, Charles, that I
  will never do; I had rather suffer
  the severest
  punishment that could
  be inflicted upon
  me, than tell a lie.
  Nothing shall induce me to add to the fault I have already committed.

When my father comes home, I will confess what I have done, and rely
upon his indulgence for pardoning a disobedience I so sincerely repent."



Deimos, satellite of Mars, 125.

Denning, W.F., description of Jupiter, 175.

De Vico on rotation of Venus, 76.

Dewar, James, discovers free hydrogen in air, 232.

De Witt discovers Eros, 133.

Dick, Thomas, on Saturn, 201.

Douglass, A.E., sees Mars's canals, 92.
  sees clouds in Mars, 119.

Doppler's principle, 79, 200.

Earth and moon's orbit, 217.
  birth of moon from, 236.
  change of distance from sun, 27.
  less advanced than Mars, 89.
  older than Venus, 58.
  seen from Mercury, 41.
  seen from Venus, 69-71, 75.
  seen from moon, 214.

Earth, similarity to Venus, 46.
  supposed signals to and from Mars, 110.

Elger, T.G., on cracks in moon, 227.
  on Tycho's rays, 246.

Ephemeris, how to use, 260, 264.

Eros, an asteroid, 131-134, 136, 137.

Flammarion, C., observes Venus's atmosphere, 56.
  on plurality of worlds, 8.

Forbes, Prof. George, on ultra-Neptunian planet, 210.

Galileo on lunar world, 215.

Gravity, as affecting life on planets, 20, 46.

Hall, Asaph, discovers Mars's moons, 90.

Herodotus, lunar crater, 227.

Herschel, Sir John, on Saturn, 185.

Holden, E.S., on photograph of lunar crater, 242.

Huggins on Mercury's atmosphere, 21.

Inhabitants of foreign planets, 1, 4, 5.

Interplanetary communication, 1, 3, 72, 110, 112.

Juno, an asteroid, 129.

Jupiter, cloudy aspect of, 165.
  density of, 162.
  distance of, 161.
  equatorial belts on, 165.
  future of, 180.
  gravity on, 162.
  great red spot on, 169.
  markings outside the belts, 168.
  and the nebular theory, 178.
  once a companion star, 179.
  polar compression of, 161.
  possibly yet incandescent, 177.
  question of a denser core, 176.
  resemblance of, to sun, 174.
  rotation of, 161, 173.
  satellites of, 166, 181.
  seen from satellites, 182.
  size of, 160.
  solar light and heat on, 182.
  south belt of, 172.
  surface conditions of, 163.
  theories about the red spot, 170.
  trade-winds and the belts of, 167.
  various rates of rotation of, 173.
  visibility of rotation of, 166.

Keeler, J.E., on Saturn's rings, 200.

Kepler, lunar crater, 223.

Kinetic theory of gases, 116.

Kirkwood, Daniel, on asteroids, 131.

Lagrange on Olbers's theory, 139.

Lick Observatory and Mars's canals, 92.

Life, a planetary phenomenon, 10.
  in sea depths, 62.
  on planets, 62, 63.
  prime requisites of, 64.
  resisting extreme cold, 123.
  universality of, 9.

Loewy and Puiseux, on lunar atmosphere, 248.
  on lunar "seas," 234.

Lowell, Percival, description of Mars, 108.
  on markings of Venus, 60.
  on Mercury's rotation, 33.
  on rotation of Venus, 77.
  sees Mars's canals, 92.
  theory of Martian canals, 101.

Lucian, on appearance of earth from moon, 213.

Lyman, C.S., observes Venus's atmosphere, 55.

Mars, age of, 89.
  atmosphere of, 86, 115, 117.
  bands of life on, 104.
  canals on, 90.
    described by Schiaparelli, 93.
    gemination of, 91, 105.
    have builders of, disappeared? 107.
    and irrigation, 101.
    and lines of vegetation, 102.
    and seasonal changes, 99.
    and water circulation, 100.
  carbon dioxide on, 118.
  circular spots or "oases" on, 103.
  colors of, 89.
  dimensions of, 86.
  distance of, 85, 86.
  enigmatical lights on, 111.
  gravity on, 86.
  inclination of axis, 86.
  length of year, 86.
  Lowell's theory of, 101.
  light and heat on, 85.
  moonlight on, 128.
  orbit of, 85.
  polar caps of, 87, 118.
  possible size of inhabitants, 106.
  satellites of, 90, 124, 126.
  seasons on, 87.
  supposed signals from, 110, 112.
  temperature of, 120, 122.
  water vapor on, 117.

Mercury, atmosphere of, 21, 28, 43, 44.
  day and night on, 34, 38, 40.
  dimensions, 18.
  earth seen from, 41.
  habitability of, 33, 40, 44.
  heavens seen from, 41, 42.
  heat and light on, 25, 28.
  holds place of honor, 19.
  length of year, 24.
  mass of, 19.
  moon visible from, 41.
  resemblances to moon, 43.
  rotation of, 30.
  shape of orbit, 23.
  sun as seen from, 37.
  velocity in orbit, 23.
  Venus seen from, 41.
  virtual fall toward sun, 24.
  visibility of, 21.
  water on, 43.

Moon, the area of surface, 219.
  atmosphere of, 7, 215, 231, 247, 248.
  clouds on, 6, 245.
  constitution of, 236.
  craters, 221.
  day and night on, 254.
  distance of, 212, 215.
  density of, 219.
  former cataclysm on, 237.
  former life on, 241, 243.
  giantism on, 228, 229.
  gravity on, 219, 228, 229.
  libration of, 249.
  meteorites and, 230.
  mountains on, 220.
  the older world in, 242.
  origin of, 235.
  phases and motions of, 250.
  rotation of, 249.
  seas of, 234.
  size of, 218.
  snow on, 246.
  speculation about, 212.
  temperature of, 255.
  vegetation on, 6, 244, 247.
  visibility of features of, 213.

Nasmyth and Carpenter on lunar craters, 224.

Neptune, description of, 208-210.

Newcomb, Simon, on Olbers's theory, 141.

Newton, lunar crater, 222.

Olbers's theory of planetary explosion, 138.
  on Vesta's light, 138.

Pallas, an asteroid, 129.

Perrotin sees canals on Mars, 92.

Phobos, satellite of Mars, 125.

Pickering, E.C., discovers ninth moon of Saturn, 195.
  finds Eros on Harvard plates, 133.
  on shape of Eros, 136.
  on light of Eros, 137.

Pickering, W.H., on lunar atmosphere, 247.
  observes changes in moon, 244.
  sees Mars's canals, 92.
  theory of Tycho's rays, 246.
  on Venus's atmosphere, 54.

Planets, classification of, 15.
  how to find, 256, 273.
  resemblances among, 12.

Plato, lunar ring plain, 225.

Plurality of worlds in literature, 2.
  subject ignored, 8.

Proctor, R.A., on Jupiter's moons, 180.
  on other worlds, 8.

Roche's limit, 201.

Rosse, Lord, on temperature of moon, 255.

Saturn, age of, 189.
  composition of, 190.
  density of, 188.
  distance of, 186.
  the gauze ring, 199-202.
  gravity on, 188.
  inclination of axis, 187.
  interior of, 206.
  length of year, 186.
  popular telescopic object, 185.
  rings of, 185, 196.
    gaps in, 197.
    origin of, 200.
    periodic disappearance of, 198.
    seen from planet, 207.
    shadow of, 198.
  rotation of, 187.
  satellites of, 195.
  size of, 187.

Schiaparelli discovers canals on Mars, 90.
  describes Martian canals, 93.
  discovers Mercury's rotation, 30, 32.
  on rotation of Venus, 76.

Solar system, shape and size of, 14.
  unity of, 9.
  viewed from space, 11.

Stoney, Johnstone, on atmospheres of planets, 116.
  on escape of gases from moon, 231.

Sun, the, isolation in space, 13.
  no life on, 10.
  resemblances with Jupiter, 174.

Swedenborg, on Saturn's rings, 204.

Tidal friction, 80, 81, 236, 253.

Tycho, lunar crater, 222.

Ultra-Neptunian planet, 210.

Uranus, description of, 208-210.

Venus, age of, 58.
  atmosphere of, 53, 55, 59, 61, 68.
  absence of seasons on, 51.
  density of, 47.
  distance of, 47, 50.
  gravity on, 46, 47.
  inclination of axis, 50.
  life on, 57, 58, 61, 65, 67, 68, 82, 117.
  light and heat on, 50-57.
  orbit of, 50.
  phases of, 49.
  resemblances of, to earth, 46.
  rotation of, 76, 79, 80.
  size of, 46.
  twilight on, 83.
  visibility of, 47.

Vesta, an asteroid, 129, 130, 138.

Vogel on Mercury's atmosphere, 21.

Wireless telegraphy, 1, 112.

Young, C.A., on Olbers's theory of asteroids, 142.
  on temperature of Mars, 122.
  on Venus's atmosphere, 53.

Zodiac, the, 258.

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY'S PUBLICATIONS.

RICHARD A. PROCTOR'S WORKS. With Illustrations, some colored. 12mo. Cloth, $1.75.

     CONTENTS.--Introduction.--What the Earth teaches us.--What we learn
     from the Sun.--The Inferior Planets.--Mars, the Miniature of our
     Earth.--Jupiter, the Giant of the Solar System.--Saturn, the Ringed
     World.--Uranus and Neptune, the Arctic Planets.--The Moon and other
     Satellites.--Meteors and Comets: their Office in the Solar
     System.--Other Suns than Ours.--Of Minor Stars, and of the
     Distribution of Stars in Space.--The Nebulæ: are they External
     Galaxies?--Supervision and Control. To which are
added Essays on the Jewish Sabbath and Astrology. 12mo. Cloth, $1.75.

     CONTENTS.--Past and Future of the Earth.--Seeming Wastes in
     Nature.--New Theory of Life in other Worlds.--A Missing Comet.--The
     Lost Comet and its Meteor Train.--Jupiter.--Saturn and its
     System.--A Giant Sun.--The Star Depths.--Star Gauging.--Saturn and
     the Sabbath of the Jews.--Thoughts on Astrology.

THE EXPANSE OF HEAVEN. A Series of Essays on the Wonders of the Firmament. 12mo. Cloth, $2.00.

     CONTENTS.--A Dream that was not all a Dream.--The Sun.--The Queen
     of Night.--The Evening Star.--The Ruddy Planet.--Life in the Ruddy
     Planet.--The Prince of Planets.--Jupiter's Family of Moons.--The
     Ring-Girdled Planet.--Newton and the Law of the Universe.--The
     Discovery of Two Giant Planets.--The Lost Comet.--Visitants from
     the Star Depths.--Whence come the Comets?--The Comet Families of
     the Giant Planets.--The Earth's Journey through Showers.--How the
     Planets Grew.--Our Daily Light.--The Flight of Light.--A Cluster of
     Suns.--Worlds ruled by Colored Suns.--The King of Suns.--Four
     Orders of Suns.--The Depths of Space.--Charting the Star
     Depths.--The Star Depths Astir with Life.--The Drifting Stars.--The
     Milky Way.

THE MOON: Her Motions, Aspect, Scenery, and Physical Conditions. With Three Lunar Photographs,
Map, and Many Plates, Charts, etc. 12mo. Cloth, $2.00. 

     But how about Mr. Wills's predecessors? How about 'Don Quixote's'
     previous connection with the English stage? Well, it was scarcely
     to be expected that so popular a tale would never excite
     the attention of the playwright or the musician.
     

LIGHT SCIENCE FOR LEISURE HOURS. A Series of Familiar Essays on Scientific Subjects, Natural
Phenomena, etc. 12mo. Cloth, $1.75.

A TIMELY BOOK.

China.

Travels and Investigations in the "Middle Kingdom"--A Study of its Civilization and Possibilities.
Together with an Account of the Boxer War, the Relief of the Legations, and the Re-establishment
of Peace. By JAMES HARRISON WILSON, A.M., LL.D., late Major-General United States Volunteers,
and Brevet Major-General United States Army. Third edition, revised throughout, enlarged, and
reset. 12mo. Cloth, $1.75.

     General Wilson's second visit to China and his recent active
     service in that country have afforded exceptional chances for a
     knowledge of present conditions and the possibilities of the
     future. In the light of the information thus obtained at first hand
     in the country itself, General Wilson is enabled to write with a
     peculiar authoritativeness in this edition, which brings his study
     of China down to the present day. In addition to the new chapters
     which have been added explaining the origin and development of the
     Boxer insurrection, the relief of the legations, and the outlook
     for the future, the author has revised his book throughout, and has
     added much valuable matter in the course of his narrative. This
     book, which is therefore in many respects new, puts the reader in
     possession of a broad and comprehensive knowledge of Chinese
     affairs, and this includes the latest phases of the subject. The
     practical and discriminating character of the author's study of
     China will be appreciated more than ever at this time when
     practical questions relating to Chinese administration, commerce,
     and other matters of the first importance, are engaging so much
     attention. This new edition is indispensable for any one who wishes
     a compact, authoritative presentation of the China of to-day.

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK.

D. APPLETON & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS.

The Sun.

By C.A. YOUNG, Ph.D., LL.D., Professor of Astronomy in Princeton University. New and revised
edition, with numerous Illustrations. Let us give full play to the element of variety.

     Let every book have an individuality, a character, of its
     own. Let us be able to identify it easily. Let it retain its original
     garb, so that we may always be able to distinguish it. Surely
     it is one of the greatest charms of a row of volumes that each
     has its special features, and can readily be found when wanted.
     

It may be laid down as a general rule that the binding of a book should
have a distinct reference to the nature of its contents.

 Cloth, $5.00.

     "Sir Robert Ball has the happy gift of making abstruse problems
     intelligible to the 'wayfaring man' by the aid of simple language
     and a few diagrams. Science moves so fast that there was room for a
     volume which should enlighten the general leader on the present
     state of knowledge about solar phenomena, and that place the
     present treatise admirably fills."--London Chronicle.

An Atlas of Astronomy.

By Sir ROBERT S. BALL, F.R.S., Professor of Astronomy and Geometry at the University of Cambridge;
author of "Starland," "The Cause of an Ice Age," etc. With 72 Plates, Explanatory Text, and
Complete Index. Small 4to. The paucity of learning shown in the answers of the nuns being sufficient
to convince any fairminded person that the whole affair was a ridiculous
comedy, the bailiff felt encouraged to persevere until he had unravelled
the whole plot.

     Consequently, at three o'clock in the afternoon, he returned to the
     convent, accompanied by his clerk, by several magistrates, and
     by a considerable number of the best known people of Loudun, and asked
     to see the superior.
     

Studies in Spectrum Analysis.

By J. NORMAN LOCKYER, F.R.S., Correspondent of the Institute of France, etc. With 60 Illustrations.
12mo. Cloth, $2.50.

     "The study of spectrum analysis is one fraught with a peculiar
     fascination, and some of the author's experiments are exceedingly
     picturesque in their results. They are so lucidly described, too,
     that the reader keeps on from page to page, never flagging in
     interest in the matter before him, nor putting down the book until
     the last page is reached."--New York Evening Express.

The Story of the Stars.

By G.F. CHAMBERS, F.R.A.S., author of "Handbook of Descriptive and Practical Astronomy," etc.
With 24 Illustrations. (Library of Useful Stories.) 16mo. Cloth, 40 cents.

     "One can here get a clear conception of the relative condition of
     the stars and constellations, and of the existent universe so far
     as it is disclosed to view. The author presents his wonderful and
     at times bewildering facts in a bright and cheery spirit that makes
     the book doubly attractive."--Boston Home Journal.

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK.

