SKETCHES NEW AND OLD

by Mark Twain

Part 5.

THE SIAMESE TWINS--[Written about 1868.]

I do not wish to write of the personal habits of these strange creatures solely, but also of
certain curious details of various kinds concerning them, which, belonging only to their private
life, have never crept into print.  Knowing the Twins intimately, I feel that I am peculiarly
well qualified for the task I have taken upon myself.

The Siamese Twins are naturally tender and affectionate indisposition, and have clung to each
other with singular fidelity throughout a long and eventful life.  Even as children they were
inseparable companions; and it was noticed that they always seemed to prefer each other's society
to that of any other persons.  They nearly always played together; and, so accustomed was their
mother to this peculiarity, that, whenever both of them chanced to be lost, she usually only
hunted for one of them --satisfied that when she found that one she would find his brother
somewhere in the immediate neighborhood.  And yet these creatures were ignorant and unlettered-barbarians
themselves and the offspring of barbarians, who knew not the light of philosophy and science. 'slacked
for a time of some better leasure,' changed to 'slacked for a time of some better leasure.' after
the Dedication.

'Captaine in the Elizabeth Bonaduentnre' changed to 'Captaine in the Elizabeth Bonaduenture'
on page 2.
'willed him to goe to to the Gouernour of the Citie' changed to 'willed
him to goe to the Gouernour of the Citie' on page 4.

'Maister Carleill
our Lieuteuant generall' changed to 'Maister Carleill our Lieutenant
generall' on page 6.  How surely do the habits
of a lifetime become second nature to us!  The Twins always go to bed at the same time; but
Chang usually gets up about an hour before his brother.  By an understanding between themselves,
Chang does all the indoor work and Eng runs all the errands.  This is because Eng likes to
go out; Chang's habits are sedentary.  However, Chang always goes along. Eng is a Baptist,
but Chang is a Roman Catholic; still, to please his brother, Chang consented to be baptized
at the same time that Eng was, on condition that it should not "count."  During the war they
were strong partisans, and both fought gallantly all through the great struggle--Eng on the
Union side and Chang on the Confederate.  They took each other prisoners at Seven Oaks, but
the proofs of capture were so evenly balanced in favor of each, that a general army court had
to be assembled to determine which one was properly the captor and which the captive. The jury
was unable to agree for a long time; but the vexed question was finally decided by agreeing
to consider them both prisoners, and then exchanging them.  At one time Chang was convicted
of disobedience of orders, and sentenced to ten days in the guard-house, but Eng, in spite
of all arguments, felt obliged to share his imprisonment, notwithstanding he himself was entirely
innocent; and so, to save the blameless brother from suffering, they had to discharge both
from custody--the just reward of faithfulness. 

Here it vvas resolued in full assembly of Captaines, to vndertake the enterprise of S HELENA,
and from thence to seeke out the inhabitation of our English countreymen in VIRGINIA, distant from
thence some sixe degrees Northvvard.  The bystanders interfered, and tried to separate them, but they could not do it, and
so allowed them to fight it out.  In the end both were disabled, and were carried to the hospital
on one and the same shutter.

Their ancient habit of going always together had its drawbacks when they reached man's estate,
and entered upon the luxury of courting.  Both fell in love with the same girl.  Each tried
to steal clandestine interviews with her, but at the critical moment the other would always
turn up. By and by Eng saw, with distraction, that Chang had won the girl's affections; and,
from that day forth, he had to bear with the agony of being a witness to all their dainty billing
and cooing.  But with a magnanimity that did him infinite credit, he succumbed to his fate,
and gave countenance and encouragement to a state of things that bade fair to sunder his generous
heart-strings.  He sat from seven every evening until two in the morning, listening to the
fond foolishness of the two lovers, and to the concussion of hundreds of squandered kisses--for
the privilege of sharing only one of which he would have given his right hand.  But he sat
patiently, and waited, and gaped, and yawned, and stretched, and longed for two o'clock to
come.  And he took long walks with the lovers on moonlight evenings--sometimes traversing ten
miles, notwithstanding he was usually suffering from rheumatism.  He is an inveterate smoker;
but he could not smoke on these occasions, because the young lady was painfully sensitive to
the smell of tobacco.  Eng cordially wanted them married, and done with it; but although Chang
often asked the momentous question, the young lady could not gather sufficient courage to answer
it while Eng was by.  However, on one occasion, after having walked some sixteen miles, and
sat up till nearly daylight, Eng dropped asleep, from sheer exhaustion, and then the question
was asked and answered.  The lovers were married.  All acquainted with the circumstance applauded
the noble brother-in-law.  His unwavering faithfulness was the theme of every tongue.  He had
stayed by them all through their long and arduous courtship; and when at last they were married,
he lifted his hands above their heads, and said with impressive unction, "Bless ye, my children,
I will never desert ye!" and he kept his word.  Fidelity like this is all too rare in this
cold world. 

During our being in this towne, as formerly also at S. IAGO there had passed iustice vpon the
life of one of our owne companie for an odious matter: so here likewise was there an Irish man
hanged, for the murthering of his Corporall.

