1920

New York Thomas Y. Crowell Company Publishers

  +----------------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                                      |
  |                    JOHANNA SPYRI'S ALPINE STORIES                    |
  |                                                                      |
  |                                                                      |
  |  GRITLI'S CHILDREN. Complete Edition. Translated by LOUISE BROOKS.   |
  |                      Illustrated in color. 8vo.                      |
  |                                                                      |
  | HEIDI. Complete Edition. Translated by HELENE S. WHITE. 16 full-page |
  |                     illustrations in color. 8vo.                     |
  |                                                                      |
  | LITTLE ALPINE MUSICIAN. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE. Illustrated in  |
  |                             color. 8vo.                              |
  |                                                                      |
  |   RICO AND WISELI.                      |
  |                                                                      |
  | UNCLE TITUS. Translated by LOUISE BROOKS. Illustrated in color. 8vo. |
  |                                                                      |
  |  VERONICA. Translated by LOUISE BROOKS. Illustrated in color. 8vo.   |
  |                                                                      |
  |  JO, THE LITTLE MACHINIST. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE. Illustrated  |
  |                            in color. 8vo.                            |
  |                                                                      |
  | LITTLE CURLY HEAD. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE. Illustrated in color |
  |                                 8vo.                                 |
  |                                                                      |
  | LITTLE MISS GRASSHOPPER. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE. Illustrated in |
  |                   color by CHARLES COPELAND. 8vo.                    |
  |                                                                      |
  |   MONI, THE GOAT BOY.                    |
  |                                                                      |
  |   TRINI, THE LITTLE STRAWBERRY GIRL. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE.    |
  |                      Illustrated in color. 8vo.                      |
  |                                                                      |
  |      TONI, THE LITTLE WOOD CARVER. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE.      |
  |                      Illustrated in color. 8vo.                      |
  |                                                                      |
  | TISS, A LITTLE ALPINE WAIF. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE. Illustrated |
  |                            in color. 8vo.                            |
  |                                                                      |
  |  THE ROSE CHILD. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE. Illustrated in color.  |
  |                                 8vo.                                 |
  |                                                                      |
  |     WHAT SAMI SINGS WITH THE BIRDS. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE.     |
  |                      Illustrated in color. 8vo.                      |
  |                                                                      |
  +----------------------------------------------------------------------+

CONTENTS

AT HOME IN THE LITTLE STONE HUT

A HARD SENTENCE

UP IN THE MOUNTAINS

IN THE SANITARIUM

CHAPTER FIRST

AT HOME IN THE LITTLE STONE HUT

High up in the Bernese Oberland, quite a distance above the meadow-encircled hamlet of Kandergrund,
stands a little lonely hut, under the shadow of an old fir-tree. Not far away rushes down from
the wooded heights of rock the Wild brook, which in times of heavy rains, has carried away
so many rocks and bowlders that when the storms are ended a ragged mass of stones is left,
through which flows a swift, clear stream of water. Therefore the little dwelling near by this
brook is called the stone hut.

Here lived the honest day-laborer Toni, who conducted himself well in every farm-house, where
he went to work, for he was quiet and industrious, punctual at his tasks, and reliable in every
way.

In his hut at home he had a young wife and a little boy, who was a joy to both of them. Near
the hut in the little shed was the goat, the milk of which supplied food for the mother and
child, while the father received his board through the week on the farms where he worked from
morning until night. Only on Sunday was he at home with his wife and little Toni. The wife
Elsbeth, kept her little house in good order; it was narrow and tiny, but it always looked
so clean and cheerful that every one liked to come into the sunny room, and the father, Toni,
was never so happy as when he was at home in the stone hut with his little boy on his knee.

For five years the family lived in harmony and undisturbed peace. Although they had no abundance
and little worldly goods, they were happy and content. The husband earned enough, so they did
not suffer want, and they desired nothing beyond their simple manner of life, for they loved
each other and their greatest delight was little Toni.

The little boy grew strong and healthy and with his merry ways delighted his father's heart,
when he remained at home on Sundays, and sweetened all his mother's work on week-days, when
his father was away until late in the evening.

Little Toni was now four years old and already knew how to be helpful in all sorts of small
ways, in the house and the goat's shed and also in the field behind the hut. From morning until
night he tripped happily behind his mother for he was as content as the little birds up in
the old fir-tree.

When Saturday night came the mother scrubbed and cleaned with doubled energy, to finish early,
for on that day the father was through his work earlier than other days, and she always went
with little Toni by the hand, part way to meet him. This was a great delight to the child.
He now knew very well how one task followed another in the household. When his mother began
to scrub, he jumped around in the room, with delight and cried out again and again: "Now we
are going for Father! Now we are going for Father!" until the moment came when his mother took
him by the hand and started along.

Saturday evening had come again in the lovely month of May. Outdoors the birds in the trees
were singing merrily up to the blue sky; indoors the mother was cleaning busily, in order to
get out early into the golden evening, and meanwhile now outside, now in the house, little
Toni was hopping around and shouting:

"Now we are going for Father!"

It was not long before the work was finished. The mother put on her shawl, tied on her best
apron and stepped out of the house.

Toni jumped for joy and ran three times around his mother, then seized her hand and shouted
once more:

"Now we are going for Father!"

Then he tripped along beside his mother in the lovely, sunny evening. They wandered to the
Wild brook, over the wooden bridge, which crosses it, and came to the narrow foot-path, winding
up through the flower-laden meadows to the farm where the father worked.

The last rays of the setting sun fell across the meadows and the sound of the evening bells
came up from Kandergrund.

The mother stood still and folded her hands.

"Lay your hands together Toneli," she said, "it is the Angelus."

The child obeyed.

"What must I pray, Mother?" he asked.

"Give us and all tired people a blessed Sunday! Amen!" said the mother devoutly.

Toneli repeated the prayer. Suddenly he screamed: "Father is coming!"

Down from the farm some one was running as fast as he could come.

"That is not Father," said his mother, and both went towards the running man. When they met,
the man stood still and said, gasping:

"Don't go any farther, turn around, Elsbeth. I came straight to you, for something has happened."

"Oh, my God!" cried the woman in the greatest anguish, "has something happened to Toni?"

"Yes, he was with the wood-cutters, and then he was struck. They have brought him back; he
is lying up at the farm-but don't go up there," he added, holding Elsbeth fast, for she wanted
to start off as soon as she heard the news.

"Not go up?" she said quickly. "I must go to him; I must help him and see about bringing him home."

"You cannot help him, he is--he is already dead," said the messenger in an unsteady voice.
Then he turned and ran back again, glad to have the message off his mind.

Elsbeth threw herself down on a stone by the way, unable to stand or to walk. She held her
apron before her face and burst into weeping and sobbing, so that Toneli was distressed and
frightened. He pressed close to his mother and began to cry too.

It was already dark, when Elsbeth finally came to herself and could think of her child. The
little one was still sitting beside her on the ground, with both hands pressed to his eyes,
and sobbing pitifully. His mother lifted him up.

"Come, Toneli, we must go home; it is late," she said, taking him by the hand.

But he resisted.

"No, no, we must wait for Father!" he said and pulled his mother back.

Again she could not keep back the tears. "Oh, Toneli, Father will come no more," she said,
stifling her sobs; "he is already enjoying the blessed Sunday, we prayed for, for the weary.
See, the dear Lord has taken him to Heaven; it is so beautiful there, he will prefer to stay
there."

"Then we will go too," replied Toneli, starting

"Yes, yes, we shall go there too," promised his mother, "but now we must first go home to the
stone hut," and without a word she went with the little one back to the silent cottage.

The proprietor of the Matten farm sent word to Elsbeth the following day that he would do everything
necessary for her husband, and so she need not come until it was time for the service, for
she would not recognize her husband. He sent her some money in order that she would not have
too much care in the next few days, and promised to think of her later on.

Elsbeth did as he advised and remained at home until the bells in Kandergrund rang for the
service. Then she went to accompany her husband to his resting place.

Sad and hard days came for Elsbeth. She missed her good, kind husband everywhere, and felt
quite lost without him. Besides, cares came now which she had known little about before, for
her husband had had his good, daily work. But now she felt sometimes as if she would almost
despair. She had nothing but her goat and the little potato field behind the cottage, and from
these she had to feed and clothe herself and the little one, and besides furnish rent for the
little house.

Elsbeth had only one consolation, but one that always supported her when pain and care oppressed
her; she could pray, and although often in the midst of tears, still always with the firm belief
that the dear Lord would hear her supplication.

When at night she had put little Toni in his tiny bed she would kneel down beside him and repeat
aloud the old hymn, which now came from the depths of her heart, as never before:

  Oh, God of Love, oh Father-heart,
    In whom my trust is founded,
  I know full well how good Thou art--
    E'en when by grief I am wounded.

  Oh Lord, it surely can not be
    That Thou wilt let me languish
  In hopeless depths of misery,
    And live in tears of anguish.

  Oh Lord, my soul yearns for thine aid
    In this dark vale of weeping;
  For thee I've waited, hoped and prayed
    Assured of thy safe keeping.

  Lord let me bear whate'er thy Love
    May send of grief or sorrow,
  Until Thou, in thy Heaven above
    Make dawn a brighter morrow.

And in the midst of her urgent praying, the mother's tears flowed abundantly, and little Toni,
deeply moved in his heart by his mother's weeping and earnest prayer, kept his hands folded
and wept softly too.

So the time passed. Elsbeth struggled along and little Toni was able to help her in many ways,
for he was now seven years old. He was his mother's only joy, and she was able to take delight
in him for he was obedient and willing to do everything she desired. He had always been so
inseparable from his mother that he knew exactly how the tasks of the day had to be done, and
he desired nothing but to help her whenever he could. If she was working in the little field,
he squatted beside her, pulled out the weeds, and threw the stones across the path.

If his mother was taking the goat out of the shed so that she could nibble the grass around
the hut, he went with her step by step, for his mother had told him he must watch her so that
she would not run away.

If his mother was sitting in winter by her spinning-wheel, he sat the whole time beside her,
mending his winter shoes with strong strips of cloth, as she had taught him to do. He had no
greater wish than to see his mother happy and contented. His greatest pleasure was, when Sunday
came and she was resting from all work, to sit with her on the little wooden bench in front
of the house and listen as she told him about his father and talk with her about all kinds
of things.

But now the time had come for Toni to go to school. It was very hard for him to leave his mother
and remain away from her so much. The long way down to Kandergrund and up again took so much
time, that Toni was hardly ever with his mother any more through the day, but only in the evening.
Indeed he always came home so quickly that she could hardly believe it possible, for he looked
forward with pleasure all day long to getting home again. He lost no time with his school-mates
but ran immediately away from them as soon as school was over. He was not accustomed to the
ways of the other boys since he had been constantly alone with his quietly working mother and
used to performing definite tasks continually without any noise.

So it was altogether strange to him and he took no pleasure in it, when the boys coming out
of the school-house, set up a great screaming, one running after another, trying to see which
was the stronger, and throwing one another on the ground, or wrestling so that their caps were
thrown far away and their jackets half torn off.

The wrestlers would often call to him:

"Come and play!" and when he ran away from them they would call after him: "You are a coward."
But this made little difference to him; he didn't hear it long, for he ran with all his might
in order to be at home again with his mother.

Now a new interest for him arose in the school: he had seen beautiful animals drawn on white
sheets, which the children of the upper classes copied. He quickly tried to draw them, too,
with his pencil and at home continued drawing the animals again and again as long as he had
a bit of paper. Then he cut out the animals and tried to make them stand on the table, but
this he could not do. Then suddenly the thought came to him that if they were of wood they
could stand. He began quickly with his knife to cut around on a little piece of wood until
there was a body and four legs; but the wood was not large enough for the neck and the head;
so he had to take another piece and calculate from the beginning how high it must be and where
the head must be placed. So Toni cut away with much perseverance until he succeeded in making
something like a goat and could show it with great satisfaction to his mother. She was much
delighted at his skill and said:

"You are surely going to be a wood-carver, and a very good one."

From that time on Toni looked at every little piece of wood which came in his way, to see if
it would be good for carving, and if so he would quickly put it away, so that he often brought
home all his pockets full of these pieces, which he then collected like treasures into a pile
and spent every free moment carving them.

Thus the years passed by. Although Elsbeth always had many cares, she experienced only joy
in her Toni. He still clung to her with the same love, helped her in every way as well as he
could and spent his life beside her, entirely at his quiet occupation, in which he gradually
acquired a quite gratifying skill. Toni was never so content as when he was sitting in the
little stone hut with his carving and his mother came in and out happily employed, always saying
a kindly word to him and finally sat down beside him at her spinning-wheel.

CHAPTER SECOND

A HARD SENTENCE

Toni was twelve years old in the winter, and now his school days were over, and the time had
come to look about for some kind of work which would bring him in some money and by which he
could learn something necessary for future years.

Spring had come and work had begun in the fields. His mother thought it would be best to ask
the proprietor of the Matten farm, if he had some light work for Toni; but every time she spoke
about it he would say beseechingly:

"Oh, Mother, don't do that; let me be a wood-carver!"

She would have had no objection to this, but knew no way to bring it about, and she had known
the farmer up on the Matten farm ever since her husband had worked there, and ever since his
death, from time to time he had sent her a little wood or meal.

She hoped that he would employ Toni at first for light tasks in the field, so that he would
gradually learn to do the heavier work.

So on Saturday night after the day's work was ended and she sat down with Toni to their scanty
supper, she said once more:

"Toni, now we must take a decided step; I think it is best for me to go up to the Matten farm
to-morrow."

"Oh, Mother, don't do that!" said Toni quite beseechingly. "Don't go to the farmer! If you
will only let me be a wood-carver, I will work so hard, that I will earn enough, and you will
not have to do so much, and then I can stay at home with you. Besides you would be all alone,
and I can't bear it, if I have to be always away from you. Let me stay with you; don't send
me away, Mother."

"Oh, you good Toni," said his mother, "what wouldn't I give to be able to keep you always with
me! But that really cannot be. I know of no way for you to be a wood-carver; some one would
have to teach you, and when you had learned, how should we sell the carvings? You would have
to know people and go about, or else your work wouldn't bring any money. If only I could talk
with some one, who could give me good advice!"

"Don't you know any one, Mother, you can ask?" said Toni anxiously and racked his brain to
try to think of some one. His mother too began to consider.

"I think I will go to the pastor, who has already given me advice," said his mother, delighted
to have found a way out of the difficulty.

Toni was quite happy and now was determined that early the next morning they should go down
to the church and then his mother could go in to see the pastor and Toni would wait outside.

Everything was carried out on Sunday morning as they had planned. His mother had put two of
the little carved animals in her pocket to show the pastor as examples of her boy's good ability.
The pastor received her very cordially, had her sit down beside him and enquired with interest
about her affairs, for he knew Elsbeth and how bravely she had helped herself through all the
hard times.

She told him now the whole story, how Toni from a very early age had worked at the carving
with so much interest and now wished for nothing so much as to carry on this work, but how
she knew of no way for him to learn, nor how, later, the work could be sold. Finally she showed
him the two little animals as examples of Toni's skill.

The pastor replied to the mother that the plan would be very difficult to carry out. Although
the two little goats were not badly carved, yet in order to perform the work right and to earn
his bread by it, Toni would have first to learn from a good carver, because making only little
animals or boxes would not amount to anything or bring in any money, and he would only be wasting
his time.

However, down in the village of Frutigen there was a very skillful, well-known wood-carver,
who made wonderful large works which went far into the world, even to America. He carved whole
groups of animals on high rocks, chamois and eagles and whole mountains with the herdsman and
the cows. Elsbeth could talk with this carver. If Toni studied with him he could help him to
sell the finished work, for he had ways open for it.

Elsbeth left the pastor with gratitude and new hope in her heart. In front of the house Toni
was waiting in great suspense. She had to tell him at once everything the pastor had said,
and when she finally related about the wood-carver in Frutigen Toni suddenly stood still and said:

"Then come, Mother, let us go to the place at once."

However, his mother had not thought it over--she made many objections, but Toni begged so earnestly,
that she finally said:

"We must go home first and have something to eat, for it is very far away; but we can do that
quickly and then start off again right away."

So they hurried back to the house, took a little bread and milk and started on their way again.
They had several hours to travel, but Toni was so busy with his plans and thoughts for the
future, the time flew like a dream and he looked up in great surprise, when his mother said:

"See, there is the church tower of Frutigen!"

They were soon standing in front of the wood-carver's house, and learned from the children
before the door, that their father was at home.

Inside in the large, wainscotted room, sat the wood-carver with his wife at the table, looking
at a large book of beautiful colored pictures of animals which he would be able to make good
use of in his handicraft. When the two arrived he welcomed them and invited them to come and
be seated on the wooden bench, where he and his wife were sitting and which ran along the wall
around the entire room. Elsbeth accepted the invitation and immediately began to tell the wood-carver
why she had come and what she so much desired of him.

Meanwhile Toni stood as if rooted to the floor and stared motionless at a single spot. In front
of him next the wall was a glass case, in which could be seen two high rocks, carved out of
wood. On one was standing a chamois with her little ones. They had such dainty, slender legs,
and their fine heads sat so naturally on their necks that it seemed as if they were all alive
and not at all made of wood. On the other rock stood a hunter, his gun hanging by his side,
and his hat, with even a feather in it, sat on his head, all so finely carved, that one would
think it must be a real hat and a real little feather, and yet all was of wood.

Next the hunter stood his dog, and it seemed as if he would even wag his tail. Toni was like
one enchanted and hardly breathed.

When his mother finished speaking, the wood-carver said it seemed to him as if she thought
the affair would half go of itself, but it was not so.

If a thing was to be done right, it cost much time and patience to learn. He was not averse
to taking the boy, for it seemed to him that he had a desire to learn; but she would have to
pay for his board for a couple of months in Frutigen, besides paying for his instruction, which
would be as much as his board, and she herself must know whether she could spend so much on
the boy. On the other hand he would promise that the boy would be taught right, and she could
see there in the glass case, what he could learn to do.

At first Elsbeth was so disappointed and dismayed she was unable to speak a word. Now she knew
that it would be absolutely impossible for her to fulfill her boy's greatest wish. The necessary
expense of board and instruction was beyond anything that she could manage, so much so that
it was quite out of the question. It was all over with Toni's plans.

She rose and thanked the wood-carver for his willingness to take the boy, but she would have
to decline his offer. Then she beckoned to Toni, whose eyes were still so fastened to the glass
case that he paid no attention. She took him by the hand and led him quietly out of the door.

Outside Toni said, drawing a deep breath:

"Did you see what was in the case? Mother, did you see it?"

"Yes, yes, I saw it, Toni," replied his mother with a sigh, "but did you hear what the wood-carver
said?"

Toni had heard nothing; all his mind had been directed to one point.

"No, I didn't hear anything; when can I go?" he asked longingly.

"Oh, it is not possible, Toni, but don't take it so to heart! See, I can't do it, although
I would like to so much," declared his mother; "but everything would come to more than I earn
in a year, and you know how hard I have to work to manage to make the two ends meet."

It was a hard blow for Toni. All his hopes for many years lay destroyed before him; but he
knew how his mother worked, how little good she herself had, and how she always tried to give
him a little pleasure when she could. He said not a word and silently swallowed his rising
tears, hut he was very much grieved that all his hopes were over, since for the first time
he had seen what wonderful things could be made out of a piece of wood.

CHAPTER THIRD

UP IN THE MOUNTAINS

The next morning, the farmer on the Matten farm sent word to Elsbeth, to come up to see him
towards evening, as he had something to talk with her about. At the right time she laid aside
her hoe, tied on a clean apron, and said:

"Finish the hoeing, Toni; then you can milk the goat and give her some fresh straw, so she
will have a better bed. Then I will be back again."

She went up to the Matten farm. The farmer was standing in the open barn-door gazing with satisfaction
at his beautiful cows, wandering in a long procession to the well. Elsbeth stepped up to him.

"Well, I am glad you have come," he said, holding out his hand to her. "I have been thinking
about you on account of the boy's welfare. He is now at an age to do some light work and help
you a little, at least to take care of himself."

"I have already been thinking about that," replied Elsbeth, "and wanted to ask you, if you
could give him a little light work in the fields?"

"That is fortunate," continued the farmer. "I have a little job for him, healthy and not very
hard, that is to say not hard at all. He can go up to the small mountain with the cows. The
herdsman with his boys is on the big mountain and a man is also there to come every morning
and evening for the milking, so the boy will not be entirely alone and will have nothing to
do but watch the cows so that none wander off, that they don't hook each other or do anything
out of the way. While he sits there on the mountain he is master and can have all the milk
he wants. A king couldn't have anything better."

Elsbeth was a little frightened by the offer. If Toni had been more with the farm men, and
had been with cows, or if he had naturally a different disposition, wilder and more roving
and commanding-but as he was so quiet and shy, and besides without any knowledge of such things,
to be for the first time all alone for several months, away from home, up on the mountains,
watching a herd of cows, this seemed to her too hard for Toni. What would the poor boy, who
was not particularly strong, do if anything happened to him or to the herd? She expressed all
her thoughts to the farmer, but it made no difference; he thought it would be good for the
boy to get out for once, and up on the mountain he would be much stronger than at home, and
nothing could happen to him, for he would be given a horn and if anything went wrong he could
blow lustily, and immediately the farm man would come from the other mountain; in a half hour
he would be there.

Elsbeth finally thought the farmer understood it much better than she, and so it was decided
that the next week, when the cows went up to the mountain pasture, Toni should go with them.

"He shall have a good bit of money and a new suit of clothes when he comes down. That will
be a help for the winter," said the farmer finally.

Elsbeth thanked him as she said good-by, and turned homeward.

Toni was at first opposed to this, when he heard that he would be away so long without being
able to come home a single time; but his mother explained to him how easy the work would be,
that he would grow stronger up there, so as to be able to do better things later on, and that
the Matten farmer would give him a new suit and a good bit of money as pay. So Toni objected
no longer, but said he would be glad to do something and not let his mother work alone.

Then it occurred to Elsbeth that, if Toni was going to be away the whole summer she could perhaps
go to one of the big hotels in Interlaken where so many strangers go for the summer. There
she could earn a good sum of money and meet the coming winter without anxiety. She was already
known in Interlaken for she had served as chambermaid in one of the hotels for several summers
before her marriage.

When the day came for the big herd of cows to be taken up to the mountain pasture, Toni's mother
gave him his little bundle and said:

"Go now, in God's name! Don't forget to pray, when the day begins, and when it ends, and the
dear Lord will not forget you, and His protection is better than that of men."

So Toni started off with his little bundle behind the herd up the mountain.

Immediately after this Elsbeth closed her cottage. She took the goat up to the Matten farm.
When the farmer heard that she was going to Interlaken, he promised her to take the goat, and
thought when Elsbeth came home again, she would give twice as much milk, and what he made from
her, he would give back to Elsbeth in cheese. Then she started down to Interlaken.

The herd had already been climbing the mountain for several hours. The herdsman turned off
to the left with the big herd, and the man went with Toni up towards the right, followed by
the smaller herd, which consisted of fewer cows but many young cattle, for not many cows could
be kept on the small mountain pasture, because the milk had to be carried across to the big
one where the herdsman's hut stood.

They now reached the highest point of the pasture. There stood a little hut. All around there
was nothing but pasture, not a tree, not a bush. In the hut on one side was a narrow seat fastened
to the wall in front of which stood a table. On the other side stood a bed of hay. In the corner
was a little, round stool and on this a wooden jug.

Toni and the man stepped inside. The latter placed on the floor the big wooden milk-pail, which
he had brought up on his back, took out of it a round loaf of bread and a huge piece of cheese,
laid both on the table and said: "Of course you have a knife," to which Tony assented.

Then the man took the wooden jug, swung the milk-pail on his back and went out. Toni followed
him. The man lifted a wooden basin out of the big pail, seated himself on the little round
stool which he had brought out of the hut and began to milk one cow after another. If one was
too far away, he would call out: "Drive her here!" and Toni obeyed. When the basin was full
he poured it into the big pail and silently went on until all the cows had been milked. At
the last the man filled the jug with milk, handed it to Toni, took the pail on his back, the
basin in his hand and saying "Good night!" went down the mountain.

Then Toni was all alone. He put his jug of milk in the hut and came out again. He looked around
on every side. He looked over to the big mountain, but between that and his pasture was a wide
valley so one had to descend in order to climb up to the big one. But all around both pastures
great dark masses of mountains looked down, some rocky, gray and jagged, others covered with
snow, all reaching up to the sky, so high and mighty and with such different peaks and horns
and some with such broad backs, that it almost seemed to Toni as if they were enormous giants,
each one having his own face and looking down at him. It was a clear evening. The mountain
opposite was shining in the golden evening light, and now a little star came into sight above
the dark mountains, and looked down to Toni in such a friendly way that it cheered him very much.

He thought of his mother, where she was now and how she was in the habit of standing with him
at this time in front of the little cottage and talking so pleasantly. Then suddenly there
came over him such a feeling of loneliness that he ran into the hut, threw himself down on
the cot, buried his face in the hay and sobbed softly, until the weariness of the day overcame
him and he fell asleep.

The bright morning lured him out early. The man was already outside. He milked the cows, spoke
not a word and went away.

Now a long, long day followed. It was perfectly still all around. The cows grazed and lay down
around in the sun-bathed pasture. Tom went into the hut two or three times, drank some milk
and ate some bread and cheese. Then he came out again, sat down on the ground and carved on
a piece of wood he had in his pocket, for although he no longer dared to cherish the hope of
becoming a wood-carver, yet he could not help carving for himself as well as he could. At last
it was evening again. The man came and went. He said not a word, and Toni had nothing to say
either.

Thus passed one day after another. They were all so long! so long! In the evening, when it
began to grow dark it always seemed terrible to Toni, for then the high mountains looked so
black and threatening, as if they would suddenly do him some harm. Then he would rush back
into the hut and crawl into his bed of hay.

Many days had passed like this, one exactly the same as the other. The sun had always shone
in a cloudless sky; always at evening the friendly little star had gleamed above the dark mountain.
But one afternoon, thick, gray clouds began to chase one another across the sky; now and then
blinding lightning flashed, and suddenly frightful thunder-bolts sounded, which echoed roaring
from the mountains, as if there were twice as many and then a terrible storm broke. It was
as dark as night; the rain beat against the hut, and meanwhile the thunder rolled with fearful
reverberations through the mountains; quivering lightning lighted up the black, frightful giant-forms,
which seemed quite specter-like to come nearer and look down menacingly. The cattle ran together
in alarm and bellowed loudly, and great birds of prey flapped around with piercing shrieks.

