We are not now considering the matter of the agreeableness of one society or another, whether
life is on the whole pleasanter in certain conditions at the North or at the South, whether
there is not a charm sometimes in isolation and even in provincialism. It is a fair question
to ask, what effect upon individual lives and character is produced by an industrial and commercial
spirit, and by one less restless and more domestic. But the South is now face to face with
certain problems which relate her, inevitably, to the moving forces of the world. One of these
is the development of her natural resources and the change and diversity of her industries.
On the industrial side there is pressing need of institutions of technology, of schools of
applied science, for the diffusion of technical information and skill in regard to mining and
manufacturing, and also to agriculture, so that worn-out lands may be reclaimed and good lands
be kept up to the highest point of production. Neither mines, forests, quarries, water-ways,
nor textile fabrics can be handled to best advantage without scientific knowledge and skilled
labor. The South is everywhere demanding these aids to her industrial development. But just
in the proportion that she gets them, and because she has them, will be the need of higher
education. The only safety against the influence of a rolling mill is a college, the only safety
against the practical and materializing tendency of an industrial school is the increased study
of whatever contributes to the higher and non-sordid life of the mind. The South would make
a poor exchange for her former condition in any amount of industrial success without a corresponding
development of the highest intellectual life.

But, besides the industrial problem, there is the race problem. It is the most serious in the
conditions under which it is presented that ever in all history confronted a free people. Whichever
way you regard it, it is the nearest insoluble. Under the Constitution it is wisely left to
the action of the individual States. The heavy responsibility is with them. In the nature of
things it is a matter of the deepest concern to the whole Republic, for the prosperity of every
part is vital to the prosperity of the whole. In working it out you are entitled, from the
outside, to the most impartial attempt to understand its real nature, to the utmost patience
with the facts of human nature, to the most profound and most helpful sympathy. It is monstrous
to me that the situation should be made on either side a political occasion for private ambition
or for party ends.

I would speak of this subject with the utmost frankness if I knew what to say. It is not much
of a confession to say that I do not. The more I study it the less I know, and those among
you who give it the most anxious thought are the most perplexed, the subject has so many conflicting
aspects. In the first place there is the evolution of an undeveloped race. Every race has a
right to fair play in the world and to make the most of its capacities, and to the help of
the more favored in the attempt. If the suggestion recently made of a wholesale migration to
Mexico were carried out, the South would be relieved in many ways, though the labor problem
would be a serious one for a long time, but the "elevation" would be lost sight of or relegated
to a foreign missionary enterprise; and as for results to the colored people themselves, there
is the example of Hayti. If another suggestion, that of abandoning certain States to this race,
were carried out, there is the example of Hayti again, and, besides, an anomaly introduced
into the Republic foreign to its traditions, spirit, aspirations, and process of assimilation,
alien to the entire historic movement of the Aryan races, and infinitely more dangerous to
the idea of the Republic than if solid Ireland were dumped down in the Mississippi valley as
an independent State. 

I never sanctioned it, I never wished for it, I never even thought it possible. There are passages
in the letter itself which I might modify if I were to re-write it, but it would rather be by adding
to them than by taking from them. Two accusations have been directed against its substance.
One that it is hostile to the Emperor; the other that it is hostile to this assembly. No one who knows
my character, and knows my history, will believe that I can have intended to injure the Emperor.
 And human nature is exactly in the South what it
is in the North. That is one impregnable fact, to be taken as the basis of all our calculations;
the whites of the South will not, cannot, be dominated, as matters now stand, by the colored race.

But, then, there is the suffrage, the universal, unqualified suffrage. And here is the dilemma.
Suffrage once given, cannot be suppressed or denied, perverted by chicane or bribery without
incalculable damage to the whole political body. Irregular methods once indulged in for one
purpose, and towards one class, so sap the moral sense that they come to be used for all purposes.
The danger is ultimately as great to those who suppress or pervert as it is to the suppressed
and corrupted. It is the demoralization of all sound political action and life. I know whereof
I speak. In the North, bribery in elections and intimidation are fatal to public morality.
The legislature elected by bribery is a bribable body.

I believe that the fathers were right in making government depend upon the consent of the governed.
I believe there has been as yet discovered no other basis of government so safe, so stable
as popular suffrage, but the fathers never contemplated a suffrage without intelligence. It
is a contradiction of terms. A proletariat without any political rights in a republic is no
more dangerous than an unintelligent mob which can be used in elections by demagogues. Universal
suffrage is not a universal panacea; it may be the best device attainable, but it is certain
of abuse without safeguards. One of the absolutely necessary safeguards is an educational qualification.
No one ought anywhere to exercise it who cannot read and write, and if I had my way, no one
should cast a ballot who had not a fair conception of the effect of it, shown by a higher test
of intelligence than the mere fact of ability to scrawl his name and to spell out a line or
two in the Constitution. This much the State for its own protection is bound to require, for
suffrage is an expediency, not a right belonging to universal humanity regardless of intelligence
or of character. 

The style is the purest and richest Second Pointed, and the effect of the pierced work of the
spire is, as your correspondent observes, very fine when seen from a distance. There is a rich
colour, too, in the material, which has a remarkably pleasing result
upon the eye. I cannot but regard it as a blunder in statesmanship
to give suffrage without an educational qualification, and to deem it possible to put ignorance
over intelligence. You are not, responsible for the situation, but you are none the less in
an illogical position before the law. Now, would you not gain more in a rectification of your
position than you would lose in other ways, by making suffrage depend upon an educational qualification?
I do not mean gain party-wise, but in political morals and general prosperity. Time would certainly
be gained by this, and it is possible in this shifting world, in the growth of industries and
the flow of populations, that before the question of supremacy was again upon you, foreign
and industrial immigration would restore the race balance.

