Miss Hargrove laughed heartily as she said, "A high tribute to me!" and then made known her
father's statement that the Clifford tract in the West adjoined his own, that it would soon
be very valuable, and that he was interested in the railroad approaching it. "I left him,"
she concluded, "poring over his maps, and he told me to say to you, sir" (to Mr. Clifford),
"that he wished to see you soon."

"How about the four-leaved clover now?" cried Amy.

In the afternoon they started for the chestnut-trees. Webb carried a light ladder, and both
he and Burt had dressed themselves in close-fitting flannel suits for climbing. The orchard,
as they passed through it, presented a beautiful autumn picture. Great heaps of yellow and
red cheeked apples were upon the ground; other varieties were in barrels, some headed up and
ready for market, while Mr. Clifford was giving the final cooperage to other barrels as fast
as they were filled.

"Father can still head up a barrel better than any of us," Leonard remarked to Miss Hargrove.

"Well, my dear," said the old gentleman, "I've had over half a century's experience."

"It's time I obtained some idea of rural affairs," said Gertrude to Webb. "There seem to be
many different kinds of apples here. Can you easily tell them apart?"

"Yes, as easily as you know different dress fabrics at Arnold's. Those umbrella-shaped trees
are Rhode Island greenings; those that are rather long and slender branching are yellow bell-flowers;
and those with short and stubby branches and twigs are the old-fashioned dominies. Over there
are Newtown pippins. Don't you see how green the fruit is? It will not be in perfection till
next March. Not only a summer, but an autumn and a winter are required to perfect that superb
apple, but then it becomes one of Nature's triumphs. Some of those heaps on the ground will
furnish cider and vinegar. Nuts, cider, and a wood fire are among the privations of a farmer's
life."

"Farming, as you carry it on, appears to me a fine art. How very full some of the trees are!
and others look as if they had been half picked over."

"That is just what has been done. The largest and ripest apples are taken off first, and the
rest of the fruit improves wonderfully in two or three weeks. By this course we greatly increase
both the quality and the bulk of the crop."

"You are very happy in your calling, Webb. How strange it seems for me to be addressing you
as Webb!"

"It does not seem so strange to me; nor does it seem strange that I am talking to you in this
way. I soon recognized that you were one of those fortunate beings in whom city life had not
quenched nature."

They had fallen a little behind the others, and were out of ear-shot.

"I think," she said, hesitatingly and shyly, "that I had an ally in you all along."

He laughed and replied, "At one time I was very dubious over my expedition to Fort Putnam."

"I imagine that in suggesting that expedition you put in two words for yourself."

"Call it even," he said.

"I wish you might be as happy as I am. I'm not blind either, and I wonder that Amy is so unconscious."

"I hope she will remain so until she awakens as naturally as from sleep. She has never had
a brother, and as such I try to act toward her. My one thought is her happiness, and, perhaps,
I can secure it in no other way. I feared long since that you had guessed my secret, and am
grateful that you have not suggested it to Amy. Few would have shown so much delicacy and consideration."

"I'm not sure that you are right, Webb. If Amy knew of your feeling, it would influence her
powerfully. She misjudges you now."

"Yes, it was necessary that she should misunderstand me, and think of me as absorbed in things
remote from her life. The knowledge you suggest might make her very sad, for there never was
a gentler-hearted girl. You have remarkable tact. Please use it to prevent the constraint which
might arise between us."

Burt now joined them with much pretended jealousy, and they soon reached the trees, which,
under the young men's vigorous blows, rained down the prickly burrs, downy chestnuts, and golden
leaves. Blue jays screamed indignantly from the mountain-side, and squirrels barked their protest
at the inroads made upon their winter stores. As the night approached the air grew chilly,
and Webb remarked that frost was coming at last. He hastened home before the others to cover
up certain plants that might be sheltered through the first cold snap. The tenderer ones had
long since been taken up and prepared for winter blooming.

To Amy's inquiry where Johnnie was, Maggie had replied that she had gone nutting by previous
engagement with Mr. Alvord, and as the party returned in the glowing evening they met the oddly
assorted friends with their baskets well filled. In the eyes of the recluse there was a gentler
expression, proving that Johnnie's and Nature's ministry had not been wholly in vain. He glanced
swiftly from Burt to Miss Hargrove, then at Amy, and a faint suggestion of a smile hovered
about his mouth. He was about to leave them abruptly when Johnnie interposed, pleading: "Mr.
Alvord, don't go home till I pick you some of your favorite heart's-ease, as you call my pansies.
They have grown to be as large and beautiful as they were last spring. Do you know, in the
hot weather they were almost as small as johnny-jumpers? but I wouldn't let 'em be called by
that name."

"They will ever be heart's-ease to me, Johnnie-doubly so when you give them," and he followed
her to the garden.

In the evening a great pitcher of cider fresh from the press, flanked by dishes of golden fall
pippins and grapes, was placed on the table. The young people roasted chestnuts on hickory
coals, and every one, even to the invalid, seemed to glow with a kindred warmth and happiness.
The city belle contrasted the true home-atmosphere with the grand air of a city house, and
thanked God for her choice. At an early hour she said good-by for a brief time and departed
with Burt. He was greeted with stately courtesy by Mrs. Hargrove herself, whom her husband
and the prospective value of the Western land had reconciled to the momentous event. Burt and
Gertrude were formally engaged, and he declared his intention of accompanying her to the city
to procure the significant diamond.

After the culminating scenes of Burt's little drama, life went on very serenely and quietly
at the Clifford home. Out of school hours Alf, Johnnie, and Ned vied with the squirrels in
gathering their hoard of various nuts. The boughs in the orchard grew lighter daily. Frost
came as Webb had predicted, and dahlias, salvias, and other flowers, that had flamed and glowed
till almost the middle of October, turned black in one morning's sun. The butternut-trees had
lost their foliage, and countless leaves were fluttering down in every breeze like many-hued
gems. The richer bronzed colors of the oak were predominating in the landscape, and only the
apple, cherry, and willow trees about the house kept up the green suggestion of summer.

CHAPTER LVIII

THE MOONLIGHT OMEN

Webb permitted no marked change in his manner. He toiled steadily with Leonard in gathering
the fall produce and in preparing for winter, but Amy noticed that his old preoccupied look
was passing away. Daily he appeared to grow more genial and to have more time and thought for
her. With increasing wonder she learned the richness and fulness of his mind. In the evenings
he read aloud to them all with his strong, musical intonation, in which the author's thought
was emphasized so clearly that it seemed to have double the force that it possessed when she
read the same words herself. He found time for occasional rambles and horseback excursions,
and was so companionable during long rainy days that they seemed to her the brightest of the
week. Maggie smiled to herself and saw that Webb's spell was working. He was making himself
so quietly and unobtrusively essential to Amy that she would find half of her life gone if
she were separated from him.

Gertrude returned for a short time, and then went to the city for the winter. Burt's orbit
was hard to calculate. He was much in New York, and often with Mr. Hargrove, from whom he was
receiving instructions in regard to his Western expedition. That gentleman's opinion of Burt's
business capacity grew more favorable daily, for the young fellow now proposed to show that
he meant to take life in earnest. "If this lasts he will make a trusty young lieutenant," the
merchant thought, "and I can make his fortune while furthering mine." Burt had plenty of brains
and good executive ability to carry out the wiser counsels of others, while his easy, vivacious
manner won him friends and acceptance everywhere.

It was arranged, after his departure, that Amy should visit her friend in the city, and Webb
looked forward to her absence with dread and self-depreciation, fearing that he should suffer
by contrast with the brilliant men of society, and that the quiet country life would seem dull,
indeed, thereafter.

Before Amy went on this visit there came an Indian summer morning in November, that by its
soft, dreamy beauty wooed every one out of doors. "Amy," said Webb, after dinner, "suppose
we drive over to West Point and return by moonlight." She was delighted with the idea, and
they were soon slowly ascending the mountain. He felt that this was his special opportunity,
not to break her trustful unconsciousness, but to reveal his power to interest her and make
impressions that should be enduring. He exerted every faculty to please, recalling poetic and
legendary allusions connected with the trees, plants, and scenes by which they were passing.

"Oh, Webb, how you idealize nature!" she said. "You make every object suggest something fanciful,
beautiful, or entertaining. How have you learned to do it?"

"As I told you last Easter Sunday--how long ago it seems--if I have any power for such idealization
it is largely through your influence. My knowledge was much like the trees as they then appeared.
I was prepared for better things, but the time for them had not yet come. I had studied the
material world in a material sort of way, employing my mind with facts that were like the bare
branches and twigs. You awakened in me a sense of the beautiful side of nature. How can I explain
it? Who can explain the rapid development of foliage and flowers when all is ready?"

"But, Webb, you appeared, during the summer, to go back to your old materiality worse than
ever. You made me feel that I had no power to do anything for you. You treated me as if I were
your very little sister who would have to go to school a few years before I could be your companion."

"Those were busy days," he replied, laughing. "Besides," he added, hesitatingly, "Burt was
at one time inclined to be jealous. Of course, it was very absurd in him, but I suppose lovers
are always a little absurd."

"I should think it was absurd. I saw whither Burt was drifting long ago--at the time of the
great flood which swept away things of more value than my silly expectations. What an unsophisticated
little goose I was! I suppose Johnnie expects to be married some day, and in much the same
way I looked forward to woman's fate; and since you all seemed to wish that it should be Burt,
I thought, 'Why not?" Wasn't it lucky for Burt, and, indeed, for all of you, that I was not
a grown-up and sentimental young woman? Mr. Hargrove, by uniting his interests with yours in
the West, will make your fortunes, and Burt will bring you a lovely sister. It pleases me to
see how Gertrude is learning to like you. I used to be provoked with her at first, because
she didn't appreciate you. Do you know, I think you ought to write? You could make people fall
in love with nature. Americans don't care half as much for out-door life and pursuits as the
English. It seems to me that city life cannot compare with that of the country."

"You may think differently after you have been a few weeks in Gertrude's elegant home."

They had paused again on the brow of Cro' Nest, and were looking out on the wide landscape.
"No, Webb," she said; "her home, no doubt, is elegant, but it is artificial. This is simple
and grand, and to-day, seen through the soft haze, is lovely to me beyond all words. I honestly
half regret that I am going to town. Of course, I shall enjoy myself--I always do with Gertrude--but
the last few quiet weeks have been so happy and satisfying that I dread any change."

"Think of the awful vacuum that your absence will make in the old home!"

"Well, I'm a little glad; I want to be missed. But I shall write to you and tell you of all
the frivolous things we are doing. Besides, you must come to see me as often as you can."

"I certainly shall."

They saw evening parade, the moon rising meanwhile over Sugarloaf Mountain, and filling the
early twilight with a soft radiance. The music seemed enchanting, for their hearts were attuned
to it. As the long line of cadets shifted their guns from "carry arms" to "shoulder arms" with
instantaneous action, Webb said that the muskets sent out a shivering sound like that of a
tree almost ready to fall under the last blows of an axe.

Webb felt that should he exist millions of ages he should never forget the ride homeward. The
moon looked through the haze like a veiled beauty, and in its softened light Amy's pure, sweet
profile was endowed with ethereal beauty. The beech trees, with their bleached leaves still
clinging to them, were almost spectral, and the oaks in their bronzed foliage stood like black
giants by the roadside. There were suggestive vistas of light and shadow that were full of
mystery, making it easy to believe that on a night like this the mountain was haunted by creatures
as strange as the fancy could shape. The girl at his side was a mystery. Viewless walls incased
her spirit. What were her hidden and innermost thoughts? The supreme gift of a boundless love
overflowed his heart to his very lips. She was so near, and the spell of her loveliness so
strong, that at times he felt that he must give it expression, but he ever restrained himself.
His words might bring pain and consternation to the peaceful face. She was alone with him,
and there would be no escape should he speak now. No; he had resolved to wait till her heart
awoke by its own impulses, and he would keep his purpose even through the witchery of that
moonlight drive. "How strangely isolated we are," he thought, "that such feeling as mine can
fill my very soul with its immense desire, and she not be aware of anything but my quiet, fraternal
manner!"

As they were descending the home slope of the mountain they witnessed a rare and beautiful
sight. A few light clouds had gathered around the moon, and these at last opened in a rift.
The rays of light through the misty atmosphere created the perfect colors of a rainbow, and
this phenomenon took the remarkable form of a shield, its base resting upon one cloud, and
its point extending into a little opening in the cloud above.

"Oh, what a perfect shield!" cried Amy. "Was there ever anything so strange and lovely?"

Webb checked his horse, and they looked at the vision with wonder. "I never saw anything to
equal that," said Webb.

"Is it an omen, Webb?" she asked, turning a little from him that she might look upward, and
leaning on his shoulder with the unconsciousness of a child.

"Let us make it one, dear sister Amy," he said, drawing her nearer to him. "Let it remind you,
as you recall it, that as far as I can I will ever shield you from every evil of life." As
he spoke the rainbow colors became wonderfully distinct, and then faded slowly away. Her head
drooped lower on his shoulder, and she said, dreamily:

"It seems to me that I never was so happy before in my life as I am now. You are so different,
and can be so much to me, now that your old absurd constraint is gone. Oh, Webb, you used to
make me so unhappy! You made me feel that you had found me out--how little I knew, and that
it was a bore to have to talk with me and explain. I know I'm not highly educated. How could
I be? I went everywhere with papa, and he always appeared to think of me as a little girl.
And then during the last year or two of his life he was so ill that I did not do much else
than watch over him with fear and trembling, and try to nurse him and beguile the hours that
were so full of pain and weakness. But I'm not contented to be ignorant, and you can teach
me so much. I fairly thrill with excitement and feeling sometimes when you are reading a fine
or beautiful thing. If I can feel that way I can't be stupid, can I?"

"No, Amy."

"Think how much faster I could learn this winter if you would direct my reading, and explain
what is obscure!"

"I will very gladly do anything you wish. You underrate yourself, Amy. You have woman's highest
charm. There is a stupidity of heart which is far worse than that of the mind, a selfish callousness
in regard to others and their rights and feelings, which mars the beauty of some women worse
than physical deformity. From the day you entered our home as a stranger, graceful tact, sincerity,
and the impulse of ministry have characterized your life. Can you imagine that mere cleverness,
trained mental acuteness, and a knowledge of facts can take the place of these traits? No man
can love unless he imagines that a woman has these qualities, and bitter will be his disappointment
if he finds them wanting."

Her laugh rang out musically on the still air. "Hear the old bachelor talk!" she cried. "I
believe you have constructed an ideally perfect creature out of nature, and that you hold trysts
with her on moonlight nights, you go out to walk so often alone. Well, well, I won't be jealous
of such a sister-in-law, but I want to keep you a little while longer before you follow Burt's
example."

"I shall never give you a sister-in-law, Amy."

"You don't know what you'll do. How sure Burt was of himself!"

"Burt and I are different."

"Yes, Webb, you are. If you ever love, it will be for always; and I don't like to think of
it. I'd like to keep you just as you are. Now that you see how selfish I am, where is woman's
highest charm?"

Webb laughed, and urged his horse into a sharp trot. "I am unchangeable in my opinions too,
as far as you are concerned," he remarked. "She is not ready yet," was his silent thought.

When she came down to the late supper her eyes were shining with happiness, and Maggie thought
the decisive hour had come; but in answer to a question about the drive, Amy said, "I couldn't
have believed that so much enjoyment was to be had in one afternoon. Webb is a brother worth
having, and I'm sorry I'm going to New York."

"Am I not a brother worth having?" Leonard asked.

"Oh, you are excellent, as far as you go, but you are so wrapped up in Maggie that you are
not of much account; and as for Burt, he is more over head and ears than you are. Even if a
woman was in love, I should think she would like a man to be sensible."

"Pshaw, Amy! you don't know what you are talking About," said Maggie.

"Probably not. I suppose it is a kind of disease, and that all are more or less out of their
heads."

"We've been out of our heads a good many years, mother, haven't we?" said Mr. Clifford, laughing.

"Well," said Leonard, "I just hope Amy will catch the disease, and have it very bad some day."

"Thank you. When I do, I'll send for Dr. Marvin."

A few days later Webb took her to New York, and left her with her friend. "Don't be persuaded
into staying very long," he found opportunity to say, in a low tone.

"Indeed I won't; I'm homesick already;" and she looked after him very wistfully. But she was
mistaken. Gertrude looked so hurt and disappointed when she spoke of returning, and had planned
so much, that days lengthened into weeks.

CHAPTER LIX

THE HOSE REVEALS ITS HEART

Webb returned to a region that was haunted. Wherever he went, a presence was there before him.
In every room, on the lawn, in the garden, in lanes no longer shaded, but carpeted with brown,
rustling leaves, on mountain roads, he saw Amy with almost the vividness of actual vision,
as he had seen her in these places from the time of her first coming. At church he created
her form in her accustomed seat, and his worship was a little confused. She had asked him to
write, and he made home life and the varying aspects of nature real to her. His Christ is merely a
rather fat model sitting with his back against a wall, and two women with wings on either side
of him. There is no attempt to suggest a Divine death or to express the Kingdom of Heaven on
the angels' faces. But the legs of the man are as fine a piece of painting as has ever been
accomplished.

In an exhibition of portraits now open in Paris, entitled Cent Chefs-d'Oeuvre,
Manet has been paid the highest honour; he himself would not demand
a greater honour--his "Bon Bock" has been hung next to a celebrated
portrait by Hals....

Without seeing it, I know that the Hals is nobler,
grander; I know, supposing the Hals to be a good one, that its flight
is that of an eagle as compared with the flight of a hawk.

The comparison is exaggerated; but, then, so are all comparisons. I also know that Hals does
not tell us more about his old woman than Manet tells us about the man who sits so gravely by
his glass of foaming ale, so clearly absorbed by it, so oblivious
to all other joys but those that it brings him.

Hals never placed any one more clearly in his favourite hour of the day, the well-desired hour,
looked forward to perhaps since the beginning of the afternoon.

In this marvellous portrait we read the age, the rank, the habits, the limitations, physical
and mental, of the broad-faced man who sits so stolidly, his fat hand clasping his glass of foaming ale.
Nothing has been omitted. We look at the picture, and the man and his environment become part
of our perception of life. That stout, middle-aged man of fifty, who works all day in some small
business, and goes every evening to his cafe to drink beer, will abide with us for ever. His
appearance, and his mode of life, which his appearance so admirably expresses, can never become
completely dissociated from our understanding of life. For Manet's "Bon Bock" is one of the
eternal types, a permanent national conception, as inherent in French life as Polichinelle,
Pierrot, Monsieur Prud'homme, or the Baron Hulot. I have not seen the portrait for fifteen or
eighteen years, and yet I see it as well as if it were hung on the
wall opposite the table on which I am writing this page.

I can see that round, flat face, a little swollen with beer, the small eyes, the spare beard
and moustaches. His feet are not in the picture, but I know how much he pays for his boots, and
how they fit him. Nor did Hals ever paint better; I mean that nowhere in Hals will you find finer handling,
or a more direct luminous or simple expression of what the eye saw. It has all the qualities
I have enumerated, and yet it falls short of Hals.

It has not the breadth and scope of the great Dutchman. There is a sense of effort, on sent
le souffle, and in Hals one never does.

It is more bound together, it does not flow with the mighty and luminous
ease of the chefs d'oeuvre at Haarlem.

But is this Manet's final achievement, the last word he has to say? I think not. It was painted early
in the sixties, probably about the same period as the Luxembourg picture, when the effects of
his Spanish travel were wearing off, and Paris was beginning to command his art. Manet used
to say, "When Degas was painting Semiramis I was painting modern Paris." It would have been
more true to have said modern Spain.

For it was in Spain that Manet found his inspiration. He had not been to Holland when he painted
his Spanish pictures.
 "I've had my little fling," she said, "and I suppose it was time I saw more
of the world and society, but oh, what a refuge and haven of rest the old place is! Gertrude
is lovely, her father very gallant and polite, but Mrs. Hargrove's stateliness oppresses me,
and in society I felt that I had to take a grain of salt with everything said to me. Gertrude
showed her sense in preferring a home. I was in some superb houses in the city that did not
seem like homes."

Webb, in his solicitude that the country-house should not appear dull, found time to go out
with her on pleasant days, and to interest her deeply in a course of reading. It was a season
of leisure; but his mother began to smile to herself as she saw how absorbed he was in his pupil.

The nights grew colder, the stars gained a frosty glitter, the ground was rock-like, and the
ponds were covered with a glare of black ice. Amy was eager to learn to skate, and Webb found
his duty of instructor delightful. Little danger of her falling, although, with a beginner's
awkwardness, she essayed to do so often; strong arms were ever near and ready, and any one
would have been glad to catch Amy in such peril.

They were now looking forward to Burt's return and the holiday season, which Gertrude would
spend with them. Mystery lurked behind every door. Not merely the shops, but busy and stealthy
fingers, would furnish the gifts. Webb had bought his present for Amy, but had also burned
the midnight oil in the preparation of another--a paper for a magazine, and it had been accepted.
He had planned and composed it while at work stripping the husks from the yellow corn, superintending
the wood teams and the choppers in the mountain, and aiding in cutting from an adjacent pond
the crystal blocks of ice--the stored coolness for the coming summer. Then while others thought
him sleeping he wrote and rewrote the thoughts he had harvested during the day.

One of his most delightful tasks, however, was in aiding Amy to embower the old house in wreaths
and festoons of evergreens. The rooms grew into aromatic bowers. Autumn leaves and ferns gave
to the heavier decorations a light, airy beauty which he had never seen before. Grace itself
Amy appeared as she mounted the step-ladder and reached here and there, twining and coaxing
everything into harmony.

What was the effect of all this companionship on her mind? She least of all could have answered:
she did not analyze. Each day was full and joyous. She was being carried forward on a shining
tide of happiness, and yet its motion was so even, quiet, and strong that there was nothing
to disturb her maidenly serenity. If Webb had been any one but Webb, and if she had been in
the habit of regarding all men as possible admirers, she would have understood herself long
before this. If she had been brought up with brothers in her own home she would have known
that she welcomed this quiet brother with a gladness that had a deeper root than sisterly affection.
But the fact that he was Webb, the quiet, self-controlled man who had called her sister Amy
for a year, made his presence, his deep sympathy with her and for her, seem natural. His approaches
had been so gradual that he was stealing into her heart as spring enters a flower. You can
never name the first hour of its presence; you take no note of the imperceptible yet steady
development. The process is quiet, yet vital and sure, and at last there comes an hour when
the bud is ready to open. That time was near, and Webb hoped that it was. His tones were now
and then so tender and gentle that she looked at him a little wonderingly, but his manner was
quiet and far removed from that of the impetuous Burt. There was a warmth in it, however, like
the increasing power of the sun, and in human hearts bleak December can be the spring-time
as truly as May.

It was the twenty-third--one of the stormiest days of a stormy month. The snowflakes were whirling
without, and making many a circle in the gale before joining their innumerable comrades that
whitened the ground. The wind sighed and soughed about the old house as it had done a year
before, but Webb and Amy were armed against its mournfulness. They were in the parlor, on whose
wide hearth glowed an ample fire. Burt and Gertrude were expected on the evening train.

"Gertie is coming home through the snow just as I did," said Amy, fastening a spray of mistletoe
that a friend had sent her from England to the chandelier; "and the same old warm welcome awaits
her."

"What a marvellous year it has been!" Webb remarked.

"It has, indeed. Just think of it! Burt is engaged to one of whose existence he did not know
a year ago. He has been out West, and found that you have land that will make you all rich."

"Are these the greatest marvels of the year, Amy?"

"No, there is a greater one. I didn't know you a year ago to-day, and now I seem to have known
you always, you great patient, homely old fellow--'deliciously homely.' I shall never get over
that."

"The eyes of scores of young fellows looked at you that evening as if you were deliciously
handsome."

"And you looked at me one time as if you hadn't a friend in the world, and you wanted to be
back in your native wilds."

"Not without you, Amy; and you said you wished you were looking at the rainbow shield with
me again."

"Oh, I didn't say all that; and then I saw you needed heartening up a little."

"I did indeed. You were dancing with a terrible swell, worth, it was said, half a million,
who was devouring you with his eyes."

"I'm all here, thank you, and you look as if you were doing some devouring yourself. What makes
you look at me so? Is there anything on my face?"

"Yes, some color, but it's just as Nature arranged it, and you know Nature's best work always
fascinates me."

"What a gallant you are becoming! There, don't you think that is arranged well?" and she stood
beneath the mistletoe looking up critically at it.

"Let me see if it is," and he advanced to her side. "This is the only test," he said, and quick
as a flash he encircled her with his arm and pressed a kiss upon her lips.

She sprang aloof and looked at him with dilating eyes. He had often kissed her before, and
she had thought nothing more of it than of a brother's salute. Was it a subtile, mysterious
power in the mistletoe itself with which it had been endowed by ages of superstition? Was that
kiss like the final ray of the Jane sun that opens the heart of the rose when at last it is
ready to expand? She looked at him wonderingly, tremblingly, the color of the rose mounting
higher and higher, and deepening as if the blood were coming from the depths of her heart.
He did not speak. In answer to her wondering, questioning look, he only bent full upon her
his dark eyes that had held hers once before in a moment of terror. She saw his secret in their
depths at last, the devotion, the love, which she herself had unsuspectingly said would "last
always." She took a faltering step toward him, then covered her burning face with her hands.

"Amy," he said, taking her gently in his arms, "do you understand me now? Dear, blind little
girl, I have been worshipping all these months, and you have not known it."

"I--I thought you were in love with nature," she whispered.

"So I am, and you are nature in its sweetest and highest embodiment. Every beautiful thing
in nature has long suggested you to me. Amy, I can wait. You shall have your girlhood. It seems
to me now that I have loved you almost from the first hour I saw you. I have known that I loved
you ever since that June evening when you left me in the rose garden. Have I not proved that
I can be patient and wait?"

She only pressed her burning face closer upon his shoulder. "It's all growing clear now," she
again whispered. "How blind I've been! I thought you were only my brother."

"I can be 'only your brother,' if you so wish," he said, gravely. "Your happiness is my first
thought."

She looked up at him shyly, tears in her eyes, and a smile hovering about her tremulous lips.
"I don't think I understood myself any better than I did you. I never had a brother, and--and--I
don't believe I loved you just right for a brother;" and her face was hidden again.

His eyes went up to heaven, as if he meant that his mating should be recognized there. Then
gently stroking her brown hair, he asked, "Then I shan't have to wait, Amy?"

"Am I keeping you waiting, Webb?" she faltered from her deep seclusion.

"Oh, that blessed mistletoe!" cried Webb, lifting the dewy, flower-like face and kissing it
again and again. "You are my Christmas gift, Amy."

"Oh, I beg your pardon; I didn't know," began Mr. Clifford from the doorway, and was about
to make a hasty and excited retreat.

"Stay, father!" cried Webb. "A year ago you received this dear girl as your daughter. She has
consented to make the tie closer still if possible."

The old gentleman took Amy in his arms for a moment, and then said, "This is too good to keep
to myself for a moment," and he hastened the blushing, laughing girl to his wife, and exclaimed,
"See what I've brought you for a Christmas present. See what that sly, silent Webb has been
up to. He has been making love to our Amy right under our noses, and we didn't know it,"

"You didn't know it, father; mother's eyes are not so blind. Amy, darling, I've been hoping
and praying for this. You have made a good choice, my dear, if it is his mother that says it.
Webb will never change, and he will always be as gentle and good to you as he has been to me."

"Well, well, well," said Mr. Clifford, "our cup is running over, sure enough. Maggie, come
here," he called, as he heard her step in the hall. "Here is a new relative. I once felt a
little like grumbling because we hadn't a daughter, and now I have three, and the best and
prettiest in the land. You didn't know what Webb was about."

"Didn't I, Webb--as long ago as last October, too?"

"Oh, Webb, you ought to have told me first," said Amy, reproachfully, when they were alone.

"I did not tell Maggie; she saw," Webb answered. Then, taking a rosebud which she had been
wearing, he pushed open the petals with his finger, and asked, "Who told me that 'this is no
way for a flower to bloom'? I've watched and waited till your heart was ready, Amy." And so
the time flew in mutual confidences, and the past grew clear when illumined by love.

"Poor old Webb!" said Amy, with a mingled sigh and laugh. "There you were growing as gaunt
as a scarecrow, and I loving you all the time. What a little goose I was! If you had looked
at Gertrude as Burt did I should have found myself out long ago. Why hadn't you the sense to
employ Burt's tactics?"

"Because I had resolved that nature should be my sole ally. Was not my kiss under the mistletoe
a better way of awakening my sleeping beauty than a stab of jealousy?"

"Yes, Webb, dear, patient Webb. The rainbow shield was a true omen, and I am sheltered indeed."

CHAPTER LX

CHRISTMAS LIGHTS AND SHADOWS

Leonard had long since gone to the depot, and now the chimes of his returning bells announced
that Burt and Gertrude were near. To them both it was in truth a coming home. Gertrude rushed
in, followed by the exultant Burt, her brilliant eyes and tropical beauty rendered tenfold
more effective by the wintry twilight without; and she received a welcome that accorded with
her nature. She was hardly in Amy's room, which she was to share, before she looked in eager
scrutiny at her friend. "What's in the air?" she asked. "What has transfigured Webb? Oh, you
little wild-flower, you've found out that he is saying his prayers to you at last, have you?
Evidently he hasn't said them in vain. You are very happy, dear?"

"Yes, happier than you are."

"I deny that point-blank. Oh, Amy darling, I was true to you and didn't lose Burt either."

Maggie had provided a feast, and Leonard beamed on the table and on every one, when something
in Webb and Amy's manner caught his attention. "This occasion," he began, "reminds me of a
somewhat similar one a year ago to-morrow night. It is my good fortune to bring lovely women
into this household. My first and best effort was made when I brought Maggie. Then I picked
up a little girl at the depot, and she grew into a tall, lovely creature on the way home, didn't
she, Johnnie? And now to-night I've brought in a princess from the snow, and one of these days
poor Webb will be captured by a female of the MacStinger type, for he will never muster up
courage enough--What on earth are you all laughing about?"

"Thank you," said Amy, looking like a peony.

"You had better put your head under Maggie's wing and subside," Webb added. Then, putting his
arm about Amy, he asked, "Is this a female of the MacStinger type?"

Leonard stared in blank amazement. "Well," said he, at last, "when did this happen? I give
up now. The times have changed. When I was courting, the whole neighborhood was talking about
it, and knew I was accepted long before I did. Did you see all this going on, Maggie?"

"Certainly," she answered.

"Now, I don't believe Amy saw it herself," cried Leonard, half desperately, and laughter broke
out anew.

"Oh, Amy, I'm so glad!" said Burt, and he gave her the counterpart of the embrace that had
turned the bright October evening black to Webb.

"To think that Webb should have got such a prize!" ejaculated Leonard. "Well, well, the boys
in this family are in luck."

"It will be my turn next," cried Johnnie.

"No, sir; I'm the oldest," Alf protested.

"Let's have supper," Ned remarked, removing his thumb from his mouth.

"Score one for Ned," said Burt. "There is at least one member of the family whose head is not
turned by all these marvellous events."

Can the sunshine and fragrance of a June day be photographed? No more can the light and gladness
of that long, happy evening be portrayed. Mrs. Clifford held Gertrude's hand as she had Amy's
when receiving her as a daughter. The beautiful girl, whose unmistakable metropolitan air was
blended with gentle womanly grace, had a strong fascination for the invalid. She kindled the
imagination of the recluse, and gave her a glimpse into a world she had never known.

"Webb," said Amy, as they were parting for the night, "I can see a sad, pale orphan girl clad
in mourning. I can see you kissing her for the first time. Don't you remember? I had a strange
little thrill at heart then, and you said, 'Come to me, Amy, when you are in trouble.' There
is one thing that troubles me to-night. All whom I so dearly love know of my happiness but
papa. I wish he knew."

"Tell it to him, Amy," he answered, gently, "and tell it to God."

There were bustle and renewed mystery on the following day. Astonishing-looking packages were
smuggled from one room to another. Ned created a succession of panics, and at last the ubiquitous
and garrulous little urchin had to be tied into a chair. Johnnie and Alf were in the seventh
heaven of anticipation, and when Webb brought Amy a check for fifty dollars, and told her that
it was the proceeds of his first crop from his brains, and that she must spend the money, she
went into Mr. Clifford's room waving it as if it were a trophy such as no knight had ever brought
to his lady-love.

"Of course, I'll spend it," she cried. "I know just how to spend it. It shall go into books
that we can read together. What's that agricultural jargon of yours, Webb, about returning
as much as possible to the soil? We'll return this to the soil," she said, kissing his forehead,
"although I think it is too rich for me already."

In the afternoon she and Webb, with a sleigh well laden, drove into the mountains on a visit
to Lumley. He had repaired the rough, rocky lane leading through the wood to what was no longer
a wretched hovel. The inmates had been expecting this visit, and Lumley rushed bareheaded out-of-doors
the moment he heard the bells. Although he had swept a path from his door again and again,
the high wind would almost instantly drift in the snow. Poor Lumley had never heard of Sir
Walter Raleigh or Queen Elizabeth, but he had given his homage to a better queen, and with
loyal impulse he instantly threw off his coat, and laid it on the snow, that Amy might walk
dry-shod into the single room that formed his home. She and Webb smiled significantly at each
other, and then the young girl put her hand into that of the mountaineer as he helped her from
the sleigh, and said "Merry Christmas!" with a smile that brought tears into the eyes of the
grateful man.

"Yer making no empty wish, Miss Amy. I never thought sich a Christmas 'ud ever come to me or
mine. But come in, come in out of the cold wind, an' see how you've changed everything. Go
in with her, Mr. Webb, and I'll tie an' blanket your hoss. Lord, to think that sich a May blossom
'ud go into my hut!"

They entered, and Mrs. Lumley, neatly clad in some dark woollen material, made a queer, old-fashioned
courtesy that her husband had had her practice for the occasion. But the baby, now grown into
a plump, healthy child, greeted her benefactress with nature's own grace, crowing, laughing,
and calling, "Pitty lady; nice lady," with exuberant welcome. The inmates did not now depend
for precarious warmth upon two logs, reaching across a dirty floor and pushed together, but
a neat box, painted green, was filled with billets of wood. The carpeted floor was scrupulously
clean, and so was the bright new furniture. A few evergreen wreaths hung on the walls with
the pictures that Amy had given, and on the mantel was her photograph--poor Lumley's patron saint.

Webb brought in his armful of gifts, and Amy took the child on her lap and opened a volume
of dear old "Mother Goose," profusely illustrated in colored prints--that classic that appeals
alike to the hearts of children, whether in mountain hovels or city palaces. The man looked
on as if dazed. "Mr. Webb," he said, in his loud whisper, "I once saw a picter of the Virgin
and Child. Oh, golly, how she favors it!"

"Mrs. Lumley," Amy began, "I think your housekeeping does you much credit. I've not seen a
neater room anywhere."

"Well, mum, my ole man's turned over a new leaf sure nuff. There's no livin' with him unless
everythink is jesso, an, I guess it's better so, too. Ef I let things git slack, he gits mighty
savage."

"You must try to be patient, Mr. Lumley. You've made great changes for the better, but you
must remember that old ways can't be broken up in a moment."

"Lor' bless yer, Miss Amy, there's no think like breakin' off short, there's nothink like turnin'
the corner sharp, and fightin' the devil tooth and nail. It's an awful tussle at first, an'
I thought I was goin' to knuckle under more'n once. So I would ef it hadn't 'a ben fer you,
but you give me this little ban', Miss Amy, an' looked at me as if I wa'n't a beast, an' it's
ben a liftin' me up ever sence. Oh, I've had good folks talk at me an' lecter, an' I ben in
jail, but it all on'y made me mad. The best on 'em wouldn't 'a teched me no more than they
would a rattler, sich as we killed on the mountain. But you guv me yer han', Miss Amy, an'
thar's mine on it agin; I'm goin' to be a man."

She took the great horny palm in both her hands. "You make me very happy," she said, simply,
looking at him above the head of his child, "and I'm sure your wife is going to help you. I
shall enjoy the holidays far more for this visit. You've told us good news, and we've got good
news for you and your wife. Tell him, Webb."

"Yes, Lumley," said Webb, clapping the man on the shoulder, "famous news. This little girl
has been helping me just as much as she has you, and she has promised to help me through life.
One of these days we shall have a home of our own, and you shall have a cottage near it, and
the little girl here that you've named Amy shall go to school and have a better chance than
you and your wife have had."

"Oh, goshwalader!" exclaimed the man, almost breaking out into a hornpipe. "The Lord on'y knows
what will happen ef things once git a goin' right! Mr. Webb, thar's my han' agin'. Ef yer'd
gone ter heaven fer her, yer couldn't 'a got sich a gell. Well, well, give me a chance on yer
place, an' I'll work fer yer all the time, even nights an' Sundays."

It was hard for them to get away. The child dropped her books and toys, and clung to Amy. "She
knows yer; she knows all about yer," said the delighted father. "Well, ef yer must go, yer'll
take suthin' with us;" and from a great pitcher of milk he filled several goblets, and they
all drank to the health of little Amy. "Yer'll fin' half-dozen pa'triges under the seat, Miss
Amy," he said, as they drove away. "I was bound I'd have some kind of a present fer yer."

She waved her hand back to him, and saw him standing bareheaded in the cutting wind, looking
after her.

"Poor old Lumley was right," said Webb, drawing her to him; "I do feel as if I had received
my little girl from heaven. We will give those people a chance, and try to turn the law of
heredity in the right direction."

In the twilight of that evening, Mr. Alvord sat over his lonely hearth, his face buried in
his hands. The day had been terribly long and torturing; memory had presented, like mocking
spectres, his past and what it might have been. A sense of loneliness, a horror of great darkness,
overwhelmed him. Nature had grown cold and forbidding, and was losing its power to solace.
Johnnie, absorbed in her Christmas preparations, had not been to see him for a long time. He
had gone to inquire after her on the previous evening, and through the lighted window of the
Clifford home had seen a picture that had made his own abode appear desolate indeed. In despairing
bitterness he had turned away, feeling that that happy home was no more a place for him than
was heaven. He had wandered out into the storm for hours, like a lost spirit, and at last had
returned and slept in utter exhaustion. On the morning preceding Christmas memory awoke with
him, and as night approached he was sinking into sullen, dreary apathy.

There was a light tap at the door, but he did not hear it. A child's face peered in at his
window, and Johnnie saw him cowering over his dying fire. She had grown accustomed to his moods,
and had learned to be fearless, for she had banished his evil spells before. Therefore she
entered softly, laid down her bundles and stood beside him.

"Mr. Alvord!" she said, laying her hand on his shoulder. He started up, and at the same moment
a flickering blaze rose on the hearth, and revealed the sunny-haired child standing beside
him. If an angel had come, the effect could not have been greater. Like all who are morbid,
he was largely under the dominion of imagination; and Johnnie, with her fearless, gentle, commiserating
eyes, had for him the potency of a supernatural visitor. But the healthful, unconscious child
had a better power. Her words and touch brought saneness as well as hope.

"Why, Mr. Alvord," she cried, "were you asleep? See! your fire is going out, and your lamp
is not lighted, and there is nothing ready for your supper. What a queer man you are, for one
who is so kind! Mamma said I might come and spend a little of Christmas-eve with you, and bring
my gifts, and then that you would bring me home. I know how to fix up your fire and light your
lamp. Then we'll get supper together. Won't that be fun?" and she bustled around, the embodiment
of beautiful life.

"Oh, Johnnie!" he said, taking her sweet face in his hands, and looking into her clear eyes,
"Heaven must have sent you. I was so lonely and sad that I wished I had never lived."

"Why, Mr. Alvord! and on Christmas-eve, too? See what I've brought you," and she opened a book
with the angels' song of "peace and good-will" illustrated. "Mamma says that whoever believes
that ought to be happy," said the child. "Don't you believe it?"

"Yes, it's true for those who are like you and your mother."

She leaned against him, and looked over his shoulder at the pictures. "Mr. Alvord, mamma said
the song was for you, too. Of course, mamma's right. What else did He come for but to help
people who are in trouble? I read stories about Him every Sunday to mamma, and He was always
helping people who were in trouble, and who had done wrong. That's why we are always glad on
Christmas. You look at the book while I set your table."

He did look at it till his eyes were blinded with tears, and like a sweet refrain came the
words. "A little child shall lead them."

Half an hour later Leonard, with a kindly impulse, thought he would go to take by the hand
Johnnie's strange friend, and see how the little girl was getting on. The scene within, as
he passed the window, checked his steps. Then the movement of the face, how full it is of the indolent
south, and the oval of the face is composed to harmonise and enhance the lace head-dress; and
its outline, though full of classical simplifications, tells the character with Holbein-like fidelity;
it falls away into a soft, weak chin in which resides a soft sensual
lassitude.

The black eyes are set like languid stars in the face, and the flesh rounds off softly, like
a sky, modelled with a little shadow, part of the outline, and expressing
its beauty.

And then there are the marvels of the dress to consider: the perfect and spontaneous creation
of the glitter of the long silk arms, and the muslin of the wrists,
soft as foliage, and then the hardness of the bodice stitched with
jewellery and set so romantically on the almost epicene bosom.

 Isn't it funny that he should be so old, and yet not know
why we keep Christmas?"

Amy sang again the Christmas hymn that her own father and the father who had adopted her had
loved so many years before. "My daughter," said Mr. Clifford, as he was fondly bidding her
good-night, "how sweetly you have fulfilled the hopes you raised one year ago!"

Mrs. Clifford had gone to her room, leaning on the arm of Gertrude. As the invalid kissed her
in parting, she said:

"You have beautiful eyes, my dear, and they have seen far more of the world than mine, but,
thank God, they are clear and true. Keep them so, my child, that I may welcome you again to
a better home than this"

Once more "the old house stood silent and dark in the pallid landscape." The winds were hushed,
as if the peace within had been breathed into the very heart of Nature, and she, too, could
rest in her wintry sleep. The moon was obscured by a veil of clouds, and the outlines of the
trees were faint upon the snow. A shadowy form drew near; a man paused, and looked upon the
dwelling. "If the angels' song could be heard anywhere to-night, it should be over that home,"
Mr. Alvord murmured; but, even to his morbid fancy, the deep silence of the night remained
unbroken. He returned to his home, and sat down in the firelight. A golden-haired child again
leaned upon his shoulder, and asked, "What else did He come for but to help people who are
in trouble, and who have done wrong?" He started up. Was it a voice deep in his own soul that
was longing to escape from evil? or was it a harmony far away in the sky, that whispered of
peace at last? That message from heaven is clearest where the need is greatest.

Mr. Hargrove's home was almost a palace, but its stately rooms were desolate on Christmas-eve.
He wandered restlessly through their magnificence. He paid no heed to the costly furniture
and costlier works of art. "Trurie was right," he muttered. "What power have these things to
satisfy when the supreme need of the heart is unsatisfied? It seems as if I could not sleep
to-night without seeing her. There is no use in disguising the truth that I'm losing her. Even
on Christmas-eve she is absent. It's late, and since I cannot see her, I'll see her gift;"
and he went to her room, where she had told him to look for her remembrance.

To his surprise, he found that, according to her secret instructions, it was lighted. He entered
the dainty apartment, and saw the glow of autumn leaves and the airy grace of ferns around
the pictures and windows. He started, for he almost saw herself, so true was the life-size
and lifelike portrait that smiled upon him. Beneath it were the words, "Merry Christmas, papa!
You have not lost me; you have only made me happy."

The moon is again rising over old Storm King; the crystals that cover the white fields and
meadows are beginning to flash in its rays; the great pine by the Clifford home is sighing
and moaning. What heavy secret has the old tree that it can sigh with such a group near as
is now gathered beneath it? Burt's black horse rears high as he reins him in, that Gertrude
may spring into the cutter, then speeds away like a shadow through the moonlight Webb's steed
is strong and quiet, like himself, and as tireless. Amy steps to Webb's side, feeling it to
be her place in very truth. Sable Abram draws up next, with the great family sleigh, and in
a moment Alf is perched beside him. Then Leonard half smothers Johnnie and Ned under the robes,
and Maggie, about to pick her way through the snow, finds herself taken up in strong arms,
like one of the children, and is with them. The chime of bells dies away in the distance. Wedding-bells
will be their echo.

       *       *       *       *       *

The merry Christmas-day has passed. Dr. and Mrs. Marvin, the Kev. Mr. and Mrs. Barkdale, and
other friends have come and gone with their greetings; the old people are left alone beside
their cheery fire.

"Here we are, mother, all by ourselves, just as we were once before on Christmas night, when
you were as fair and blooming as Amy or Gertrude. Well, my dear, the long journey seems short
to-night. I suppose the reason is that you have been such good company."

"Dear old father, the journey would have been long and weary indeed, had I not had your strong
arm to lean upon, and a love that didn't fade with my roses. There is only one short journey
before us now, father, and then we shall know fully the meaning of the 'good tidings of great
joy' forever."

THE END