At the close of the flowering season the bulbs should be gradually reduced to a resting state
by withholding moisture. When the foliage turns yellow the pots may be laid on their sides
in a cold frame, if available, or in any other convenient place where they will not be forgotten,
until about the middle of July. They should then be placed upright, and have a supply of water.
After fresh growth has fairly commenced, shake the bulbs out of the pots, remove most of the
old soil, and re-pot in a compost consisting of mellow turfy loam and leaf-mould, with a sufficient
admixture of silver sand to insure drainage. The corm should be so placed in the pot as to
bring the crown about level with the rim, and every care must be taken to avoid injuring the
young roots. Place the pots in a close frame for a few days, after which ample ventilation
should be given to maintain a robust condition. The lights may remain constantly open until
there is danger from autumn frosts. Specimens that show a great number of flower-buds should
be assisted occasionally with weak manure water.

=C. Coum= and =C. europæum= are rarely well grown, for although quite hardy, the climate of
this country does not suit them in their season of flowering, which is the early spring. The
cool greenhouse is the safest place for them, except in sheltered spots, where they may be
planted out on a border of peat, or amongst ferns in a rockery. When grown in pots, light turfy
loam and peat in equal quantities, with a fourth part of cow-manure and a liberal addition
of sand, will form an excellent compost for them. The pots should never be exposed to the drying
action of the sun or wind, but should be plunged to the rim in coal-ashes. The best time for
potting or planting them is September or October.

Instructions on raising Cyclamens from seed will be found at page 256.

==DAFFODIL==--=see= ==NARCISSUS==, =page= 344

==DOG'S-TOOTH VIOLET==

The red and white varieties are as hardy as any plant in our gardens, and by their neat habit
and elegant leaves and flowers they are admirably adapted to plant in quantities in the front
of a rockery, in either peat or sandy loam and leaf-mould. They are equally suitable for edging
small beds in gardens where spring flowers are systematically grown; in fact, they are true
'spring bedders.' Autumn is the proper time to plant the bulbs. But Dog's-tooth Violets are
also worth growing in pots, especially where an unheated 'Alpine house' is kept for plants
of this class. Several bulbs may be put in a pot of the 48-size.

==FERRARIA==--=see= ==TIGRIDIA==, =page 350=

==FREESIA==

The singularly graceful form, wide range of beautiful colours, and delicious perfume of this
flower have made it an immense favourite; and happily there is no Cape bulb which can be grown
with greater ease in the frame or cool greenhouse. One characteristic is very marked, and it
is the disproportion between the small bulb and the fine flowers produced from it.

Procure the bulbs as early in the autumn as possible, and lose no time in potting them. Any
light rich soil will answer, but that which suits them best is composed of two parts of loam,
one of leaf-mould, and one of peat, with enough sand or grit added to insure drainage. Commence
with pots of the right size, for the roots are extremely brittle, and there must be no risk
of injuring them by re-potting. The 48-size will accommodate several bulbs. Place under a south
wall, and cover with leaf-mould until top growth commences, and then remove the covering.

At the end of September transfer the pots to a cold frame, and when the plants attain a height
of four inches, support them with neat sticks, which should not be inserted too near the bulbs.
Watering will require judgment, for too much moisture turns the foliage yellow. When the pots
are full of roots, liquid manure twice a week will be helpful.

After the blooming season has passed, encourage the foliage to wither by withholding water.
The roots may be stored away in their own pots until the following August.

==FRITILLARIA==

Fritillarias produce bell-shaped flowers, varying in colour, but generally of a purplish tint,
and beautifully spotted. They thrive in a good deep loam, but may be grown in almost any soil,
and do well under the shade of trees. They are quite hardy, and, like most other bulbs, should
be planted in autumn. Fritillarias are occasionally grown in pots kept in a cold frame, but
they will not endure forcing in the least degree, and the mixed border is the best position
for them. These flowers make a charming ornament when grown in bowls filled with moss-fibre.

==GLADIOLUS==

The Gladiolus is adapted for many important uses and it associates admirably with Dahlias,
Hollyhocks, Pyrethrums, and Phloxes in the furnishing of clumps on the lawn and in the mixed
border. It is perfectly in harmony with surroundings when planted in American beds or in the
shrubbery. For supplying cut flowers it is invaluable, as they retain their freshness in a
vase for many days, and a plentiful supply should be grown in reserved spots expressly for
this purpose.

==Culture in Pots.==--The early-flowering varieties are of especial value for decorating greenhouses
and conservatories during spring and early summer. The corms of these Gladioli are small, and
a 32-sized pot will accommodate several. The soil should be decidedly rich, and it must be
porous, because water has to be given freely when the plants are in full growth. Pot the corms
in autumn, and cover with leaf-mould until the roots are developed, when successive batches
can be brought forward and gently forced for a continuous supply of elegant flowers during
April and May. A mild temperature of about 55° is quite sufficient for them.

==Culture in the Open Ground.==--The autumn-flowering Gladioli are grown in the open ground,
and preparations should begin well in advance of planting time. Almost any soil can be made
to answer, but that which suits them best is a good medium, friable loam with a cool rich subsoil,
and each grower must decide for himself how far this is within reach naturally, or can be secured
by resources at command. Thus, a light soil may be made suitable by placing a thick layer of
rotten cow-manure a foot below the surface, and a heavy, retentive loam can be reduced to the
proper state by the admixture of lighter material. On the surface spread a liberal quantity
of manure and dig it in, leaving the soil in a rough state to be disintegrated by frosts. Before
the planting time arrives it is worth some trouble to free the ground from wire worms, or they
will play havoc with the growth just as it is appearing above ground. Potatoes serve admirably
as traps for these pests.

Gladioli are peculiarly liable to injury from wind, so that a sheltered, but not a shaded,
position should, if possible, be chosen for them. The time of planting depends partly on the
district, partly on the season; but the soil must be in suitable condition and fine weather
is necessary. From the middle of March to the middle of April should afford some suitable opportunity
of getting the bulbs in satisfactorily. Give the land a light forking, not deep enough to bring
up the manure, and make the surface level. The rows may be twelve or eighteen inches apart;
we prefer the greater distance, because of the convenience it affords in attending to the plants
when growing; nine inches is sufficient space in the rows.

There are two methods of putting in the bulbs, each of which has advocates among practised
growers. One is to take out the soil with a trowel to the depth of six or seven inches for
each corm, then insert about two inches of mixed sand and powdered charcoal or wood ashes;
lay the root upon it, and carefully cover with fine soil. If that process is considered too
tedious, draw a deep drill with a hoe, and at the bottom put the light mixture already named;
place the roots at regular distances upon it, and lightly return the top soil. The operation
should be so performed as to leave the crown of the corm four inches below the surface. When
planting is completed, give the bed a finishing touch with the rake.

An eminent grower strips off the outer coat or skin of each bulb before planting to ascertain
that there is no disease; and this cannot otherwise be discovered. No doubt the procedure prevents
the bed from showing blanks, but that object can be more safely attained by growing a reserve
in pots. There is, however, another practice which possesses very decided advantages, and it
is to break the skin at the crown of the bulb to allow the foliage free exit. The skin is so
tough that it is frequently the means of distorting the plant in its attempt to force an opening.

The bed for a time needs little attention, except to keep it free from weeds, and this is best
done by hand. When the shoots reach about a foot high, tying must be resorted to in earnest.
The most effectual plan, of course, is to put a separate stake to each plant, and for exhibition
specimens this is certainly advisable. But rows can be secured by a stake at each end, with
two or three strands of strong material carried across, to which each flower must be tied.
Whatever method is adopted, care should be taken to avoid cutting the plant, while holding
it secure from damage in a high wind. Let the material which is placed round the flowering-stem
be soft and wide, such as list, which answers admirably.

Water must be freely and regularly given during dry weather, either in the morning or in the
evening; and a mulch of old manure spread over the bed will prevent evaporation, and save the
ground from caking hard.

Another important matter is shading. For ordinary purposes this is not essential; but as it
very much lengthens the duration of the flower, it is worth attention on that ground alone,
and for exhibition it is indispensable. Whether shading is provided by separate protectors
made expressly for the purpose, or by home-made contrivances of canvas or wood, the point to
be quite certain about is security, or an accident may wreck well-grounded hopes.

The lifting and storing of the corms affect the quality of the next year's flowers so much
that it is important to accomplish lifting at the most suitable time, and the storing in the
best manner. By the middle or end of October, on some fine day, take up the roots, even if
the foliage be still green; tie a label to each variety, and hang them in some airy place until
they can be cleared of soil and leaves. Remove each stem with a sharp knife, and lay out the
bulbs to dry for another fortnight. They can then be stored in paper bags or in boxes on any
dry shelf which is safe from vermin and frost.

An article on the culture of the Gladiolus from seed will be found on page 267.

==GLOXINIA==

Gloxinias may be had in bloom almost all the year by judicious management. When required for
early flowering, those that start first should be selected and carefully shifted into other
pots, and be kept near the glass, as they depend much on light for rapid and luxuriant growth.
The most suitable soil is a light fibrous loam, combined with a little peat and silver sand.
Manure water during the growing period twice a week is helpful, but it should be discontinued
when the flowers show colour. The plants love shade, and at no time should suffer from drought.
Storing Gloxinias for their season of rest, =i.e.= the winter, must be carefully attended to,
as losses frequently occur during this stage. It is also important that the plants should not
be 'dried off' too quickly; place them in a light, airy position, and by a gradual reduction
of moisture the leaves will fall off naturally. The bulbs may then be stored away on a shelf,
in an even temperature of about 50°, each bulb being closely surrounded by cocoa-nut fibre
and peat in equal parts to prevent excessive dryness, which, like too much damp, often causes
the loss of the bulb.

Besides growing the same plants from year to year, it is always desirable to have a fresh stock
coming on, as the old bulbs may deteriorate after two or three years. This can easily be managed
by successive sowings of seed, as advised at page 268.

==HEMEROCALLIS==--=see under= ==LILIES==, =page 343=

==HYACINTH==

One of the most valuable characteristics of the Hyacinth is the ease with which it can be flowered
in a variety of ways by very simple modes of treatment. It may be employed as a hardy, rough-weather
plant for the garden border, or as a grand exhibition and conservatory flower. The bulbs may
be planted at any time from September to the middle of December, with the certainty of their
blooming well, if properly cared for; but the prudent cultivator will plant them as early as
possible in the autumn, and so manage them afterwards as to secure the longest period of growth
previous to their flowering. They can be forced to flower at Christmas, but the more slowly
the flowers are developed the finer in the end will they be. To obtain good bulbs is a matter
of the utmost importance, and it may be useful here to remark that the mere size of a Hyacinth
bulb is no criterion of its value--nor, indeed, is its neatness of form or brightness of appearance.
The two most important qualities are soundness and density. If the bulbs are hard and heavy
in proportion to their size, they may be depended on to produce good flowers of their kind.
The bulbs of some sorts are never large or handsome, while, on the other hand, many others
partake of both these qualities in a marked degree.

One other matter in general relating to the treatment of Hyacinths needs to be referred to.
Harm has often been done by the practice of massing the flowers, whether in pot groups or in
garden beds, without consideration of colour harmonies. Yet no other bulbous flower offers
such a wide choice of delightful colours, or is so eminently adapted to artistic blending,
as the Hyacinth. By eschewing the dull blues and allied shades and by bringing into association
exquisite tones of mauve, pink, apricot, salmon, pale yellow, rich lilac, bright red, &c.,
it is easy to demonstrate that there are possibilities in Hyacinths which may never have been
suspected before. The following are a few of the charming blends which may be made, and will
especially appeal to those who grow Hyacinths indoors: (i) Apricot, cream, and pale blue; (2)
cream, pale pink, and rose-pink; (3) bright pink and pale blue; (4) bright red, rich blue,
and pure white; (5) rose-pink and rich blue; (6) pale yellow and rich blue; (7) deep mauve
and pale mauve; (8) cream and pale blue; (9) bright blue shades (dull, washy, and nondescript
blue, purple, and violet tints must be avoided); (10) blush pink and rose-pink; (11) apricot
and cream; (12) pale lavender, cream, and apricot. These examples will show that charming effects
can be secured either with two or with three varieties. Colour-grouping may also be carried
out in the garden, but in this case great care must be exercised to get varieties of clear,
bright hues which flower at the same time, such as Inimitable Bedding Hyacinths. Modern taste
further dictates that the bare soil shall be hidden, and this end is best served by providing
a groundwork of dwarf plants, such as Daisies, Forget-me-nots, double white Arabis, and mauve
Aubrietia. Another course is to mix Hyacinths with Daffodils of the Chalice or Star section;
there is no better variety than Sir Watkin, but others may be used.

==Culture in Pots.==--It is not necessary to use large pots, or pots of a peculiar shape, for
Hyacinths. There is nothing better than common flower-pots, and in those of 60-size single
bulbs may be flowered in a most satisfactory manner. The pots usually employed are the 48-and
32-sizes, the last-named being required only for selected bulbs grown for exhibition. We advise
the use of small pots where Hyacinths are grown in pits and frames for decorative purposes,
because they can be conveniently placed in ornamental stands, or packed close together in baskets
of moss, when required for the embellishment of the drawing-room. As the use of new pots for
Hyacinths is often the cause of failure, they should not be employed if well-cleansed old pots
are available. The tender roots of the bulbs frequently become too dry owing to the absorbent
nature of the new pots. A rich, light soil is indispensable, and it should consist chiefly
of turfy loam, with leaf-mould and a liberal allowance of sharp sand. The mixture ought to
be in a moderately moist condition when ready for use. In small pots one hollow crock must
suffice, but the 48-and 32-sized pots can be prepared in the usual way, with one large hollow
crock, and a little heap of smaller potsherds or nodules of charcoal over it. Fill the pots
quite full of soil, and then press the bulb into it, and press the soil round the bulb to finish
the operation. If potted loosely, they will not thrive; if potted too firmly, they will rise
up as soon as the roots begin to grow, and be one-sided. In large pots the bulbs should be
nearly covered with soil, but in small pots they must be only half covered, in order to afford
them the largest possible amount of root-room. When potted, a cool place must be found for
them, and unless they go absolutely dry, they should not have a drop of water until they begin
to grow freely and are in the enjoyment of full daylight. The pots may be stored in a dark,
cool pit, or any out-of-the-way place where neither sun, nor frost, nor heavy rains will affect
them; but it is advisable to plunge them in coal-ashes and also to cover them with a few inches
of the ashes. As to their removal, they must be taken out as wanted for forcing, and certainly
before they push up their flower spikes, as they will do if they remain too long in the bed.
The cultivator will be guided in respect of their removal from the bed by circumstances; but
when they are removed, a distinct routine of treatment must be observed, or the flowering will
be unsatisfactory. For a short time they should be placed in subdued daylight, that the blanched
growth may acquire a healthy green hue slowly; and they need to be kept cool in order that
they shall grow very little until a healthy colour is acquired. The floor of a cool greenhouse
is a good place for them when first taken out of the bed and cleaned up for forcing. Another
matter of great importance is to place them near the glass immediately their green colour is
established, and to grow them as slowly as the requirements of the case will permit. If to
be forced early, allow plenty of time to train them to bear a great heat, taking from bed to
pit, and from pit to cool house, and deferring to the latest possible moment placing them in
the heat in which they are to flower. Those to bloom at Christmas should be potted in September,
those to follow may be potted a month later. If a long succession is required, a sufficient
number should be potted every two or three weeks to the end of the year. Those potted latest
will, of course, flower in frames without the aid of heat. In any and every case the highest
temperature of the forcing-pit should be 70°; to go beyond that point will cause an attenuated
growth and poverty of colour. If liquid manure is employed at all, it should be used constantly
and extremely weak until the flowers begin to expand, and then pure soft water only should
be used. No matter what may be the particular constitution of the liquid manure, it must be
weak, or it will do more harm than good. The spikes should be supported by wires or neat sticks
in ample time, and a constant watch kept to see that the stems are not cut or bent, as they
rapidly develop beyond the range allowed them by their supports.

==Culture in Glasses==.--It is of little consequence whether rain, river, or spring water be
employed in this mode of culture, but it must be pure, and in the glasses it should nearly
but not quite touch the bulbs. Store at once in a dark, cool place, to encourage the bulbs
to send their roots down into the water before the leaves begin to grow. When the roots are
developed, bring the glasses from the dark to the light, in order that leaves and flowers may
be in perfect health. Let them have as much light as possible, with an equable temperature,
and provide supports in good time. Hyacinths are often injured by being kept in rooms that
are at times extremely cold and at others heated to excess. Those who wish to grow the bulbs
to perfection in glasses should remove them occasionally as circumstances may require, to prevent
the injury that must otherwise result from rapid and extreme alternations of temperature. It
is not desirable to introduce to the water any stimulating substance, but the glasses must
be kept nearly full of water by replenishing as it disappears. If the leaves become dusty,
they may be cleansed with a soft brush or a sponge dipped in water, but particular care must
be taken not to injure them in the process.

==Culture in Moss-fibre==.--While Hyacinths, differing from Daffodils and Tulips, are perhaps
relatively better in pots of soil than in bowls of moss-fibre, they may still be grown successfully
in bowls provided a fairly deep receptacle is chosen and care is taken to avoid making the
fibre hard. With a shallow bowl and very firm fibre it may be found that the roots strike upward
and the plant does not get that abundant supply of moisture which is essential to its welfare.
For this method of culture preference should be given to the Roman, Giant Italian, Christmas
Pink, Miniature and Grape Hyacinths, which look particularly charming in bowls and similar
contrivances. Detailed directions are given on page 319.

==Culture in Beds==.--The Hyacinth will grow well in any ordinary garden soil, but that which
suits it best is a light rich loam. The bed should be effectually drained, for though the plant
loves moisture it cannot thrive in a bog during the winter. It is advisable to plant early,
and to plant deep. If a rich effect is required, especially in beds near the windows of a residence,
the bulbs should be six inches apart, but at a greater distance a good effect may be produced
by planting nine inches apart. The time of blooming may be to some extent influenced by the
time and manner of planting, but no strict rules can be given to suit particular instances.
Late planting and deep planting both tend to defer the time of blooming, although there will
not be a great difference in any case, and as a rule the late bloom is to be preferred, because
less liable to injury from frost. The shallowest planting should insure a depth of three inches
of earth above the crown of the bulb, but they will flower better, and only a few days later,
if covered with full six inches of earth over the crowns. The Hyacinth is so hardy that protection
need not be thought of, except in peculiar cases of unusual exposure, or on the occurrence
of an excessively low temperature when they are growing freely. Under any circumstances, there
is no protection so effectual as dry litter, but a thin coat of half-rotten manure spread over
the bed is to be preferred in the event of danger being apprehended at any time before the
growth has fairly pushed through.

The bulbs may be taken up as soon as the leaves acquire a yellow colour, so that the brilliant
display of spring may be immediately followed by another, equally brilliant perhaps, but in
character altogether different. When grown in beds, Hyacinths do not require water or sticks;
all they need is to be planted properly, and they will take care of themselves.

==Miniature Hyacinths.==--These charming little sparkling gems are invaluable for baskets,
bowls and other contrivances which are adapted for the choicest decorative purposes. In quality
they are excellent, the spikes being symmetrical, the flowers well formed, and the colours
brilliant. But they are true miniatures, growing about half the size of the other kinds, and
requiring less soil to root in. They will flower well if planted in a mixture of moss-fibre
and charcoal, kept constantly moist, and covered with the greenest moss, to give to the ornament
containing them a finished appearance.

==Feather and Grape Hyacinths== will grow in any good garden soil, and are admirably adapted
for borders that are shaded by trees. They should be planted in large clumps, and be allowed
to remain several years undisturbed. Both classes are beautiful--the Feather Hyacinth emphatically
so; indeed, numerous as beautiful flowers are, this, for delicacy of structure, has peculiar
claims to our admiration, when presenting its feathery plumes a foot or more in length, all
cut into curling threads of the most elegant tenuity. Grape Hyacinths make a charming ornament
for the drawing-room when grown in bowls of moss-fibre.

==Roman Hyacinth.==--This flower is particularly welcome in the short, dark days of November,
December, and January. For placing in glasses to decorate the drawing-room or dinner-table
the spikes of bloom are largely grown; and the separate flowers, mounted on wire, form an important
feature in winter bouquets, for which purpose their delicious perfume renders them especially
valuable.

The bulbs can be grown with the utmost ease. Pot them immediately they can be obtained in August
or September, and stand them in some spare corner in the open ground, where they can be covered
with a few inches of leaf-mould. This will encourage the roots to start before there is any
top growth. In October remove the covering, and transfer the pots to a pit or frame, or they
may be placed under the greenhouse stage for a time, provided they will not be in the way of
dripping water. A little later, room should be found for them upon the stage, or the foliage
may become drawn. When the buds are visible, plunge the pots in a bottom heat of 65° or 70°,
and in a week the flowers will be fit for use. Like its more imposing prototype, the Roman
Hyacinth may have its roots gently freed from soil for packing in bowls or vases filled with
wet moss or sand; but they ought not to be subjected to a violent change of temperature. If
wanted in glasses, they can be grown in water after the usual fashion, but the flower is scarcely
adapted for this mode of treatment. They will, however, grow well in bowls filled with moss-fibre.

==Italian Hyacinth.==--Although rather later in flowering than the Roman variety, the Italian
Hyacinth deserves to be grown as a pot plant, especially for its more lasting quality. The
graceful flowers are carried on long stout stems which are most effective for the decoration
of vases. The bulbs are perfectly hardy, and may be planted in clumps in the open border, where
they will bloom in April and afford abundant sprays for cutting. The habit is less formal than
that of the Dutch Hyacinth and the flowers exhale a sweet delicate perfume. As previously stated,
the Italian Hyacinth is especially suitable for growing in moss-fibre.

==HYACINTHUS CANDICANS==

An excellent companion to Delphiniums, Salvias, and perennial Lobelias in the mixed border.
The stately spikes of this flower also associate well with shrubs, and help to enliven a bed
of Rhododendrons at a period of the year when the latter is uninteresting. Roots may be planted
in any soil from November to March; and, as they are perfectly hardy, they can be left in the
open ground all the year without the least misgiving as to their safety. A strong root will
produce a succession of flower-spikes, and this tendency will be assisted by cutting off each
spike immediately it has ceased to be attractive.

==IRIS==

The common varieties of Iris are well-known favourites of the border, and the whole family
have claims on the attention of amateurs, on account of their excellent faculty of taking care
of themselves if properly planted in the first instance. The tuberous or bulbous rooted kinds
do not require a rich soil; a sandy loam suits them, and they thrive in peat. Such beautiful
species as Reticulata, the Chalcedonian, and the Peacock are worth growing in pots placed in
frames or in a cool greenhouse. The English, Dutch, and Spanish varieties should be planted
in clumps in front of a shrubbery border, where they may be seen to advantage. The crown of
the bulb must not be more than three inches below the surface. From September to December will
answer for planting, and the roots may be taken up when the flowering period is over, or if
the space is not wanted they can be allowed to remain for the following season. Bulbs of the
English class should never be kept out of the ground longer than can be helped, but they ought
not to be grown in one spot for more than three years; after that time the clumps must be divided
and a fresh position found for them.

==IXIA and SPARAXIS==

These attractive Cape bulbs are hardy in favoured districts, and may be left out for years
in a sheltered border. In places where none but the hardiest plants pass through the winter
safely, they must be grown in the greenhouse or the frame, and any good sandy soil will suit
them, whether peat or loam. They should be potted early in the autumn, and have plenty of air
at all times when the weather is favourable, especially when they are growing freely in spring.
If carefully managed, they may remain two seasons in the same pots. Use the 48-size, and plant
four or five bulbs in each. A dry, deep, sandy border under a wall in any of the warmer western
and southern districts might be furnished with such plants as Ixias, Sparaxis, Alstroemerias,
Oxalis, Tritonias, Babianas, and the choicest of the smaller kinds of Iris. It would constitute
a garden of the most interesting exotics.

==JONQUIL==

For its delicious fragrance and exquisite beauty the Jonquil has long been considered one of
the most valuable of the Narciss family for cultivation in pots, and it is also a first-rate
border and woodland flower. When forced, the treatment should agree as nearly as possible with
that prescribed for the Narcissus. Four or five bulbs may be planted in one pot.

==LACHENALIA==

An elegant plant which is not quite hardy enough to be trusted in the open ground; but it is
the easiest matter possible to grow it well in the greenhouse. The bulbs should be potted as
soon as they begin to grow in the autumn, and several bulbs may be put into each pot. There
can be no better soil than turfy loam, without manure or sand. It is of the utmost importance
that the plants should have abundance of water, when they will produce leaves two inches across,
and spikes of flowers fully double the size of those commonly met with. An admirable use for
these bulbs is to insert them all over the outside of hanging-baskets, which they will cover
with the most graceful display of aërial vegetation imaginable, the flower-spikes turning upwards,
and the leaves hanging down.

==LEUCOJUM==

The Spring Snowflake (=L. vernum=) blooms as early as February or March, and the Summer Snowflake
(=L. æstivum=) comes into flower in May and June. They closely resemble the Snowdrop, but are
much larger than that well-known spring favourite. The bulbs are perfectly hardy, and will
grow in any garden soil. Plant in clumps three inches deep, any time from the end of September
until the middle of November.

==LILIES==

Hardy border Lilies are among the most useful garden plants known. They are peculiarly hardy
and robust, requiring no support from sticks or ties; several of them remain green all the
winter, and are capable of resisting any amount of frost. If left alone, they increase rapidly,
and become more valuable every year. We will say nothing of their beauty, for that is proverbial;
but it may be useful to observe that many of the most lovely Lilies, usually regarded as only
suitable for the greenhouse, and grown with great care under glass, are really as hardy as
the old common white Lily, and may be grown with it in the same border. To grow Lilies well
requires a deep, moist, rich loam. A stubborn clay may be improved for them by deep digging,
and incorporating with the staple plenty of rotten manure and leaf-mould. They all thrive in
peat, or rotten turf, or, indeed, in any soil containing an abundance of decomposing vegetable
matter. The autumn is the proper time to plant Lilies, but they may be planted at any season,
if they can be obtained in a dormant state or growing in pots. They should be planted deep
for their size, say, never less than six inches. After they have stood some years it is necessary
to lift and part the clumps, when the borders should be deeply dug and liberally manured before
replanting. If the stems of Lilies become leafless and unsightly before the flowers are past,
it is a sign that the roots are too dry, or that the soil is impoverished; and therefore, as
soon as the stems die down, they should be lifted, and perhaps transferred to a more favourable
spot.

==Amaryllis.==--These magnificent plants do not require the high temperature in which they
are usually grown, nor should they be allowed to remain for a great length of time dust-dry,
as we sometimes find them. It is important to remember that they have distinct seasons of activity
and rest, but must not be forced into either condition by such drastic measures as are occasionally
resorted to. The proper soil for them is turfy loam, enriched with rotten manure, and rendered
moderately porous by an admixture of sand. The light soil in which many plants thrive will
not suit them; the soil must be firm, and somewhat rough in texture. When first potted, give
them very little water, and promote growth by means of a bottom heat of 65°. Increase the supply
of water as the plants progress, and shift them into 6-inch pots for flowering. While they
are in flower they may be placed in the conservatory, or wherever else they may be required
for decorative purposes. When the flowers have faded take them to the greenhouse to complete
their growth, after which dry them off slowly, but with the clear understanding that they are
never to be desiccated. They may be wintered in the greenhouse, and should certainly be placed
where they will always be slightly moist, even if a few leaves remain green throughout the
winter. Frequent disturbance of the roots is to be particularly avoided in the cultivation
of Amaryllis, and therefore it is desirable to allow them to remain in the same pots two or
three years; or if they are shifted on, it should be done in such a way that the roots are
scarcely seen in the process. Top dressing and liquid manure will help them when they have
been some time in the same pots.

