At six in the morning the girls were out of bed, for Alice could hardly wait until Rebecca's
hair was taken down, she was so eager to see the result of her labors.

The leads and rags were painfully removed, together with much hair, the operation being punctuated
by a series of squeaks, squeals, and shrieks on the part of Rebecca and a series of warnings
from Alice, who wished the preliminaries to be kept secret from the aunts, that they might
the more fully appreciate the radiant result.

Then came the unbraiding, and then--dramatic moment--the "combing out;" a difficult, not to
say impossible process, in which the hairs that had resisted the earlier stages almost gave
up the ghost.

The long front strands had been wound up from various angles and by various methods, so that,
when released, they assumed the strangest, most obstinate, most unexpected attitudes. When
the comb was dragged through the last braid, the wild, tortured, electric hairs following,
and then rebounding from it in a bristling, snarling tangle, Massachusetts gave one encompassing
glance at the State o' Maine's head, and announced her intention of going home to breakfast! The
General never wore expensive clothes and always carried a crooked-handled walking stick. I'se
never heard him say "niggah", never heard him cuss. He always helped us niggars--gave gave us
nickles and dimes at times.

Alexander Stephens wuz crippled.

The State o' Maine, deserted and somewhat unnerved, sat down before the glass and attacked
her hair doggedly and with set lips, working over it until Miss Jane called her to breakfast;
then, with a boldness born of despair, she entered the dining-room, where her aunts were already
seated at table. There was a moment of silence after the grotesque figure was fully taken in;
then came a moan from Jane and a groan from Miranda.

"What have you done to yourself?" asked Miranda sternly.

"Made an effort to be beautiful and failed!" jauntily replied Rebecca, but she was too miserable
to keep up the fiction. "Oh, Aunt Miranda, don't scold, I'm so unhappy! Alice and I rolled
up my hair to curl it for the raising. She said it was so straight I looked like an Indian!"

"Mebbe you did," vigorously agreed Miranda, "but 't any rate you looked like a Christian Injun,
'n' now you look like a heathen Injun; that's all the difference I can see. What can we do
with her, Jane, between this and nine o'clock?"

"We'll all go out to the pump just as soon as we're through breakfast," answered Jane soothingly.
"We can accomplish considerable with water and force."

Rebecca nibbled her corn-cake, her tearful eyes cast on her plate and her chin quivering.

"Don't you cry and red your eyes up," chided Miranda quite kindly; "the minute you've eaten
enough run up and get your brush and meet us at the back door."

"I would n't care myself how bad I looked," said Rebecca, "but I can't bear to be so homely
that I shame the State of Maine!"

Oh, what an hour followed this plaint! Did any aspirant for literary or dramatic honors ever
pass to fame through such an antechamber of horrors? Did poet of the day ever have his head
so maltreated?  To be dipped in the rain-water tub, soused again and again; to be held under
the spout and pumped on; to be rubbed furiously with rough roller towels; to be dried with
hot flannels!  And is it not well-nigh incredible that at the close of such an hour the ends
of the long hair should still stand out straight, the braids having been turned up two inches
by Alice, and tied hard in that position with linen thread?

