CANADIAN NOTABILITIES, VOLUME I

BY JOHN CHARLES DENT

JOSEPH BRANT--THAYENDANEGEA.

Few tasks are more difficult of accomplishment than the overturning of the ideas and prejudices
which have been conceived in our youth, which have grown up with us to mature age, and which
have finally become the settled convictions of our manhood. The overturning process is none
the less difficult when, as is not seldom the case, those ideas and convictions are widely
at variance with facts. Most of us have grown up with very erroneous notions respecting the
Indian character--notions which have been chiefly derived from the romances of Cooper and his
imitators. We have been accustomed to regard the aboriginal red man as an incarnation of treachery
and remorseless ferocity, whose favourite recreation is to butcher defenceless women and children
in cold blood. A few of us, led away by the stock anecdotes in worthless missionary and Sunday
School books, have gone far into the opposite extreme, and have been wont to regard the Indian
as the Noble Savage who never forgets a kindness, who is ever ready to return good for evil,
and who is so absurdly credulous as to look upon the pale-faces as the natural friends and
benefactors of his species. Until within the last few years, no pen has ventured to write impartially
of the Indian character, and no one has attempted to separate the wheat from the chaff in the
generally received accounts which have come down to us from our forefathers. The fact is that
the Indian is very much what his white brother has made him. The red man was the original possessor
of this continent, the settlement, of which by Europeans sounded the death-knell of his sovereignty.
The aboriginal could hardly be expected to receive the intruder with open arms, even if the
latter had acted up to his professions of peace and good-will. It would have argued a spirit
of contemptible abjectness and faintness of heart if the Indian had submitted without a murmur
to the gradual encroachments of the foreigner, even if the latter had adopted a uniform policy
of mildness and conciliation. But the invader adopted no such policy. Not satisfied with taking
forcible possession of the soil, he took the first steps in that long, sickening course of
treachery and cruelty which has caused the chronicles of the white conquest in America to be
written in characters of blood. The first and most hideous butcheries were committed by the
whites. And if the Indians did not tamely submit to the yoke sought to be imposed upon their
necks, they only acted as human beings, civilized and uncivilized, have always acted upon like
provocation. More than that, you've insulted my daughter and me beyond any future reparation.
As for your son, he got less than he deserved." He turned to the rancher. "You came just in time,
it seems. Please see that he leaves the house."

Johnson waved with his gun significantly towards the door.

"Move right along lively," he added. "And I'll go along with you to see that you don't hamstring my
horses, which I don't put past an underhanded cattle-thief like you."

Sorenson seemed striving for words that would adequately blast those before him, but they appeared
lacking. With a last malignant glare he walked out upon the veranda and down across the yard,
with his guard following him.

When Johnson returned after Sorenson's departure in his car, he was grinning sardonically.

"I shouldn't want him running among my cattle; he'd bite 'em and give
'em the rabies," he remarked.

Janet caught and pressed his toil-roughened hand.

"You'll never know how much I thank you for coming in just when you did," she cried.

"Pshaw, your father would have showed up and stopped him."

"I'm not so sure. Father has no weapon, and that man did have one. It was the sight of your pistol
that made him cower. You couldn't have chosen a more lucky minute to arrive."

"Well, it was a little bit timely, as it turned out. Considering too that we were coming to
see you anyway, it was just as well to walk in when we could do some good. Mary has something
for you to read, if you read Spanish."

"Yes, I do."

"That's good. Show 'em what you have, daughter."

Mary drew a knotted handkerchief from her bosom and undid the knots. Appeared the doubled paper
she had found. This she passed to Janet.

"Why,--why, this is the document I had!" the latter exclaimed, joyfully. "Where did you find it?"

"Up by the smashed automobile, when father and I were at the cabin." She exchanged a guarded
look with her father. "There are names in it that made me think it might be valuable. So when
father came back from Bowenville I showed it to him. But neither of us could read it. We thought
we'd better bring it to you to read."

"It is valuable, very valuable. I had it when I was seized by Ed Sorenson and he took it away from
me. Evidently, then, it fell from his pocket at the time of the accident. Yes, indeed, it's
important. It means everything to certain parties. I'll read it, but you understand what it
tells is private at present."

"We understand--and I think I know what it's going to say," Johnson remarked, grimly.

Thereupon while the others listened Janet read a translation of the long document. To her and
her father the facts were not new, for Weir had already related such as he knew of the happenings
in Vorse's saloon on that eventful day thirty years previous. Nor for that matter were they
strange to Johnson and his daughter, though of course neither Janet nor her father were aware
of the rancher's more intimate knowledge of the subject.

"A pretty good story as far as it goes, but like all lawyers' papers long-winded," Johnson stated,
critically.

"What do you mean, far as it goes?" Janet asked, curiously. "Did you know this old Mexican? Did
you ever hear him tell about the thing?"

"I knew he was there at the time, but he never told me anything."

Here Dr. Hosmer spoke.

"Saurez died yesterday. It must have been shortly after he made this deposition. He died in Vorse's
saloon, which gives a color of suspicion to his death. In addition, Martinez, as you know,
was dragged away somewhere."

"Then Vorse learned old Saurez had blabbed, and killed him," Johnson said, in a convinced tone.
"Vorse is a bad bird, I want to say. But so are all of them, Sorenson, Burkhardt and Judge Gordon
as well."

Janet brought the talk back to the subject.

"You make me still wonder, Mr. Johnson," she said. "You seemed to think there's more to the account
than is told in this paper."

Again the rancher and his daughter glanced at each other, hesitatingly.

"Tell them, father," Mary broke forth all at once. "They know this much, and you know you can
trust them."

The man, however, shook his head with a certain dogged purpose.

"If this is just a paper in some trifling lawsuit or other, it will be better if I keep my own
counsel," he stated. "I've riled Sorenson considerable as it is now, and I don't care particularly
about having him gunning on my trail active-like. If it really mattered----"

"It does matter; it matters everything," Janet cried, "if you really know something more!"

"Why?"

"Because it concerns Mr. Weir. The Joseph Weir described and named in this affidavit was his
father. He believes these men robbed his father; this paper proves it, but not absolutely, for
Mexican evidence here in this country doesn't carry as much weight against white men--especially
men as rich and strong as these named--as it would in other places perhaps. You know that. This
paper was obtained for Mr. Weir."

"Oho, so that's the way of it!"

Johnson said, with a long drawn-out tone.

He regarded the paper in silence for a time, busy with his thoughts, absently twisting his beard,
until at length a look of satisfaction grew on his face.

"Well, well, this is fine," he went on presently. "I never thought I should be able to pay the
obligation I owe him, and I won't fully at that, but this will help. No, that paper doesn't
tell all, for I reckon Saurez didn't see all." He glanced triumphantly at the doctor and the
girl. "But I did."

"You!" both exclaimed.

But before he could explain, the memory of the cattleman's threat recurred to Janet to banish thoughts
of aught else than Weir's danger from her mind.

"Mr. Sorenson said he was going up to the dam to shoot Mr. Weir," she exclaimed. "We must give
warning."

"Did he say he was going himself?" Johnson asked.

"To get the paper, yes." Then Janet continued anxiously. "But the paper isn't all. His son told
him what occurred in the mountains and I believe the man wants to harm Mr. Weir as well as
to obtain the paper. Perhaps he plans on gaining the document first, then killing him. In any
case, we must put Mr. Weir on guard."

"I'll just drive up there and tell the engineer," Johnson stated. "Shouldn't be surprised if I
got a chance yet to use my gun. You girls can stay here."

Janet gazed at him with a flushing face.

"The man could go to the dam and kill Mr. Weir and get safely home while you're starting with
your team," said she. "No, we must drive there in a car. Father, you take Mr. Johnson in yours,
and I'll carry Mary in mine. We'll go along of course, for we'll not remain here in the cottage
alone with such terrible things happening in San Mateo."

And to this there was no dissent.

CHAPTER XXIV

THE ALARM

At the dam Weir found Meyers and Atkinson anxiously waiting his return. The sudden concerted melting
away of workmen from camp had been warning to his subordinates that the danger of a general
spree had taken definite form, which the report of a pair of young engineers confirmed when
they followed a group of laborers to the old adobe house and beheld the beginning of the debauch.

"Get
out all the staff, Meyers, and you, Atkinson, all the foremen and sober men left, then go
down the road and put that joint out of business, taking axes and whatever is necessary."

"And if they fight?" Meyers asked.

"Try first to placate them. If that fails, some of you draw them off in order to permit the
others to enter the house and destroy the whiskey. It's a tough job, but you may succeed. If
the crowd turns ugly as it may, being drunk, come back. No need to take the risk of broken
heads or being beaten up. See, however, if you can't outwit the outfit.

Possibly you could push that mud house over from the rear by means of a beam; that would do the
business. I leave it to you to decide what's best to do, men, after you've examined the situation."

"The
camp will be unguarded except for you and the two men with you," Weir's assistant suggested.
"If the crowd drinking down at that place should take the notion to come here and tear things
up, there would be nothing to hinder them.

A few should stay, anyway, I imagine--half a dozen, who can use guns."

"Well, pick out six to remain," the other agreed.

For Meyers' suggestion had raised a disagreeable possibility. It was never safe to ignore precautions
when a gang of two or three hundred rough, active laborers, however loyal when sober, were made irresponsible
and crazy by liquor; and one stage of drunkenness in such men was usually manifested in a wild
desire for violence. The scheme of Weir's enemies might comprise using this very act for wrecking
the camp.

Six men, to be sure, would offer little resistance to stemming the movement once it was started,
but the sight of steel in the guards' hands might cause even a reckless mob to pause long enough for an
appeal. If the men should be brought to listen, they could probably be diverted from their
purpose, as impassioned crowds are easily swayed by men of force.

In any case the camp and dam should be defended to the last. That went without saying.

Meyers and Atkinson had little more than departed with their muster of engineers, foremen and
sober workmen, some fifty in all, when the two cars driven by Dr. Hosmer and Janet arrived
at headquarters. To the occupants of both machines the camp appeared singularly dark and silent,
the office building and the commissary shack alone showing lights.

The four visitors entered the main room in the former building, where they found Mr. Pollock
and Martinez.

"Mr. Weir stepped out for a moment to make a round of the camp and the horse corrals," the
easterner replied in answer to an inquiry from the doctor. "Will you be seated?" And he politely
placed chairs for Janet and Mary, while his look scrutinized the party with discreet interest.

"Oh, Mr. Martinez, you've escaped!" Janet exclaimed, after a surprised stare at the lawyer.

The
Mexican smiled, bowed and drew one point of his black mustache through his fingers.

"I have indeed, Miss Janet," said he. "Not without an unpleasant experience, however. I understand
you secured the paper concerning which I telephoned you, and though I understand it has since
been lost--through no fault of yours--I desire to express my thanks for your excellent assistance in the
matter."

"But it has been found again; we have it with us."

Martinez gave a start, none the less sincere for being dramatic.

"What! Saurez' deposition? Weir thought it burned. Why, this is the most wonderful luck in the
world! It gives us the whip-hand again."

Janet nodded.

"Mary Johnson here found it in a crack in the rocks when she and her father went up to the cabin
to bring Ed Sorenson down. Father has it. That's one reason we're here. But there's another; Mr.
Sorenson has learned of his son's accident, has seen him, talked with him, been told lies and
now is in a dreadful rage, threatening every one concerned. He was at our house and made a
scene. He's coming here, or so he said, to kill Mr. Weir and obtain the document. So we hurried
to the dam to give warning."

At this juncture Mr. Pollock stepped forward.

"Mr. Sorenson hasn't yet appeared, and I assure you he will be prevented from harming any one
if he comes. You are Miss Janet Hosmer, I judge, of whom I've heard so much that is praiseworthy.
Will you allow me to introduce myself? I'm Mr. Pollock, a company director, and to a degree in Mr.
Weir's confidence."

Janet expressed her pleasure at his acquaintance and in turn introduced
her father and the Johnsons.

"Mr. Weir spoke of you to us, but we weren't aware he had informed you of the paper." Then she
added, "But he would wish to, naturally."

Weir's voice, without, in conversation with some one caused them all to look towards the door.
In the panel of light falling on the darkness before the house they perceived the engineer's
tall figure by a horse, from which the rider was dismounting. Letting the reins drag and leaving
the horse to stand, the latter walked with Weir into the room.

"Why, this is a delightful surprise!" the engineer exclaimed on beholding the four who had come
while he was out. "And unexpected." His eyes rapidly interrogated
the different faces. "I suppose it's business, not pleasure, that
brings you."

"That's so," said Johnson, the rancher, nodding.

"Well,
Madden is here on business, too, it seems." He glanced at Mr. Pollock.
"Mr. Madden is our sheriff and he has a warrant for my arrest." He
turned back to the officer. "You come at a bad time for my affairs.
You saw that big show at the old house half way down the road? That
crowd is made up of my workmen, who are being entertained with free
whiskey, and there's no telling but what they may come here to tear
things up. The whiskey is furnished by Vorse, I suspect, and is being
served at Vorse's place. Your warrant is inspired by Vorse and others,
isn't it? The two circumstances coming at the same moment, the free
drunk and my arrest, look fishy to me. What do you think? I'm in charge
of a property here representing a good deal of money and I should
hate to be absent if the men took the idea into their heads to turn
the camp upside down, especially if the idea was inspired by Vorse
and his friends."

"I haven't served the warrant yet," Madden replied.

"And
you know that I'm not going to skip the country at the prospect of
your serving it?"

"No. There's no hurry; I'll just sit around for
a while. And understand, Weir, this arrest is none of my doings, except
officially. I take no stock in the yarn about your having attacked
the greaser you killed. Martinez' and Miss Janet's testimony at the
inquest satisfied me in that respect."

Mr. Pollock now drew Weir
aside for a whispered conference. When they rejoined the others the
engineer made the lawyer acquainted with the sheriff.

"Mr. Weir has
agreed to my suggestion to take you into our confidence, Mr. Madden,"
he stated. "There may be other warrants for you to serve soon, and
I'm sure you will respect what we reveal. All of us here except you
know the facts I'm about to relate; indeed, have shared in them to
an extent; and in addition to our word we'll present proof. You know
Dr. Hosmer and his daughter certainly, you probably know Mr. Johnson
and the young lady with him, and are aware whether their statements
are to be relied on."

"They are," Madden answered, without hesitation.

"You're
already convinced of the truth of Weir's innocence in the charge of
murder now being preferred against him. Well, now, a friend at court
is worth something; and we propose to make you that friend."

"I'm
not against him like most of the town, anyway," was the sheriff's
answer.

"Go ahead with your explanation," Pollock said to the engineer.

Thereupon
Weir briefly sketched out events for the officer as they had occurred
and as showing the motives which had inspired his enemies in seeking
to destroy him:--the original plot against his father, his determination
to uncover the four conspirators, the episode at the restaurant in
Bowenville, the discovery of Ed Sorenson as the hirer of the dead
Mexican assassin, the obtaining of Saurez' deposition and Martinez'
imprisonment in Vorse's saloon cellar, Janet's abduction and rescue
and the loss of the paper.

"But the paper isn't lost," Dr. Hosmer
interrupted. "Mary Johnson found it and here it is." With which he
drew the crumpled document from his breast pocket and laid it on the
table.

"You have it again!" Weir exclaimed. "You found it, Mary!"
He stepped forward and took the girl's hand in his for a moment. "You're
a friend indeed to bring this back to me."

"I owed you more than
that," she said, coloring.

"But Mr. Sorenson has learned about his
son and the paper and everything that happened, except Ed Sorenson
told him lies instead of the truth," Janet put in. "He's terribly
angry at all of us. He said he would kill you for crippling Ed."

"Sorenson
is welcome to try," Weir responded, with a quick blaze in his eyes.

At
this point Mr. Pollock interposed.

"You didn't finish your story,
Weir. Relate for Mr. Madden's benefit what occurred at Judge Gordon's
house."

This tragic conclusion to the afternoon's happenings the
engineer told, though remarking that the company director should be
the true narrator. At his announcement that Judge Gordon had taken
his own life by poison his listeners remained dumbfounded.

"He's
dead, then?" Madden asked, at last.

"Yes. And the transfer of property
made to Mr. Pollock amounts to an acknowledgment of his guilt. Now,
I should like to have Martinez read this deposition, for I've never
heard its contents myself."

This the Mexican did, translating the
Spanish paragraphs into English with fluent ease, ending by reading
the list of witnesses. Martinez gave the paper a slap of his hand.

"And
old Saurez was found dead in Vorse's saloon by me an hour after he
had signed this," he said. "Draw your own conclusions."

Madden shifted
on his seat. He glanced at the document and at the others and then
gazed out the door at the darkness.

"Looks like a clear case; I always
imagined if these men's past was dug into there would be a lot of
crooked business turned up. But granting that everything is as shown,
with Lucerio the county attorney under Sorenson's thumb and the community
as it is there's a question if Saurez' statement even will be enough
to convict them."

At that Janet jumped up, her eyes gleaming.

"That
is not all the proof, not all by any means!" she cried.

"What more
is there?"

"Mr. Johnson's evidence."

"Johnson's!" came in surprised
tones from all four of the men uninformed of the rancher's story.

"Yes,
he saw the man Dent killed and the plotters make your father, Mr.
Weir, believe he had done the killing."

Steele stared at Johnson
dumbfounded.

"Just that; I saw the whole dirty trick worked, looking
through the back door of the saloon."

"Then you were the boy!" Weir
gasped. "The boy who looked in! After thirty years I supposed that
boy gone, lost, vanished beyond finding."

"I stayed right here,"
was the reply. "Of course I kept my mouth shut about what I had seen.
I worked on ranches and rode range and at last got the little place
on Terry Creek and married. Nothing strange in my remaining in the
country where I grew up, especially as I only knew the cattle business."

Weir
swung about to Madden.

"Here's a live witness," said he. "With the
other proof his evidence should be final."

"Whenever you say, I'll
arrest the men. As for this warrant I have, I'll just continue to
carry it in my pocket," the sheriff stated. "I must remark that I
never heard of a more villainous plot, taking it all around, than
you've brought to light."

"And the charges must cover everything,"
Pollock said sternly. "From Dent's murder to the conspiracy against
the irrigation company."

"I'll stay here in case you need me to stop
any trouble with your workmen," Madden remarked.

But trouble though
imminent was coming from another direction, as was suddenly shown
when a man, dust-covered and hatless, rushed into the office.

"They're
on the way," he cried.

"Who? The workmen?" Weir demanded.

"No. I
don't know anything about the workmen, but a bunch of Mexicans, fifty
or more, are headed this way to blow up the dam. I saw and heard them."

"Where?"

"At
the spring a mile south. I was watching down there, where Atkinson
had sent me after supper, relieving the man who kept lookout during
the afternoon. That was where the booze was dealt out last night,
you remember. I was sitting there when I heard a crowd coming. At
first I thought it was our men, but when they stopped to drink and
smoke, I saw by their talk they were Mexicans. But there was one white
man with them, a leader. He and a Mexican talked in English. They're
to raid the camp, crawling up the canyon, to dynamite the dam first,
then fire the buildings."

"Then they're on the road here now?"

"Yes."
The speaker licked his lips. "I cut along the hillside until I got
ahead of them, but it was slow going in the dark and stumbling through
the sage. They must be close at hand by this time, though I came faster
than they did. The white man said to the Mexican that they wanted
to reach the dam just at moonrise, and that will be pretty quick now."

"Go
to the bunk-house and call the men waiting there, and get a gun yourself,"
Weir ordered. "The storekeeper will give you one." When the messenger
had darted out, he looked at the others. "You must take these girls
away from here, doctor, at once."

"But I don't go," Johnson snapped
forth, drawing his revolver and giving the cylinder a spin.

"I never
could hit anything, and haven't had a firearm in my hand for years,
but I can try," Pollock stated. "This promises to be interesting,
very interesting."

"Very," said Weir.

For a little he stood in thought,
while the others gazed at him without speaking. His straight body
seemed to gather strength and power before their eyes, his clean-cut
features to become hard and masterful.

"Up the canyon he said they
were coming, didn't he?" he remarked at last, more to himself than
to them. "Very well, so much the better. Johnson, you and Madden take
charge of the men when they come and line them along the hillside
this side of the dam. Put out all lights." With which he strode out
of the building.

They looked after him in uncertainty.

"I'm not
going; you may be hurt, and need me," Mary stated, with a stubborn
note in her voice.

"Then keep out of reach--and run for town if the
ruffians get into camp," was her father's answer.

"I stay too," Janet
exclaimed, resolutely.

CHAPTER XXV

NO QUARTER

The peril threatening
the unfinished dam now alone engaged Steele Weir's mind. No sooner were the terms of the Treaty made known than Brant
repaired to Quebec, to claim from General Haldimand the fulfilment of his pledge. General Haldimand
received his distinguished guest cordially, and professed himself ready to redeem his promise.
It was of course impossible to fulfil it literally, as the Mohawk valley had passed beyond
British control; but the Chief expressed his willingness to accept in lieu of his former domain
a tract of land on the Bay of Quinte. The General agreed that this tract should at once be
conveyed to the Mohawks. The arrangement, however, was not satisfactory to the Senecas, who
had settled in the Genesee Valley, in the State of New York. The Senecas were apprehensive
of further trouble with the United States, and were anxious that the Mohawks should settle
in their own neighbourhood, to assist them in the event of another war. They offered the Mohawks
a large tract of their own territory, but the Mohawks were determined to live only under British
rule. Accordingly, it was finally arranged that the latter should have assigned to them a tract
of land on the Grand River (then called the Ouse) comprehending six miles on each side of the
stream, from the mouth to the source. This tract, which contains some of the most fertile land
in the Province, was formally conveyed to them by an instrument under Governor Haldimand's
hand and seal, in which it was stipulated that they should "possess and enjoy" it forever.
The Indians, unversed in technicalities, supposed that they now had an absolute and indefeasible
estate in the lands. Of course they were mistaken. Governor Haldimand's conveyance did not
pass the fee, which could only be effected by a crown patent under the Great Seal.

These several negotiations occupied some time. Towards the close of the year 1785, Brant, feeling
aggrieved at the non-payment of certain pecuniary losses sustained by the Mohawks during the
war, again set sail for England, where in due course he arrived. As on the occasion of his
former visit, he was received with the utmost consideration and respect, not by the nobility
and gentry alone, but by royalty itself. He seems to have lived upon terms of equality with
the best society of the British capital, and to have so borne himself as to do no discredit
to his entertainers. The Baroness Riedesel, who had formerly met him at Quebec, had an opportunity
of renewing acquaintance with him, and has left on record the impression which he produced
upon her. She writes: "His manners are polished. He expresses himself with great fluency, and
was much esteemed by General Haldimand. His countenance is manly and intelligent, and his disposition
very mild."

During this visit a dramatic episode occurred which occupies a conspicuous place in all books
devoted to Brant's life. The present writer has told the story elsewhere as follows:--One gusty
night in the month of January, 1786, the interior of a certain fashionable mansion in the West
End of London presented a spectacle of amazing gorgeousness and splendour. The occasion was
a masquerade given by one of the greatest of the city magnates; and as the entertainment was
participated in by several of the nobility, and by others in whose veins ran some of the best
blood in England, no expense had been spared to make the surroundings worthy of the exalted
rank of the guests. Many of the dresses were of a richness not often seen, even in the abodes
of wealth and fashion. The apartments were brilliantly lighted, and the lamps shone upon as
quaint and picturesque an assemblage as ever congregated in Mayfair. There were gathered together
representatives of every age and clime, each dressed in the garb suited to the character meant
to be personified. Here, a magnificently-attired Egyptian princess of the time of the Pharaohs
languished upon the arm of an English cavalier of the Restoration. There, high-ruffed ladies
of Queen Elizabeth's court conversed with mail-clad Norman warriors of the time of the Conqueror.
A dark-eyed Jewess who might have figured at the court of King Solomon jested and laughed with
a beau of Queen Anne's day. If the maiden blushed at some of the broad jokes of her companion,
her blushes were hidden by the silken mask which, in common with the rest of the guests, she
wore upon the upper part of her face, and which concealed all but the brilliancy of her eyes.
Cheek by jowl with a haughty Spanish hidalgo stood a plaided Highlander, with his dirk and
claymore. Athenian orators, Roman tribunes, Knights of the Round Table, Scandinavian Vikings
and Peruvian Incas jostled one another against the rich velvet and tapestry which hung from
ceiling to floor. Truly, a motley assemblage, and one well calculated to impress the beholder
with the transitoriness of mortal fame. In this miscellaneous concourse the occupants of the
picture frames of all the public and private galleries of Europe seemed to have been restored
to life, and personally brought into contact for the first time. And though, artistically speaking,
they did not harmonize very well with each other, the general effect was in the highest degree
marvellous and striking. But of all the assembled guests, one in particular is the cynosure
of all eyes--the observed of all observers. This is the cleverest masquer of them all, for
there is not a single detail, either in his dress, his aspect or his demeanour, which is not
strictly in conformity with the character he represents. He is clad in the garb of an American
Indian. He is evidently playing the part of one of high dignity among his fellows, for his
apparel is rich and costly, and his bearing is that of one who has been accustomed to rule.
The dress is certainly a splendid make-up, and the wearer is evidently a consummate actor.
How proudly he stalks from room to room, stately, silent, leonine, majestic. Lara himself--who,
by the way, had not then been invented--had not a more chilling mystery of mien. He is above
the average height--not much under six feet--and the nodding plumes of his crest make him look
several inches taller than he is in reality. His tomahawk, which hangs loosely exposed at his
girdle, glitters like highly-polished silver; and the hand which ever and anon toys with the
haft is long and bony. The dark, piercing eyes seem almost to transfix every one upon whom
they rest. One half of the face seems to be covered by a mask, made to imitate the freshly-painted
visage of a Mohawk Indian when starting out upon the war path. He is evidently bent upon preserving
a strict incognito, for the hours pass by and still no one has heard the sound of his voice.
The curiosity of the other guests is aroused, and, pass from room to room as often as he may,
a numerous train follows in his wake. One of the masquers composing this train is arrayed in
the loose vestments of a Turk, and indeed is suspected to be a genuine native of the Ottoman
Empire who has been sent to England on a diplomatic mission. Being emboldened by the wine he
has drunk, the Oriental determines to penetrate the mystery of the dusky stranger. He approaches
the seeming Indian, and after various ineffectual attempts to arrest his attention, lays violent
hold of the latter's nose. Scarcely has he touched that organ when a blood-curdling yell, such
as has never before been heard within the three kingdoms, resounds through the mansion.

  "Ah, then and there was hurling to and fro!"

The peal of the distant drum did not spread greater consternation among the dancers at Brussels
on the night before Waterloo. What wonder that female lips blanched, and that even masculine
cheeks grew pale? That yell was the terrible war-whoop of the Mohawks, and came hot from the
throat of the mysterious unknown. The truth flashed upon all beholders. The stranger was no
disguised masquerader, but a veritable brave of the American forest. Of this there could be
no doubt. No white man that ever lived could learn to give utterance to such an ejaculation.
The yell had no sooner sounded than the barbarian's tomahawk leapt from its girdle. He sprang
upon the luckless Turk, and twined his fingers in the poor wretch's hair. For a single second
the tomahawk flashed before the astonished eyes of the spectators; and then, before the latter
had time--even if they could have mustered the courage--to interfere, its owner gently replaced
it in his girdle, and indulged in a low chuckle of laughter. The amazed and terrified guests
breathed again, and in another moment the mysterious stranger stood revealed to the company
as Joseph Brant, the renowned warrior of the Six Nations, the steady ally of the British arms,
and the terror of all enemies of his race. Of course the alarm soon quieted down, and order
was restored. It was readily understood that he had never intended to injure the terrified
Oriental, but merely to punish the latter's impertinence by frightening him within an inch
of his life. Probably, too, that feeling of self-consciousness from which few minds are altogether
free, impelled him to take advantage of the interest and curiosity which his presence evidently
inspired, to create an incident which would long be talked about in London drawing-rooms, and
which might eventually be handed down to posterity.

The anecdotes preserved of his stay in London at this time are almost innumerable. He was a
great favourite with the King and his family, notwithstanding the fact that when he was first
introduced at Court he declined to kiss His Majesty's hand; adding, however, with delightful
naivete, that he would gladly kiss the hand of the Queen. The Prince of Wales also took great
delight in his company, and occasionally took him to places of questionable repute--or rather,
to places as to the disrepute of which there was no question whatever, and which were pronounced
by the Chief "to be very queer places for a prince to go to." His envoy was successful, and
his stay in London, which was prolonged for some months, must have been very agreeable, as
"he was caressed by the noble and great, and was alike welcome at Court and at the banquets
of the heir-apparent." After his return to America his first act of historical importance was
to attend the great Council of the Indian Confederacy in the far west. He used his best endeavours
to preserve peace between the Western Indians and the United States, and steadily opposed the
confederation which led to the expedition of Generals St. Clair and Wayne. We next find him
engaged in settling his people upon the tract which had been granted to them on the banks of
the Grand River. The principal settlement of the Mohawks was near the bend of the river, just
below the present site of the city of Brantford. They called the settlement "Mohawk Village."
The name still survives, but all traces of the village itself have disappeared. Brant built
the little church which still stands there, an illustration of which is given above, and in
which service has been held almost continuously every Sunday since its bell first awoke the
echoes of the Canadian forest. Brant himself took up his abode in the neighbourhood for several
years, and did his best to bring his dusky subjects under the influence of civilization. In
order to facilitate his passage across the Grand River he threw a sort of temporary boom across,
at a spot a few yards below where the iron-bridge now spans the stream at Brantford. From this
circumstance the place came to be known as "Brant's ford;" and when, years afterwards, a village
sprung up close by, the name of "Brantford" was given to it.

The Indians had not been long settled at Mohawk Village before difficulties began to arise
between them and the Provincial Government as to the nature of the title to their lands. The
Indians, supposing their title to be an absolute one, began to make leases and sales to the
white settlers in the neighbourhood. To this proceeding the Government objected, upon the ground
that the Crown had a pre-emptive right, and that the land belonged to the Indians only so long
as they might choose to occupy it. Many conferences were held, but no adjustment satisfactory
to the Indians was arrived at. There has been a good deal of subsequent legislation and diplomacy
over this vexed question, but so far as any unfettered power of alienation of the lands is
concerned Governor Haldimand's grant was practically a nullity, and so remains to this day.
These disputes embittered the Chief's declining years, which was further rendered unhappy by
petty dissensions among the various tribes composing the Six Nations; dissensions which he
vainly endeavoured to permanently allay. Another affliction befel him in the shape of a dissipated
and worthless son, whom he accidently killed in self-defence. The last few years of his life
were passed in a house built by him at Wellington Square; now called Burlington, a few miles
from Hamilton. He had received a grant of a large tract of land in this neighbourhood, and
he built a homestead there in or about the year 1800.

Here he kept up a large establishment, including seven or eight negro servants who had formerly
been slaves. He exercised a profuse and right royal hospitality alike towards the whites and
the Indian warriors who gathered round him. On the first of May in each year he used to drive
up, in his coach-and-four, Mohawk Village, to attend the annual Indian festival which was to
held there. On these occasions he was generally attended by a numerous retinue of servants
in livery, and their procession used to strike awe into the minds of the denizens of the settlements
through which they passed.

He died at his house at Wellington Square, after a long and painful illness, on the 24th November,
1807, in the sixty-fifth year of his age. His last thoughts were for his people, on whose behalf
he had fought so bravely, and whose social and moral improvement he was so desirous to promote.
His nephew, leaning over his bed, caught the last words that fell from his lips: "Have pity
on the poor Indians; if you can get any influence from the great, endeavour to do them all
the good you can."

His remains were removed to Mohawk Village, near Brantford, and interred in the yard of the
little church which he had built many years before, and which was the first Christian church
erected in Upper Canada. And there, by the banks of the Grand River,

  "After life's fitful fever he sleeps well."

Sufficient has been said in the course of the preceding sketch to enable the reader to form
a tolerably correct idea of the character of this greatest representative of the heroic Six
Nations. No expression of opinion was evermore unjust than that which has persistently held
him up to the execration of mankind as a monster of cruelty. That the exigences of his position
compelled him to wink at many atrocities committed by his troops is beyond question. That,
however, was a necessary incident of Indian warfare; nay, of all warfare; and after a careful
consultation and comparison of authorities we can come to no other conclusion than that, for
an Indian, reared among the customs and traditions of the Six Nations, Joseph Brant was a humane
and kind-hearted man. No act of perfidy was ever brought home to him. He was a constant and
faithful friend, and, though stern, by no means an implacable enemy. His dauntless courage
and devotion to his people have never been seriously questioned. The charges of self-seeking
and peculation which Red Jacket, "the greatest coward of the Five Nations," attempted to fasten
upon him, only served to render his integrity more apparent than it would otherwise have been.
He was not distinguished for brilliant flights of eloquence, as were Tecumseh and Cornstalk;
but both his speeches and his writings abound with a clear, sound common-sense, which was quite
as much to the purpose in his dealings with mankind. His early advantages of education were
not great, but he made best use of his time, and some of his correspondence written during
the latter years of his life would not discredit an English statesman. He translated a part
of the prayers and services of the Church of England, and also a portion of the Gospels, into
the Mohawk language, and in the latter years of his life made some preparation for a voluminous
history of the Six Nations. This latter work he did not live to carry out. In his social, domestic
and business relations he was true and honest, and nothing pleased him better than to diffuse
a liberal and genial hospitality in his own home. Taking him all in all, making due allowance
for the frailties and imperfections incidental to humanity, we must pronounce Joseph Brant
to have possessed in an eminent degree many of the qualities which go to make a good and a
great man.

Brant was thrice married. By his first wife, Margaret, he had two children, Isaac and Christina,
whose descendents are still living. By his second wife he had no issue. His third wife, Catharine,
whom he married in 1780, survived him and was forty-eight years of age at the time of his death.
She was the eldest daughter of the head-chief of the Turtle tribe, the tribe first in dignity
among the Mohawks. By the usages of that nation, upon her devolved the right of naming her
husband's successor in the chieftaincy. The canons governing the descent of the chieftaincy
of the Six Nations recognize, in a somewhat modified form, the doctrine of primogeniture; but
the inheritance descends through the female line, and the surviving female has a right, if
she so pleases, to appoint any of her own male offspring to the vacant sovereignty. Catharine
Brant exercised her right by appointing to that dignity John Brant, her third and youngest
son. This youth, whose Indian name was Ahyouwaighs, was at the time of his father's death only
thirteen years of age. He was born at Mohawk village, on the 27th September, 1794, and received
a liberal English education. Upon the breaking out of the war of 1812, the young chief took
the field with his warriors, on behalf of Great Britain, and was engaged in most of the actions
on the Niagara frontier, including the battles of Queenstown Heights, Lundy's Lane, and Beaver
Dams. When the war closed in 1815, he settled at "Brant House," the former residence of his
father, at Wellington Square. Here he and his sister Elizabeth dispensed a cheerful hospitality
for many years. In 1821 he visited England for the purpose of trying to do what his father
had failed in doing, viz, to bring about a satisfactory adjustment of the disputes between
the Government and the Indians respecting the title of the latter to their lands. His mission,
however, was unsuccessful. While in England he called upon the poet Campbell, and endeavoured
to induce that gentleman to expunge certain stanzas from the poem of "Gertrude of Wyoming,"
with what success has already been mentioned.

In the year 1827, Ahyouwaighs was appointed by the Earl of Dalhousie to the rank of Captain,
and also in the superintendency of the Six Nations. In 1832 he was elected as a member of the
Provincial Parliament for the County of Haldimand, but his election was contested and eventually
set aside, upon the ground that many of the persons by whose votes he had been elected were
merely lessees of Indian lands; and not entitled, under the law, as it then stood to exercise
the franchise. Within a few months afterwards, and in the same year, he was carried off by
cholera, and was buried in the same vault as his father. He was never married, and left no
issue. His sister Elizabeth was married to William Johnson Kerr, a grandson of that same Sir
William Johnson who had formerly been a patron of the great Thayendanegea. She died at Wellington
Square in April, 1834, leaving several children, all of whom are since dead. By his third wife
Brant had several other children, whose descendants are still living in various parts of Ontario.
His widow died at the advanced age of seventy-eight years on the 24th of November, 1837, being
the thirtieth anniversary of her husband's death.

The old house in which Joseph Brant died at Wellington Square, is still in existence, though
it has been so covered in by modern improvements that no part of the original structure is
outwardly visible. Mr. J. Simcoe Kerr, a son of Brant's daughter Elizabeth, continued to reside
at the old homestead down to the time of his death in 1875. It has since been leased and refitted
for a summer hotel, and is now known as "Brant House." The room in which the old chief was
so unhappy as to slay his son is pointed out to visitors, with stains--said to be the original
blood stains--on the floor. Among the historical objects in the immediate neighbourhood is
a gnarled old oak nearly six feet in diameter at the base, known as "The Old Council Tree,"
from the fact that the chief and other dignataries of the Six Nations were wont to hold conferences
beneath its spreading branches. Close by is a mound where lie the bodies of many of Brant's
Indian contemporaries buried, native fashion in a circle, with the feet converging to a centre.

Thirty years ago, the wooden vault in which Brant's remains and those of his son John were
interred had become dilapidated. The Six Nations resolved upon constructing a new one of stone,
and re-interring the remains. Brant was a prominent member of the Masonic fraternity in his
day, and the various Masonic lodges throughout the neighbourhood lent their aid to the Indians
in their undertaking. The project was finally carried out on the twenty-seventh of November,
1850. There was an immense gathering at Mohawk village on the occasion, which is generally
referred to as "Brant's second funeral." The Indians and whites vied with each other in doing
honour to the memory of the departed chief. The remains were interred in a more spacious vault,
over which a plain granite tomb was raised. The slab which covers the aperture contains the
following inscription:

             This Tomb
     Is erected to the memory of
         THAYENDANEGEA, or
        CAPT. JOSEPH BRANT,
        Principal Chief and
            Warrior of
      The Six Nations Indians,
       By his Fellow Subjects,
    Admirers of his Fidelity and
         Attachment to the
          British Crown.
      Born on the Banks of the
      Ohio River, 1742, died at
    Wellington Square, U.C., 1807.

    It also contains the remains
     Of his son Ahyouwaighs, or
         CAPT. JOHN BRANT,
   who succeeded his father as
          TEKARIHOGEA,
    And distinguished himself
     In the war of 1812-15
 Born at the Mohawk Village, U.C., 1794;
   Died at the same place, 1832.
         Erected 1850.

This sketch would be incomplete without some allusion to the project which was set in motion
about six years ago, having for its object the erection of a suitable monument to the great
Chief's memory. On the 25th of August, 1874, His Excellency, Lord Dufferin, in response to
an invitation from the Six Nations, paid them a visit at their Council House, in the township
of Tuscarora, a few miles below Brantford. He was entertained by the chiefs and warriors, who
submitted to him, for transmission to England, an address to His Royal Highness Prince Arthur,
who was enrolled an Honorary Chief of the Confederacy on the occasion of his visit to Canada
in 1869. The address, after referring to Brant's many and important services to the British
Crown, expressed the anxious desire of his people to see a fitting monument erected to his
memory. Lord Dufferin transmitted the address, and received Prince Arthur's assurances of his
approval of, and good will towards, the undertaking. A committee, consisting of many of the
leading officials and residents of the Dominion, was at once formed, and a subscription list
was opened at the Bank of British North America, at Brantford. A good many contributions have
since come in, but the fund is still insufficient to enable the committee to carry out their
project in a fitting manner. We have referred to the fact that no village is now in existence
at Mohawk. The Indians have deserted the neighbourhood and taken up their quarters elsewhere.
Brant's tomb by the old church, being in an out-of-the-way spot, remote from the haunts of
men, has fallen a prey to the sacrilegious hands of tourists and others, who have shamefully
mutilated it by repeated chippings of fragments which have been carried away as relics. It
is proposed to place the new monument in the centre of Victoria Park, opposite the Court House,
in Brentford, where it will be under the surveillance of the local authorities, and where there
will be no danger of mutilation. That Brant's memory deserves such a tribute is a matter as
to which there can be no difference of opinion, and the undertaking is one that deserves the
hearty support of the Canadian people. We owe a heavy debt to the Indians; heavier than we
are likely to pay. It does not reflect credit upon our national sense of gratitude that no
fitting monument marks our appreciation of the services of those two great Indians, Brant and
Tecumseh.

SAMUEL DE CHAMPLAIN.

Standing on the summit of one of the rocky eminences at the mouth of the Sagueuay, and looking
back through the haze of two hundred and seventy-four years, we may descry two small sailing
craft slowly making their way up the majestic stream which Jacques Cartier, sixty-eight years
before, christened in honour of the grilled St. Lawrence. The vessels are of French build,
and have evidently just arrived from France. They are of very diminutive size for an ocean
voyage, but are manned by hardy Breton mariners for whom the tempestuous Atlantic has no terrors.
They are commanded by an enterprising merchant-sailor of St. Malo, who is desirous of pushing
his fortunes by means of the fur trade, and who, with that end in view, has already more than
once navigated the St. Lawrence as far westward as the mouth of the Saguenay. His name is Pontgrave.
Like other French adventurers of his time he is a brave and energetic man, ready to do, to
dare, and, if need be, to suffer; but his primary object in life is to amass wealth, and to
effect this object he is not over-scrupulous as to the means employed. On this occasion he
has come over with instructions from Henry IV., King of France, to explore the St. Lawrence,
to ascertain how far from its mouth navigation is practicable, and to make a survey of the
country on its banks. He is accompanied on the expedition by a man of widely different mould;
a man who is worth a thousand of such sordid, huckstering spirits; a man who unites with the
courage and energy of a soldier a high sense of personal honour and a singleness of heart worthy
of the Chevalier Bayard himself. To these qualities are added an absorbing passion for colonization,
and a piety and zeal which would not misbecome a Jesuit missionary. He is poor, but what the
poet calls "the jingling of the guinea" has no charms for him. Let others consume their souls
in heaping up riches, in chaffering with the Indians for the skins of wild beasts, and in selling
the same to the affluent traders of France. It is his ambition to rear the fleur-de-lis in
the remote wildernesses of the New World, and to evangelize the savage hordes by whom that
world is peopled. The latter object is the most dear to his heart of all, and he has already
recorded his belief that the salvation of one soul is of more importance than the founding
of an empire. After such an exordium it is scarcely necessary to inform the student of history
that the name of Pontgrave's ally is Samuel De Champlain. He has already figured somewhat conspicuously
in his country's annals, but his future achievements are destined to outshine the events of
his previous career, and to gain for him the merited title of "Father of New France."

He was born some time in the year 1567, at Brouage, a small seaport town in the Province of
Saintonge, on the west coast of France. Part of his youth was spent in the naval service, and
during the wars of the League he fought on the side of the King, who awarded him a small pension
and attached him to his own person. But Champlain was of too adventurous a turn of mind to
feel at home in the confined atmosphere of a royal court, and soon languished for change of
scene. Ere long he obtained command of a vessel bound for the West Indies, where he remained
more than two years. During this time he distinguished himself as a brave and efficient officer.
He became known as one whose nature partook largely of the romantic element, but who, nevertheless,
had ever an eye to the practical. Several important engineering projects seem to have engaged
his attention during his sojourn in the West Indies. Prominent among these was the project
of constructing a ship-canal across the Isthmus of Panama, but the scheme was not encouraged,
and ultimately fell to the ground. Upon his return to France he again dangled about the court
for a few months, by which time he had once more become heartily weary of a life of inaction.
With the accession of Henry IV. to the French throne the long religious wars which had so long
distracted the country came to an end, and the attention of the Government began to be directed
to the colonisation of New France--a scheme which had never been wholly abandoned, but which
had remained in abeyance since the failure of the expedition undertaken by the brothers Roberval,
more than half a century before. Several new attempts were made at this time, none of which
was very successful. The fur trade, however, held out great inducements to private enterprise,
and stimulated the cupidity of the merchants of Dieppe, Rouen and St Malo. In the heart of
one of them something nobler than cupidity was aroused. In 1603, M. De Chastes, Governor of
Dieppe, obtained a patent from the King conferring upon him and several of his associates a
monopoly of the fur trade of New France. To M. De Chastes the acquisition of wealth--of which
he already had enough, and to spare--was a matter of secondary importance, but he hoped to
make his patent the means of extending the French empire into the unknown regions of the far
West. The patent was granted soon after Champlain's return from the West Indies, and just as
the pleasures of the court were beginning to pall upon him. He had served under De Chastes
during the latter years of the war of the League, and the Governor was no stranger to the young
man's skill, energy, and incorruptible integrity. De Chastes urged him to join the expedition,
which was precisely of a kind to find favour in the eyes of an ardent adventurer like Champlain.
The King's consent having been obtained, he joined the expedition under Pontgrave, and sailed
for the mouth of the St. Lawrence on the 15th of March, 1603. The expedition, as we have seen,
was merely preliminary to more specific and extended operations. The ocean voyage, which was
a tempestuous one, occupied more than two months, and they did not reach the St. Lawrence until
the latter end of May. They sailed up as far as Tadousac, at the mouth of the Saguenay, where
a little trading-post had been established four years before by Pontgrave, and Chauvin. Here
they cast anchor, and a fleet of canoes filled with wondering natives gathered round their
little barques to sell peltries, and (unconsciously) to sit to Champlain for their portraits.
After a short stay at Tadousac the leaders of the expedition, accompanied by several of the
crew, embarked in a batteau and preceded up the river past deserted Stadacona to the site of
the Indian village of Hochelaga, discovered by Jacques Cartier in 1535. The village so graphically
described by that navigator had ceased to exist, and the tribe which had inhabited it at the
time of his visit had given place to a few Algonquin Indians. Our adventurers essayed to ascend
the river still farther, but found it impossible to make headway against the rapids of St.
Louis, which had formerly presented an insuperable barrier to Cartier's westward progress.
Then they retraced their course down the river to Tadousac, re-embarked on board their vessels,
and made all sail for France. When they arrived there they found that their patron, De Chastes,
had died during their absence, and that his Company had been dissolved. Very soon afterwards,
however, the scheme of colonization was taken up by the Sieur de Monts, who entered into engagements
with Champlain for another voyage to the New World. De Monts and Champlain set sail on the
7th of March, 1604, with a large expedition, and in due course reached the shores of Nova Scotia,
then called Acadie. After an absence of three years, during which Champlain explored the coast
as far southward as Cape Cod, the expedition returned to France. A good deal had been learned
as to the topographical features of the country lying near the coast, but little had been done
in the way of actual colonization. The next expedition was productive of greater results. De
Monts, at Champlain's instigation, resolved to found a settlement on the shores of the St Lawrence.
Two vessels were fitted up at his expense and placed under Champlain's command, with Pontgrave
as lieutenant of the expedition, which put to sea in the month of April, 1608, and reached
the mouth of the Saguenay early in June. Pontgrave began a series of trading operations with
the Indians at Tadousac, while Champlain proceeded up the river to fix upon an advantageous
site for the projected settlement. This site he found at the confluence of the St. Charles
with the St. Lawrence, near the place where Jacques Cartier had spent the winter of 1535-6.
Tradition tells us that when Cartier's sailors beheld the adjacent promontory of Cape Diamond
they exclaimed, "Quel bec"--("What a beak!")--which exclamation led to the place being called
Quebec. The most probable derivation of the name, however, is the Indian word kebec, signifying
a strait, which might well have been applied by the natives to the narrowing of the river at
this place. Whatever may be the origin of the name, here it was that Champlain, on the 3rd
of July, 1608, founded his settlement, and Quebec was the name which he bestowed upon it. This
was the first permanent settlement of Europeans on the American continent, with the exception
of those at St. Augustine, in Florida, and Jamestown, in Virginia.

Champlain's first attempts at settlement, as might be expected, were of a very primitive character.
He erected rude barracks, and cleared a few small patches of ground adjacent thereto, which
he sowed with wheat and rye. Perceiving that the fur trade might be turned to good account
in promoting the settlement of the country, he bent his energies to its development. He had
scarcely settled his little colony in its new home ere he began to experience the perils of
his quasi-regal position. Notwithstanding the patent of monopoly held by his patron, on the
faith of which his colonization scheme had been projected, the rights conferred by it began
to be infringed by certain traders who came over from France and instituted a system of traffic
with the natives. Finding the traffic exceedingly profitable, these traders ere long held out
inducements to some of Champlain's followers. A conspiracy was formed against him and he narrowly
escaped assassination. Fortunately, one of the traitors was seized by remorse, and revealed
the plot before it had been fully carried out. The chief conspirator was hanged, and his accomplices
were sent over to France, where they expiated their crime at the galleys. Having thus promptly
suppressed the first insurrection within his dominions, Champlain prepared himself for the
rigours of a Canadian winter. An embankment was formed above the reach of the tide, and a stock
of provisions was laid in sufficient for the support of the settlement until spring. The colony,
inclusive of Champlain himself, consisted of twenty-nine persons. Notwithstanding all precautions,
the scurvy broke out among them during the winter. Champlain, who was endowed with a vigorous
constitution, escaped the pest, but before the advent of spring the little colony was reduced
to only nine persons. The sovereign remedy which Cartier had found so efficacious in a similar
emergency was not to be found. That remedy was a decoction prepared by the Indians from a tree
which they called Auneda--believed to have been a species of spruce--but the natives of Champlain's
day knew nothing of the remedy, from which he concluded that the tribe which had employed it
on behalf of Cartier and his men had been exterminated by their enemies.

With spring, succours and fresh immigrants arrived from France, and new vitality was imported
into the little colony. Soon after this time, Champlain committed the most impolitic act of
his life. The Hurons, Algonquins and other tribes of the St. Lawrence and the Ottawa, resolved
upon taking the war-path against their enemies, the Iroquois, or Five Nations--the boldest,
fiercest, and most powerful confederacy known to Indian history. Champlain, ever since his
arrival in the country, had done his utmost to win the favour of the natives with whom he was
brought more immediately into contact, and he deemed that by joining them in opposing the Iroquois,
who were a standing menace to his colony, he would knit the Hurons and Algonquins to the side
of the King of France by permanent and indissoluble ties. To some extent he was right, but
he underestimated the strength of the foe, an alliance with whom would have been of more importance
than an alliance with all the other Indian tribes of New France. Champlain cast in his lot
with the Hurons and Algonquins, and accompanied them on their expedition against their enemies.
By so doing he invoked the deadly animosity of the latter against the French for all time to
come. He did not forsee that by this one stroke of policy he was paving the way for a subsequent
alliance between the Iroquois and the English.

On May 28th, 1609, in company with his Indian allies, he started on the expedition, the immediate
results of which were so insignificant--the remote results of which were so momentous. The
war-party embarked in canoes, ascended the St. Lawrence to the mouth of the Richelieu--then
called the River of the Iroquois--and thence up the latter stream to the lake which Champlain
beheld for the first time, and which until that day no European eye had ever looked upon. This
picturesque sheet of water was thenceforward called after him, and in its name his own is still
perpetuated. The party held on their course to the head waters of the lake, near to which several
Iroquois villages were situated. The enemy's scouts received intelligence of the approach of
the invaders, and advanced to repel them. The opposing forces met in the forest on the south-western
shore, not far from Crown point, on the morning of the 30th of July. The Iroquois, two hundred
in number, advanced to the onset. But his arquebuse was levelled; the report startled the woods,
a chief fell dead, and another by his side rolled among the bushes. Then there arose from the
allies a yell which, says Champlain, would have drowned a thunderclap, and the forest was full
of whizzing arrows. For a moment the Iroquois stood firm, and sent back their arrows lustily;
but when another and another gunshot came from the thickets on their flank they broke and fled
in uncontrollable terror. Swifter than hounds, the allies tore through the bushes, in pursuit.
The arquebuse had done its work. The victory was complete." The victorious allies, much to
the disgust of Champlain, tortured their prisoners in the most barbarous fashion, and returned
to Quebec, taking with them fifty Iroquois scalps. Thus was the first Indian blood shed by
the white man in Canada. The man who shed it was a European and a Christian, who had not even
the excuse of provocation. This is a matter worth bearing in mind when we read of the frightful
atrocities committed by the Iroquois upon the whites in after years. Champlain's conduct on
this occasion seems incapable of defence, and it was certainly a very grave error, considered
simply as an act of policy. The error was bitterly and fiercely avenged, and for every Indian
who fell on the morning of that 30th of July, in this, the first battle fought on Canadian
soil between natives and Europeans, a tenfold penalty was exacted.

Six weeks after the performance of this exploit, Champlain, accompanied by Pontgrave, returned
to France. Upon his arrival at court he found De Monts there, trying to secure a renewal of
his patent of monopoly, which had been revoked in consequence of loud complaints on the part
of other French merchants who were desirous of participating in the profits arising from the
fur trade. His efforts to obtain a renewal proving unsuccessful, De Monts determined to carry
on his scheme of colonization unaided by royal patronage. Allying himself with some affluent
merchants of Rochelle, he fitted out another expedition and once more despatched Champlain
to the New World. Champlain, upon his arrival at Tadousac, found his former Indian allies preparing
for another descent upon the Iroquois, in which undertaking he again joined them; the inducement
this time being a promise on the part of the Indians to pilot him up the great streams leading
from the interior, whereby he hoped to discover a passage to the North Sea, and thence to China
and the Indies. In this second expedition he was less successful than in the former one. The
opposing forces met near the confluence of the Richelieu and St. Lawrence Rivers, and though
Champlain's allies were ultimately victorious, they sustained a heavy loss, and he himself
was wounded in the neck by an arrow. After the battle, the torture-fires were lighted, as was
usual on such occasions, and Champlain for the first time was an eye-witness to the horrors
of cannibalism.

He soon afterwards began his preparations for an expedition up the Ottawa, but just as he was
about to start on the journey, a ship arrived from France with intelligence that King Henry
had fallen a victim to the dagger of Ravaillac. The accession of a new sovereign to the French
Throne might materially affect De Monts's ability to continue his scheme, and Champlain once
more set sail for France to confer with his patron. The late king, while deeming it impolitic
to continue the monopoly in De Monts's favour, had always countenanced the latter's colonisation
schemes in New France; but upon Champlain's arrival he found that with the death of Henry IV
De Monts's court influence had ceased, and that his western scheme must stand or fall on its
own merits. Champlain, in order to retrieve his patron's fortunes as far as might be, again
returned to Canada in the following spring, resolved to build a trading post far up the St.
Lawrence, where it would be easily accessible to the Indian hunters on the Ottawa.--The spot
selected was near the site of the former village of Hochelaga, near the confluence of the two
great rivers of Canada. The post was built on the site now occupied by the hospital of the
Grey Nuns of Montreal, and even before its erection was completed a horde of rival French traders
appeared on the scene. This drove Champlain once more back to France, but he soon found that
the ardour of De Monts for colonization had cooled, and that he was not disposed to concern
himself further in the enterprize. Champlain, being thus left to his own resources, determined
to seek another patron, and succeeded in enlisting the sympathy of the Count de Soissons, who
obtained the appointment of Lieutenant-General of New France, and invested Champlain with the
functions of that office as his deputy. The Count did not long survive, but Henry de Bourbon,
Prince of Conde, succeeded to his privileges, and continued Champlain in his high office. In
the spring of 1613 Champlain again betook himself to Canada, and arrived at Quebec early in
May. Before the end of the month he started on his long-deferred tour of western exploration.
Taking with him two canoes, containing an Indian and four Frenchmen, he ascended the Ottawa
in the hope of reaching China and Japan by way of Hudson's Bay, which had been discovered by
Hendrick Hudson only three years before. In undertaking this journey Champlain had been misled
by a French imposter called Nicholas Vignan, who professed to have explored the route far inland
beyond the head waters of the Ottawa, which river, he averred, had its source in a lake connected
with the North Sea. The enthusiastic explorer, relying upon the good faith of Vignan, proceeded
westward to beyond Lake Coulange, and after a tedious and perilous voyage, stopped to confer
with Tessouat, an Indian chief, whose tribe inhabited that remote region. This potentate, upon
being apprised of the object of their journey, undeceived Champlain as to Vignan's character
for veracity, and satisfied him that the Frenchman had never passed farther west than Tessouat's
own dominions. Vignan, after a good deal of prevarication, confessed that his story was false,
and that what the Indian chief had stated was a simple fact. Champlain, weary and disgusted,
abandoned his exploration and returned to Quebec, leaving Vignan with the Indians in the wildernesses
of the Upper Ottawa.

His next visit to France, which took place during the summer of the same year was fraught with
important results to the colony. A new company was formed under the auspices of the Prince
of Conde, and a scheme was laid for the propagation of the Gospel among the Indians by means
of Recollet missionaries sent out from France for the purpose. These, who were the first priests
who settled in Canada, came out with Champlain in May, 1615. A province was assigned to each
of them, and they at once entered upon the duties of their respective missions. One of them
settled among the Montagnais, near the mouth of the Saguenay; two of them remained at Quebec;
and the fourth, whose name was Le Caron, betook himself to the far western wilds. Champlain
then entered upon a more extended tour of westward exploration than any he had hitherto undertaken.
Accompanied by an interpreter and a number of Algonquins as guides, he again ascended the Ottawa,
passed the Isle of Allumettes, and thence to Lake Nipissing. After a short stay here he continued
his journey, descended the stream since known as French River, into the inlet of Lake Huron,
now called Georgian Bay. Paddling southward past the innumerable islands on the eastern coast
of the bay, he landed near the present site of Penetanguishene, and thence followed an Indian
trail leading through the ancient country of the Hurons, now forming the northern part of the
county of Simcoe, and the north-eastern part of the county of Grey. This country contained
seventeen or eighteen villages, and a population, including women and children, of about twenty
thousand. One of the villages visited by Champlain, called Cahiague, occupied a site near the
present town of Orillia. At another village, called Carhagouha, some distance farther west,
the explorer found the Recollet friar Le Caron, who had accompanied him from France only a
few months before as above mentioned. And here, on the 12th of August, 1615, Le Caron celebrated,
in Champlain's presence, the first mass ever heard in the wilderness of western Canada.

After spending some time in the Huron country, Champlain accompanied the natives on an expedition
against their hereditary foes, the Iroquois, whose domain occupied what is now the central
and western part of the State of New York. Crossing Lake Couchiching and coasting down the
north-eastern shore of Lake Simcoe, they made their way across country to the Bay of Quinte,
thence into Lake Ontario, and thence into the enemy's country. Having landed, they concealed
their canoes in the woods and marched inland. On the 10th of October they came to a Seneca
[Footnote: The Senecas were one of the Five Nations composing the redoubtable Iroquois Confederacy.
The Tuscaroras joined the League in 1715, and it is subsequently known in history as the "Six
Nations."] village on or near a lake which was probably Lake Canandaigua. The Hurons attacked
the village, but were repulsed by the fierce Iroquois, Champlain himself being several times
wounded in the assault. The invading war-party then retreated and abandoned the campaign, returning
to where they had hidden their canoes, in which they embarked and made the best of their way
back across Lake Ontario, where the party broke up. The Hurons had promised Champlain that
if he would accompany them on their expedition against the Iroquois they would afterwards furnish
him with an escort back to Quebec. This promise they now declined to make good. Champlain's
prestige as an invincible champion was gone, and wounded and dispirited, he was compelled to
accompany them back to their country near Lake Simcoe, where he spent the winter in the lodge
of Durantal, one of their chiefs. Upon his return to Quebec in the following year he was welcomed
as one risen from the dead. Hitherto Champlain's love of adventure had led him to devote more
attention to exploration than to the consolidation of his power in New France. He determined
to change his policy in this respect; and crossed over to France to induce a larger emigration.
In July, 1620, he returned with Madame de Champlain, who was received with great demonstrations
of respect and affection by the Indians upon her arrival at Quebec. Champlain found that the
colony had rather retrograded than advanced during his absence, and for some time after his
return, various causes contributed to retard its prosperity. At the end of the year 1621, [Footnote:
In this year, Eustache, son of Abraham and Margaret Martin, the first child of European parentage
born in Canada, was born at Quebec.] the European population of New France numbered only forty-eight
persons. Rival trading companies continued to fight for the supremacy in the colony, and any
man less patient and persevering than the Father of New France would have abandoned his schemes
in despair. This untoward state of things continued until 1627, when an association, known
to history by the name of "The Company of the One Hundred Associates," was formed under the
patronage of the great Cardinal Richelieu. The association was invested with the Vice-royalty
of New France and Florida, together with very extensive auxiliary privileges, including a monopoly
of the fur trade, the right to confer titles and appoint judges, and generally to carry on
the Government of the colony. In return for these truly vice-regal privileges the company undertook
to send out a large number of colonists, and to provide them with the necessaries of life for
a term of three years, after which land enough for their support and grain wherewith to plant
it was to be given them. Champlain himself was appointed Governor. This great company was scarcely
organized before war broke out between France and England. The English resolved upon the conquest
of Canada, and sent out a fleet to the St. Lawrence under the command of Sir David Kertk. The
fleet having arrived before Quebec, its commander demanded from Champlain a surrender of the
place, and as the Governor's supply of food and ammunition was too small to enable him to sustain
a siege, he signed a capitulation and surrendered. He then hastened to France, where he influenced
the cabinet to stipulate for the restoration of Canada to the French Crown in the articles
of peace which were shortly afterwards negotiated between the two powers. In 1632 this restoration
was effected, and next year Champlain again returned in the capacity of Governor. From this
time forward he strove to promote the prosperity of the colony by every means in his power.
Among the means whereby he zealously strove to effect this object was the establishment of
Jesuit missions for the conversion of the Indians. Among other missions so established was
that in the far western Huron country, around which the Relations des Jesuites have cast such
a halo of romance.

The Father of New France did not live to gather much fruit from the crop which he had sown.
His life of incessant fatigue at last proved too much even for his vigorous frame. After an
illness which lasted for ten weeks, he died on Christmas Day, 1635, at the age of sixty-eight.
His beautiful young wife, who had shared his exile for four years, returned to France where
she became an Ursuline nun, and founded a convent at Meaux, in which she immured herself until
her death a few years later.

Champlain's body was interred in the vaults of a little Recollet church in the Lower Town.
This church was subsequently burned to the ground, and its very site was not certainly known
until recent times. In the year 1867 some workmen were employed in laying water-pipes beneath
the flight of stairs called "Breakneck Steps," leading from Mountain Hill to Little Champlain
street. Under a grating at the foot of the steps they discovered the vaults of the old Recollet
church, with the remains of the Father of New France enclosed. Independently of his energy,
perseverance, and fortitude as an explorer, Samuel de Champlain was a man of considerable mark,
and earned for himself an imperishable name in Canadian history. He wrote several important
works which, in spite of many defects, bear the stamp of no ordinary mind. His engaging in
war with the Iroquois was a fatal error, but it arose from the peculiar position in which he
found himself placed at the outset of his western career, and it is difficult to see how anything
short of actual experience could have made his error manifest. The purity of his life was proverbial,
and was the theme of comment among his survivors for years after his death. He foresaw that
his adopted country was destined for a glorious future. "The flourishing cities and towns of
this Dominion," says one of has eulogists, "are enduring monuments to his foresight; and the
waters of the beautiful lake that bears his name chant the most fitting requiem to his memory
as they break in perpetual murmurings on their shores."

This sketch would be incomplete without some reference to the mysterious astrolabe which is
alleged to have been found in the month of August, 1867, and which is supposed by some to have
been lost by Champlain on the occasion of his first voyage up the Ottawa in 1613, as recounted
in the preceding pages. The facts of the case may be compressed into few words, although they
have given rise to many learned disquisitions which, up to the present time, have been barren
of any useful result.

In the month of August, 1867, some men were engaged in cultivating a piece of ground on the
rear half of lot number twelve, in the second range of the township of Ross, in the county
of Renfrew, Ontario, while turning up the soil, as it is said, they came upon a queer looking
instrument, which upon examination proved to be an astrolabe an instrument used in former times
to mark the position of the stars, and to assist in computing latitudes, but long since gone
out of use. Upon its face was engraved the date 1603. Now, Champlain's first journey up the
Ottawa was made in the summer of 1613, and he must have passed at or near the identical spot
where the astrolabe was found. It is claimed that this instrument belonged to Champlain, and
that it was lost by him in this place. In support of this claim it is represented that Champlain's
latitudes were always computed with reasonable exactness up to the time of his passing through
the portage of which the plot of ground whereon the instrument was found forms a part. After
that time his computations are generally erroneous--so erroneous, indeed, as to have led some
readers of his journal very seriously astray in following out his course. This, in reality,
is all the evidence to be found as to the ownership of the lost astrolabe. Taken by itself,
it is reasonably strong circumstantial evidence. On the other hand it may be contended that
astrolabes had pretty well gone out of use before the year 1613, and Champlain was a man not
likely to be behind his times in the matter of scientific appliances. But the strongest argument
is to be found in the fact that Champlain's journal, which contains minute details of everything
that happened from day to day, makes no allusion whatever to his having lost his astraolabe--a
circumstance, it would seem, not very likely to be omitted. The question is of course an open
one, and has given rise, as has already been said, to much discussion among Canadian archaeologists.
It is, however, of little historical importance, and needs no further allusion in these pages.

THE HON. WILLIAM OSGOODE.

In view of the fact that this gentleman's name has a very fair chance of immortality in this
Province, it is to be regretted that so little is accurately known about him, and that only
the merest outline of his career has come down to the present times. Many Canadians would gladly
know something more of the life of the first man who filled the important position of Chief-Justice
of Upper Canada, and the desire for such knowledge is by no means confined to members of the
legal profession. He was the faithful friend and adviser of our first Lieutenant-Governor,
and it is doubtless to his legal acumen that we owe those eight wise statues which were passed
during the first session of our first Provincial Parliament, which assembled at Newark on the
17th of September, 1792.

Nothing is definitely known concerning Chief-Justice Osgoode's ancestry. A French-Canadian
writer asserts that he was an illegitimate son of King George the Third. No authority whatever
is assigned in support of this assertion, which probably rests upon no other basis than vague
rumour. Similar rumours have been current with respect to the paternity of other persons who
have been more or less conspicuous in Canada, and but little importance should be attached
to them. He was born in the month of March, 1754, and entered as a commoner at Christchurch
College, Oxford, in 1770, when he had nearly completed his sixteenth year. After a somewhat
prolonged attendance at this venerable seat of learning, he graduated and received the degree
of Master of Arts' in the month of July, 1777. Previous to this time he had entered himself
as a student at the Inner Temple, having already been enrolled as a student on the books of
Lincoln's Inn. He seems at this time to have been possessed of some small means but not sufficient
for his support, and he pursued his professional studies with such avidity as temporarily to
undermine his health. He paid a short visit to the Continent, and returned to his native land
with restored physical and mental vigour. In due course he was called to the Bar, and soon
afterwards published a technical work on the law of descent, which attracted some notice from
the profession. He soon became known as an erudite and painstaking lawyer, whose opinions were
entitled to respect, and who was very expert as a special pleader. At the Bar he was less successful,
owing to an almost painful fastidiousness in his choice of words, which frequently produced
an embarrassing hesitation of speech. He seems to have been a personal friend of Colonel Simcoe,
even before that gentleman's appointment as Lieutenant-Governor of Upper Canada, and their
intimacy may possibly have had something to do with Mr. Osgoode's appointment as Chief-Justice
of the new Province in the spring of 1792. He came over in the same vessel with the Governor,
who sailed on the 1st of May. Upon reaching Upper Canada the Governor and staff, after a short
stay at Kingston, passed on to Newark (now Niagara). The Chief-Justice accompanied the party,
and took up his abode with them at Navy Hall, where he continued to reside during the greater
part of his stay in the Province which was of less than three years' duration. The solitude
of his position, and his almost complete isolation from society, and from the surroundings
of civilized life seem to have been unbearable to his sensitive and social nature. In 1795
he was appointed Chief-Justice of the Lower Province, where he continued to occupy the Judicial
Bench until 1801, when he resigned his position, and returned to England. His services as Chief-Justice
entitled him to a pension of L800 per annum, which he continued to enjoy for rather more than
twenty-two years. For historical purposes, his career may be said to have ceased with his resignation,
as he never again emerged from the seclusion of private life. He was several times requested
to enter Parliament, but declined to do so. During the four years immediately succeeding his
return to England he resided in the Temple. In 1804, upon the conversion of Melbourue House--a
mansion in the West End of London--into the fashionable set of chambers known as "The Albany,"
he took up his quarters there for the remainder of his life. Among other distinguished men
who resided there contemporaneously with him were Lord Brougham and Lord Byron. The latter
occupied the set of chambers immediately adjoining those of the retired Chief-Justice, and
the two became personally acquainted with each other; though, considering the diversity of
their habits, it is not likely that any very close intimacy was established between them. In
conjunction with Sir William Grant, Mr. Osgoode was appointed on several legal commissions.
One of these consisted of the codification of certain Imperial Statutes relating to the colonies.
Another commission in which he took part was an enquiry into the amount of fees receivable
by certain officials in the Court of King's Bench, which enquiry was still pending at the time
of his death. He lived very much to himself, though he was sometimes seen in society. He died
of acute pneumonia on the 17th of January, 1824, in the seventieth year of his age. One of
his intimate friends has left the following estimate of his character:--"His opinions were
independent, but zealously loyal; nor were they ever concealed, or the defence of them abandoned,
when occasions called them forth. His conviction of the excellence of the English Constitution
sometimes made him severe in the reproof of measures which he thought injurious to it; but
his politeness and good temper prevented any disagreement even with those whose sentiments
were most opposed to his own. To estimate his character rightly, it was, however, necessary
to know him well; his first approaches being cold, amounting almost to dryness. But no person
admitted to his intimacy ever failed to conceive for him that esteem which his conduct and
conversation always tended to augment. He died in affluent circumstances, the result of laudable
prudence, without the smallest taint of avarice or illiberal parsimony. On the contrary, he
lived generously, and though he never wasted his property, yet he never spared, either to himself
or friends, any reasonable indulgence; nor was he backward in acts of charity or benevolence."

He was never married. There is a story about an attachment formed by him to a young lady of
Quebec, during his residence there. It is said that the lady preferred a wealthier suitor,
and that he never again became heart-whole. This, like the other story above mentioned, rests
upon mere rumour, and is entitled to the credence attached to other rumours of a similar nature.
His name is perpetuated in this Province by that of the stately Palace of Justice on Queen
Street West, Toronto; also, by the name of a township in the county of Carleton.

LORD SYDENHAM.

Towards the close of last century there was in the City of London, England, a prominent mercantile
house which carried on business under the style of "J. Thomson, T. Bonar & Co." The branch
of commerce to which this house chiefly devoted its attention was the Russian trade. It had
existed, under various styles, for more than a hundred years, and had built up so extensive
a trade as to have a branch establishment at the Russian capital. The senior partner of the
firm was John Thomson of Waverley Abbey, and Roehampton, in the county of Surrey. In the year
1820 this gentleman assumed the name of Poulett--in remembrance of his mother, who was heiress
of a branch of the family of that name--and he was afterwards known as John Poulett Thomson.
In 1781 he married Miss Charlotte Jacob, daughter of a physician at Salisbury. By this lady
he had a numerous family, consisting of nine children. The youngest of these, Charles Edward
Poulett Thomson, destined to be the first governor of United Canada, and to be raised to the
peerage under the title of Baron Sydenham, was born on the 13th of September, 1799, at the
family seat in Surrey--Waverley Abbey, above-mentioned. His mother had long been in delicate
health, and at the time of his birth was so feeble as to give rise to much solicitude as to
her chances of recovery. She finally rallied, but for some months she led the life of an invalid.
Her feebleness reflected itself in the constitution of her son, who never attained to much
physical strength. The feebleness of his body was doubtless increased by the nervous activity
of his intellect, which constantly impelled him to mental feats incompatible with his delicate
frame. It may be said that he passed through the forty-two years which made up the measure
of his life in a chronic state of bodily infirmity. The fret and worry incidental to an ambitious
parliamentary and official career doubtless also contributed their share to the shortening
of his life.

His childhood was marked by a sprightly grace and beauty which made him a general favourite.
In his fourth year he was for a time the especial pet of his Majesty King George III. He made
the King's acquaintance at Weymouth, where, with other members of his family, he spent part
of the summer of 1803. While walking on the Parade, in charge of his nurse, his beauty and
sprightliness attracted the notice of His Majesty, who was also spending the season there,
in the hope of regaining that physical and mental vigour which never returned to him. The King
was much taken with the vivacity and pert replies of the handsome little fellow, and insisted
on a daily visit from him. The child's conquest over the royal heart was complete, and His
Majesty seemed to be never so well pleased as when he had little Master Thomson in his arms,
carrying him about, and showing him whatever amusing sights the place afforded. On one occasion
the King was standing on the shore near the pier-head, in conversation with Mr. Pitt, who had
come down from London to confer with His Majesty about affairs of State. His Majesty was about
to embark in the royal yacht for a short cruise, and, as was usual at that time of the day,
he had Master Thomson in his arms. When just on the point of embarking, he suddenly placed
the child in the arms of Mr. Pitt, saying hurriedly, "Is not this a fine boy, Pitt? Take him
in your arms, Pitt--take him in your arms. Charming boy, isn't he?" Pitt complied with the
royal request with the best grace he could, and carried the child in his arms to the door of
his lodgings.

At the age of seven, Master Thomson was sent to a private school at Hanwell, whence, three
years afterwards, he was transferred to the charge of the Rev. Mr. Wooley, at Middleton. After
spending a short time there, he became a pupil of the Rev. Mr. Church, at Hampton, where he
remained until he had nearly completed his sixteenth year. You smile as if I jested; do not men
Sleep as we do? Had you fair dreams in the night? For me--but I should fret you with my dreams-- I
dreamed sweet things. You are good at soothsaying: Make me a sonnet of my dream.

CHASTELARD. I will, When I shall know it.

QUEEN. I thought I was asleep In Paris, lying by my lord, and knew In somewise he was well awake,
and yet I could not wake too; and I seemed to know He hated me, and the least breath I made Would
turn somehow to slay or stifle me. Then in brief time he rose and went away, Saying, Let her dream,
but when her dream is out I will come back and kill her as she wakes. And I lay sick and trembling
with sore fear, And still I knew that I was deep asleep; And thinking I must dream now, or I die,
God send me some good dream lest I be slain, Fell fancying one had bound my feet with cords
And bade me dance, and the first measure made I fell upon my face and wept for pain: And my cords
broke, and I began the dance To a bitter tune; and he that danced with me Was clothed in black
with long red lines and bars And masked down to the lips, but by the chin I knew you though
your lips were sewn up close With scarlet thread all dabbled wet in blood. And then I knew the dream
was not for good. And striving with sore travail to reach up And kiss you (you were taller in my
dream) I missed your lips and woke.

CHASTELARD. Sweet dreams, you said? An evil dream I hold it for, sweet love.

QUEEN. You call love sweet; yea, what is bitter, then? There's nothing broken sleep could hit
upon So bitter as the breaking down of love. You call me sweet; I am not sweet to you, Nor you-O,
I would say not sweet to me, And if I said so I should hardly lie. But there have been those
things between us, sir, That men call sweet.

CHASTELARD. I know not how There is Turns to There hath been; 't is a heavier change Than change of flesh
to dust. Yet though years change And good things end and evil things grow great, The old love
that was, or that was dreamed about, That sang and kissed and wept upon itself, Laughed and
ran mad with love of its own face, That was a sweet thing.
QUEEN. Nay, I know not well. 'T is when the man is held fast underground
They say for sooth what manner of heart he had. We are alive, and
cannot be well sure If we loved much or little: think you not It were
convenient one of us should die?

CHASTELARD. Madam, your speech is
harsh to understand.

QUEEN. Why, there could come no change then;
one of us Would never need to fear our love might turn To the sad
thing that it may grow to be. By this time, indeed,
he had established for himself a reputation of no common order. The part he had taken in the
debates of the House, and in the proceedings of its Committees, on questions connected with
commerce and finance, had proved him to possess not only a clear practical acquaintance with
the details of these subjects, but also principles of an enlarged and liberal character, and
powers of generalization and a comprehensiveness of view rarely found combined in so young
a man. The next three or four years were busy ones with him. It will be remembered that this
was the era of the Reform Bill. Mr. Thomson did not take a prominent part in the discussions
on that measure, his time being fully occupied with the financial and fiscal policy, but he
put forth the weight of his influence in favour of the Bill. His principal efforts, during
his tenure of office, were directed to the simplification and amendment of the Customs Act,
and to an ineffectual attempt to negotiate a commercial treaty with France. After the dissolution
in 1831 he was re-elected for Dover. He was, however, also elected--without any canvass or
solicitation on his part--for Manchester, the most important manufacturing constituency in
the kingdom; and he chose to sit for the latter. In 1834 he succeeded to the Presidency of
the Board of Trade, as successor to Lord Auckland. Then followed Earl Grey's resignation and
Lord Melbourne's accession. On the dismissal of the Ministry in November, Mr. Thomson was,
of course, left without office, but on Lord Melbourne's re-accession in the following spring
he was reinstated in the Presidency of the Board of Trade--an office which he continued to
hold until his appointment as Governor-General of Canada.

Early in 1836 his health had become so seriously affected by his official labours that he began
to recognize the necessity of resigning his office, and of accepting some post which would
not so severely tax his energies. He continued to discharge his official duties, however, until
the reconstruction of Lord Melbourne's Administration in 1839, when he signified his wish to
be relieved. He was offered a choice between the office of Chancellor of the Exchequer and
that of Governor-General of Canada. He chose the latter, and having received his appointment
and been sworn in before the Privy Council, he set sail from Portsmouth for Quebec on the 13th
of September, which was the fortieth anniversary of his birth. He reached his destination after
a tedious, stormy voyage, and assumed the reins of government on the 19th of October. He was
well received in this country. The mercantile community of Canada were especially disposed
to favour the appointment of a man who had himself been bred to commercial pursuits, and who
would be likely to feel a more than ordinary interest in promoting commercial interests.

Canada was at this time in a state of transition. Owing to the strenuous exertions of the Reform
party in this country, seconded by Lord Durham's famous "Report," the concession of Responsible
Government and the union of the provinces had been determined upon by the Home Ministry. It
was Mr. Thomson's mission to see these two most desirable objects carried out. He had a most
difficult part to play. As a pronounced Liberal, he naturally had the confidence of the Reform
party, but there were a few prominent members of that party who did not approve of the Union
project, and he felt that he could not count upon their cordial support. True, the opponents
of the measure constituted a very small minority of the Reform party generally; but there was
another party from whom the strongest opposition was to be expected--the Family Compact. This
faction was not yet extinct, though its days were numbered. It still controlled the Legislative
Council, which body had already recorded a vote hostile to the Union. The situation was one
calling for the exercise of great tact, and the new Governor-General proved himself equal to
the occasion. He made no changes in the composition either of the Special Council of the Lower
Province--a body formed under Imperial sanction by Sir John Colborne--or in that of the Legislative
Council of Upper Canada. After a short stay at Quebec he proceeded to Montreal, and convoked
the Special Council on the 11th of November. He laid before this body the views of the Imperial
Ministry relating to the union of the Provinces, and the concession of Responsible Government.
By the time the Council had been in session two days the majority of the members were fully
in accord with the Governor's views, and a series of resolutions were passed as a basis of
Union. This disposed of the question, so far as the Lower Province was concerned, and after
discharging the Council from further attendance, Mr. Thomson proceeded to Toronto to gain the
assent of the Upper Canadian Legislature. With the Assembly no difficulty was anticipated,
but to gain the assent of the Tory majority in the Legislative Council would evidently be no
easy matter, for the success of the Governor's policy involved the triumph of Reform principles,
and the inevitable downfall of the Family Compact. The Governor's tact, however, placed them
in an anomalous position. For several years past the Tory party had been boasting of their
success in putting down the Rebellion, and had raised a loud and senseless howl of loyalty.
They were never weary of proclaiming their devotion to the Imperial will, irrespective of selfish
considerations. This cry, which had been perpetually resounding throughout the Province during
the last three years, supplied the Governor with the means of bending to his pleasure those
who had raised it. He delivered a message to the Legislature in which he defined the Imperial
policy, and appealed in the strongest terms to those professions of loyalty which the Tory
majority in the Council were for ever proclaiming. He also published a circular despatch from
Lord John Russell, the tone of which was an echo of that of his own message. The Tory majority
were thus placed on the horns of a dilemma. They must either display their much-vaunted loyalty,
by acceding to the Imperial will, or they must admit that their blatant professions had been
mere party cries to deceive the electors. Their opposition, moreover, would render necessary
the resignation of their offices. With the best grace they could, they announced their intention
to support the Imperial policy. The Assembly passed resolutions in accordance with the spirit
of Governor's message. Nothing further was necessary to render the Union an accomplished fact;
except the sanction of the Imperial Parliament. A Union Bill, framed under the supervision
of Sir James Stuart, Chief Justice of Lower Canada, was forwarded to England, where, in a slightly
modified form, it was passed by both Houses, and received the royal assent. Owing to a suspending
clause in the Bill, it did not come into operation until the 10th of February, 1841, when,
by virtue of the Governor-General's proclamation, the measure took effect, and the union of
the Canadas was complete.

Soon after the close of the session of the Upper Canadian Legislature, Mr. Thomson was raised
to the peerage by the title of Baron Sydenham, of Sydenham, in Kent, and Toronto in Canada.
The greater part of the following autumn was spent by him in travelling about through the Upper
Province. He seems to have been greatly pleased both with the country and the people. The following
extract from a private letter, written from the shores of the Bay of Quinte on the 18th of
September, is worth quoting, as showing the impressions of an intelligent observer at that
time:--"Amherstburg, Sandwich, River St. Clair, Lake Huron, Goderich, Chatham, London, Woodstock,
Brantford, Simcoe, the Talbot Road and Settlement, Hamilton, Dundas, and so back to Toronto--you
can follow me on a map. From Toronto across Lake Simcoe to Penetangnishene on Lake Huron again,
and back to Toronto, which I left again last night for the Bay of Quinte, all parties uniting
in addresses at every place, full of confidence in my government, and of a determination to
forget their former disputes. Escorts of two and three hundred farmers on horseback at every
place from township to township, with all the etceteras of guns, music, and flags. What is
of more importance, my candidates everywhere taken for the ensuing elections. In short, such
unanimity and confidence I never saw, and it augurs well for the future.... The fact is that
the truth of my original notion of the people of this country is now confirmed. The mass only
wanted the vigorous interference of a well-intentioned government, strong enough to control
both the extreme parties, and to proclaim wholesome truths and act for the benefit of the country
at large, in defiance of ultras on either side. But, apart from all this political effort,
I am delighted to have seen this part of the country--I mean the great district, nearly as
large as Ireland, placed between the three lakes, Erie, Ontario, and Huron. You can conceive
nothing finer. The most magnificent soil in the world; four feet of vegetable mould; a climate,
certainly the best in North America. The greater part of it admirably watered. In a word, there
is land enough and capabilities enough for some millions of people, and for one of the finest
Provinces in the world. The most perfect contrast to that miserable strip of land along the
St. Lawrence called Lower Canada, which has given so much trouble. I shall fix the capital
of the United Provinces in this one, of course. Kingston will most probably be the place. But
there is everything to be done there yet, to provide accommodation for the meeting of the Assembly
in the spring."

As suggested in the foregoing extract, Kingston was fixed upon as the seat of Government of
the United Provinces, and the Legislature assembled there on the 13th of June, 1841. The Governor-General's
speech at the opening of the session was marked by tact, moderation, and good sense. A strong
Opposition, however, soon began to manifest itself, and Mr. Neilson, of Quebec, moved an amendment
to the Address directly condemnatory of the Union. The amendment was defeated by a vote of
50 to 25. Throughout the session nearly all the Government measures received the support of
the House, an important exception being the French Election Bill. Meanwhile the state of Lord
Sydenham's health was such as to render his duties very difficult for him, and as the great
object of his mission to Canada had been successfully accomplished, he resolved to return home
at the close of the session. THE QUEEN.

SCENE I.--The Queen's Chamber. Night. Lights burning In front of the bed.

[Enter CHASTELARD and MARY BEATON.]

MARY BEATON. Be tender of your feet.

CHASTELARD. I shall not fail: These ways have light enough to help a man That walks with such
stirred blood in him as mine.

MARY BEATON. I would yet plead with you to save your head: Nay, let this be then: sir, I chide
you not. Nay, let all come. Do not abide her yet.

CHASTELARD. Have you read never in French books the song Called the Duke's Song, some boy made ages
back, A song of drag-nets hauled across thwart seas And plucked up with rent sides, and caught
therein A strange-haired woman with sad singing lips, Cold in the cheek like any stray of
sea, And sweet to touch? so that men seeing her face, And how she sighed out little Ahs of pain
And soft cries sobbing sideways from her mouth, Fell in hot love,
and having lain with her Died soon? one time I could have told it
through: Now I have kissed the sea-witch on her eyes And my lips ache
with it; but I shall sleep Full soon, and a good space of sleep.

MARY BEATON. Alas!

CHASTELARD. What makes you sigh though I be found a fool?

You have no blame: and for my death, sweet friend, I never could have lived long either way.
Why, as I live, the joy I have of this Would make men mad that were not mad with love; I hear
my blood sing, and my lifted heart Is like a springing water blown of wind For pleasure of this
deed. Now, in God's name, I swear if there be danger in delight I must die now: if joys have
deadly teeth, I'll have them bite my soul to death, and end In the old asp's way, Egyptian-wise;
be killed In a royal purple fashion. Look, my love Would kill me if my body were past hurt Of any
man's hand; and to die thereof, I say, is sweeter than all sorts
of life. I would not have her love me now, for then I should die meanlier
some time. I am safe, Sure of her face, my life's end in her sight,
My blood shed out about her feet--by God, My heart feels drunken when
I think of it. See you, she will not rid herself of me, Not though
she slay me: her sweet lips and life Will smell of my spilt blood.

MARY
BEATON. Give me good-night.

CHASTELARD. Yea, and good thanks.

[Exit
MARY BEATON.]

Here is the very place: Here has her body bowed the
pillows in And here her head thrust under made the sheet Smell sort
of her mixed hair and spice: even here Her arms pushed back the coverlet,
pulled here The golden silken curtain halfway in It may be, and made
room to lean out loose, Fair tender fallen arms. No one ever has who has nothing to do." His assistance was always
promptly and eagerly afforded whenever he could serve his friends, or confer a favour on a
deserving object. His integrity and sense of honour were high, and his disinterestedness was
almost carried to excess. The remuneration for his official services was lower than that of
any other official of equal standing, and far below his deserts. Never having married, however,
owing to an early disappointment, his needs were moderate, and his private fortune considerable.
His person and manner were very prepossessing, and his aptitude and acquired knowledge great.
He was very popular in the social circle, and his death left a void among his friends which
was never filled.

MONTCALM.

"Go to; the boy is a born generalissimo, and is destined to be a Marshal of France," said M.
Ricot, holding up his hands in amazement. The boy referred to was a little fellow seven or
eight years of age, by name Louis Joseph de Saint Veran. M. Ricot was his tutor, and was led
to express himself after this fashion in consequence of some precocious criticisms of his pupil
on the tactics employed by Caius Julius Caesar at a battle fought in Transalpine Gaul fifty
odd years before the advent of the Christian era. It was evident to the critic's youthful mind
that the battle ought to have resulted differently, and that if the foes of "the mighty Julius"
had had the wit to take advantage of his indiscretion, certain pages of the "Commentaries"
might have been conceived in a less boastful spirit. Little Louis Joseph had sketched a rough
plan, showing the respective positions of the opposing forces, and had then demanded of his
tutor why this had not been done, why that had been neglected, and why the other had never
been even so much as thought of. M. Ricot, after carefully following out the reasoning of his
pupil, could find no weak point therein, and was fain to admit that the Great Roman had been
guilty of a huge blunder in the arrangement of his forces. Fortunately for the General's military
reputation, the Gauls had been beaten in spite of his defective strategy, and he himself had
survived to transmit to posterity a rather egotistical account of the affair. M. Ricot had
been reading those "Commentaries" all his life--reading them, as he supposed, critically--but
he had never lighted upon the discovery which his present pupil had made upon a first perusal.
Well might he exclaim, "Go to; the boy is a born generalissimo, and is destined to be a marshal
of France."

Such is the anecdote--preserved in an old volume of French memoirs--of the childhood of him
who subsequently became famous on two continents, and who for more than a hundred years past
has been accounted one of the most redoubtable commanders of his age. If the story is true,
certainly the Marquis de Montcalm did not carry out the splendid promise of his boyhood. He
lived to fight the battles of his country with unflinching courage, with a tolerable amount
of military skill, and with a tenacity of purpose that often achieved success against tremendous
odds. But, unlike the great general to whom, during the last few weeks of his life, it was
his fortune to be opposed, he never gave any evidence of possessing an original military genius--such
a genius as would seem to have been possessed by the youth who figures in the foregoing anecdote.
His chivalrous bravery, his high-bred courtesy, and, more than all, his untimely death, have
done much to make his name famous in history, and to obscure certain features of character
which we are not usually accustomed to associate with greatness.

He was descended from a noble French family, and was born at the Chateau of Candiac, near Nismes,
in southern France, on the 28th of February, 1712. Concerning his early years but few particulars
have come down to us. He seems to have entered the army before he had completed his fourteenth
year, and to have distinguished himself in various campaigns in Germany, Bohemia and Italy
during the war for the Austrian succession. At the disastrous battle of Piacenza, in Italy,
fought in the year 1746, he gained the rank of colonel; and in 1749 he became a brigadier-general.
Seven years subsequent to the latter date he began to figure conspicuously in Canadian history,
and from that time forward we are able to trace his career pretty closely. Early in 1756, having
been elevated to the rank of a Field-Marshal--thus verifying the prediction of his old tutor--he
was appointed successor to the Baron Dieskau in the chief command of the French forces in this
country. He sailed from France early in April, and arrived at Quebec about a month afterwards.
He was accompanied across the Atlantic by a large reinforcement, consisting of nearly 14,000
regular troops, and an ample supply of munitions of war. He at once began to set on foot those
active operations against the British in America which were followed up with such unremitting
vigilance throughout the greater part of the following three years.

The state of affairs in Canada at this period may be briefly summarized as follows:--The Government
was administered by the Marquis de Vaudreuil-Cavagnal, a man ill-fitted for so onerous a position
in such troublous times. The colony extended from the seaboard to the far west, through the
valley of the Ohio, and had a white population of about 80,000. Previous to Montcalm's arrival
there were 3,000 veteran French troops in the country, in addition to a well-trained militia.
The country, indeed, was an essentially military settlement, and the people felt that they
might at any time be called upon to defend their frontiers. The countless tribes and offshoots
of the Huron-Algonquin Indians had cast in their lot with the French, and were to contribute
not a little to the success of many of their warlike operations. The French, by means of their
forts at Niagara, Toronto and Frontenac (Kingston), held almost undisputed sovereignty over
Lake Ontario; and their forts at Crown Point and Ticonderoga enabled them to control Lake Champlain.

Still, the French colonists laboured under some serious disadvantages, which contributed eventually
to decide the contest adversely to them. They had given comparatively little attention to the
cultivation of the soil, and suffered from a chronic scarcity of food. They were subjected
to feudal exactions ill-suited to the condition of the country, and were further impoverished
by huge commercial monopolies. Every branch of the public service was corrupt, and the peculations
of the officials, if not shared by the Governor himself, were at least winked at or sanctioned
by him. Montcalm, whatever may have been his shortcomings in some respects, was no self-seeker,
and was very properly disgusted with the mal-administration which everywhere prevailed. His
dissatisfaction with, and contempt for, the Governor, had the effect of producing much internal
dissention among the Canadians, and of hastening the downfall of French dominion in the colony.

The population of the British colonies at this time was not much less than three millions;
but this population, unlike that of Canada, knew little of military affairs. The British colonists
had spent their time in commercial and agricultural pursuits, and had not cast loose from the
spirit of puritanism which had animated the breasts of their forefathers. Here is the summary
of some extracts from them:

"Jesus Christ is my Lord and teacher," says Ballou in one of his essays exposing the inconsistency of
Christians who allowed a right of self-defense and of warfare. "I have promised leaving all
else, to follow good and through evil, to death itself. But I am a citizen of the democratic
republic of the United States; and in allegiance to it I have sworn to defend the Constitution
of my country, if need be, with my life. Christ requires of me to
do unto others as I would they should do unto me.

The Constitution of the United States requires of me to do unto two millions of slaves [at that
time there were slaves; now one might venture to substitute the word 'laborers'] the very opposite
of what I would they should do unto me--that is to help to keep them in their present condition
of slavery. And, in spite of this, I continue to elect or be elected, I propose to vote, I
am even ready to be appointed to any office under government. That will not hinder me from being
a Christian. I shall still profess Christianity, and shall find no
difficulty in carrying out my covenant with Christ and with the government.

"Jesus

Christ forbids me to resist evil doers, and to take from them an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth,
bloodshed for bloodshed, and life for life.

"My government demands from me quite the opposite, and bases a system of self-defense on gallows,
musket, and sword, to be used against its foreign and domestic foes. And the land is filled accordingly
with gibbets, prisons, arsenals, ships of war, and soldiers.

"In the maintenance and use of these expensive appliances for murder, we can very suitably
exercise to the full the virtues of forgiveness to those who injure us, love toward our enemies,
blessings to those who curse us, and doing good to those who hate us.

"For this we have a succession of Christian priests to pray for us and beseech the blessing
of Heaven on the holy work of slaughter.

"I see all this (i.e., the contradiction between profession and practice), and I continue to
profess religion and take part in government, and pride myself on being at the same time a
devout Christian and a devoted servant of the government. I do not want to agree with these senseless
notions of non-resistance. I cannot renounce my authority and leave only immoral men in control
of the government. The Constitution says the government has the right to declare war, and
I assent to this and support it, and swear that I will support it.

And I do not for that cease to be a Christian. War, too, is a Christian duty. Is it not a Christian
duty to kill hundreds of thousands of one's fellow-men, to outrage women, to raze and burn towns,
and to practice every possible cruelty? It is time to dismiss all these false sentimentalities.
It is the truest means of forgiving injuries and loving enemies. If we only do it in the spirit
of love, nothing can be more Christian than such murder."

In another pamphlet, entitled "How many Men are Necessary to Change a Crime into a Virtue?" he
says: "One man may not kill. If he kills a fellow-creature, he is a murderer. If two, ten, a hundred
men do so, they, too, are murderers.

But a government or a nation may kill as many men as it chooses, and that will not be murder, but a great
and noble action. Only gather the people together on a large scale, and a battle of ten thousand
men becomes an innocent action. But precisely how many people must there be to make it so?--that
is the question. One man cannot plunder and pillage, but a whole nation can. But precisely
how many are needed to make it permissible? Why is it that one man, ten, a hundred, may not
break the law of God, but a great number may?"

And here is a version of Ballou's catechism composed for his flock:

CATECHISM OF NON-RESISTANCE.

Q. Whence is the word "non-resistance" derived?

A. From the command, "Resist not evil." (M. v. 39.)

Q. What does this word express?

A. It expresses a lofty Christian virtue enjoined on us by Christ.

Q. Ought the word "non-resistance" to be taken in its widest sense--that is to say, as intending
that we should not offer any resistance of any kind to evil?

A. No; it ought to be taken in the exact sense of our Saviour's teaching--that is, not repaying
evil for evil. We ought to oppose evil by every righteous means in our power, but not by evil.

Q.
What is there to show that Christ enjoined non-resistance in that sense?

A. It is shown by the words he uttered at the same time. But if one smites thee on the right
cheek, turn him the other also; and if one will go to law with thee to take thy coat from thee,
give him thy cloak also."

Q. Of whom was he speaking in the words, "Ye have heard it was said of old"?

A. Of the patriarchs and the prophets, contained in the Old Testament, which the Hebrews ordinarily
call the Law and the Prophets.

Q. What utterances did Christ refer to in the words, "It was said of old"?

A. The utterances of Noah, Moses, and the other prophets, in which they admit the right of doing
bodily harm to those who inflict harm, so as to punish and prevent evil deeds.

Q. Quote such utterances. 6. 12 and 23-25.

"He that killeth any man shall surely be put to death. 17, 19, 20. 18, 21.

Noah, Moses, and the Prophets taught that he who kills, maims, or injures his neighbors does
evil.

To resist such evil, and to prevent it, the evil doer must be punished with death, or maiming,
or some physical injury. Wrong must be opposed by wrong, murder by murder, injury by injury, evil
by evil. Thus taught Noah, Moses, and the Prophets. But Christ rejects all this. "I say unto
you," is written in the Gospel, "resist not evil," do not oppose injury with injury, but rather
bear repeated injury from the evil doer. What was permitted is forbidden. When we understand what
kind of resistance they taught, we know exactly what resistance Christ forbade.

Q. Then the ancients allowed the resistance of injury by injury?

A. Yes. But Jesus forbids it.

The Christian has in no case the right to put to death his neighbor who has done him evil, or to do
him injury in return.

Q. May he kill or maim him in self-defense?

A. No.

Q. May he go with a complaint to the judge that he who has wronged him may be punished?

A. No. What he does through others, he is in reality doing himself.

Q. Can he fight in conflict with foreign enemies or disturbers of the peace?

A. Certainly not. He cannot take any part in war or in preparations for war. He cannot make
use of a deadly weapon. He cannot oppose injury to injury, whether he is alone or with others,
either in person or through other people.

Q. Can he voluntarily vote or furnish soldiers for the government?

A. He can do nothing of that kind if he wishes to be faithful to Christ's law.

Q. Can he voluntarily give money to aid a government resting on military force, capital punishment,
and violence in general?

A. No, unless the money is destined for some special object, right
in itself, and good both in aim and means.

Q. Can he pay taxes to such a government?

A. No; he ought not voluntarily to pay taxes, but he ought not to resist the collecting of taxes.
A tax is levied by the government, and is exacted independently of the will of the subject. It is
impossible to resist it without having recourse to violence of some kind. Since the Christian
cannot employ violence, he is obliged to offer his property at once to the loss by violence
inflicted on it by the authorities.

Q. Can a Christian give a vote at elections, or take part in government or law business?

A. No; participation in election, government, or law business is participation in government
by force.

Q. Wherein lies the chief significance of the doctrine of non-resistance?

A. In the fact that it alone allows of the possibility of eradicating evil from one's own heart, and
also from one's neighbor's. This doctrine forbids doing that whereby evil has endured for ages
and multiplied in the world. He who attacks another and injures him, kindles in the other a
feeling of hatred, the root of every evil. To injure another because he has injured us, even with
the aim of overcoming evil, is doubling the harm for him and for oneself; it is begetting, or
at least setting free and inciting, that evil spirit which we should wish to drive out. Satan
can never be driven out by Satan. Error can never be corrected by error, and evil cannot be
vanquished by evil.

True non-resistance is the only real resistance to evil. It is crushing the serpent's head. It destroys
and in the end extirpates the evil feeling.

Q. But if that is the true meaning of the rule of non- resistance, can it always put into practice?

A.
It can be put into practice like every virtue enjoined by the law of God. A virtue cannot be
practiced in all circumstances without self-sacrifice, privation, suffering, and in extreme
cases loss of life itself.

But he who esteems life more than fulfilling the will of God is already dead to the only true
life. Trying to save his life he loses it. Besides, generally speaking, where non-resistance
costs the sacrifice of a single life or of some material welfare, resistance costs a thousand such
sacrifices.

Non-resistance is Salvation; Resistance is Ruin.

It is incomparably less dangerous to act justly than unjustly, to submit to injuries than to resist
them with violence, less dangerous even in one's relations to the
present life.

If all men refused to resist evil by evil our world would be happy.

Q. But so long as only a few act thus, what will happen to them?

A. If only one man acted thus, and all the rest agreed to crucify
him, would it not be nobler for him to die in the glory of non-resisting
love, praying for his enemies, than to live to wear the crown of Caesar
stained with the blood of the slain?

  However, one man, or
  a thousand men, firmly resolved not
  to oppose evil by evil are far more free from danger by violence
than those who resort to violence, whether among civilized or savage
neighbors.

The robber, the murderer, and the cheat will leave them in peace, sooner than those who oppose them
with arms, and those who take up the sword shall perish by the sword, but those who seek after
peace, and behave kindly and harmlessly, forgiving and forgetting
injuries, for the most part enjoy peace, or, if they die, they die
blessed.

In this way, if all kept the ordinance of non-resistance, there would obviously be no evil
nor crime. If the majority acted thus they would establish the rule of love and good will even
over evil doers, never opposing evil with evil, and never resorting to force. If there were a
moderately large minority of such men, they would exercise such a salutary moral influence on
society that every cruel punishment would be abolished, and violence and feud would be replaced
by peace and love. Even if there were only a small minority of them, they would rarely experience
anything worse than the world's contempt, and meantime the world, though unconscious of it,
and not grateful for it, would be continually becoming wiser and better for their unseen action
on it. And if in the worst case some members of the minority were persecuted to death, in
dying for the truth they would have left behind them their doctrine, sanctified by the blood
of their martyrdom. Peace, then, to all who seek peace, and may overruling love be the imperishable
heritage of every soul who obeys willingly Christ's word, "Resist not evil."

ADIN BALLOU.

For fifty years Ballou wrote and published books dealing principally with the question of non-resistance
to evil by force. In these works, which are distinguished by the clearness of their thought
and eloquence of exposition, the question is looked at from every possible side, and the binding
nature of this command on every Christian who acknowledges the Bible as the revelation of God
is firmly established. All the ordinary objections to the doctrine of non-resistance from the
Old and New Testaments are brought forward, such as the expulsion of the moneychangers from the
Temple, and so on, and arguments follow in disproof of them all. The practical reasonableness
of this rule of conduct is shown independently of Scripture, and all the objections ordinarily
made against its practicability are stated and refuted. Thus one chapter in a book of his treats
of non-resistance in exceptional cases, and he owns in this connection that if there were cases
in which the rule of non-resistance were impossible of application, it would prove that the law
was not universally authoritative. Quoting these cases, he shows that it is precisely in them
that the application of the rule is both necessary and reasonable. There is no aspect of the question,
either on his side or on his opponents', which he has not followed up in his writings. I mention
all this to show the unmistakable interest which such works ought to have for men who make a profession
of Christianity, and because one would have thought Ballou's work would have been well known,
and the ideas expressed by him would lave been either accepted or refuted; but such has not been
the case.

The work of Garrison, the father, in his foundation of the Society of Non-resistants and his Declaration,
even more than my correspondence with the Quakers, convinced me of the fact that the departure
of the ruling form of Christianity from the law of Christ on non-resistance by force is an
error that has long been observed and pointed out, and that men have labored, and are still laboring,
to correct. Ballou's work confirmed me still more in this view. But the fate of Garrison,
still more that of Ballou, in being completely unrecognized in spite of fifty years of obstinate and
persistent work in the same direction, confirmed me in the idea that there exists a kind of
tacit but steadfast conspiracy of silence about all such efforts.

Ballou died in August, 1890, and there was as obituary notice of him in an American journal of
Christian views (RELIGIO- PHILOSOPHICAL JOURNAL, August 23). In this laudatory notice it is recorded
that Ballou was the spiritual director of a parish, that he delivered from eight to nine thousand
sermons, married one thousand couples, and wrote about five hundred articles; but there is not
a single word said of the object to which he devoted his life; even
the word "non-resistance" is not mentioned.

Precisely as it was with all the preaching of the Quakers for two hundred years and, too, with
the efforts of Garrison the father, the foundation of his society and journal, and his Declaration,
so it is with the life-work of Ballou. It seems just as though it did not exist and never had
existed.

We have an astounding example of the obscurity of works which aim at expounding the doctrine
of non-resistance to evil by force, and at confuting those who do not recognize this commandment,
in the book of the Tsech Helchitsky, which has only lately been noticed and has not hitherto
been printed.
Soon after the appearance of my book in German, I received a letter
from Prague, from a professor of the university there, informing me
of the existence of a work, never yet printed, by Helchitsky, a Tsech
of the fifteenth century, entitled "The Net of Faith." In this work,
the professor told me, Helchitsky expressed precisely the same view
as to true and false Christianity as I had expressed in my book "What
I Believe." The professor wrote to me that Helchitsky's work was to
be published for the first time in the Tsech language in the JOURNAL
OF THE PETERSBURG ACADEMY OF SILENCE. Since I could not obtain the
book itself, I tried to make myself acquainted with what was known
of Helchitsky, and I gained the following information from a German
book sent me by the Prague professor and from Pypin's history of Tsech
literature. This was Pypin's account:

"'The Net of Faith' is Christ's
teaching, which ought to draw man up out of the dark depths of the
sea of worldliness and his own iniquity. True faith consists in believing
God's Word; but now a time has come when men mistake the true faith
for heresy, and therefore it is for the reason to point out what the
true faith consists in, if anyone does not know this. It is hidden
in darkness from men, and they do not recognize the true law of Christ.

"To
make this law plain, Helchitsky points to the primitive organization
of Christian society--the organization which, he says, is now regarded
in the Roman Church as an abominable heresy. This Primitive Church
was his special ideal of social organization, founded on equality,
liberty, and fraternity. Christianity, in Helchitsky's view, still
preserves these elements, and it is only necessary for society to
return to its pure doctrine to render unnecessary every other form
of social order in which kings and popes are essential; the law of
love would alone be sufficient in every case.

"Historically, Helchitsky
attributes the degeneration of Christianity to the times of Constantine
the Great, whom he Pope Sylvester admitted into the Christian Church
with all his heathen morals and life. Constantine, in his turn, endowed
the Pope with worldly riches and power. From that time forward these
two ruling powers were constantly aiding one another to strive for
nothing but outward glory. Divines and ecclesiastical dignitaries
began to concern themselves only about subduing the whole world to
their authority, incited men against one another to murder and plunder,
and in creed and life reduced Christianity to a nullity. Helchitsky
denies completely the right to make war and to inflict the punishment
of death; every soldier, even the 'knight,' is only a violent evil
doer--a murderer."

The same account is given by the German book,
with the addition of a few biographical details and some extracts
from Helchitsky's writings.

Having learnt the drift of Helchitsky's
teaching in this way, I awaited all the more impatiently the appearance
of "The Net of Faith" in the journal of the Academy. But one year
passed, then two and three, and still the book did appear. It was
only in 1888 that I learned that the printing of the book, which had
been begun, was stopped. I obtained the proofs of what had been printed
and read them through. It is a marvelous book from every point of
view.

Its general tenor is given with perfect accuracy by Pypin.
Helchitsky's fundamental idea is that Christianity, by allying itself
with temporal power in the days of Constantine, and by continuing
to develop in such conditions, has become completely distorted, and
has ceased to be Christian altogether. Helchitsky gave the title "The
Net of Faith" to his book, taking as his motto the verse of the Gospel
about the calling of the disciples to be fishers of men; and, developing
this metaphor, he says:

"Christ, by means of his disciples, would
have caught all the world in his net of faith, but the greater fishes
broke the net and escaped out of it, and all the rest have slipped
through the holes made by the greater fishes, so that the net has
remained quite empty. The greater fishes who broke the net are the
rulers, emperors, popes, kings, who have not renounced power, and
instead of true Christianity have put on what is simply a mask of
it."

Helchitsky teaches precisely what has been and is taught in
these days by the non-resistant Mennonites and Quakers, and in former
tunes by the Bogomilites, Paulicians, and many others. He teaches
that Christianity, expecting from its adherents gentleness, meekness,
peaceableness, forgiveness of injuries, turning the other cheek when
one is struck, and love for enemies, is inconsistent with the use
of force, which is an indispensable condition of authority.

The Christian,
according to Helchitsky's reasoning, not only cannot be a ruler or
a soldier; he cannot take any part in government nor in trade, or
even be a landowner; he can only be an artisan or a husbandman.

This
book is one of the few works attacking official Christianity which
has escaped being burned. All such so-called heretical works were
burned at the stake, together with their authors, so that there are
few ancient works exposing the errors of official Christianity. The
book has a special interest for this reason alone. But apart from
its interest from every point of view, it is one of the most remarkable
products of thought for its depth of aim, for the astounding strength
and beauty of the national language in which it is written, and for
its antiquity.
Between young Bruce and two of these--Ramsay and Canning--an uncommonly warm intimacy prevailed;
and it is a somewhat curious coincidence that they lived to be the three successive rulers
of India during the transition period of British Government there. Ramsay, then Lord Dalhousie,
was the last Governor before the breaking out of the Mutiny; Canning was the over-ruler of
the Mutiny; and Bruce, as Lord Elgin, was the first who went out as Viceroy after the Indian
Empire was brought under the government of the Crown.

Among the brilliant young men who were his friends and compeers at college, James Bruce is
said to have been as conspicuous as any for the brilliancy and originality of his speeches
at the Union. But he was not less distinguished by maturity of judgment, by a love of abstract
thought, and by those philosophical studies which lay the foundation of true reasoning in the
mind. In 1834 he published a pamphlet to protest against a monopoly of Liberal sentiment by
the Whigs; and in 1841 he went into the House of Commons for Southampton on Conservative principles,
which had, however, a strong flavour of Whiggism about them. He soon developed a remarkable
aptitude for political life. He seconded the Address which turned out Lord Melbourne and brought
in Sir Robert Peel, in a speech prophetically favourable to free trade, and he would doubtless
have been a cordial supporter of Peel's liberal commercial policy had not his Parliamentary
career speedily come to an end. In 1840, George, Lord Bruce, elder brother of James, died,
unmarried, and the latter became heir-apparent to the family honours. On the 22nd of April,
1841, he married Elizabeth Mary, daughter of Mr. C. L. Canning Bruce. The death of his father
soon afterwards raised him to the Scottish peerage. He had no seat in either House of Parliament,
and in 1842 he accepted from Lord Stanley the office of Governor of Jamaica--an appointment
which decided his vocation in life. With his career at Jamaica we have no special concern,
and it need not detain us. It may be remarked, in passing, that he remained there four years,
during which period--owing, doubtless, in some measure to the sudden death of his wife soon
after their arrival in the island--he led a somewhat secluded life. He quitted his post in
1846, and returned to England. Almost immediately after his arrival there Lord Grey, the Colonial
Secretary, offered him the position of Governor-General of British North America. He accepted
it, says his biographer, not in the mere spirit of selfish ambition, but with a deep sense
of the responsibility attached to it. It was arranged that he should go to Canada at the beginning
of the new year. Thus it happened that the young Conservative Peer, who had already shaken
off his early Tory prepossessions, found himself called upon to build on the broad foundations
laid by the most advanced member of the Liberal party of that day, and to inaugurate the new
principle of government which Lord Durham and Charles Butler had conceived, not merely in Canada,
but throughout the colonial empire of Britain. Leaving his bride behind him, to follow at a
less inclement season, he set out for the seat of his new duties early in January, and reached
Montreal on the 29th. He took up his quarters at Monklands, the suburban residence of the Governor.

Nine years had elapsed since the Rebellion of 1837, Lord Durham, Lord Sydenham, Sir Charles
Bagot, Lord Metcalfe, and Lord Cathcart had successively governed the North American Provinces
in that short interval, but--except in the case of Lord Durham--with not very satisfactory
results. The method of Responsible Government was new with us. The smouldering fires of rebellion
were only just extinguished. The repulsion of races was at its strongest. The deposed clique
which had virtually ruled the colony was still furious, and the depressed section was suspicious
and restive. It was just at the time, too, when, between English and American legislation,
we were suffering at once from the evils of protection and free trade. For some months after
his arrival in this country matters went smoothly enough. The Draper Administration, never
very strong, had for several years been growing gradually weaker and weaker, and was now tottering
towards its fall; but so far it could command a small majority of votes, and continued to hold
the reins of power. The result of the next general elections, however, which were held at the
close of the year, was the return of a large preponderance of Reformers, among whom were nearly
all the leading spirits of the Reform Party. Upon the opening of Parliament on the 25th of
February, 1848, the Draper Administration resigned, and its leader accepted a seat on the judicial
bench. The Governor accordingly summoned the leaders of the opposition to his councils, and
the Baldwin-Lafontaine ministry was formed. After a short session the House was prorogued on
the 25th March. It did not meet again until the 18th of January following. It is hardly necessary
to inform the Canadian reader that the Canadian Parliament sat at Montreal at that time. During
the session one of the stormiest episodes in our history occurred. Every Canadian who has passed
middle age remembers that disturbed time. The excitement arose out of the Rebellion Losses
Bill, as it was called--a measure introduced by Mr. Lafontaine, the object of which was to
reimburse such of the inhabitants of the Lower Province as had sustained loss from the rebellion
of eleven years before. It was natural that they should take up the work left half done by
their predecessors; and early in the session of 1849 Mr. Lafontaine introduced the Rebellion
Losses Bill. The Opposition contrived to kindle a flame all over the country. Meetings were
held denouncing the measure, and petitions were presented to the Governor with the obvious
design of producing a collision between him and Parliament. The Bill was finally passed in
the Assembly by forty-seven votes to eighteen.

On the 25th of April Lord Elgin went down to the Parliament Buildings and gave his assent to
the Bill. On leaving the House he was insulted by the crowd, who pelted him with missiles.
Similar scenes on a somewhat smaller scale, were enacted in Toronto and elsewhere in the Upper
Province. The house of Mr. Baldwin and some other prominent members of the Reform party were
attacked, and the owners burned in effigy.

Meanwhile addresses numerously signed came pouring in to the Governor from all quarters, expressing
entire confidence in the Administration, and unbounded regret for the indignities to which
he had been subjected. Lord Elgin, however, felt bound to tender his resignation to the Home
Government. Meanwhile the Bill which had caused such an explosion in the colony, was running
the gauntlet of the British Parliament. On June 14th it was vehemently attacked in the House
of Commons. Mr. Gladstone himself describing it as a "measure for rewarding rebels." The strongest
pressure had already been put upon Lord Elgin to induce him to refuse the Royal Assent to the
Bill. To do so would have been to place himself in direct collision with his Parliament, and
this he steadily refused to do. The Home Government, represented by Lord Grey, firmly supported
him, approved his policy, and shortly afterwards conferred upon him a British peerage as an
acknowledgment of the unshaken confidence of the Queen. Being urgently pressed to remain in
office as Governor-General he consented, and the more readily because the agitation soon quieted
down.

Since the session of 1849 no Parliament has ever sat, nor is any ever again likely to sit,
at Montreal. In view of the riot and the burning of the Parliament Buildings it was determined
to remove the Legislature, which met at Toronto for the next two years. Subsequently it met
alternately at Quebec and Toronto until 1866, since which time Ottawa has been the permanent
capital of the Dominion.

After the storm consequent on the Rebellion Losses Bill, the most important event by which
Lord Elgin's Canadian administration was characterized was the negotiation of the Reciprocity
Treaty with the United States. The conclusion of this Treaty was a matter requiring much time
and a good deal of prudent negotiation. Within a few weeks the terms of a Treaty of Reciprocity
were agreed upon, and they soon afterwards received the sanction of the Governments concerned.
Lord Elgin returned to England at the close of 1854, being succeeded in the government of Canada
by Sir Edmund Walker Head, who had examined him for a Merton Fellowship at Oxford in 1833.
Soon after Lord Elgin's return home, the Chancellorship of the Duchy of Lancaster was offered
him by Lord Palmerston, with a seat in the Cabinet; but he preferred to take no active part
in public affairs, and enjoyed an interval of two years' rest from official labour. His subsequent
career can only be glanced at very briefly. In 1857 he was sent to China to try what could
be done to repair, or to turn to the best account, the mischiefs done by Sir John Bowring's
course, and by the patronage of it at home, in the face of the moral reprobation of the people
at large. He was present at the taking of Canton, and in conjunction with the French, succeeded
by prompt and vigorous measures in reducing the Celestial Empire to terms. After signing a
Treaty with the Chinese Commissioners at Tientsin, on the 26th of July, 1858, the conditions
of which were highly favourable to the British, he sailed for Japan, and boldly entered the
harbour of Jeddo, from which foreigners had always been rigidly excluded. Here he obtained
very important commercial privileges for the British, and on the 26th of August concluded a
treaty with the Japanese. He returned to England in May, 1859. The merchants of London, in
recognition of his immense services to British commerce, did themselves honour by the thoroughness
of their acknowledgment of Lord Elgin's services, and presented him with the freedom of the City.

He held the office of Postmaster-General till the hostile acts of the Chinese Government towards
the English and French Ministers in China rendered it necessary that he should go out again,
and opening Pekin to British diplomacy, returned to England in April, 1861. Almost immediately
afterwards he was offered the Viceroyalty of India. This splendid appointment he was not disposed
to decline. He accepted, and went out to the seat of his Government He lived only eighteen
months longer, a period, says his biographer, hardly sufficient for him to master the details
of administration of that great Empire, with which he had no previous acquaintance, and I quite
insufficient for him to give to the policy of the Government the stamp of his own mind. He
died of heart-disease; while making a vice-regal excursion through his dominions, on the 20th
of November, 1863, and was buried in the cemetery at Dhurmsala, in a spot selected by Lady Elgin.

"Perhaps," says a sympathetic critic of Lord Elgin's career, "the noblest part of the history
of England is to be found in the recorded lives of those who have been her chosen servants,
and who have died in that service. Self-control, endurance, and an heroic sense of duty, are
more conspicuous in such men than the love of action and fame. But their lives are the landmarks
of our race. Lord Elgin, it is true, can hardly be ranked with the first of British statesmen,
or orators, or commanders. His services, great as they unquestionably were, had all been performed
under the orders of other men. Even among his own contemporaries he fills a place in the second
rank. But happy are the country and the age in which such men are to be found in the second
rank, and are content to be there."

MAJOR-GENERAL JAMES WOLFE.

  "Tis in the prime of summer-time, an evening calm and cool,
  When certain bright-eyed English boys come bounding out of school."

The school is at Greenwich, six miles below London Bridge, and is kept by the Reverend Samuel
Swinden. Date, some time in the month of June, 1741. The boys are of all ages, from five years
upwards, and most of them are sons of military and naval officers resident in the neighbourhood.
One of them, a sturdy little urchin of seven years, is a son of the Treasurer of the great
Marine Hospital down by the river's bank. He is destined by his father for the legal profession,
but has already begun to shew his contempt for the law by breaking His Majesty's peace several
times in the course of every week. He has been at school only a few months, and hitherto he
has not displayed much aptitude for his lessons; but he has distinguished himself in numberless
hand-to-hand engagements with his fellow-scholars, and has gained the reputation of being,
for a youngster of his inches, tremendously heavy about the fist. On this particular evening
the school has been dismissed barely five minutes before the pugnacious little rascal contrives
to get into an altercation with a lad several years his senior. As to the precise nature, of
the casus belli, history and tradition are alike silent. The pair adjourn to a secluded part
of the playground to settle their differences a la Dogginson, "by fighting it out with their
fistes." The other boys follow as a matter of course, to see fair play. It is to be regretted
that history has not furnished sufficient data to enable us to describe the passage of arms
very minutely. Suffice it is to say that after a few rounds have been fought, it becomes apparent
to all the spectators that Master Jackey Jervis has at last found his match. His opponent,
a great hulking fellow without any forehead, who has arms like sledge-hammers, and who has
hitherto found it impossible to learn the multiplication table, takes all Master Jackey's blows
with seeming nonchalance, and ever and anon puts in a tremendous rejoinder which stretches
the Treasurer's son upon the sward. When the contest has gone on after this fashion for some
time the seconds propose that, as there has been a sufficient effusion of blood to vindicate
the courage of both the combatants, there may well be a cessation of hostilities. The big fellow
stolidly remarks that it is all one to him; but Master Jackey spurns the proposal with lofty
contempt. The contest is renewed; another round is fought, and the lighter weight once more
bites the grass. Before he can arise to resume the fray, the company receives an accession
in the person of a tall, slabsided, awkwardly-made youth, who impetuously elbows the others
aside, and makes his way to the centre of the fistic arena. The new-comer is somewhat older
than any of the other boys, and is apparently verging towards manhood. His appearance is somewhat
peculiar. The most partial admirer could hardly pronounce him handsome. Apart from his ungainly
build, he has fiery red hair, high, prominent cheek bones, a receding forehead, and a proboscis
of the kind which the French call a nose in the air. There is a set, decisive expression about
his mouth which betokens an indomitable will; and a flash in his sparkling blue eyes bears
witness that he has an ominous temper of his own. But, though his personal appearance is by
no means that of an Adonis, the brightness of his complexion and a certain bold frankness of
facial expression preserves him from absolute ugliness. Those who know him, moreover, are aware
that he possesses qualities which more than redeem his plainness of feature. Though by no means
of a robust constitution, he is endowed with unflinching courage. He has a high sense of honour,
and is the repository of the secrets of nearly every boy in the school. He is a diligent student,
and though somewhat vain of his superior knowledge, is ever ready to assist those of his fellow-pupils
who are anxious to learn. Add to all this that he is the senior boy of the school; that, though
a stern disciplinarian, he is generous, impartial, and a protector of the weak; and it will
readily be understood that he is popular both with master and scholars. Unnecessary to say
that there is no more fighting, for the senior boy has forbidden it, and he is not one who
tolerates any opposition to his authority. Two minutes suffice to quell the disturbance; and
the belligerents shake hands and march off to their respective homes. Little Jackey, however,
has been rather severely handled in the encounter, and does not put in an appearance for several
days, when the preceptor reads him a lecture before the whole school on the ill effects resulting
from little boys permitting their angry passions to rise.

It is to be presumed that the lecture was not taken very seriously to heart, for Master Jervis,
during the following seventy years, was many times conspicuous for little ebullitions of temper.
He never took kindly to his father's scheme to make a lawyer of him. About three years subsequent
to the event just recorded he ran away to sea, and began that glorious maritime career, the
details of which form an important chapter in the history of England. For Master Jackey Jervis
lived to take part in more deadly encounters than the one in the play-ground at Greenwich,
and to take high rank among the naval heroes of Great Britain. After valiantly fighting the
battles of his country in both hemispheres, and rising to the rank of Admiral, he achieved
that signal victory over the Spanish fleet which procured for him the Earldom of St. Vincent.
Nor is the low-browed lad who was his opponent altogether unknown to fame. His name was Thomas
Brett, and he lived to do good service in various capacities under Nelson and Collingwood.
But the fame of the senior boy--the florid-complexioned youth with the aspiring nose--is more
dear to Canadians of British blood than is that of either of his schoolfellows; for his name
was James Wolfe.

His career was short, and was compressed within a space of less than thirty-four years. It
terminated in the moment of victory on the Plains of Abraham. But, brief as was his earthly
span, few lives of any length have accomplished so much; and his death was so glorious that
it should scarcely have been regretted, even by his nearest and dearest, what he did is known
to us. What he might have done if his life had been spared, can only be conjectured; but he
possessed all the qualifications of a great military commander, and needed but time and opportunity
for their development. Of these, so long as they were vouchsafed to him, no man knew better
how to take advantage; and it is not extravagant to believe that had he lived to the age of
Marlborough or Wellington, he would have won a place in history not less distinguished than theirs.

He was born at the Vicarage, in the little village of Westerham, Kent, on the 2nd of January,
1726. [Footnote: Authorities are all but unanimous in placing this date a year later--i.e.,
on the 2nd of January, 1727. Even the standard biography of Wolfe (Wright's) repeats the error.
That it is an error becomes apparent when we learn that he was baptized at twenty days old,
and that the parish register shows this ceremony to have taken place on the 11th of January,
1726--the latter date being Old Style, equivalent to January 22nd, New Style. The correct date
is further confirmed by the entry in the register of the baptism of his brother, Edward, who
was about a year younger, and who was baptized of the 10th of January, 1727.] His father, Colonel
Edward Wolfe, was an officer in the English army, who subsequently rose to the rank of Lieutenant-General.
His mother was Henrietta, daughter of Edward Thompson, of Marsden, Yorkshire. James was their
first-born, and was the only member of the family destined to attain high distinction. The
only other offspring of the marriage was a younger son, Edward, who was born about a year after
the birth of James, and who did not live to reach manhood. Edward entered the army while still
a mere lad, and fought in the battle of Dettingen, on the 16th of June, 1743. He died on October
of the following year, of consumption, accellerated by the hardships incidental to a campaigning
life.

But little is known of the childhood of the two brothers. Both of them seem to have been of
rather frail constitutions, and the precarious state of their health is said to have caused
their parents much anxiety. As they grew up to youth they appear to have become somewhat more
healthful, though still far from robust. Their earliest scholastic attainments were received
at the hands of a Mr. Lawrence, who kept a small school in their native village. Their father
was almost always on active service with his regiment, and the boys saw very little of him.
About 1737 the family removed from Westerham to Greenwich, where the children at once began
to attend Mr. Swinden's School. The episode described in the opening paragraph is about the
only anecdote which has been preserved of their connection with that institution, and for it
we are indebted, not to any life of Wolfe, but to an old history of Greenwich. Early in November,
1741, within five months after the happening of the incident above described, Master James
received his first commission, appointing him Second Lieutenant in his father's regiment of
Marines; but there is no trace of his ever having served under it. He shortly afterwards exchanged
into the Line, and his first active service was in the capacity of Ensign of the Twelfth, or
Colonel Duroure's Regiment of Foot. The exchange took place early in 1742, and in April of
that year he embarked with his regiment for Flanders. The first of his letters which have been
preserved, is written to his mother from Ghent, and is dated August 27th, 1742. His brother
Edward followed him to the Continent during the same year, and died, as we have seen, in October,
1744. James's aptitude for the military profession soon became apparent to his superior officers,
and shortly after the completion of his seventeenth year we find him filling the important
pest of Adjutant. He, as well as his brother, took part in the battle of Dettingen, on the
16th of June, and though they were placed in the middle of the first line, they both escaped
without a scar. A few days afterwards James, in consequence of the talent for command which
he had already displayed, was promoted to a lieutenancy and on the 3rd of June, 1744, he received
a captain's commission in the Fourth, or King's Regiment of Foot, commanded by Lieutenant-General
Barrell. His life for some months thereafter was one of uninterrupted campaigning, but it contains
no incident necessary to be remarked upon. Nest year, Great Britain was compelled to withdraw
her forces from Flander's in order to suppress the Jacobite rebellion in Scotland, known as
the "Rising of the Forty-five." Early in June, Wolfe was commissioned a Brigade-Major, and
almost immediately afterwards he returned to England. He was at once despatched northward to
Newcastle, and fought at Falkirk and Culloden, in both of which engagements his regiments suffered
severely, though he himself escaped unwounded.

The Anti-Jacobin Review for 1802 contains an anecdote which, though probably apocryphal, may
as well be inserted here. It is said that when Wolfe was riding over the field of Culloden
with the Duke of Cumberland they observed a Highlander, who, although severely wounded, was
able to sit up, and who, leaning on his arm, seemed to smile defiance upon them. "Wolfe," said
the Duke, "shoot me that Highland scoundrel, who thus dares to look on us with such insolence."
To which Wolfe replied: "My commission is at your Royal Highness' disposal, but I can never
consent to become an executioner." From this day forward, it is said, Wolfe visibly declined
in the favour of the Commander-in-Chief. It is manifestly impossible to disprove such a story
as this; but it is an undoubted fact that Wolfe did not decline in the Duke's favour after
the battle of Culloden, and as no authorities are cited in support of the anecdote, it is not
unreasonable to infer that the whole is fictitious. For some months after the "dark day of
Culloden," Wolfe remained in the Highlands, but we have no information as to how he spent his
time there. He passed a part of the following winter in London, where he took up his quarters
with his parents, who then lived in their town house in Old Burlington-street. During his stay
in the metropolis at this time he must frequently have passed through Temple Bar. If so, he
doubtless had the grim satisfaction of seeing the heads of some of his former opponents, the
Highland rebels, grinning at passers-by from the spikes over the gateway.

In January, 1747, he again set out for the Continent with the British reinforcements for the
Netherlands. At the battle of Laffeldt, fought on the 2nd July, he received a slight wound,
and was publicly thanked by the Commander-in-Chief for his distinguished services. We do not
find that he took part in any other active engagement at this time, and we hear no more of
his wound. We next find him in London, where he seems to have spent the greater part of the
winter of 1747-8. The treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle was signed soon after, whereby peace was restored
to Europe.

About this time Wolfe had his first experience of the tender passion, the object being a Miss
Lawson, one of the maids of honour to the Princess of Wales. His suit, however, was disapproved
of by his parents, and does not appear to have been particularly acceptable to the young lady
herself, for, after a good deal of delay, she rejected his offer of his hand. She died unmarried
in March, 1759--the same year which witnessed the death of her former admirer. Wolfe was not
precisely the kind of material of which despairing lovers are made, and beyond a few expressions
of regret, he does not seem to have taken the rejection very deeply to heart. On the 5th of
January, 1749, he was gazetted as Major of the 20th Regiment, stationed in Scotland, whither
he repaired soon after. His promotion to a Lieutenant-Colonelcy in the same regiment followed
fifteen months later, and the next three years were for the most part spent with his regiment
in the Highlands, which were gradually recovering from the effects of the rebellion. Then came
a journey to Paris, where he remained several months, and where he was presented to the King,
Louis XV., and to Madame de Pompadour. The following two or three years of his life were not
marked by any incident of special importance.

In 1757, in consequence of the recommencement of hostilities with France, British forces, under
Sir John Mordaunt, were despatched to attack Rochfort, and Wolfe accompanied the expedition
as Quartermaster-General. This expedition was destined to exercise an important influence upon
his future career. He had hitherto been known simply as a brave and efficient officer, but
it was not commonly supposed, even by his intimate friends, that he was endowed with an original
military genius of high order. The time had arrived when the world was to form a more accurate
estimate of him. Sir John Mordaunt, who was placed in command of the land forces for the Rochfort
expedition, was totally unfit for so responsible a post. Sir Edward Hawke, who commanded the
fleet, did good service both before and after that time; but this expedition was one for which
he does not appear to have been suited. The incapacity of both the commanders soon began to
be painfully apparent; and Wolfe, a soldier by nature as well as by training, determined to
show them how the siege of Rochfort should be conducted. While they were wasting time in laying
and abandoning immature plans, and in suggesting this, that and the other impracticable schemes,
he, with Sir John's sanction, quietly landed on the island at one o'clock in the morning, and
made his observations. He saw a small post on the promontory of Fouras, which it was evident
must be taken before Rochfort could be besieged with success. He further noted the most favourable
point for landing the troops. Having matured his scheme, he returned and made his report to
Sir John and Sir Edward, and urgently recommended that his suggestions be acted upon. Sir Edward
approved of the plan, but Sir John thought proper to call a Council of war, which, after a
long session, decided that such an attempt was neither advisable nor practicable. The lucky
moment was lost, and the expedition returned to England without having accomplished anything.
The English people had confidently counted on the success of the expedition, and were proportionately
dissapointed. A committee of inquiry was summoned, and Sir John Mordaunt was tried by court-martial.
He was acquitted; but Pitt, who was at the head of the Government, after carefully mastering
the evidence given by Wolfe, came to the conclusion that the Quartermaster was an extraordinary
young man, and that if his advice had been followed there would have been a very different
result from the expedition. The youth who had the intrepidity to take the initiatory observations,
and who had had the military skill to concoct the plan of attack, was evidently a person whose
services it might be worth while to turn to account. At no period in the history of England
had there been a greater scarcity of capable military leaders, and not often had capable leaders
been more urgently needed. This young Wolfe was evidently an original military genius, and
must be pushed forward. He was immediately promoted to the rank of Colonel, and was soon to
receive still higher promotion.

The incompetency of the superior officers in the British army had of late become painfully
manifest on both sides of the Atlantic. The American campaign of 1757 was even more disastrous
than were British operations in Europe. Lord Loudoun, who had been despatched to America in
the preceding year, to direct the campaign against the French, had accomplished nothing, and
the enemy, under Montcalm, were uniformly successful in their operations. In August occurred
the terrible massacre at Fort William Henry. Other massacres followed, and the colonists were
literally panic-stricken. The border settlements were laid waste, the houses and property of
the inhabitants destroyed, and the colonists themselves scalped and murdered by the French
and their Indian allies. French spies gained early intelligence of every movement contemplated
by the British, and were thus, in many cases, the means of rendering those movements abortive.
The grand British scheme of the year, however, was the reduction of Louisburg, in furtherance
of which an armament such had never before been collected in the British Colonies, assembled
at Halifax. This armament consisted of about 12,000 troops, 19 vessels of war, and a considerable
number of smaller craft. The troops were embarked early in August with the ostensible object
of capturing Louisburg; but Lord Loudoun, learning that the French anticipated the attack,
and were prepared to oppose it, abandoned the idea. He landed a part of the forces on the coast
of Nova Scotia, and returned with the rest to New York. A fleet specially sent out from Great
Britain, under the command of Admiral Holborne, sailed for Cape Breton about the same time;
but the sight of the French ships in Louisburg harbour proved too much for the Admiral's nerves,
and he steered for Halifax. Here he was reinforced by four men-of-war, and the fleet again
set sail for Louisburg. The French fleet remained under the shelter of the batteries in the
harbour; and would not be coaxed out. Holborne cruised about the coast until late in the autumn,
when his fleet was dispersed and almost destroyed by a succession of violent storms. Considering
that, under the circumstances, he had done enough for his country for that time, he returned
to England with the shattered remains of his fleet.

Such was the position of affairs at the close of the year 1757. Public indignation was aroused
by the incompetency and supineness of the military and naval commanders, and it became apparent
either that more efficient leaders most be found or that all operations in America must be
abandoned. The new Ministry, with Pitt at its head, proved equal to the occasion. Lord Loudoun
was recalled and General Abercromby appointed in his stead. The Great Commoner formed his plans
for next year's campaign, which included the reduction of Fort Duquesne, Louisburg, Ticonderoga,
and Crown Point. The expedition against Louisburg required a conjoint naval and military armament.
The naval command was assigned to Admiral Boscawen, and the military forces to Colonel Amherst,
who was advanced to the rank of Major-General. With the latter was associated Wolfe, Whitmore,
and Lawrence, as Brigade-Generals. Operations against Crown Point and Ticonderoga were entrusted
to General Abercromby and Lord Howe. Those against Fort Duquesne were conducted by General
Forbes. The expedition against Fort Duquesne was completely successful, but Abercromby proved
himself as inefficient as his predecessor in office, Lord Loudoun. Howe, who was a thoroughly
capable officer, was killed at Ticonderoga on the 6th of July, before his powers could be brought
into play. The expedition under Abercromby proved an utter failure. Not so the expedition against
Louisburg, the capture of which was the most important event of the year. Being regarded as
the key to the St. Lawrence, it was a strongly fortified place. A fortress had been erected
there at a cost of 30,000,000 livres. The garrison was defended by the Chevalier de Drucourt,
with 3,100 troops and about 700 Indians; while two frigates and six line-of-battle ships guarded
the harbour, the entrance to which was blocked by three sunken frigates. Boscawen's fleet crossed
the Atlantic, and in due course laid siege to Louisburg. Wolfe led the left division of attack,
which may be said to have borne the brunt of the entire siege. A landing was effected on the
8th of June, and during the following seven weeks the operations were almost entirely conducted
by Wolfe, to whose skill and judgment their success is mainly to be attributed. The garrison
surrendered on the 26th of July, and together with sailors and marines, amounting collectively
to 5,637 men, were carried to England as prisoners of war. 15,000 stand of arms and a great
quantity of military stores became the property of the victors; and a glorious array of captured
colours were sent to England, where they were carried in solemn procession through the principal
thoroughfares, and finally placed in St. Paul's Cathedral. The town of Louisburg was reduced
to a heap of ruins. The inhabitants were sent to France in English ships, and the fortifications
were soon after demolished. A few fishermen's huts are all the dwellings to be found on the
site at the present day.

From the moment when the news of the fall of Louisburg reached England, the eyes of the entire
nation were turned upon Pitt and Wolfe, who jointly shared the popular enthusiasm. The lustre
of the British arms--tarnished by so many reverses--began to shine with restored brilliancy,
and the nation rose almost as one man to do honour to the brave young officer whose prowess
and courage had been so signally displayed in its behalf. He returned to England towards the
close of the year, and at once rejoined his regiment. His health had suffered a good deal during
the campaign in America, but this did not prevent his offering his services to Pitt for the
forthcoming campaign in the St Lawrence. His offer was accepted, and he was rewarded with the
rank of Major-General. To him was assigned the command of the land forces; the naval armament
being entrusted to Admiral Saunders.

Before starting on this, his final expedition, he became a suitor to Miss Katherine Lowther,
sister to Sir James Lowther, afterwards Earl of Lonsdale. Her father had formerly been Governor
of Barbadoes, and died in 1745. We have no means of ascertaining when Wolfe first formed the
acquaintance of this lady, but there is no allusion to her in any of his letters written previous
to this time, and it is probable that until his return from America there had been no love
passages between them. His courtship in this instance was successful. What young lady of generous
impulses would be likely to refuse the hand of the brave hero of Louisburg, whose praises were
in everybody's mouth, and who was the favourite of the greatest statesman that ever swayed
the destinies of Great Britain? His suit was accepted, and he carried the lady's portrait with
him across the seas, wearing it next his heart until the evening before his death.

Having got together a staff of officers to his liking, he embarked at Spithead on the 17th
of February, 1759, and reached Halifax on the 30th of April following. Louisburg harbour was
not clear of ice until about the middle of May, when the fleet sailed thither. During his stay
at Louisburg Wolfe received intelligence of the death of his father, who died at Blackheath
on the 26th of March, in the 75th year of his age. The fleet left Louisburg early in June,
and proceeded to the St. Lawrence. Wolfe, in due course, landed on the Isle of Orleans, just
below Quebec, where the troops, to the number of 8,000, were landed without opposition, on
the morning of the 27th of June. Having seen his army encamped, Wolfe set out, accompanied
by his Chief Engineer, and an escort to reconnoitre the enemy's position. Upon reaching the
western point of the island, he was not long in perceiving that Quebec would not fall without
a struggle. The prospect, sufficiently grand at any time, was rendered more than ordinarily
impressive by the warlike preparations to be seen on every hand. In front, on the summit of
Cape Diamond, rose the lofty citadel, with the flag of France fluttering in the breeze. Above,
all the way to Cape Rouge, every landing-place bristled with well-guarded encampments. Below,
on the elevated range extending from the mouth of the River St. Charles to the mouth of the
Montmorenci--a distance of eight miles--was a still more imposing array. Every assailable point
was efficiently guarded by a redoubt. A bridge, protected by tetes de pont, spanned the St.
Charles, and formed a ready means of communication between the garrison and the troops on the
opposite side of the river. The mouth of the stream, just below the citadel, was closed by
a boom, and was further defended by stranded frigates. The natural advantages of the situation
had been enhanced by the highest military skill, and there was not a vulnerable point to be
seen anywhere. The enemy's forces, 12,000 strong, composed of French regulars, Canadian militia,
and a few Indians, were under the direction of the Marquis de Montcalm, one of the most consummate
generals of the age. The position was one which was one which might have well been pronounced
impregnable, and Wolfe could hardly have been censured if he had then and there abandoned all
hope of success.

But there are some men whom no difficulties can discourage, and no danger can daunt. Such a
man was the intrepid young Major-General who had been sent out by Pitt to sound the death-note
of French Dominion in Canada. With a shattered constitution, and a frame already in an advanced
stage of consumption, the indomitable young hero commenced the first moves in that desperate
game which he was finally destined to win at the cost of his own life. The siege lasted nearly
three months, during all of which time, consumed by organic disease, and worn out by long and
uninterrupted service, his dauntless resolution never wholly failed him. For weeks and weeks
his eagle eye, ever on the alert to spy out a vulnerable point in that seemingly immaculate
coat-of-mail, scanned the redoubts from Cape Rouge to the Montmorenci. There was no fool-hardiness--no
wilful throwing away of life--but there was much to be dared, and much to be left to mere chance.
Whenever there seemed to be any, even the slightest, prospect of effecting an opening, that
chance was greedily seized and eagerly acted upon. Contemplated in the light of the grand result,
we are lost in amazement at the indomitable soul of that frail young invalid who, undismayed
by repeated defeat, by conflicting counsels, and by the effect of continued exposure upon his
enfeebled frame, steadfastly persevered in his course until the goal was won. For British dominion
in Canada was established, not by bravery alone. Montcalm's veteran troops were as brave as
those to which they were opposed. Quebec was won by patience, by unceasing vigilance, by military
skill, and by an inward conviction in the breast of the English commander that "All things
are possible to him who will but do his duty, and who knoweth not when he is beaten." The time
was one which called for action and no time was lost in useless deliberation. Wolfe's plan
of attack was soon formed, and he at once proceeded to carry it out. The soldiers were directed
to hold themselves in readiness either to march or fight at the shortest notice. A little before
midnight on the 28th--about thirty hours after the forces had been landed--the sentinel on
the western point of the island perceived certain black objects in the river which were slowly
moving towards the land where he stood. He had no sooner aroused his companions than a tremendous
discharge of artillery took place. The force immediately turned out and prepared for battle,
but no enemy being, visible, it was necessary to wait for daylight. It then appeared that the
French commander had despatched eight fire-ships and rafts, freighted with explosives, towards
the British fleet in the river. These explosives had been launched from the shore in the darkness,
but had been lighted prematurely, and failed to accomplish anything beyond a grand display
of fireworks. Wolfe proceeded with his plans, and on the 30th he issued a proclamation to the
inhabitants, calling upon them to transfer their allegiance, and enjoining upon them that they
should at least preserve a strict neutrality. Monckton, one of Wolfe's Brigadier-Generals,
then crossed over the arm of the river with a strong detachment, took possession of Peint Levi,
threw up entrenchments, and planted batteries along the southern shore. In effecting this manoeuvre
a body of 1,200 Canadians were dislodged and repulsed, and the British gained an advantageous
position for attacking the citadel. Monckton held the position in spite of all Montcalm's efforts
to dislodge him, and on the 13th of July the batteries opened fire from here upon the citadel.
The fleet in the river also opened fire upon the French lines on the northern shore between
Quebec and the Falls of Montmorenci, and under cover of the fire Wolfe landed on the eastern
bank of the Montmorenci River, and intrenched his position there. The shells from the batteries
at Point Levi set fire to the Upper Town of Quebec, whereby the great Cathedral and many other
buildings were destroyed. Hostilities were renewed day by day, and there was great destruction
both of property and of human life; but after weeks of toilsome operation the capture of Quebec
seemed as far off as when the British fleet first arrived in the St. Lawrence. On the night
of the 28th of July, the French made a second attempt to destroy the English fleet with fire-rafts,
but the sailors grappled the rafts before they could reach the fleet and quietly towed them ashore.

Meantime, Wolfe's efforts to decoy Montcalm to emerge from his fastnesses and to enter into
a general engagement were unceasing; but the French General was not to be tempted. Several
British men-of-war sailed up the St. Lawrence, past the city, and got into the upper river.
Wolfe was thus enabled to reconnoitre the country above, the bombardment of the citadel being
kept up almost without intermission. On the 31st, Wolfe, from his camp near the month of the
Montmorenci, made a formidable attack upon the French on the other side of the (Montmorenci)
River, near Beauport. The attack was unsuccessful, and the British were compelled to retire
with considerable loss. Attempts to dislodge the French were made at all points along the river;
but owing to their advantageous position, all such attempts were fruitless, and as the weeks
passed by without securing any decisive advantage to his arms, Wolfe's anxiety became so great
as to bring on a slow fever, which for some days confined him to his bed. As soon as he was
able to drag himself thence he called his chief officers together and submitted to them several
new methods of attack. Most of the officers were of opinion that the attack should be made
above the city, rather than below. Wolfe coincided in this view, and on the 3rd of September
transferred his own camp to Point Levi. Soon afterwards a narrow path, scarcely wide enough
for two men to march abreast, was discovered on the north bank of the St. Lawrence, leading
up the cliffs, about two miles above the city. The spot was known as L'Anse du Foulon, but
has since been known as Wolfe's Cove. Wolfe determined to land his forces here, and under cover
of night, to ascend to the heights above. The heights once reached, it was probable that Montcalm
might hazard a battle. Should he decline to do so, the British troops would at any rate have
gained an advantageous point for a fresh attack upon the citadel.

Having determined upon this line of proceeding, preparations were at once set on foot for carrying
it out. An important point was to keep the French in ignorance of the design, and if possible
to mislead them as to the spot where it was proposed to make the attack. With this view, soundings
were made in the river opposite Beauport, between the mouth of the St. Charles and the Falls
of Montmorenci, as though with the intention of effecting a landing there. The ruse was successful,
and Montcalm's attention was directed to this spot as the probable point which he would soon
have to defend. He hurried down to the entrenchments at Beauport, and made preparations to
oppose the British in their anticipated attempt to land.

On the evening of the 12th of September, several of the heaviest vessels of the British fleet
anchored near Beauport. Boats were lowered, and were soon filled with men, as though it were
intended to effect a landing forthwith. Montcalm's attention having been thus concentrated
upon this point, the smaller vessels sailed up the river past Cape Diamond, and joined the
squadron under Admiral Holmes, which lay near Cape Rouge. The forces on the south bank of the
St. Lawrence simultaneously advanced up the shore from Point Levi, and having arrived opposite
the squadron, were quietly taken on board, where they awaited further orders. Wolfe, with the
germs of a hectic fever still rankling in his blood, was nevertheless actively engaged in reconnoitring
the position both on the river and on land. And now we again meet for a few moments with our
old friend, Mr. John Jervis. Eighteen years have passed over his head since we last met him
in the playground at Greenwich. He is now commander of the Porcupine, one of the sloops of
war in the St. Lawrence. A few weeks before this time he had rendered an essential service
to his old school-fellow, James Wolfe. One of the General's passages up the river had been
made in the Porcupine, and in passing the batteries of the Lower Town of Quebec, the wind had
died away, and the vessel had been driven by the current towards the northern shore. A cannonade
was at once opened upon the vessel from the French batteries, and Wolfe would soon have been
in the hands of the enemy. Jervis proved equal to the occasion. His word of command rang out
to lower the ship's boats. The command was at once obeyed, and the crew soon towed the Porcupine
out of danger. The memory of this event may perhaps have had something to do with Wolfe's conduct
towards his old friend on the evening of this 12th of September. The General sent for young
Jervis, and had a conversation with him upon various private matters. He expressed his conviction
that he would not survive the impending battle, and taking Miss Lowther's picture from his
bosom, he delivered it to Jervis. "If I fall," he said, "let it be given to her with my best
love." Jervis, of course, promised compliance, and the somewhile pupils of, Mr. Swindon bade
each other a last farewell.

The hours intervening between this conference and midnight were chiefly spent by the General
in adding a codicil to his will, and in making a final inspection of arrangements for the proposed
landing at L'Anse du Foulon. The night was calm and beautiful, and as he passed from ship to
ship he commented to the officers on the contrast between the quietness which reigned supreme,
and the resonant roar of battle which would almost certainly be heard there on the morrow.
As he quietly moved about he was heard repeating in a low tone several stanzas of Gray's "Elegy."

The occasion was a solemn one, and he doubtless felt that, for him, the last line had a special
significance at that time. Who shall say what other thoughts filled his breast on that last
evening of his life? Perchance he thought of his mother, of his dead father and brother, and
of her who was pledged to share his name and fame. Let us hope that, in that solemn hour, with
the forebodings of his coming doom strong upon him, he was able to look back upon his life
with a consciousness that he had served his God with at least some measure of the zeal which
he had ever been wont to display in the service of his country. He continued to repeat the
beautiful lines of the poet, down to the concluding words of the epitaph. Then after a brief
pause, turning to his officers:--"Gentlemen," he said, "I would rather be the author of that
piece than take Quebec to-morrow." [Footnote: There is a story to the effect that Wolfe, on
this night, composed the well-known song which bears his name, commencing: "How stands the
glass around?" The story is altogether without foundation, the song having been written and
published long before General Wolfe was born. The poetical talent of the family seems to have
been confined to the Irish branch, one of the members whereof, the Rev. Charles Wolfe, subsequently
won immortality by a single short poem, "The Burial of Sir John Moore."]

But not much time could be given to sentiment. A little after midnight, Wolfe embarked a strong
detachment of forces in flat-bottomed boats, and, placing himself at their head, quietly glided
down the river to L'Anse du Foulon. The spot was soon reached, and the landing was effected
in safety. The cliff here rises almost perpendicularly to a height of 350 feet, and one of
the soldiers was heard to remark that going up there would be like going up the side of a house.
No time was lost, and the ascent of the ravine was at once begun. The enemy had a line of sentinels
all along the top of the cliff, and one of the sentries was stationed at the precise spot where
the British would emerge on the summit. When those who were in the van of ascent had reached
a point about half way up the acclevity, the sentry's attention was aroused by the noise of
scrambling that was necessarily made by the British soldiers. Calling "Qui vive?" down the
cliff, he was answered in French, and, suspecting nothing amiss, he proceeded on his rounds.
Meanwhile the British had not waited to ascend two abreast, but were scrambling up as best
they could. Seizing hold of bushes, roots, and projections of rock, they rapidly scaled the
steep sides of the cliff, and were soon within a few yards of the top. About a hundred of them
made the ascent at a point a few yards further east than the ravine, and directly above their
heads was a sentry-post with five or six French soldiers, who, hearing the noise, began to
peer down the side of the cliff. Darkness prevented their seeing much, but the roots and bushes
seemed all alive, and firing a volley down at random, they took to their heels and fled. The
British vigorously pushed their way up, and were soon on level ground. Long before daylight
4,828 British troops stood upon the Heights of Abraham, commanding the city from the West.
One solitary cannon had been toilsomely dragged up the ravine. It was destined to do good service
against the French troops, and to carry a message of death to their commander, ere many hours
had passed.

The decisive moment was at hand. By this time Wolfe felt certain that the French General would
now emerge from his entrenchments and fight. His conviction proved to be well founded. About
six o'clock in the morning, Montcalm, who had been vigilantly watching during the night for
an attack at Beauport, received the intelligence of Wolfe's manoeuvre. Hastening across the
St. Charles, he hurried along past the northern ramparts of Quebec, and advanced to do battle.
His forces consisted of 7,520 troops, besides 400 Indians. In addition to these, he had a force
of about 1,500 men farther up the river, near Cape Rouge, under H. de Bougainville. Messengers
were dispatched to this officer directing him to hasten to the scene of action and attack the
British in their rear.

The battle began early in the forenoon, when Montcalm's artillery opened fire upon the British.
His force, independently of that under H. de Bougainville, being nearly double that of the
British, he hoped to turn his numerical superiority to account by out-flanking the enemy's
left, and crowding them towards the bank, when he would oppose them to the front and to the
north, while H. de Bougainville would sweep down upon their rear. M. de Bougainville, however,
was slow in arriving, and Montcalm's attack on the north and east was opposed by the British
with such determination that he was compelled to draw back. Then, remustering his troops, he
returned to the charge. This was the decisive moment. The British, by Wolfe's command, threw
themselves on the ground, and though the hot fire of the approaching Frenchmen did terrible
execution among them not a shot was fired in return. On came the foe until they had advanced
to within forty yards of the British. Then Wolfe's voice was suddenly heard above the din of
battle like the note of a clarion. Responsive to his call, the troops rose as one man and poured
in a volley so deadly as to strike even the well-trained veterans of France with awe. Scores
of them fell to rise no more, and hundreds sank wounded on the plain. Such of the terrified
Canadian troops as were able to run, fled in sheer terror. Before the smoke of that terrible
volley had cleared away, Wolfe, his delicate frame trembling with illness, but buoyed up with
the assurance of a glorious victory, placed himself at the head of the Louisburg Grenadiers
and the 28th Regiment, and led them to the fray. Wrapping a handkerchief round his left wrist,
which had just been shattered by a bullet, he continued to advance at the head of his men,
inspiriting them alike by his acts and his deeds. He gave the word to "Charge," and the word
has scarcely passed his lips when he received a bullet in the groin. Staggering under the shock,
he yet continued to advance, though unable to speak above his breath. The battle had not yet
raged more than fifteen minutes, but it was even now virtually decided. The French troops were
utterly disorganized, and fled in all directions. Montcalm, brave to rashness, rode along the
broken ranks, and vainly tried to re-form them. As he continued to harangue them, exposing
himself to the enemy's fire with utter indifference to his own safety, he was struck by a shot
from the solitary gun which the British had been able to drag up the heights. He fell, mortally
wounded; and from that moment there can no longer be said to have been any fighting. It was
a fierce pursuit on the one side and a frantic flight on the other.

Less than three minutes before Montcalm's fall, Wolfe had received a third bullet wound--this
time in the left breast. He leant upon the arm of the nearest officer, saying, "Support me--do
not let my brave fellows see me fall. The day is ours--keep it." He was at once carried to
the rear. Hearing some one giving directions to fetch a surgeon, he murmured, "It is useless--all
is over with me." As his life ebbed away he heard a voice exclaim "They run, they run!" The
words inspired him with temporary animation. Slightly raising his head he asked, "Who--who
run?" "The enemy, sir," was the reply; "they give way everywhere." His head then sank, and
turning slightly on one side, as in a heavy sleep, he was heard to murmur, "Now, God be praised,
I die in peace."

And thus died all that was mortal of James Wolfe. [Footnote: There are various accounts extant
of this closing scene in Wolfe's life, all professing to come more or less directly from eye-witnesses.
No two of them agree in all points, and one of them states that the General never uttered a
syllable after he was carried to the rear. The above is the version generally accepted by historians,
and is supported by the testimony of the most trustworthy of those who were present at the scene.]

Everybody knows the rest of the story; how M. de Bougainville appeared on the field too late
to be of any service; how, seeing what had befallen, he retreated again to Cape Rouge; how
the Marquis de Vaudreuil, the Governor, and his 1,300 Canadians deserted the lines below Quebec,
and made what haste they could to Montreal; how the beleagured garrison, reduced by famine
and slaughter, capitulated on the fifth day after the battle; how a year afterwards Canada
was surrendered to the British Crown; and how the surrender was ratified by the Treaty of Paris
on the 10th of February, 1763.

And Montcalm. He had his wish, expressed shortly after he received his death-wound, and did
not live to see the surrender of the city which he had defended so bravely. The story of his
life and death has been told at length in a previous sketch. At present it is sufficient to
day that he died on the day following the battle, and that he was buried within the precincts
of the Ursuline Convent, on Garden street, Quebec.

The British loss on the Plains of Abraham consisted of 59 killed and 597 wounded. The French
loss was much greater, amounting to about 600 killed and more than 1,000 wounded and taken
prisoners. The death-roll seems wonderfully small when compared with the carnage in many fields
famous in history; but, judged by its results and all the attendant circumstances, the battle
may very properly be numbered among the decisive conflicts of the world.

When intelligence of the death of Wolfe and the fall of Quebec reached England, the enthusiasm
of the people rose to a height which may almost be described as delirious. The effect was much
heightened by the fact that such good news was wholly unexpected; for only three days before,
despatches had arrived from Wolfe wherein it did not appear that he was by any means sanguine
of success. Bonfires blazed from one end of the kingdom to the other, and the streets of the
metropolis were redolent of marrow-bones and cleavers. Persons who had never seen each other
before shook hands, and in some cases even embraced one another, when they met on the streets.
The coffee-houses were thronged with hysteric orators who held forth about the days of chivalry
having come back again. Sermons about the sword of the Lord and of Gideon were heard in churches
and chapels throughout the land. While all these things were passing in nearly every city,
town, and important village in the kingdom, one spot remained unillumined. That spot was Blackheath,
where the hero's mother mourned the loss of her only child--the child to whom, notwithstanding
his delicate health, she had tried to look forward as the stay of her declining years. The
neighbours, one and all, of whatsoever degree, respected her great sorrow, and forbore to take
part in the general rejoicings. We can fancy, too, that there was mourning and desolation at
Raby Castle, the home of the beautiful Miss Lowther.[Footnote: The portrait of this lady confided
by Wolfe to John Jervis on the night of the 12th of September, was subsequently delivered to
her, and she wore it in memory of her dead hero until her marriage, nearly six years afterwards,
to Harry, Sixth and last Duke of Bolton. A man cannot get rid of the responsibility, for his own
actions. And that is clear from the following example. If your officer commands you to kill
your neighbor's child, to kill your father or your mother, would you obey? If you would not obey,
the whole argument falls to the ground, for if you can disobey the governors in one case, where
do you draw the line up to which you can obey them?

There is no line other than that laid down by Christianity, and that line is both reasonable and practicable.

And
therefore we consider it the duty of every man who thinks war inconsistent with Christianity, meekly
but firmly to refuse to serve in the army. And let those whose lot it is to act thus, remember
that the fulfillment of a great duty rests with them. The destiny of humanity in the world depends,
so far as it depends on men at all, on their fidelity to their religion. Let them confess
their conviction, and stand up for it, and not in words alone, but in sufferings too, if need
be. If you believe that Christ forbade murder, pay no heed to the arguments nor to the commands
of those who call on you to bear a hand in it. By such a steadfast refusal to make use of force, you
call down on yourselves the blessing promised to those "who hear these sayings and do them,"
and the time will come when the world will recognize you as having
aided in the reformation of mankind.

           
                
            Musser's book is called "Non-resistance Asserted," or "Kingdom of
Christ and Kingdoms of this World Separated."

 This book is devoted to the same question,
               and was
        written when the American
               Government
     was exacting military service
                from
  its citizens at the time of the Civil War.
      And it has, too, a value for all
    time, dealing with the question how,
              in such
        circumstances, people should
                and
    can refuse to eater military service.
        Here is the tenor of the author's introductory remarks:

"It is well
known that there are many persons in the United States who refuse
to fight on grounds of conscience.

They are called the 'defenseless,' or 'non-resistant' Christians. These Christians refuse to
defend their country, to bear arms, or at the call of government to make war on its enemies.
Till lately this religious scruple seemed a valid excuse to the government, and those who urged
it were let off service. But at the beginning of our Civil War public opinion was agitated on this
subject. It was natural that persons who considered it their duty to bear all the hardships
and dangers of war in defense of their country should feel resentment against those persons who
had for long shared with them the advantages of the protection of government, and who now in
time of need and danger would not share in bearing the labors and
dangers of its defense.

   It was even
     natural
   that they should declare the attitude of such men monstrous, irrational,
and suspicious."

A host of orators and writers, our author tells us, arose to oppose this attitude, and tried to prove
the sinfulness of non- resistance, both from Scripture and on common-sense grounds. And this
was perfectly natural, and in many cases the authors were right--right, that is, in regard to persons
who did not renounce the benefits they received from the government and tried to avoid the hardships
of military service, but not right in regard to the principle of non-resistance itself. Above
all, our author proves the binding nature of the rule of non-resistance for a Christian, pointing
out that this command is perfectly clear, and is enjoined upon every Christian by Christ without
possibility of misinterpretation. "Bethink yourselves whether it is righteous to obey man more
than God," said Peter and John. And this is precisely what ought to be the attitude to every man
who wishes to be Christian to the claim on him for military service,
when Christ has said, "Resist not evil by force."

As for the question of the principle itself, the author regards that as decided. As to the second
question, whether people have the right to refuse to serve in the army who have not refused the
benefits conferred by a government resting on force, the author considers it in detail, and
arrives at the conclusion that a Christian following the law of Christ, since he does not go
to war, ought not either to take advantage of any institutions of government, courts of law,
or elections, and that in his private concerns he must not have recourse to the authorities,
the police, or the law.
 The chance
wayfarer from these western shores who happens to stray within the walk of this majestic specimen
of mediaeval architecture will have some difficulty, for the nonce, in believing in the reality
of such contrivances as steamboats and railways. Certainly it is one of the last places in
the world where one might naturally expect to see anything to remind him of so modern a spot
as the capital of Ontario. But should any Torontonian who is familiar with his country's history
ever find himself within those walls, let him walk down the south aisle till he reaches the
entrance to the little chapel of St. Gabriel. If he will then pass through the doorway into
the chapel and look carefully about him, he will soon perceive something to remind him of his
distant home, and of the Province of which that home is the capital. Several feet above his
head, on the inner wall, he will notice a medallian portrait in bold relief, by Flaxman, of
a bluff, hearty, good-humoured-looking English gentleman, apparently in the prime of life,
and attired in the dress of a Lieutenant-General. His hair, which is pretty closely cut, is
rather inclined to curl--evidently would curl if it were a little longer. Below the medallion
is a mural tablet bearing the following inscription:

"Sacred to the memory of John Graves Simcoe, Lieutenant-General in the army, and Colonel in
the 22nd Regiment of Foot, who died on the 25th day of October, 1806, aged 54. In whose life
and character the virtues of the hero, the patriot, and the Christian were so eminently conspicuous,
that it may justly be said, he served his King and his country with a zeal exceeded only by
his piety towards God."

On the right of the inscription is depicted the figure of an Indian warrior with a conspicuous
scalp-lock. On the left is the figure of a veteran of the Queen's Rangers. To the well-read
spectator, the portrait stands confessed as the likeness of the first Governor of Upper Canada,
and the founder of the Town of York.

Monumental inscriptions, as a rule, are not the most trustworthy authorities whereby one may
be enabled to form an unprejudiced estimate of the moral and intellectual qualities of "those
who have gone before." In visiting any of the noteworthy resting-places of the illustrious
dead, either in the old world or the new, we are not seldom astonished upon reading the sculptured
testimony of the survivors, to find that "'tis still the best that leave us." One may well
wonder, with the Arch-Cynic, where the bones of all the sinners are deposited. In the case
of Governor Simcoe, however, there is much to be said in the way of just commendation, and
the inscription is not so nauseously fulsome us to excite disgust. Toronto's citizens, especially,
should take pleasure in doing honour to his memory. But for him, the capital of the Province
would not have been established here, and the site of the city might long have remained the
primitive swamp which it was when his eyes first beheld it on the morning of the 4th of May, 1793.

His life, from the cradle to the grave, was one of almost uninterrupted activity. He was born
at Cotterstock, Northamptonshire. sometime in the year 1752, and was a soldier by right of
inheritance. His father, Captain John Simcoe, after a life spent in his country's service,
died in the St. Lawrence River, on board H. M. ship Pembroke, of miasmatic disease, contracted
in exploring portions of the adjoining country for military purposes. His death took place
only a few day's before the siege of Quebec, in 1759. He left behind him a widow and two children.
The younger of these children did not long survive his father. The elder who had been christened
John Graves lived to add fresh laurels to the family name, and at the time of his father's
death was in his eighth year. Shortly after the gallant Captain's death his widow removed to
the neighbourhood of Exeter, where the remaining years of her life were passed. Her only surviving
son was sent to one of the local schools until he had reached the age of fourteen, when he
was transferred to Eton. Few reminiscences of his boyish days have come down to us. He appears
to have been a diligent student, more especially in matters pertaining to the history of his
country, and from a very early age he declared his determination to embrace a military life.
From Eton he migrated to Merton College, Oxford, where he continued to pursue his studies until
he had entered upon his nineteenth year, when he entered the army as an ensign in the 35th
regiment of the line. This regiment was despatched across the Atlantic to take part in the
hostilities with the revolted American Colonies, and young Simcoe did his devoirs gallantly
throughout the whole course of the war of Independence. In June, 1775, he found himself at
Boston, and on the 17th of that month he took part in the memorable fight at Bunker Hill. He
subsequently purchased the command of a company in the 40th Regiment, and fought at the battle
of Brandywine, where he was severely wounded. Upon the formation of the gallant, provincial
corps called "The Queen's Rangers," he applied for the command, and as soon as he had recovered
from his wound his application was granted. Under his command, the Rangers did good service
in many engagements, and fought with a valour and discipline which more than once caused them
to be singled out for special mention in the official despatches of the time. Sir Henry Clinton,
Commander-in-chief of the royalist forces in America, in a letter written to Lord George Germaine,
under the date of 13th May, 1780, says that "the history of the corps under his (Simcoe's)
command is a series of gallant, skilful, and successful enterprises. The Queen's Rangers have
killed or taken twice their own numbers."

Upon the close of the war, the Rangers were disbanded, the officers being placed on the half-pay
list. Young Simcoe had meanwhile been promoted to the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel. During the
progress of hostilities he had conceived an intense dislike to the colonists and their political
principles, and the termination of the war caused no change in his sentiments toward them.
This aversion accompanied him through life, and as we shall presently see, was destined to
materially affect his subsequent career. Meanwhile, he returned to England with his constitution
much impaired by the hard service he had undergone. Rest and regular habits, however, soon
enabled him to recover, in a great measure, his wonted vigour. We next hear of him as a suitor
to Miss Gwillim, a near relative of Admiral Graves, Commander of the British fleet during the
early part of the Revolutionary War. The courtship soon terminated in marriage; and not long
afterwards the ambitious young soldier was elected as member of the British House of Commons
for the constituency of St. Maw's, Cornwall. The latter event took place in 1790. During the
following session, Mr. Pitt's Bill for the division of the Province of Quebec into the two
Provinces of Upper and Lower Canada came up for discussion. The member for St. Maw's was a
vehement supporter of the measure, and upon it receiving the royal assent the appointment of
Lieutenant-Governor of the new Province of Upper Canada was conferred upon him. He sailed from
London on the 1st of May, 1792, accompanied by a staff of officials to assist him in conducting
the administration of his Government. His wife, with her little son, accompanied him into his
voluntary exile, and her maiden name is still perpetuated in this Province in the names of
three townships bordering on Lake Simcoe, called respectively North, East, and West Gwillimbury.
The party arrived in Upper Canada on the 8th of June, and after a brief stay at Kingston took
up their abode at Newark, near the mouth of the Niagara River.

What Colonel Simcoe's particular object may have been in accepting the position of Lieutenant-Governor
of such an uninviting wilderness as this Province then was, it is not easy to determine. He
had retained his command in the army, and in addition to his receipts from that source, he
owned valuable estates in Devonshire, from which he must have derived an income far more than
sufficient for his needs. Upper Canada then presented few inducements for an English gentleman
of competent fortune to settle within its limits. Its entire population, which was principally
distributed along the frontier, was not more than 20,000. At Kingston were a fort and a few
houses fit for the occupation of civilized beings. At Newark, there was the nucleus of a little
village on the edge of the forest. Here and there along the St. Lawrence, around the Bay of
Quinte, and along the Niagara frontier, were occasional little clusters of log cabins. In the
interior, except at the old French settlement in the western part of the Province, there was
absolutely nothing that could properly be called a white settlement. Roving tribes of Indians
spread their wigwams for a season along the shores of some of the larger streams, but the following
season would probably find the site without any trace of their presence. A few representatives
of the Six Nations had been settled by Joseph Brant at Mohawk, on the Grand River, and there
were a few Mississaugas near the mouth of the Credit. There was not a single well-constructed
waggon road from one end of the Province to the other. Such was the colony wherein Governor
Simcoe took up his abode with seeming satisfaction. It has been suggested that he must have
been actuated by philanthropic and patriotic motives, and that he was willing to sacrifice
himself for the sake of rendering Upper Canada a desirable place of settlement. Another suggestion
is that he believed the flames of war between Great Britain and her revolted colonies likely
to be re-kindled; in which case, he as Governor of an adjoining colony, which must be the battle-ground,
would necessarily be called upon to play an important part. Whatever his motives may have been,
he came over and administered the government for several years with energy and good judgment.
He selected Newark as his temporary capital, and took up his quarters in an old store-house--upon
which he bestowed the name of Navy Hall--on the outskirts of the village. Here, on the 16th
of January, 1793, was born his little daughter Kate, and here he began to lay the foundation
of the great popularity which he subsequently attained. He cultivated the most friendly relations
with the Indians in the neighbourhood, who soon began to look upon him as their "Great Father."
They conferred upon him Iroquois name of Deyonynhokrawen--"One whose door is always open."
At a grand Council-fire kindled a few weeks after his arrival they conferred upon his little
son Frank the dignity of a chieftain, under the title of "Tioga." The friendliness of the Indians
conduced not little to the Governor's satisfaction: but there were other matters imperatively
demanding his attention. The quality of the land in the interior, and even its external features,
were subjects upon which very little was accurately known. He directed surveys to be made of
the greater part of the country, which was laid out, under his supervision, into districts
and counties. He did what he could to promote immigration, and held out special inducements
to those former residents of the revolted colonies who had remained faithful to Great Britain
during the struggle. These patriots, who are generally known by the name of United Empire Loyalists,
received free grants of land in various parts of the Province, upon which they settled in great
numbers. Free grants were also conferred upon discharged officers and soldiers of the line.
To ordinary emigrants, lands were offered at a nominal price; and under this liberal system
the wilderness soon began to wear a brighter aspect.

About two months after his arrival--that is to say, on the 17th of September, 1792, the first
Provincial Parliament of Upper Canada met at Newark. The House of Assembly consisted of sixteen
representatives chosen by the people; the Upper House of eight representatives appointed for
life by the Governor on behalf of the Crown. This Legislature remained in session nearly a
month, during which time it passed eight Acts, each of which was a great boon to the country,
and reflected credit upon the intelligence and practical wisdom of the members. One of these
Acts introduced the law of England with respect to property and civil rights, in so far as
the same is applicable to the circumstances of a new and sparsely-settled country. Another
established trial by jury. Another provided for the easy collection of small debts. Still another
provided for the erection of gaols, courthouses and such other public buildings as might be
necessary, in each of the four districts (the Eastern, Middle, Home and Western) into which
the Province had been divided. The session closed on the 15th October, when the Governor complimented
the members on their having done so much to promote the public welfare and convenience, and
dismissed them to their homes.

Governor Simcoe was not long in discovering that Newark was not a suitable place for the capital
of the Province. It was not central; and its proximity to the American Fort of Niagara, [Footnote:
This fort was still occupied by British troops, but it was well understood that it would shortly
be surrendered. The surrender took place under Jay's treaty on 1st June, 1796.] on the opposite
bank of the river, was in itself a serious consideration. "The chief town of a Province," said
he, "must not be placed within range of the guns of a hostile fort." As a temporary measure,
he set about the construction of Fort George, on our side of the river, and then began to look
about him for a suitable site for a permanent capital. He spent a good deal of time in travelling
about the country, in order that he might weigh the advantages of different localities after
personal inspection. He travelled through the forest from Newark to Detroit and back--a great
part of the journey being made on foot--and to this expedition the Province is indebted for
the subsequent survey and construction of the well-known "Governor's Road." The site of the
future seat of Government meanwhile remained undecided. Lord Dorchester, the Governor-General,
who had his headquarters at Quebec, urged that Kingston should be selected, but the suggestion
did not accord with Governor Simcoe's views. The question for sometime continued to remain
an open one. Finally, Governor Simcoe, in the course of his travels coasted along the northern
shore of Lake Ontario, and after exploring different points along the route he entered the
Bay of Toronto, and landed, as we have seen on the morning of Saturday, the 4th of May, 1793.
The natural advantages of the place were not to be overlooked, and he was not long in making
up his mind that here should be the future capital of Upper Canada. A peninsula of land extended
out into Lake Ontario, and then came round in a gradual curve, as though for the express purpose
of protecting the basin within from the force of the waves. Here, then, was an excellent natural
harbour, closed in on all sides but one. An expanse of more than thirty miles of water intervened
between the harbour and the nearest point of the territory of the new Republic. Toronto, too,
was accessible by water both from east and west--a point of some importance at a time when
there was no well-built highway on shore. These considerations (and doubtless others) presented
themselves to the Governor's mind, and having come to a decision, he at once set about making
some improvements on the site. To Lieutenant-Colonel Bouchette, he deputed the task of surveying
the harbour. To Mr. Augustus Jones [Footnote: This gentleman's name is familiar to all Toronto
lawyers and others who have had occasion to examine old surveys of the land herebouts. He subsequently
married the daughter of an Indian Chief, and Rev. Peter Jones, the Indian Wesleyan missionary,
was one of the fruits of this marriage.], Deputy Provincial Surveyor, was entrusted the laying
out of the various roads in the neighbourhood. The great thoroughfare to the north called Yonge
street, was surveyed and laid out for the most part under the personal supervision of Governor
Simcoe himself, who named it in honour of his friend, Sir George Yonge, Secretary of War in
the home government. In the course of the following summer, the Governor began to make his
home in his new capital. The village, composed of a few Indian huts near the mouth of the Don,
had theretofore been known by the name of Toronto, having been so called after the old French
fort in the neighbourhood. Discarding this "outlandish" name, as he considered it, he christened
the spot York, in honour of the King's son, Frederick, Duke of York. By this name the place
continued to be known down to the date of its incorporation in 1834, when its former designation
was restored.

At the date of the founding of York, the public press of Upper Canada consisted of a single
demy sheet, called the Upper Canada Gazette, published weekly at Newark. Its circulation varied
from 50 to 150 impressions. It was printed on Thursday, on a little press--the only one in
the Province--which also printed the Legislative Acts and the Govermental proclamations. From
the issue of August 1st, 1793, we learn that, "On Monday evening," which would be July 29th,
"His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor left Navy Hall and embarked on board His Majesty's
schooner the Mississaga, which sailed immediately with a favourable gale for York, with the
remainder of the Queen's Rangers." From this time forward, except during the sitting of the
Legislature, Governor Simcoe make York his headquarters. The Queen's Rangers referred to in
the foregoing extract were a corps which had recently been raised in Upper Canada by the royal
command, and named by the Governor after the old brigade at the head of which he had so often
marched to victory during the war of the Revolution. The first Government House of Toronto
was a somewhat remarkable structure, and deserves a paragraph to itself. When Colonel Simcoe
was about to embark from London to enter upon the duties of his Government in this country,
he accidentally heard of a movable house which had been constructed for Captain James Cook,
the famous circumnavigator of the globe. This house was made of canvas, and had been used by
its former owner as a dwelling in various islands of the southern seas. Governor Simcoe learned
that this strange habitation was for sale, and upon inspecting it he perceived that it might
be turned to good account in the wilds of Upper Canada. He accordingly purchased it, and brought
it across the Atlantic with him. He found no necessity for using it as a dwelling at Newark,
where the storehouse furnished more suitable accommodation; but upon taking up his quarters
at York, Captain Cook's pavilion was brought into immediate requisition. We have been able
to find no very minute account of it; but it must have been large, as he not only used it as
his general private and official residence, but dispensed vice-regal hospitalities within his
canvas walls. It seems to have been a migratory institution, and to have occupied a least half-a-dozen
different sites during its owner's stay at York. At one time it was placed on the edge, and
near the mouth, of the little stream subsequently known as Garrison Creek. At another time
it occupied a plot of ground on or near the present site of Gooderham's distillery. In short,
it seems to have been moved about from place to place in accordance with the convenience or
caprice of the owner and his family.

But there is one spot so intimately associated with Governor Simcoe's residence here that it
is time to give some account of it. Every citizen of Toronto has heard the name of Castle Frank,
and most have some general idea of its whereabouts. It is presumable that the Governor found
his canvas house an insufficient protection against the cold during the winter of 1793-4. Perhaps,
too, (observe please, this is a joke), the idea may have intruded itself upon his mind that
there was a sort of vagabondism in having no fixed place of abode. At any rate, during the
early spring of 1794 he erected a rustic, nondescript sort of log chateau on the steep acclivity
overlooking the valley of the Don, rather more than a mile from the river's mouth. The situation
is one of the most picturesque in the neighbourhood, even at the present day, and there must
have been a wild semi-savagery about it in Governor Simcoe's time that would render it specially
attractive to one accustomed, he had been, to the trim hedges and green lanes of Devonshire.

It must at least have possessed the charm of novelty. When finished, the edifice was a very
comfortable place of abode. From Dr. Scadding's "Toronto of Old" we learn that it was of considerable
dimensions, and of oblong shape. Its walls were composed of "a number of rather small, carefully
hewn logs, of short lengths. The whole wore the hue which unpainted timber, exposed to the
weather, speedily assumes. Christ took his disciples out of the world, he says. They do not expect
worldly blessings and worldly happiness, but they expect eternal life. The Spirit in whom they
live makes them contented and happy in every position. If the world tolerates them, they are
always happy. If the world will not leave them in peace, they will go elsewhere, since they are
pilgrims on the earth and they have no fixed place of habitation. They believe that "the dead
may bury their dead." One thing only is needful for them, "to follow their Master."

Even putting aside the question as to the principle laid down in these
two books as to the Christian's duty in his attitude to war, one cannot
help perceiving the practical importance and the urgent need of deciding
the question.

There are people, hundreds of thousands of Quakers, Mennonites, all our Douhobortsi, Molokani, and others
who do not belong to any definite sect, who consider that the use of force--and, consequently, military
service--is inconsistent with Christianity. Consequently there are every year among us in Russia
some men called upon for military service who refuse to serve on the ground of their religious
convictions. Does the government let them off then? No. Does it compel them to go, and in case
of disobedience punish them? No. This was how the government treated them in 1818. Here is an extract
from the diary of Nicholas Myravyov of Kars, which was not passed by the censor, and is not known
in Russia:

"Tiflis, October 2, 1818.

"In the morning the commandant told me that five peasants belonging to a landowner in the Tamboff
government had lately been sent to Georgia. These men had been sent for soldiers, but they
would not serve; they had been several times flogged and made to run the gauntlet, but they
would submit readily to the cruelest tortures, and even to death, rather than serve. 'Let us
go,' they said, 'and leave us alone; we will not hurt anyone; all men are equal, and the Tzar is a man
like us; why should we pay him tribute; why should I expose my life to danger to kill in battle
some man who has done me no harm? You can cut us to pieces and we will not be soldiers. He who has
compassion on us will give us charity, but as for the government rations, we have not had them
and we do not want to have them' These were the words of those peasants, who declare that
there are numbers like them Russia. They brought them four times before the Committee of Ministers,
and at last decided to lay the matter before the Tzar who gave orders that they should be
taken to Georgia for correction, and commanded the commander-in-chief to send him a report
every month of their gradual success in bringing these peasants to a better mind."

  How the correction ended is not known, as the whole episode indeed
was unknown, having been kept in profound secrecy.

This was how the government behaved seventy-five years ago--this is how it has behaved in a
great cumber of cases, studiously concealed from the people. And this is how the government behaves
now, except in the case of the German Mennonites, living in the province of Kherson, whose plea
against military service is considered well grounded. They are made to work off their term of
service in labor in the forests.

But in the recent cases of refusal on the part of Mennonites to serve in the army on religious grounds, the
government authorities have acted in the following manner:

To begin
with, they have recourse to every means of coercion used in our times
to "correct" the culprit and bring him to "a better mind," and these
measures are carried out with the greatest secrecy. I know that in
the case of one man who declined to serve in 1884 in Moscow, the official
correspondence on the subject had two months after his refusal accumulated
into a big folio, and was kept absolutely secret among the Ministry.

In less than a month from the time of his arrival at York, Governor Simcoe was compelled to
return for a short time to Newark in order to attend the second session of the Legislature,
which had been summoned to meet on the 31st of May. During this session thirteen useful enactments
were added to the statute book, the most important of which prohibited the introduction of
slaves into the Province, and restricted voluntary contracts of service to a period of nine
years. After the close of the session the Governor returned to York, and proceeded with the
improvements which had already been commenced there, under his auspices. The erection of buildings
for the accomodation of the Legislature was begun near the present site of the old gaol on
Berkeley street, in what is now the far eastern part of the city. Hereabouts various other
houses sprang up, and the town of York began to be something more than a name. It laboured
under certain disadvantages, however, and its progress for some time was slow. A contemporary
authority describes it as better fitted for a frog-pond or a beaver-meadow than for the residence
of human beings. It was on the road to nowhere, and its selection by Governor Simcoe as the
provincial capital was disapproved of by many persons, and more especially by those who had
settled on the Niagara peninsula. Lord Dorchester, the Governor-General, opposed the selection
by every means in his power. In civil matters relating to his Province, Governor Simcoe's authority
was paramount; that is to say, he was only accountable to the Home Government; but the revenue
of the Province was totally inadequate for its maintenance, and it was necessary to draw on
the Home Government for periodical supplies. In this way, Lord Dorchester, who, from his high
position, had great influence with the British Ministry, had it in his power to indirectly
control, to some extent, the affairs of Upper Canada. He was, moreover, Commander-in-Chief
of British North America, and as such had full control over the armaments. He determined that
Kingston should at all events be the principal naval and military station on Lake Ontario,
and this determination he carried out by establishing troops and vessels of war there. The
military and naval supremacy then conferred upon Kingston has never been altogether lost.

There were other difficulties too, which began to stare Governor Simeoe in the face about this
time. The nominal price at which land had been disposed of to actual settlers had caused a
great influx of immigrants into the Province from the American Republic. To so great an extent
did this immigration proceed that the Governor began to fear lest the American element in the
Province might soon be the preponderating one. Should such a state of things come about, invasion
or annexation would only be a matter of time. His hatred to the citizens of the Republic was
intense, and coloured the entire policy of his administration. In estimating their political
and national importance he was apt to be guided by his prejudices rather than by his convictions.
In a letter written to a friend about this time, he expressed his opinion that "a good navy
and ten thousand men would knock the United States into a nonentity." As the ten thousand men
were not forthcoming, however, he deemed it judicious to guard against future aggression. The
north shore of Lake Erie was settled by a class of persons whom he knew to be British to the
core. This set him reflecting upon the advisability of establishing his capital in the interior;
and within easy reach of these settlers, who would form an efficient militia in case of an
invasion by the United States. He finally pitched upon the present site of London, and resolved
that in the course of a few years the seat of government should be removed thither. This resolution,
however, was never carried out. He did not even remain in the country long enough to see the
Government established at York, which did not take place until the spring of 1797. In 1796
he received an appointment which necessitated his departure for the Island of St. Domingo,
whither he repaired with his family the same year. Various reasons have been assigned for this
appointment. The opposition of Lord Dorchester, we think, affords a sufficient explanation,
without searching any farther. It has also been alleged that his policy was so inimical to
the United States that the Government of that country complained of him at headquarters, and
thus determined the Home Ministry, as a matter of policy, to find some other field for him.
After his departure, the administration was carried on by the Honourable Peter Russell, senior
member of the Executive Council, until the arrival of Governor Peter Hunter, in 1799.

Two years before his removal from Canada, Governor Simcoe had been promoted to the rank of
Major-General. He remained at St. Domingo only a few months, when he retired to private life
on his Devonshire estates. In 1798 he became Lieutenant-General, and in 1801 was entrusted
with the command of the town of Plymouth, in anticipation of an attack upon that place by the
French fleet. The attack never took place, and his command proved a sinecure. From this time
forward we have but meagre accounts of him until a short time before his death, which, as the
monumental tablet has already informed us, took place on the 25th of October, 1806. During
the summer of that year he had been fixed upon as Commander-in-Chief of the East Indian forces,
as successor to Lord Lake. Had his life been spared he would doubtless have been raised to
the peerage and sent out to play his part in the history of British India. But these things
were not to be. Late in September he was detached to accompany the Earl of Rosslyn on an expedition
to the Tagus, to join the Earl of St. Vincent; an invasion of Portugal by France being regarded
as imminent. Though fifty-four years of age, he sniffed the scent of battle as eagerly as he
had done in the old days of the Brandy wine, and set out on the expedition in high spirits.
The vessel in which he embarked had just been repainted, and he had scarcely got out of British
waters before he was seized with a sudden and painful illness, presumed to have been, induced
by the odour of the fresh paint. The severity of his seizure was such as to necessitate his
immediate return. Upon landing at Torbay, not far from his home, he was taken very much worse,
and died within a few hours. He was buried in a little chapel on his own estates, and the tablet
in Exeter Cathedral was shortly afterwards erected in his honour.

But we Canadians have more enduring memorials of his presence among us than any monumental
tablet can supply; and unless the topographical features of this Province should undergo some
radical transformation, the name of Governor Simcoe is not likely to be soon forgotten in our
midst. The large and important county of Simcoe, together with the lake, the shores whereof
form part of its eastern boundary; the county town of the County of Norfolk; and a well-known
street in Toronto--all these remain to perpetuate the name of the first Governor of Upper Canada.
It is well that such tributes to his worth should exist among us, for he wrought a good work
in our Province, and deserves to be held in grateful remembrance. He was not a man of genius.
He was not, perhaps, a great man in any sense of the word; but he was upon the whole a wise
and beneficent administrator of civil affairs, and was ever wont to display a generous zeal
for the progress and welfare of the land which he governed. When we contrast his conduct of
the administration with that of some of his successors, we feel bound to speak and think of
him with all kindness.

The portrait which accompanies this sketch is engraved by kind permission of Dr. Scadding,
from the frontispiece to his work, 'Toronto of old,' which was copied from a miniature obtained
by the author from Captain J. K. Simcoe, a grandson of the Governor, and the present occupant
of the family estates. The copy is a remarkably faithful one, and the authenticity of the original,
coming, from such a source is beyond dispute.

The name "Castle Frank," as applied to the site of Governor Simcoe's abode, requires some explanation,
as the original castle is not now in existence. After General Simcoe's departure from the Province,
his rustic chateau was never used by any one as a permanent abode. Several of his successors
in office, however, as well as various ether residents of York, used occasionally to resort
to it as a kind of camping ground in the summer time, and it soon came into vogue for pic-nic
excursions. Captain John Denison, a well-known resident of Little York, seems to have taken
up his quarters in it for a few weeks, but not with any intention of permanently residing there.
In. or about the month of June, 1829, the building was wantonly set on fire by some fisherman
who had sailed up the Don. The timber was dry, and the edifice was soon burned to the ground.
It has never been replaced, but the name of Castle Frank survives in that of the residence
of Mr. Walter McKenzie, situated about a hundred yards distant. It is commonly applied, indeed,
to all the adjoining heights; and on a pleasant Sunday afternoon in spring or summer, multitudes
of Toronto's citizens repair thither for fresh air and a picturesque view. The route is through
St. James' Cemetery, and thence through the shady ravine and up the hill beyond. Very few persons,
we believe, could point out the exact site of the old "castle." It is, however easily discoverable
by any one who chooses to search for it. A few yards to the right of the fence which is the
boundary line between St. James' Cemetery and Mr. McKenzie's property is a slight depression
in the sandy soil. That depression marks the site of the historic Castle Frank. It should be
mentioned, however, that no curious citizen can legally gratify his desire to behold this momento
of the past without first obtaining Mr. McKenzie's permission, as the site belongs to him,
and cannot be reached from the cemetery without scaling the fence.

Besides his son Frank, whose death is recorded in the foregoing sketch. General Simcoe left
behind him a younger son, Henry Addington Simcoe, christened after the eminent statesman who
subsequently became Lord Sidmouth. The younger son took orders, and officiated for some years
as a clergyman in the West of England. After the death of his brother in the breach at Badajos,
he succeeded to the family estates; and in his turn was succeeded by his son, Captain J. K.
Simcoe, above mentioned.

THE HON. ROBERT BALDWIN.

The life of Robert Baldwin forms so important an ingredient in the political history of this
country that we deem it unnecessary to offer any apology for dealing with it at considerable
length. More especially is this the case, inasmuch as, unlike most of the personages included
in the present series, his career is ended, and we can contemplate it, not only with perfect
impartiality, but even with some approach to completeness. The twenty and odd years which have
elapsed since he was laid in his grave have witnessed many and important changes in our Constitution,
as well as in our habits of thought; but his name is still regarded by the great mass of the
Canadian people with feelings of respect and veneration. We can still point to him with the
admiration due to a man who, during a time of the grossest political corruption, took a foremost
part in our public affairs, and who yet preserved his integrity untarnished. But here was another
case: an attack by a secret, sober, malevolent band, who in cold blood approached to demolish
the company works. Not liquor moved them on their mission, but money--money paid by his arch enemies.
The men were simply hired tools, brazenly indifferent no doubt to crimes, desperate in character
certainly, for a handful of coins ready to wipe out a million dollars' worth of property and effort.
Such deserved no consideration or quarter.

Weir proposed to give none. With enemies of this kind he had but one policy, strike first and
strike with deadly force. One does not seek to dissuade a rattlesnake; one promptly stamps
it under heel. One cannot compromise with ravenous wolves; one shoots them down. One does not
wait to see how far a treacherous foe will go; one forestalls and
crushes him before he begins.

Moreover, if wise, one does it in such fashion that the enemy will not arise from the blow.

With
the information given him by the guard posted at the spring Weir immediately grasped the true
nature of the plot. The "whiskey party" was but a means of withdrawing the workmen from the
scene, of weakening the camp, while a picked company of ruffians wrecked the property. It was
an assault intended to wipe out the works and end construction, coincident with his arrest. Both
the company and he were to pay the penalty for resisting the powers that rule San Mateo. And if
the tale were spread that the destruction had been wrought by his workmen while drunk, who
would doubt it?

Like shadows the band of Mexican desperadoes would come, dynamite the dam, fire the buildings,
stampede the horses, and like shadows vanish again. In the unexpectedness of the raid, in the
confusion, in the dim light, no one would with certainty be able to say who the assailants were.
A scheme ferocious in its conception and diabolical in its cunning! But there was one flaw--the
element of chance. Chance had given Weir warning.

A strong man warned is a strong man armed.

As the engineer stood in the office, swiftly measuring the imminent menace of which he had just
been told, calculating the meager instruments of defense at hand, his mind sweeping up all the
salient aspects, features, advantages and disadvantages of the situation, he seized on the
one weak spot in the attacking party's plan. At that spot he would strike.

So giving Johnson and Madden the order to take charge of the little handful of guards, he had
plunged out into the night.

The men from the bunk-house were already running toward the office, before the door of which
the rancher gathered them together to make sure of their arms and ammunition. All told, when Martinez
and Pollock presently came from the store with guns, the little party numbered eleven.

"Is this all there are of us?" Dr. Hosmer asked.
"We are worth all that crowd that's coming," Johnson exclaimed, taking
a spare gun Martinez had brought him.

"Did Weir send the rest of
the engineers down to that house? I understood so."

"That's where
they are, I reckon."

Dr. Hosmer considered for a minute.

"I can
be there in five minutes in my car. The road is on the north side
of the stream, as is this camp: the gang that's heading here to blow
things up is coming up from the south, so it will not block the way.
Men could be here in twenty minutes from down yonder by running."

"A
good suggestion, doctor," Pollock said. "It may take you a bit longer
to find and tell them what's occurring, but even so they may return
in time. Fifty, or even twenty, might give us enough assistance to
beat off the attack."

"There comes the moon," said the man who had
been at the spring. "They must be near now."

Far in the east the
moon was stealing above the horizon. Responsible government, it is said, would have become an
accomplished fact, even if Robert Baldwin had never lived. Other much-needed reforms with which
his name is inseparably associated would have come, it is contended, all in good time, and
this present year, 1880, would have found us pretty much where we are. To argue after this
fashion is simply to beg the whole question at issue. It is true that there is no occult power
in a mere name. Ship-money, doubtless, was a doomed impost, even if there had been no particular
individual called John Hampden. The practical despotism of the Stuart dynasty would doubtless
have come to an end long before the present day, even if Oliver Cromwell and William of Orange
had never existed. In the United States, slavery was a fated institution, even if there had
been no great rebellion, and if Abraham Lincoln had never occupied the Presidential chair.
But it would be a manifest injustice to withhold from those illustrious personages the tribute
due to their great and, on the whole, glorious lives. They were the media whereby human progress
delivered its message to the world, and their names are deservedly held in honour and reverence
by a grateful posterity. Performing on a more contracted stage, and before a less numerous
audience, Robert Baldwin, fought his good fight--and won. Surrounded by inducements to prove
false to his innate convictions, he nevertheless chose to encounter obloquy and persecution
for what he knew to be the cause of truth and justice.

  "Once to every man and nation
  Comes the moment to decide,"

says Professor Lowell. The moment came to Robert Baldwin early in life. It is not easy to believe
that he ever hesitated as to his decision; and to that decision he remained true to the latest
hour of his existence. If it cannot in strictness be said of him that he knew no variableness
or shadow of turning, it is at least indisputable that his convictions never varied upon any
question of paramount importance. What Mr. Goldwin Smith has said of Cromwell might with equal
truth, be applied to Robert Baldwin: "He bore himself, not as one who gambled for a stake,
but as one who struggled for a cause." These are a few among the many claims which Robert Baldwin
has upon the sympathies and remembrances of the Canadian people; and they are claims which,
we believe, posterity will show no disposition to ignore.

In order, to obtain a clear comprehension of the public career of Robert Baldwin ft is necessary
to glance briefly at the history of one or two of his immediate ancestors. In compiling the
present sketch the writer deems it proper to say that he some time since wrote an account of
Robert Baldwin's life for the columns of an influential newspaper published in Toronto. That
account embodied the result of much careful and original investigation. It contained, indeed,
every important fact readily ascertainable with reference to Mr. Baldwin's early life. So far
as that portion of it is concerned there is little to be added at the present time, and the
writer has drawn largely upon it for the purposes of this memoir. The former account being
the product of his own conscientious labour and investigation, he has not deemed it necessary
to reconstruct sentences and paragraphs where they, already clearly expressed his meaning.
With reference to Mr. Baldwin's political life, however, the present sketch embodies the result
of fuller and more accurate information, and is conceived in a spirit which the exigencies
of a newspaper do not admit of.

At the close of the Revolution which ended in the independence of the United States, there
resided near the City of Cork, Ireland, a gentleman named William Wilcocks. He belonged to
an old family which had once been wealthy, and which was still in comfortable circumstances.
About this time a strong tide of emigration set in from various parts of Europe to the New
World. The student of history does not need to be informed that there was at this period a
good deal of suffering and discontent in Ireland. The more radical and, uncompromising among
the malcontents staid at home, hoping for better times, many of them eventually took part in
the troubles of '98. Others sought a peaceful remedy for the evils under which they groaned,
and, bidding adieu to their native land, sought an asylum for themselves, and their families
in the western wilderness. The success of the American Revolution combined with the hard times
at home to make the United States "the chosen land" of many thousands of these self-expatriated
ones. The revolutionary struggle was then a comparatively recent affair. The thirteen revolted
colonies had become an independent nation, had started on their national career under favourable
auspices, and had already become a thriving and prosperous community. The Province of Quebec,
which then included the whole of what afterwards became Upper and Lower Canada, had to contend
with many disadvantages, and its condition was in many important respects far behind that of
the American Republic. Its climate was much more rigorous than was that of its southern neighbour,
and its territory was much more sparsely settled. The western part of the Province, now forming
part of the Province of Ontario, was especially thinly peopled, and except at a few points
along the frontier, was little better than a wilderness. It was manifestly desirable to offer
strong incentives to immigration, with a view to the speedy settlement of the country. To effect
such a settlement was the imperative duty of the Government of the day, and to this end, large
tracts of land were allotted to persons whose settlement here was deemed likely to influence
colonization. Whole townships were in some cases conferred, upon condition that the grantees
would settle the same with a certain number of colonists within a reasonable time. One of these
grantees was the William Willcocks above mentioned, who was a man of much enterprise and philanthropy.
He conceived the idea of obtaining a grant of a large tract of land, and of settling it with
emigrants of his own choosing, with himself as a sort of feudal proprietor at their head. With
this object in view he came out to Canada in or about the year 1790, to spy out the land, and
to judge from personal inspection which would be the most advantageous site for his projected
colony. In setting out upon this quest he enjoyed an advantage greater even than was conferred
by his social position. A cousin of his, Mr. Peter Russell, a member of the Irish branch of
the Bedfordshire family of Russell, had already been out to Canada, and had brought home glowing
accounts of the prospects held out there to persons of capital and enterprise. Mr. Russell
had originally gone to America during the progress of the Revolutionary War, in the capacity
of Secretary to Sir Henry Clinton, Commander-in-chief of the British forces on this continent.
He had seen and heard enough to convince him that the acquisition of land in Canada was certain
to prove a royal road to wealth. After the close of the war he returned to the Old Country,
and gave his relatives the benefit of his experience. Mr. Russell also came out to Canada with
Governor Simcoe in 1792, in the capacity of Inspector-General. He subsequently held several
important, offices of trust in Upper Canada. He became a member of the Executive Council, and
as the senior member of that body the administration, of the Government devolved upon him during
the three years (1796-1799) intervening between Governor Simcoe's departure from Canada, and
the appointment of Major-General Peter Hunter as Lieutenant-Governor. His residence in Canada,
as will presently be seen, was destined to have an important bearing on the fortunes of the
Baldwin family. Meanwhile, it is sufficient to note the fact that it was largely in consequence
of the valuable topographical and statistical information, furnished by him to his cousin William
Willcocks that the latter was induced to set out on his preliminary tour of Asenation.

The result of this preliminary tour was to convince Mr. Willcocks that his cousin had not overstated
the capabilities of the country, as to the future of which he formed the most sanguine expectations.
The next step to be taken was to obtain his grant; and, as his political influence in and around
his native city was considerable, he conceived that this would be easily managed. He returned
home, and almost immediately afterwards crossed over to England, where he opened negotiations
with the Government. After some delay he succeeded in obtaining a grant of a large tract of
land forming part of the present Township of Whitchurch, in the County of York. In consideration
of this liberal grant he on his part agreed to settle not fewer than sixty colonists on the
laud so granted within a certain specified time. An Order in Council confirmatory of this arrangement
seems to have been passed. The rest of the transaction is involved in some obscurity. Mr. Willcocks
returned to Ireland, and was soon afterwards elected Mayor of Cork--an office which he had
held at least once before his American tour. Municipal and other affairs occupied so much of
his time that he neglected to take steps for settling his trans-Atlantic domain until the period
allowed him by Government for that purpose had nearly expired. However, in course of time--probably
in the summer of 1797--he embarked with the full complement of emigrants for New York, whither
they arrived after a long and stormy voyage. They pushed on without unnecessary delay, and
in due coarse arrived at Oswego, where Mr. Willcocks received the disastrous intelligence that
the Order in Council embodying his arrangement with the Government had been revoked.

Why the revocation took place does not appear, as no change of Government had taken place,
and the circumstances had not materially changed. Whatever the reason may have been the consequences
to Mr. Willcocks and his emigrants were very serious. The poor Irish families who had accompanied
him to the New World--travel-worn and helpless, in a strange land, without means, and without
experience in the hard lines of pioneer life--were dismayed at the prospect before them. Mr.
Wilcocks, a kind and honourable man, naturally felt himself to be in a manner responsible for
their forlorn situation. He at once professed his readiness to bear the expense of their return
to their native land. Most of them availed themselves of this offer, and made the best of their
way back to Ireland--some of them, doubtless, to take part in the rising of '98. A few of them
elected to remain in America, and scattered themselves here and there throughout the State
of New York. Mr. Wilcocks himself, accompanied by one or two families, continued his journey
to Canada, where he soon succeeded in securing a considerable allotment of land in Whitchurch
and elsewhere. It is probable that he was treated liberally by the Government, as his generosity
to the emigrants had greatly impoverished him, and it is certain that a few years later he
was the possessor of large means. Almost immediately after his arrival in Canada he took up
his abode at York, where he continued to reside down to the time of his death. Being a man
of education and business capacity he was appointed Judge of the Home District Court, where
we shall soon meet him again in tracing the fortunes of the Baldwin family. He had not been
long in Canada before he wrote home flattering reports about the land of his adoption to his
old friend Robert Baldwin, the grandfather of the subject of this sketch. Mr. Baldwin was a
gentleman of good family and some means, who owned and resided on a small property called Summer
Hill, or Knockmore, near Cairagoline, in the County of Cork. Influenced by the prospects held
out to him by Mr. Willcocks, he emigrated to Canada with his family in the summer of 1798,
and settled on a block of land on the north shore of Lake Ontario, in what is now the Township
of Clarke, in the County of Durham. He named his newly-acquired estate Annarva (Ann's Field),
and set about clearing and cultivating it. The western boundary of his farm was a small stream
much until then was nameless, but which has ever since been known in local parlance as Baldwin's
Creek. Here he resided for a period of fourteen years, when he removed to York, where he died
in the year 1816. He had brought with him from Ireland two sons and four daughters. The eldest
son, William Warren Baldwin, was destined to achieve considerable local renown as a lawyer
and a politician. He was a man of versatile talents, and of much firmness and energy of character.
He had studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh, and had graduated there two years before
his emigration, but had never practised his profession as a means of livelihood. He had not
been many weeks in this country before he perceived that his shortest way to wealth and influence
was by way of the legal rather than the medical profession. In those remote times, men of education
and mental ability were by no means numerous in Upper Canada. Every man was called upon to
play several parts, and there was no such organization of labour as exists in older and more
advanced communities. Dr. Baldwin resolved to practice both professions, and, in order to fit
himself for the one by which he hoped to rise most speedily to eminence, he bade adieu to the
farm on Baldwin's Creek and came up to York. He took up his quarters with his father's friend
and his own, Mr. Willcocks, who lived on Duke street, near the present site of the La Salle
Institute. In order to support himself while prosecuting his legal studies, he determined to
take in a few pupils. In several successive numbers of the Gazette and Oracle--the one newspaper
published in the Province at that time--we find in the months of December, 1802, and January,
1803, the following advertisement:--"Dr. Baldwin, understanding that some of the gentlemen
of this town have expressed some anxiety for the establishment of a Classical School, begs
leave to inform them and the public that he intends, on Monday, the first day of January next,
to open a School, in which he will instruct Twelve Boys in Writing, Reading, Classics and Arithmetic.
The terms are, for each boy, eight guineas per annum, to be paid quarterly or half-yearly;
one guinea entrance and one cord of wood to be supplied by each of the boys on opening the
School. N.B.--Mr. Baldwin will meet his pupils at. Mr. Willcocks' house on Duke street. York,
December 18th, 1802." This advertisement produced the desired effect. The Doctor got all the
pupils he wanted, and several youths, who, in after life; rose to high eminence in the colony,
received their earliest classical teaching from him. 

CHASTELARD. I pray you, madam, Bear with me a brief space and let me speak. I will not touch
your garments even, nor speak But in soft wise, and look some other way, If that it like you;
for I came not here For pleasure of the eyes; yet, if you will, Let me look on you.

QUEEN. As you will, fair sir. Give me that coif to gather in my hair-- I thank you--and my girdle-nay,
that side. Speak, if you will; yet if you will be gone, Why, you shall go, because I hate
you not. You know that I might slay you with my lips, With calling out? but I will hold my peace.

CHASTELARD.
Yea, do some while. I had a thing to say; I know not wholly what thing. O my sweet, I am come
here to take farewell of love That I have served, and life that I have lived Made up of love, here
in the sight of you That all my life's time I loved more than God, Who quits me thus with bitter
death for it. For you well know that I must shortly die, My life being wound about you as it
is, Who love me not; yet do not hate me, sweet, But tell me wherein I came short of love; For
doubtless I came short of a just love, And fell in some fool's fault that angered you. Now
that I talk men dig my grave for me Out in the rain, and in a little while I shall be thrust
in some sad space of earth Out of your eyes; and you, O you my love, A newly-wedded lady full
of mirth And a queen girt with all good people's love, You shall be fair and merry in all your
days. Is this so much for me to have of you? Do but speak, sweet: I know these are no words A man should
say though he were now to die, But I am as a child for love, and have No strength at heart;
yea, I am afraid to die, For the harsh dust will lie upon my face Too thick to see you past.
Look how I love you; I did so love you always, that your face Seen through my sleep has wrung mine
eyes to tears For pure delight in you. Why do you thus? You answer not, but your lips curl in
twain And your face moves; there, I shall make you weep And be a coward too; it were much best
I should be slain.

QUEEN. Yea, best such folk were slain; Why should they live to cozen fools with lies? You would
swear now you have used me faithfully; Shall I not make you swear? I am ware of you: You will
not do it; nay, for the fear of God You will not swear. Come, I am merciful; God made a foolish
woman, making me, And I have loved your mistress with whole heart; Say you do love her, you
shall marry her And she give thanks: yet I could wish your love Had not so lightly chosen forth
a face; For your fair sake, because I hate you not.

CHASTELARD. What is to say? why, you do surely know That since my days were counted for a man's I
have loved you; yea, how past all help and sense, Whatever thing was bitter to my love, I
have loved you; how when I rode in war Your face went floated in among men's helms, Your voice
went through the shriek of slipping swords; Yea, and I never have
loved women well, Seeing always in my sight I had your lips Curled
over, red and sweet; and the soft space Of carven brows, and splendor
of great throat Swayed lily-wise; what pleasure should one have To
wind his arms about a lesser love?

I have seen you; why, this were joy enough For God's eyes up in heaven, only to see And to come never
nearer than I am. Why, it was in my flesh, my bone and blood, Bound in my brain, to love you; yea,
and writ All my heart over: if I would lie to you I doubt I could not lie. Ah, you see now,
You know now well enough; yea, there, sweet love, Let me kiss there.

QUEEN. I love you best of them. Clasp me quite round till your lips cleave on mine, False mine,
that did you wrong. Forgive them dearly As you are sweet to them; for by love's love I am not
that evil woman in my heart That laughs at a rent faith. O Chastelard, Since this was broken
to me of your new love I have not seen the face of a sweet hour. Nay, if there be no pardon in
a man, What shall a woman have for loving him? Pardon me, sweet.

CHASTELARD. Yea, so I pardon you, And this side now; the first way. Would God please To slay me
so! who knows how he might please? Now I am thinking, if you know it not, How I might kill you, kiss
your breath clean out, And take your soul to bring mine through to God, That our two souls
might close and be one twain Or a twain one, and God himself want skill To set us either severally
apart. O, you must overlive me many years. And many years my soul be in waste hell; But when
some time God can no more refrain To lay death like a kiss across your lips, And great lords
bear you clothed with funeral things, And your crown girded over deadly brows, Then after
you shall touch me with your eyes, Remembering love was fellow with my flesh Here in sweet earth,
and make me well of love And heal my many years with piteousness. It was no uncommon occurrence in those early days, when surgeons were scarce in our
young capital, for him to be compelled to leave court in the middle of a trial, and to hurry
away to splice a broken arm or bind up a fractured limb. Years afterwards, when he had retired
from the active practice of all his professions, he used to cite a somewhat ludicrous instance
of his professional versatility. It occurred soon after his marriage. He was engaged in arguing
a case of some importance before his father-in-law, Judge Willcocks, in the Home District Court,
when a messenger hurriedly arrived to summon him to attend at the advent of a little stranger
into the world. The circumstances were, explained to the Judge, and--it appearing that no other
surgical aid was to be had at the moment--that functionary readily consented to adjourn the
further consideration of the argument until Dr. Baldwin's return. The latter hurriedly left
the court-room with the messenger, and after the lapse of somewhat more than an hour, again
presented himself and prepared to resume his interrupted argument. The Judge ventured to express
a hope that matters had gone well with the patient; whereupon the Doctor replied, "Quite well.
I have much pleasure in informing your Honour that a man-child has been born into the world
during my absence, and that both he and his mother are doing well." The worthy Doctor received
the congratulations of the Court, and was permitted to conclude his argument without any further
demands upon his surgical skill.

Almost from the outset of his professional career, Dr. Baldwin took a strong interest in political
matters. The fact that he was compelled to earn his living by honest labour, excluded him from
a certain narrow section of the society of Little York. The society from which he was excluded,
however, was by no means of an intellectual cast, and it is not likely that he sustained much
loss by his exclusion. By intellectual society in Toronto, he was regarded as a decided acquisition.
He could well afford to despise the petty littleness of the would-be aristocrats of the Provincial
capital. Still, it is probable that his political convictions were intensified by observing
that, among the members of the clique above referred to; mere merit was regarded as a commodity
of little account. He became known for a man of advanced ideas, and was not slow in expressing
his disapprobation of the way in which government was carried on whenever a more than ordinarily
flagrant instance of injustice occurred. In 1812, he became treasurer of the law Society of
Upper Canada, and while filling that position, he projected a scheme for constructing a suitable
building for the Society's occupation. The times, however, were impropitious for such a scheme,
which fell through in consequence of the impending war with the United States.

