God let the suffering old man go through with it up to the point where He knew there would
be no retreat, and then forbade him to lay a hand upon the boy. To the wondering patriarch
He now says in effect, "It's all right, Abraham. I never intended that you should actually
slay the lad. I only wanted to remove him from the temple of your heart that I might reign
unchallenged there. I wanted to correct the perversion that existed in your love. Now you may
have the boy, sound and well. Take him and go back to your tent.

The old man of God lifted his head to respond to the Voice, and stood there on the mount strong
and pure and grand, a man marked out by the Lord for special treatment, a friend and favorite
of the Most High. Now he was a man wholly surrendered, a man utterly obedient, a man who possessed
nothing. He had concentrated his all in the person of his dear son, and God had taken it from
him. God could have begun out on the margin of Abraham's life and worked inward to the center;
He chose rather to cut quickly to the heart and have it over in one sharp act of separation.
In dealing thus He practiced an economy of means and time. It hurt cruelly, but it was effective.

I have said that Abraham possessed nothing. Yet was not this poor man rich? Everything he had
owned before was his still to enjoy: sheep, camels, herds, and goods of every sort. He had
also his wife and his friends, and best of all he had his son Isaac safe by his side. He had
everything, but he possessed nothing. There is the spiritual secret. There is the sweet theology
of the heart which can be learned only in the school of renunciation. The books on systematic
theology overlook this, but the wise will understand.

After that bitter and blessed experience I think the words "my" and "mine" never had again
the same meaning for Abraham. The sense of possession which they connote was gone from his
heart. Things had been cast out forever. They had now become external to the man. His inner
heart was free from them. The world said, "Abraham is rich," but the aged patriarch only smiled.
He could not explain it to them, but he knew that he owned nothing, that his real treasures
were inward and eternal.

There can be no doubt that this possessive clinging to things is one of the most harmful habits
in the life. Because it is so natural it is rarely recognized for the evil that it is; but
its outworkings are tragic.

We are often hindered from giving up our treasures to the Lord out of fear for their safety;
this is especially true when those treasures are loved relatives and friends. But we need have
no such fears. Our Lord came not to destroy but to save. Everything is safe which we commit
to Him, and nothing is really safe which is not so committed.

Our gifts and talents should also be turned over to Him. They should be recognized for what
they are, God's loan to us, and should never be considered in any sense our own. We have no
more right to claim credit for special abilities than for blue eyes or strong muscles.

The Christian who is alive enough to know himself even slightly will recognize the symptoms
of this possession malady, and will grieve to find them in his own heart. If the longing after
God is strong enough within him he will want to do something about the matter. Now, what should
he do?

First of all he should put away all defense and make no attempt to excuse himself either in
his own eyes or before the Lord. Whoever defends himself will have himself for his defense,
and he will have no other; but let him come defenseless before the Lord and he will have for
his defender no less than God Himself. Let the inquiring Christian trample under foot every
slippery trick of his deceitful heart and insist upon frank and open relations with the Lord.

Then he should remember that this is holy business. No careless or casual dealings will suffice.
Let him come to God in full determination to be heard. Let him insist that God accept his all,
that He take things out of his heart and Himself reign there in power. It may be he will need
to become specific, to name things and people by their names one by one. If he will become
drastic enough he can shorten the time of his travail from years to minutes and enter the good
land long before his slower brethren who coddle their feelings and insist upon caution in their
dealings with God.

Let us never forget that such a truth as this cannot be learned by rote as one would learn
the facts of physical science. They must be experienced before we can really know them. We
must in our hearts live through Abraham's harsh and bitter experiences if we would know the
blessedness which follows them. The ancient curse will not go out painlessly; the tough old
miser within us will not lie down and die obedient to our command. He must be torn out of our
heart like a plant from the soil; he must be extracted in agony and blood like a tooth from
the jaw. He must be expelled from our soul by violence as Christ expelled the money changers
from the temple. And we shall need to steel ourselves against his piteous begging, and to recognize
it as springing out of self-pity, one of the most reprehensible sins of the human heart.

If we would indeed know God in growing intimacy we must go this way of renunciation. And if
we are set upon the pursuit of God He will sooner or later bring us to this test. Abraham's
testing was, at the time, not known to him as such, yet if he had taken some course other than
the one he did, the whole history of the Old Testament would have been different. God would
have found His man, no doubt, but the loss to Abraham would have been tragic beyond the telling.
So we will be brought one by one to the testing place, and we may never know when we are there.
At that testing place there will be no dozen possible choices for us; just one and an alternative,
but our whole future will be conditioned by the choice we make.

Father, I want to know Thee, but my coward heart fears to give up its toys. I cannot part with
them without inward bleeding, and I do not try to hide from Thee the terror of the parting.
I come trembling, but I do come. Please root from my heart all those things which I have cherished
so long and which have become a very part of my living self, so that Thou mayest enter and
dwell there without a rival. Then shalt Thou make the place of Thy feet glorious. Then shall
my heart have no need of the sun to shine in it, for Thyself wilt be the light of it, and there
shall be no night there. In Jesus' Name, Amen.

The great saint states here in few words the origin and interior history of the human race.
God made us for Himself: that is the only explanation that satisfies the heart of a thinking
man, whatever his wild reason may say. Should faulty education and perverse reasoning lead
a man to conclude otherwise, there is little that any Christian can do for him. For such a
man I have no message. My appeal is addressed to those who have been previously taught in secret
by the wisdom of God; I speak to thirsty hearts whose longings have been wakened by the touch
of God within them, and such as they need no reasoned proof. Their restless hearts furnish
all the proof they need.

God formed us for Himself. The Shorter Catechism, "Agreed upon by the Reverend Assembly of
Divines at Westminster," as the old New-England Primer has it, asks the ancient questions what
and why and answers them in one short sentence hardly matched in any uninspired work. "Question:
What is the chief End of Man? Answer: Man's chief End is to glorify God and enjoy Him forever."
He meant us to see Him and live with Him and draw our life from His smile. But we have been
guilty of that "foul revolt" of which Milton speaks when describing the rebellion of Satan
and his hosts. We have broken with God. We have ceased to obey Him or love Him and in guilt
and fear have fled as far as possible from His Presence.

Yet who can flee from His Presence when the heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain
Him? when as the wisdom of Solomon testifies, "the Spirit of the Lord filleth the world?" The
omnipresence of the Lord is one thing, and is a solemn fact necessary to His perfection; the
manifest Presence is another thing altogether, and from that Presence we have fled, like Adam,
to hide among the trees of the garden, or like Peter to shrink away crying, "Depart from me,
for I am a sinful man, O Lord."

So the life of man upon the earth is a life away from the Presence, wrenched loose from that
"blissful center" which is our right and proper dwelling place, our first estate which we kept
not, the loss of which is the cause of our unceasing restlessness.

The whole work of God in redemption is to undo the tragic effects of that foul revolt, and
to bring us back again into right and eternal relationship with Himself. This required that
our sins be disposed of satisfactorily, that a full reconciliation be effected and the way
opened for us to return again into conscious communion with God and to live again in the Presence
as before. Then by His prevenient working within us He moves us to return. This first comes
to our notice when our restless hearts feel a yearning for the Presence of God and we say within
ourselves, "I will arise and go to my Father." That is the first step, and as the Chinese sage
Lao-tze has said, "The journey of a thousand miles begins with a first step."

The interior journey of the soul from the wilds of sin into the enjoyed Presence of God is
beautifully illustrated in the Old Testament tabernacle. The returning sinner first entered
the outer court where he offered a blood sacrifice on the brazen altar and washed himself in
the laver that stood near it. Then through a veil he passed into the holy place where no natural
light could come, but the golden candlestick which spoke of Jesus the Light of the World threw
its soft glow over all. There also was the shewbread to tell of Jesus, the Bread of Life, and
the altar of incense, a figure of unceasing prayer.

Though the worshipper had enjoyed so much, still he had not yet entered the Presence of God.
Another veil separated from the Holy of Holies where above the mercy seat dwelt the very God
Himself in awful and glorious manifestation. While the tabernacle stood, only the high priest
could enter there, and that but once a year, with blood which he offered for his sins and the
sins of the people. It was this last veil which was rent when our Lord gave up the ghost on
Calvary, and the sacred writer explains that this rending of the veil opened the way for every
worshipper in the world to come by the new and living way straight into the divine Presence.

Everything in the New Testament accords with this Old Testament picture. Ransomed men need
no longer pause in fear to enter the Holy of Holies. God wills that we should push on into
His Presence and live our whole life there. This is to be known to us in conscious experience.
It is more than a doctrine to be held, it is a life to be enjoyed every moment of every day.

This Flame of the Presence was the beating heart of the Levitical order. Without it all the
appointments of the tabernacle were characters of some unknown language; they had no meaning
for Israel or for us. The greatest fact of the tabernacle was that Jehovah was there; a Presence
was waiting within the veil. Similarly the Presence of God is the central fact of Christianity.
At the heart of the Christian message is God Himself waiting for His redeemed children to push
in to conscious awareness of His Presence. That type of Christianity which happens now to be
the vogue knows this Presence only in theory. It fails to stress the Christian's privilege
of present realization. According to its teachings we are in the Presence of God positionally,
and nothing is said about the need to experience that Presence actually. The fiery urge that
drove men like McCheyne is wholly missing. And the present generation of Christians measures
itself by this imperfect rule. Ignoble contentment takes the place of burning zeal. We are
satisfied to rest in our judicial possessions and for the most part we bother ourselves very
little about the absence of personal experience.

Who is this within the veil who dwells in fiery manifestations? So in part run the ancient
creeds, and so the inspired Word declares.

Behind the veil is God, that God after Whom the world, with strange inconsistency, has felt,
"if haply they might find Him." He has discovered Himself to some extent in nature, but more
perfectly in the Incarnation; now He waits to show Himself in ravishing fulness to the humble
of soul and the pure in heart.

The world is perishing for lack of the knowledge of God and the Church is famishing for want
of His Presence. The instant cure of most of our religious ills would be to enter the Presence
in spiritual experience, to become suddenly aware that we are in God and that God is in us.
This would lift us out of our pitiful narrowness and cause our hearts to be enlarged. This
would burn away the impurities from our lives as the bugs and fungi were burned away by the
fire that dwelt in the bush.

What a broad world to roam in, what a sea to swim in is this God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. He is eternal, which means that He antedates time and is wholly independent of it.
Time began in Him and will end in Him. To it He pays no tribute and from it He suffers no change.
He is immutable, which means that He has never changed and can never change in any smallest
measure. To change He would need to go from better to worse or from worse to better. He cannot
do either, for being perfect He cannot become more perfect, and if He were to become less perfect
He would be less than God. He is omniscient, which means that He knows in one free and effortless
act all matter, all spirit, all relationships, all events. He has no past and He has no future.
He is, and none of the limiting and qualifying terms used of creatures can apply to Him. Love
and mercy and righteousness are His, and holiness so ineffable that no comparisons or figures
will avail to express it. Only fire can give even a remote conception of it. In fire He appeared
at the burning bush; in the pillar of fire He dwelt through all the long wilderness journey.
The fire that glowed between the wings of the cherubim in the holy place was called the "shekinah,"
the Presence, through the years of Israel's glory, and when the Old had given place to the
New, He came at Pentecost as a fiery flame and rested upon each disciple.

Spinoza wrote of the intellectual love of God, and he had a measure of truth there; but the
highest love of God is not intellectual, it is spiritual. God is spirit and only the spirit
of man can know Him really. In the deep spirit of a man the fire must glow or his love is not
the true love of God. The great of the Kingdom have been those who loved God more than others
did. We all know who they have been and gladly pay tribute to the depths and sincerity of their
devotion. We have but to pause for a moment and their names come trooping past us smelling
of myrrh and aloes and cassia out of the ivory palaces.

Frederick Faber was one whose soul panted after God as the roe pants after the water brook,
and the measure in which God revealed Himself to his seeking heart set the good man's whole
life afire with a burning adoration rivaling that of the seraphim before the throne. His love
for God extended to the three Persons of the Godhead equally, yet he seemed to feel for each
One a special kind of love reserved for Him alone. Of God the Father he sings:

    Only to sit and think of God,
      Oh what a joy it is!
    To think the thought, to breathe the Name;
      Earth has no higher bliss.

    Father of Jesus, love's reward!
      What rapture will it be,
    Prostrate before Thy throne to lie,
      And gaze and gaze on Thee!

His love for the Person of Christ was so intense that it threatened to consume him; it burned
within him as a sweet and holy madness and flowed from his lips like molten gold. In one of
his sermons he says, "Wherever we turn in the church of God, there is Jesus. He is the beginning,
middle and end of everything to us.... There is nothing good, nothing holy, nothing beautiful,
nothing joyous which He is not to His servants. No one need be poor, because, if he chooses,
he can have Jesus for his own property and possession. No one need be downcast, for Jesus is
the joy of heaven, and it is His joy to enter into sorrowful hearts. We can exaggerate about
many things; but we can never exaggerate our obligation to Jesus, or the compassionate abundance
of the love of Jesus to us. All our lives long we might talk of Jesus, and yet we should never
come to an end of the sweet things that might be said of Him. Eternity will not be long enough
to learn all He is, or to praise Him for all He has done, but then, that matters not; for we
shall be always with Him, and we desire nothing more." And addressing our Lord directly he
says to Him:

    I love Thee so, I know not how
    My transports to control;
    Thy love is like a burning fire
    Within my very soul.

Faber's blazing love extended also to the Holy Spirit. Not only in his theology did he acknowledge
His deity and full equality with the Father and the Son, but he celebrated it constantly in
his songs and in his prayers. He literally pressed his forehead to the ground in his eager
fervid worship of the Third Person of the Godhead. In one of his great hymns to the Holy Spirit
he sums up his burning devotion thus:

    O Spirit, beautiful and dread!
    My heart is fit to break
    With love of all Thy tenderness
    For us poor sinners' sake.

I have risked the tedium of quotation that I might show by pointed example what I have set
out to say, viz., that God is so vastly wonderful, so utterly and completely delightful that
He can, without anything other than Himself, meet and overflow the deepest demands of our total
nature, mysterious and deep as that nature is. Such worship as Faber knew (and he is but one
of a great company which no man can number) can never come from a mere doctrinal knowledge
of God. Hearts that are "fit to break" with love for the Godhead are those who have been in
the Presence and have looked with opened eye upon the majesty of Deity. Men of the breaking
hearts had a quality about them not known to or understood by common men. They habitually spoke
with spiritual authority. They had been in the Presence of God and they reported what they
saw there. They were prophets, not scribes, for the scribe tells us what he has read, and the
prophet tells what he has seen.

The distinction is not an imaginary one. Between the scribe who has read and the prophet who
has seen there is a difference as wide as the sea. We are today overrun with orthodox scribes,
but the prophets, where are they? The hard voice of the scribe sounds over evangelicalism,
but the Church waits for the tender voice of the saint who has penetrated the veil and has
gazed with inward eye upon the Wonder that is God. And yet, thus to penetrate, to push in sensitive
living experience into the holy Presence, is a privilege open to every child of God.

With the veil removed by the rending of Jesus' flesh, with nothing on God's side to prevent
us from entering, why do we tarry without? Why do we consent to abide all our days just outside
the Holy of Holies and never enter at all to look upon God? We hear the Bridegroom say, "Let
me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice and thy countenance is
comely." We sense that the call is for us, but still we fail to draw near, and the years pass
and we grow old and tired in the outer courts of the tabernacle. What doth hinder us?

The answer usually given, simply that we are "cold," will not explain all the facts. There
is something more serious than coldness of heart, something that may be back of that coldness
and be the cause of its existence. What is it? What but the presence of a veil in our hearts?
a veil not taken away as the first veil was, but which remains there still shutting out the
light and hiding the face of God from us. It is the veil of our fleshly fallen nature living
on, unjudged within us, uncrucified and unrepudiated. It is the close-woven veil of the self-life
which we have never truly acknowledged, of which we have been secretly ashamed, and which for
these reasons we have never brought to the judgment of the cross. It is not too mysterious,
this opaque veil, nor is it hard to identify. We have but to look in our own hearts and we
shall see it there, sewn and patched and repaired it may be, but there nevertheless, an enemy
to our lives and an effective block to our spiritual progress.

This veil is not a beautiful thing and it is not a thing about which we commonly care to talk,
but I am addressing the thirsting souls who are determined to follow God, and I know they will
not turn back because the way leads temporarily through the blackened hills. The urge of God
within them will assure their continuing the pursuit. They will face the facts however unpleasant
and endure the cross for the joy set before them. So I am bold to name the threads out of which
this inner veil is woven.

It is woven of the fine threads of the self-life, the hyphenated sins of the human spirit.
They are not something we do, they are something we are, and therein lies both their subtlety
and their power.

To be specific, the self-sins are these: self-righteousness, self-pity, self-confidence, self-sufficiency,
self-admiration, self-love and a host of others like them. They dwell too deep within us and
are too much a part of our natures to come to our attention till the light of God is focused
upon them. The grosser manifestations of these sins, egotism, exhibitionism, self-promotion,
are strangely tolerated in Christian leaders even in circles of impeccable orthodoxy. They
are so much in evidence as actually, for many people, to become identified with the gospel.
I trust it is not a cynical observation to say that they appear these days to be a requisite
for popularity in some sections of the Church visible. Promoting self under the guise of promoting
Christ is currently so common as to excite little notice.

One should suppose that proper instruction in the doctrines of man's depravity and the necessity
for justification through the righteousness of Christ alone would deliver us from the power
of the self-sins; but it does not work out that way. Self can live unrebuked at the very altar.
It can watch the bleeding Victim die and not be in the least affected by what it sees. It can
fight for the faith of the Reformers and preach eloquently the creed of salvation by grace,
and gain strength by its efforts. To tell all the truth, it seems actually to feed upon orthodoxy
and is more at home in a Bible Conference than in a tavern. Our very state of longing after
God may afford it an excellent condition under which to thrive and grow.

Self is the opaque veil that hides the Face of God from us. It can be removed only in spiritual
experience, never by mere instruction. As well try to instruct leprosy out of our system. There
must be a work of God in destruction before we are free. We must invite the cross to do its
deadly work within us. We must bring our self-sins to the cross for judgment. We must prepare
ourselves for an ordeal of suffering in some measure like that through which our Saviour passed
when He suffered under Pontius Pilate.

Let us remember: when we talk of the rending of the veil we are speaking in a figure, and the
thought of it is poetical, almost pleasant; but in actuality there is nothing pleasant about
it. In human experience that veil is made of living spiritual tissue; it is composed of the
sentient, quivering stuff of which our whole beings consist, and to touch it is to touch us
where we feel pain. To tear it away is to injure us, to hurt us and make us bleed. To say otherwise
is to make the cross no cross and death no death at all. It is never fun to die. To rip through
the dear and tender stuff of which life is made can never be anything but deeply painful. Yet
that is what the cross did to Jesus and it is what the cross would do to every man to set him free.

Let us beware of tinkering with our inner life in hope ourselves to rend the veil. God must
do everything for us. Our part is to yield and trust. We must confess, forsake, repudiate the
self-life, and then reckon it crucified. But we must be careful to distinguish lazy "acceptance"
from the real work of God. We must insist upon the work being done. We dare not rest content
with a neat doctrine of self-crucifixion. That is to imitate Saul and spare the best of the
sheep and the oxen.

Insist that the work be done in very truth and it will be done. The cross is rough, and it
is deadly, but it is effective. It does not keep its victim hanging there forever. There comes
a moment when its work is finished and the suffering victim dies. After that is resurrection
glory and power, and the pain is forgotten for joy that the veil is taken away and we have
entered in actual spiritual experience the Presence of the living God.

Lord, how excellent are Thy ways, and how devious and dark are the ways of man. Show us how
to die, that we may rise again to newness of life. Rend the veil of our self-life from the
top down as Thou didst rend the veil of the Temple. We would draw near in full assurance of
faith. We would dwell with Thee in daily experience here on this earth so that we may be accustomed
to the glory when we enter Thy heaven to dwell with Thee there. In Jesus' name, Amen.

IV

Apprehending God

     O taste and see.--Psa. 34:8

It was Canon Holmes, of India, who more than twenty-five years ago called attention to the
inferential character of the average man's faith in God. To most people God is an inference,
not a reality. He is a deduction from evidence which they consider adequate; but He remains
personally unknown to the individual. "He must be," they say, "therefore we believe He is."
Others do not go even so far as this; they know of Him only by hearsay. They have never bothered
to think the matter out for themselves, but have heard about Him from others, and have put
belief in Him into the back of their minds along with the various odds and ends that make up
their total creed. To many others God is but an ideal, another name for goodness, or beauty,
or truth; or He is law, or life, or the creative impulse back of the phenomena of existence.

These notions about God are many and varied, but they who hold them have one thing in common:
they do not know God in personal experience. The possibility of intimate acquaintance with
Him has not entered their minds. While admitting His existence they do not think of Him as
knowable in the sense that we know things or people.

