When we turn from the Mawgan district to make our way towards the Padstow estuary the grand,
broken coast goes with us, ever presenting new aspects of varying beauty--coves of golden sand
succeeded by gaunt, caverned headlands, with here and there a craggy islet lying among the
tumbling breakers. The great plateau of the Bodmin Moors here touches the coast, bringing its
profusion of prehistoric remains--though in that matter there is little of Cornwall that is
not plentifully endowed. Immediately above Bedruthan there is one cliff-castle, and on Park
Head, a little beyond, are the burial tumuli of some unknown people. We are now in the parish
of St. Eval, whose church stands on high ground about two miles inland. It is said that Bristol
merchants, in the eighteenth century, found this church so useful a landmark for their vessels
that they rebuilt it at their own cost. Eval is a saint not easy to identify; there is an inscribed
stone in Pembrokeshire giving the name Evali fili Dencui, so that he may have been a missionary
from South Wales. North of Park Head are the Butter Coves, and the coves of Porthmear and Portcothan.
They are magnificent in times of rough weather. In a quiet way Porthcothan is beginning to
attract visitors, but the place is not very accessible, and has little but its loveliness to
recommend it. There is, however, a remarkable fogou, or subterranean cavern, about 38 feet
long and 6 feet in height, with a passage leading into another similar chamber. Fogou is the
Cornish word for cave (sometimes corrupted into Hugo); but it usually signifies a cavern or
passage of artificial construction, built at an early date for the concealment of persons or
of property. There are good specimens at Cairn Uny, at Trelowarren, and at Trewoofe near Lamorna.
In most of these passages only a few yards can now be traversed, as they have fallen into disuse,
and unless repaired frequently the sides and roofs have a tendency to fall in. Sometimes they
obviously connect with old hill-castles and strongholds, in which case their construction takes
us beyond the reach of history; and generally their formation was assisted or suggested by
nature. But their comparatively recent use by smugglers for the concealment of run goods makes
it particularly difficult to speak with certainty as to their true antiquity; and the coves
around Porthcothan saw the landing of many an illicit cargo. Stories of fugitive Royalists
taking refuge in these fogous are common, and have doubtless a basis of fact. It is supposed
that the entire length of the Porthcothan fogou must have been over 1,000 yards, one gallery
leading to Trevethan, whence another communicated with the beach at Porthmear.

Passing other jagged points and creeks, we come to Constantine Bay, where the ordinary visitor
may pardonably suppose he is on the steps of a Roman emperor, but the Constantine here recorded
was a genuine Cornish saint. Perhaps his name was Cystennyn, Latinised after, as was a common
custom. He was of the Cornish royal family, being son of Cador; and Geoffrey of Monmouth tells
us, fabulously, that he succeeded Arthur as King of the British. He is chiefly remembered in
literature by the abuse that Gildas heaped upon him, in those letters, written about 546, that
are notable for imperfect accuracy, fervent religion, and virulent bad temper. Gildas calls
Constantine the "tyrannical whelp of the unclean lioness of Damnonia"; and further asks, "Why
standest thou astonished, O thou butcher of thine own soul? Why dost thou wilfully kindle against
thyself the eternal fires of hell?" It is quite likely that Constantine had done some bad things
and been no better than his neighbours; but it is supposed that he was converted in his old
age, through the preaching of St. Petrock, whom we shall meet more intimately at Padstow. It
is said that Constantine was hunting, and the stag that he was pursuing took refuge in Petrock's
cell; the animal's recognition of the saint's holiness and appeal to his protection so touched
his heart as to lead to a change of life. Another story refers his conversion to grief at the
death of his wife. Mr. Baring-Gould tells us that: "So completely did he sever himself from
the world, that it was supposed by some that he had been murdered by Conan, his successor.
He retired to a cell on the sands in the parish of St. Merryn, near Padstow, where there was
a well, and where he could be near Petrock, through whom he had been brought to the knowledge
of himself." It is probable that he journeyed later to the creek of the Helford River, in South
Cornwall, and founded the Constantine that we find there. It is doubtless on the site of his
original cell that the old church of St. Constantine stands, overwhelmed and ruined by sand-storms
long since, buried utterly for a time like that of St. Piran, and now again visible, a few
broken and rugged walls among the towans. The sand that destroyed the church destroyed also
the village, and the parish was merged in that of St. Merryn, whither the beautiful font was
conveyed. This font and other portions of St. Merryn Church are of the well-known Cataclew
stone, from the Cataclew quarries by Trevose Head. This stone was formerly put to very effective
use in church-building, and it is pleasant to know that it has again come into popularity.

But the fact that has given greatest distinction to this spot, and that which does more than
anything else to draw visitors, is the discovery, about ten years since, of a prehistoric burial-ground
at Harlyn Bay. The Athenæum of that date announced to its readers that "a discovery of the
highest importance to the study of the prehistoric races inhabiting England before the first
Roman invasion has recently been made in a remote corner of Cornwall. On a sloping sandy hillside
overlooking the picturesque white sand-bay of Harlyn excavations were being made by Mr. Reddie
Mallett for sinking a well preparatory to building a house overlooking the sea. The spot selected
for boring turned out to be exactly in the centre, not of a tumulus containing but two or three
interments, but of a perfect cemetery, with three distinct layers of burials of men, women,
and children. The drift sand that is so extensive in this part of Cornwall rose some 8 to 10
feet above the graves, but when the original hardly compressed sand was reached, the great
slates with which the kists were carefully formed were often not more than 2 feet below this
surface." Dr. Beddoe pronounced the remains to be neolithic, and the persons here interred
were of a dolichocephalic or long-skulled race--sometimes known as the long barrow-builders,
who generally buried their dead without cremation. There were some tiny kists for children,
but a great number of the bodies had been buried uncoffined. The district had afforded earlier
similar traces of pre-Roman interment, but nothing on so large a scale as this. Although a
great deal of excavation has gone on since, and there is a small museum erected close by to
contain the more striking finds, much more may yet be done and other secrets be revealed. It
is not quite certain yet where the persons lived whose bones have thus been uncovered to the
gaze of a late generation of sight-seers, but it is supposed that their habitations must have
been near this site. They were, of course, in a higher state of civilisation than mere cave-dwellers,
but their huts may have been of perishable wattle, or they may have come from some of the hut-circles
of the Bodmin Moors. The remains, like those around St. Piran's, bespeak a somewhat dense population.
As Harlyn Bay has become popular for picnic parties from Padstow and elsewhere, this old necropolis
often resounds with laughter and merry-making; but in winter and in rough weather it is left
to its own solemnity. A spirit of awe broods above it; we remember the words of Ezekiel: "The
hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the Spirit of the Lord, and set me down
in the midst of the valley which was full of bones."

Meeting the ocean westward of Harlyn is Trevose Head, with its lighthouse and coastguard station.
The headland rises to nearly 250 feet, and its light is sorely needed, the coast, with its
outlying masses of crag, being a deadly peril to navigation. The views to be obtained here
are of exceptional grandeur, and the lighthouse-keepers, though far less lonely than on many
similar stations, generally welcome a visit.

Padstow is situated on the western side of the Camel estuary, below the sandbank known as the
Doom Bar (probably dune-bar). The gates of the river-mouth are the Stepper Point, with its
white day-mark, and Pentire Point; the Doom Bar lies well within these, almost blocking the
passage, which, with vessels of any draught, must be made on the Stepper side. The name Doom
Bar is, of course, provocative of legend, and an appropriate one has been found. It is said
that Padstow had once a safe and commodious harbour, whose mouth was haunted by a beautiful
mermaid. The harbour was under her special protection, and she was consequently revered by
the inhabitants. But one day a youth foolishly fired on her from the cliffs. With a cry of
rage she plunged into the water, but reappeared for a moment to vow that henceforth the harbour
should be ruined. An old Cornishman who told the story in the days when such traditions still
passed current, used to add: "We have had commissions and I know not what about converting
this place into a harbour of refuge. A harbour of refuge would be a great blessing, but not
all the Government commissions in the world could keep the sand out, or make the harbour deep
enough to swim a frigate, unless the parsons can find out the way to take up the merry-maid's
curse." But there is another tradition attaching to the Bar. This is the country of Tregeagle--he
lies buried at St. Breock, close to Wadebridge: "John Tregeagle, of Trevorder, Esqr., 1679."
His story forms a curious mixture of the recent and the prehistoric. We see that a man named
Tregeagle truly lived and died something more than two centuries ago; but the Tregeagle or
Tergagle of legend belongs to folk-lore rather than to modern social life. Very old ideas and
superstitions have in some manner become attached to a recent name; tradition has a knack of
bringing forward its dates; stories of immemorial antiquity are related as though they were
the experience of the narrator's father or grandfather, and are modernised to suit that supposition.
Legend never sticks at absurdity or anachronism. From some versions of the story it would appear
that Tregeagle could not have lived earlier than the seventeenth century, in actual accordance
with the date on his tombstone; but in others certain of the early Cornish saints are introduced,
carrying the history twelve centuries back or further still. It would seem that Tregeagle was
a landowner in the neighbourhood of Bodmin, holding the Trevorder estate; but he won his chief
notoriety as steward on the lands of the Robartes family, at Lanhydrock. There is still a room
in the Lanhydrock mansion known as Tregeagle's. The man doubtless did many things of which
morality cannot approve, but tradition has overdone itself in attributing to him every possible
crime, including the murder of his wife, his children, and his sister. He was an unjust steward,
grinding the tenants unmercifully, and enriching himself not only at their expense but at that
of his employer. But he contrived to purchase the goodwill of the Church, and at his death
it was only seemly that the clergy should do what they could for him. When the spirits of darkness
came to claim the soul of the dying wretch they were successfully repelled by the priests with
the powers of bell, book, and candle. The Church wrangled with the fiends above the breathless
body, defeated them in heated theological controversy, dismissed them with contumely, and laid
Tregeagle to rest with his fathers at St. Breock. He was not destined to repose there long.
There was a heritage of trouble in connection with the Lanhydrock estate, and the defendant
in one particular case sorely needed the witness of Tregeagle himself, to settle a disputed
point. By some means he managed to procure it; the clergy provided a safe-conduct, and the
figure of the dead Tregeagle was led into the witness-box. A thrill of horror passed through
the court, but this spectral witness gave evidence faithfully, and gained a triumphant verdict
for defendant. The trouble now was what to do with Tregeagle. The fiends were still waiting
for him; defendant who had summoned him took no further interest in the matter; but the clergy
felt that they still owed him a duty. They knew that the dead man's chance at the Day of Doom
was not a good one, but in the meantime they would do what they could. It was decided to give
him a perpetual penance, which might keep the evil spirits at a distance. He was led away to
the shores of Dosmare Pool, on the desolate Bodmin Moors, and there set to drain the pool with
a leaky limpet-shell. In those days Dosmare was supposed to be bottomless--a reputation which
it has since destroyed by drying in hot summers. For long years Tregeagle toiled at his hopeless
task. If he ceased from his labour for a moment he would be at the mercy of the devils.

One night, after many years of fruitless toil, there came a terrific storm, with thunder and
earthquake. In sheer horror and despair Tregeagle fled. Immediately the demons were on his
track, chasing him so closely that he could not stay to dip his limpet-shell in the foaming
water. Feeling that they were upon him, he rose with a cry of anguish, and fled across the
pool, thus gaining a temporary advantage, for spirits of evil cannot cross water. He made for
the hermitage on Roche Rock, the yelling pursuers at his heels. Just as they were about to
seize him he thrust his head within the small window of the hermit's chapel, and thus was safe.
There was still a difficulty about his position. He could not get further into the church,
nor does it appear that the hermit desired it; and he could not withdraw his head lest the
fiends should seize him. He had to stay and listen to the good man's prayers and liturgies,
which only added to the terrors of his guilty conscience, so that his remorseful screams were
heard above all the psalms and prayings. The hermit found it a great affliction, for the population
of the district was kept away by the unpleasantness of Tregeagle's presence. At last two other
clergy came to his assistance, and Tregeagle was led away to the coast at Padstow. His new
task was to make ropes of sand--one of the familiar penances of such traditions. He could not
do it; it was worse than draining Dosmare. Night and day he rendered the place hideous with
his frantic cries, and the Padstow folk did not like it at all. It was making the neighbourhood
unbearable. At their earnest request another effort was made by the priests to dispose of poor
Tregeagle. He was ruining the harbour by his attempts to make the ropes of sand; every rising
sea scattered these ropes, however carefully formed, and the sand was accumulating in a bar
of Doom. It is said that St. Petrock himself, the spiritual founder of Padstow, forged a chain
of which every link was a prayer, and thus led away the unhappy ghost to Helston. In the estuary
of the Hel River he spoiled the harbourage also, for a devil tripped him one day, when toiling
across with a sack of sand, and the sand was spilt right across the mouth of the river. At
last he was cast out from Helston also, and dismissed to Land's End, where he remains labouring
to this day, endeavouring to sweep the sands from Porthcurno Cove into Nanjisal. Of course,
it cannot be done; the full force of the Atlantic drives around Land's End, and the sands are
driven backward again and again. But he is safe from the immediate attack of the fiends, and
he is out of the way of the countryfolk. His cries are lost in the crash of the seas that dominate
that desolate shore, and the fishermen have given up thinking about Tregeagle. The legends
vary in telling his doom; some make the draining of Dosmare his last penance and some this
task at the Land's End. But if an imaginative reason is desired to account for the formation
of the Padstow Doom Bar, surely this tale will do as well as any other.

It will be seen that this chronicle of Tregeagle carries him back to the time of Petrock, the
patron saint of Padstow, whose name is a corruption of Petrock's-stow. Little Petherick, sometimes
called St. Petrock Minor, is thought to be a corruption of the same name. Petrock was a Celtic
saint, probably a Welshman, who went to Ireland for his religious education; he crossed to
Cornwall in a coracle, and landed in this estuary of the Camel. He founded an oratory here,
and probably another at Little Petherick. It is also suggested that he established another
cell at Place, the seat of the Prideaux, but it seems more likely that the chapel at Place
was founded by St. Samson. After spending many years at Padstow the saint is said to have voyaged
to the East, visiting India, and also going on a visionary journey to some Island of the Blest,
after the manner of St. Brendan. After returning to Cornwall he removed to Bodmin and established
the most important of his religious foundations. Like Padstow, Bodmin was formerly named Petrockstow,
and this has caused endless confusion to the chroniclers as well as some quarrels between the
two towns. Further, the saint evidently went into Devon; we trace his footsteps at Dartmouth,
Exeter, Hollacombe, Anstey, and elsewhere. Bodmin can boast precedence of Padstow in certain
respects, for it attained episcopal consequence, besides being the county town of Cornwall;
but with regard to priority in connection with Petrock, it is clear Padstow has the first claim.
At one time Padstow appears to have been called Lodenek or Lodernek, but in the thirteenth
century it was certainly known as Aldestowe; in fact, the town has been troubled with a multiplicity
of names, which is always a regrettable thing, for a person or a place. The town is about two
miles within the estuary, and were it not for the sands that block its entrance, this would
be truly a fine harbour; even so, it is the best that North Cornwall possesses. Two vessels
sailed from here for the siege of Calais; and in the sixteenth century some sort of corporation
was granted, but this seems to have been lost. At the present day it is a picturesque, quaint
old town, in a beautiful and most interesting site, dominated by a weather-beaten old church.
But Mr. Hind, though he finds much to admire, does not regard Padstow as in any sense typically
Cornish. He says: "An air-voyager dropped from a flying-machine upon the roof of a Padstow
house would never think that he was in Cornwall. If he walked out to Stepper Point, or strode
some miles westward to Trevose Head, the first land sighted in old days by Canadian timber
vessels trading to Padstow, the majestic sweep of coast, the jagged headlands and scattered
rocks would certainly suggest Cornwall; but the estuary of the Camel from Wadebridge to Padstow,
although beautiful, has no claim to the epithet wild. The panorama induces reflection, moves
one to a mood of gentle melancholy; but it does not stimulate. Nowhere in Cornwall have I seen
such sand--gold, grey and yellow, equally lovely at all tides. Looking across the river, the
eye is soothed by these wastes of blown sand stretching inland from the sea to where the little
hamlet called Rock rises from the shore." Sundries are imported at the docks, and there is
some shipment of corn; but the ship-building, once notable, has greatly declined, and the town
now does little but repairing. It is satisfactory to find that the sands of the Doom Bar have
a certain value, as they contain much carbonate of lime, and they are carried inland for agricultural
purposes. The church, which stands well above the town, has a good Early English tower, and
a beautiful, finely carved catacleuse font; in the south porch the parish stocks are preserved.
In the chancel, over the piscina, is an effigy sometimes mistaken for that of St. Anthony,
but almost certainly the figure is St. Petrock himself, with his usual symbols, the staff and
wolf, at his feet. There are modern monochrome pictures from drawings by Hofmann in front of
the organ. It is natural to find monuments of the Prideaux family both within the church and
without; in the churchyard also are two granite crosses, one much mutilated.

Prideaux Place, generally named Place, stands a little higher than the church, in a glorious
situation; it is a finely designed Elizabethan mansion--Elizabethan in style if not exactly
in date--erected by Sir Nicholas Prideaux about the year 1600. Its old staircase was brought
thither when Stowe House, once the seat of the Grenvilles, was broken up. The Prideaux are
a Cornish family of ancient note, whose names we often meet with in the Duchy's annals; but
the most widely known was Humphrey Prideaux, born here in 1648, who at one time was Rector
of St. Clement's, Oxford, and later became Dean of Norwich. He wrote a Life of Mahomet, and
also a work in which he attempted to bridge over the interval between the Old and New Testaments--rather
a ticklish job, one might imagine. There are a good many excellent pictures at the house--a
Vandyck and many Opies; but the visitor, unless specially introduced, will have to be content
with the outside of the beautiful manor-house.

Padstow has been associated from immemorial times with a special celebration of the May-Day
festival, immediately deriving from the old folk-plays and mummings that were once universal.
The special survival here is of the Hobby Horse, that once played so prominent a part in these
boisterous masquerades, but such life as it still enjoys at Padstow is somewhat a galvanised
existence, just as children still occasionally dress in poor tinsel and gaiety in order to
collect a few coppers. Such exhibitions are melancholy rather than interesting--

    "For who would keep an ancient form
    Thro' which the spirit breathes no more?"

The horse is a wooden circle, with a dress of blackened sailcloth, a horse's head, and a prominent
tail. Readers of Scott's Abbot will, of course, remember that the Hobby Horse was equally popular
in Scotland. The Hobby Horse song, as rendered at Padstow, was probably only a variant of verses
common elsewhere, but local and topical allusions were freely introduced, and stanzas were
addressed to special personages. The performance is in a moribund condition, and it is certainly
not worth while for a stranger to travel to Padstow on May-Day to see it. Very likely he would
not see it; it is a thing that may be discontinued at any time. If we were devoting our attention
to Cornwall as it used to be, much would come into this book which is now utterly obsolete,
and would cause as great surprise to Cornish folk as to others.

If the tide serves, it is certainly worth while to go up to Wadebridge, if only for the sake
of the grand old bridge, originally built of seventeen arches, in the year 1485, by Thomas
Lovibond, Vicar of Egloshayle. The bridge has been widened since its erection, but is not otherwise
much changed. There was a ferry here in the past, but it was perilous, and Lovibond could not
rest till, with the assistance of his bishop, he had collected money for this beneficent work.
There was a great difficulty in sinking foundations for the bridge, owing to the shifting sands,
but, guided by a dream, Lovibond is said to have resorted to packs of wool--the same method
reported by tradition of Bideford Bridge. The bridge is 320 feet long, and remains the best
specimen of its class in England, as it retains its protecting angles for the use of pedestrians,
which at Bideford have been removed. Lovibond was not only a bridge-builder; he also erected
the fine tower of his church at Egloshayle (the mother-parish of Wadebridge). Egloshayle probably
means the "church by the river" (eglos-hêl); its church is particularly interesting for its
western doorway, its Norman font, and its Kestell monument, while there is some good carving
in the roof of the south aisle. The church of St. Breock is distant nearly a mile from Wadebridge,
on the western side of the river, and is perhaps still more delightful in its position; it
is noteworthy for its monuments, which, however, have been much displaced. It is here that
the remains of Tregeagle lie entombed; his spirit, if we may credit tradition, is otherwise
engaged. St. Breock is supposed to have arrived in Cornwall, from Wales, earlier than Petrock.
He was an old man, and, as Mr. Baring-Gould tells us, one day his companions "left him to sing
psalms in his cart whilst they were engaged at a distance over some pressing business. When
they returned they found a pack of wolves round the old man, but whether his sanctity, or toughness,
kept them from eating him is left undecided." Surely it must have been his sanctity. His name
attaches to the Breock Downs, a high-lying moorland rising to about 700 feet, thickly strewn
with prehistoric remains. Wadebridge has suffered by the opening of the railway to Padstow,
but it can boast that its rail to Bodmin was the second line to be opened in England. Many
jests were current in reference to the speed of this early railway. Professor Shuttleworth,
who was born at Egloshayle Vicarage, says: "I have often seen the train stop while people got
out and gathered blackberries. But it is lovely country down around Egloshayle and Wadebridge,
just as pretty and quiet as can be." Mr. Arthur Norway also has a very tender regard for the
district, for a similar reason, and he has given some weird stories of local superstition.
But it cannot be claimed that Wadebridge is on the coast, and we must retreat seaward.

Readers of Baring-Gould's stirring novel, The Roar of the Sea, are sure to look eagerly for
St. Enodoc's Church. It lies among the sand-dunes on the eastern bank of the estuary, and is
now protected from the sands that once practically buried it by the growth of rush-grass and
tamarisk hedges; even now it lies low within a deep trench, and we can easily picture its condition
in days when the parson used to enter through the roof to perform service, so as to keep his
tithes. Built in 1430, it was the successor of an earlier cell of the saint's. Its slightly
crooked spire of slate is the sole landmark to guide a visitor. In the graveyard is a curious
collection of stoups and water-bowls. It is about forty years now since the church was excavated
from the sands that rose to its roof and restored to usefulness. Those familiar with Mr. Baring-Gould's
book will remember that he places the home of Cruel Coppinger in this district, with his house
at Pentire Glaze; but we shall find the true home of Coppinger further northward, near Morwenstow.
Just within Hayle Bay is the little village of Polzeath, which in time may become a popular
watering-place; it has a wonderful charm of position, and enough sand to satisfy anybody. The
fine headland of Pentire reaches beyond, with its off-lying islet of Newland. Mr. Norway thinks
that the stretch of coast visible from Pentire is the finest in all Cornwall, and he speaks
with authority. On the west the view extends to Trevose, and embraces the whole of the beautiful
Padstow harbour, together with an unlimited ocean of marvellous ever-changing colours. "On
the east the prospect seems almost boundless. Port Isaac Bay lies just below, sweeping far
back into the land, half hidden by the Eastern Horn of Pentire. Across the bay Tintagel lies
directly opposite, eight miles away over the sea, every crevice and gully of its riven island
clearly marked in the translucent air; and beyond it the eye follows leagues and leagues of
iron cliffs towering far higher than any others in the west, and point after point of noble
jagged promontories, past Boscastle, set back a little out of sight, past Bude and Cambeak,
and rugged Morwenstow, till it rests at last on the dim line of Hartland Point, full 40 miles
away as a bird would fly. It is idle to compare any other view in the West Country with this
either in extent or grandeur, or in the immediate beauty of its surroundings. It is little
known, and rarely visited by any but by shepherds. Yet it is more easy of access from Wadebridge
than the Land's End or the Logan from Penzance; and there will be some to whom its very loneliness
is an additional attraction. However this may be, those who leave Cornwall without visiting
Pentire have missed its noblest scenery."

It is a large claim that Mr. Norway makes, but surely it is justified. The parts of Cornwall
that are best known are naturally those that come within range of the more popular resorts--Newquay,
Bude, Penzance, St. Ives, Falmouth--while eastern Cornwall is accessible from Plymouth. But
this stretch of coast is near no popular centre, and, with the exception of Tintagel and Boscastle,
it remains neglected. If Padstow or Polzeath, Portquin or Port Isaac, ever become more popular,
visitors will flock to these grand cliffs and marvel that they never came here before. There
is a remarkable triple entrenchment on the eastern Horn of Pentire, above its stark, rugged
caverns; but those who came here and fortified this noble headland, in far-back days of which
we can only dream, came not in search of the picturesque as we do, nor probably for the spiritual
repose that we crave in this age of hurry. Even sterner necessities governed their existence.
Cliff-camps of this nature cannot have been designed against any foe from the sea--even to-day
it would be a perilous thing indeed to attempt a forcible landing at such places--they were
more likely a last refuge from invading tribes that came overland from the south-east. The
struggles witnessed here must almost certainly have been far earlier than the coming of Roman
or Teuton; it was probably successive waves, or antagonist tribes, of Stone Age men that here
contended and opposed each other. But the ditches and embankments have little to tell us; tradition
is silent, the lonely barrows are dumb. Yet the blood of the peoples still flows within Cornish
veins; and those characteristics that we vaguely speak of as Celtic often derive from a far
earlier source.

The little island to the east of Pentire is the Mouls, and to the right is Portquin Bay. Port
Isaac Bay, beyond Kelland Head and Varley Point, takes its name from the delightful little
fishing village of Port Isaac, of which Port Gaverne may almost be considered as a suburb.
Both are in the parish of St. Endellion, but Port Isaac has its own church, erected in Early
English style in 1882. Its small pier is said to date from the time of Henry VIII., and before
the railway a good deal of Delabole slate was shipped here. The fishing for pilchards is here
done by trawlers, not by seines, as round Land's End. The name may probably be interpreted
as porth izic, the "corn port," though certainly this is not a grain country. Very appropriately,
it is said that fish are exhibited among the fruits and flowers at the Port Isaac annual harvest
service. Some other West Country fishing-towns have introduced nets and oars at such services,
but to bring in the actual fish seems peculiar to this place. The fish has always been a sacred
symbol in Christian art, and it represents to fisher-folk what the fruits of the earth do to
the field labourer. Both these little twin ports--Isaac and Gaverne--are entirely charming,
and much to be commended to all who would know unspoiled Cornwall. Nestling within their tiny
coves, they have a varied background of interesting country, pleasant little beaches, beautiful
cliffs, and a glorious sea. There is one other resort to be visited before reaching Tintagel,
and that is Trebarwith Strand, which similarly reaches the sea by a tiny cove, with the Gull
Rock lying off shore as a target for storms. Trebarwith is likely to become fashionable. It
has a fine stretch of sands, and provides some of the best bathing to be had in North Cornwall.
Those who wish to be near Tintagel and yet close to the sea had better come to Trebarwith rather
than to the Tintagel village itself.

CHAPTER XVI

TINTAGEL AND BOSCASTLE

When we come to the region that is specially sacred to traditions of King Arthur we find ourselves
in the presence of wonderful natural charm and of considerable historic perplexity. Those who
are content with the ordinary guide-books, and who have no conception of Arthur beyond what
they may have gained from snatches of Tennyson, will not be troubled by this perplexity; they
will take the crumbling walls on Tintagel heights to be the actual castle in which the Celtic
prince was born, and any round table will suffice them as being that around which the king
and his chieftains sat. But something a little better than this is desirable. We want Arthur
to be something more than a mere ghost, something even more than the blameless hero of a beautiful
Victorian poem. Yet if we go to the learned authorities the ghost becomes more ghostlike, the
phantom becomes more dim; it is mainly destructive criticism that we meet with, and assertions
that are largely negative. In spite of this, there must be something tangible behind so persistent
a rumour as this tradition of Arthur. Wherever the Brythonic tribes extended, there we find
traces of him. The Gaels know nothing of him. Finn, Oisin, Cuthullin, Cormac--such as these
were the great Goidhelic heroes. But the British tradition reached from Armorica to the Forth,
and carried Arthur with it. The Welsh claim him, the Bretons, the Cornish, the Lowland Scotch.
Cornwall, with Tintagel as an asset of faith, claims his birth; Somerset, with Cadbury on the
river Camel, claims Camelot; and Glastonbury boasts of his grave. Of these claims, that of
Cornwall is the most powerfully supported; there is not only Tintagel, but Kelly Rounds, Damelioc,
and Cardinham. One of the Welsh Triads speaks of the three chief palaces of Arthur as being
Caerleon-on-the-Usk, Celliwig in Cornwall, and Penrhyn Rhionedd in the north. Celliwig may
safely be identified with the partially effaced earthwork near St. Kew Station, known as Kelly
Rounds (probably from the Cornish killi, meaning woods or groves), standing in what may be
described as a Kelly district, for we have here in a cluster such names as Kelly Green, Kelly
Farm, Bokelly, Kelly Brae, Calliwith. The Rounds have been cut across by a road, but there
are distinct traces of two ramparted circles, with some remains of a sheltering earthwork to
the west. Damelioc, a large and strong entrenchment with three concentric ramparts, lies about
seven miles south-west of Tintagel; and it was here that Gorlois, Duke of Cornwall, took up
his position after placing his wife Igerne for safety within Tintagel itself. The common story
says that Uther, mad with love, overcame and slew Gorlois at Damelioc, and gained admission
to Tintagel in his guise, thus becoming the father of Arthur. Of course, there is the other
tradition that represents Arthur as of supernatural birth, washed to the shore by the waves,
rescued by Merlin, and given to the world as a son of Uther. Cardinham, the other almost certain
Arthurian locality in Cornwall, is about five miles east of Bodmin, and is identified with
the Caradigan where Arthur sometimes held court. It is a large, lonely earthwork, in a field
near a farmhouse. It must not be forgotten that the guide-books usually put forward Camelford
as another most important Arthurian place, mentioning Slaughter Bridge as the scene of the
king's last battle. There certainly was a battle here between Britons and Saxons, but this
took place at least two centuries after Arthur's time; and though a spot named Arthur's Grave
is shown to visitors, all definite connection between the king and Camelford must be surrendered.
The last great battle, according to all authentic tradition, was fought against Picts, and
what would Picts have been doing in Cornwall? The grave at Glastonbury, it must be owned with
regret, is now generally understood to be a monkish fable. It is not pleasant for a West of
England man to surrender either Camelford or Glastonbury, but truth must be faced, and the
fact is almost certain that Arthur's last battle, and therefore his grave, must be sought in
Scotland.

We may assume that Arthur was a Romanised Briton, born in the late fifth century at Tintagel;
his name being possibly a Celtic form of the Latin Artorius. He became the champion of his
race against encroaching Saxons, North-Country Picts, and wandering pagan hordes who fought
for lust of bloodshed and pillage. Against these it is likely that Arthur sought to maintain
a semi-Romanised, partially Christianised civilisation. He is credited with twelve great battles,
in all of which he proved victorious; some of these were certainly in Somerset, and the last
of his triumphs, that of Badon Hill, somewhere in Wessex. His rule thus established on a firm
foundation, for many years Britain knew comparative peace and good government. The Round Table
of which we hear so much is probably a symbolic addition of the bards, unless it means that
in Arthur's time persons of good class began to sit decently together at tables. The thirteenth
battle, in which he lost his life fighting against his nephew Mordred, has usually been given
to the West of England--Malory and Tennyson both do so. But the traditions that became most
popular sprang up in an age when the Cymry were forgetting the former wide extent of their
tribal sway, and were limiting their racial pride to a part of the country that was still free
from the Teuton. The fact that Arthur's last fight was with the Picts, and against Mordred,
is almost conclusive as to its location. His sister, the mother of Mordred, had married Llew
or Lot, of the Lothians, and there is reason to believe that the king was already familiar
with this part of Scotland. The battle is always given as fought at Camlan, and this name has
diverted later writers to the Camels of Cornwall and of Somerset. But the Celtic cam in place-names
is quite common; it signifies crooked, and we find it in a number of river-names. Mordred had
become a chieftain of the Picts, and he possibly resented any claims of suzerainty on the part
of Arthur. The fight, whose date is stated as 542, was almost certainly waged at Camelon on
the river Carron, near Falkirk. Arthur was defeated--it is likely that his forces were greatly
outnumbered; and he died, either on the field or as an immediate result of a wound then received.
Not many miles distant is an earthwork still known as Mordred's Castle; and at Carron, nearer
still, there was formerly a mound or cairn known as Arthur's Oon (oven). All the picturesque
detail in Tennyson's wonderful "Passing of Arthur" must be attributed to Cymric bards, to the
genius of Malory, and to the poet's imagination; we must be content with the conclusion that
Arthur was born but did not die in Cornwall.

In any case nothing of the present ruins at Tintagel existed in the time of Arthur. Geoffrey
of Monmouth, who wrote about the year 1150, says of the stronghold that "it is situated upon
the sea, and on every side surrounded by it; and there is but one entrance into it, and that
through a straight rock, which three men shall be able to defend against the whole power of
the kingdom." Even Gorlois, we remember, only gained admittance by stratagem. Tintagel, Dundagel,
or Dundiogl, the Dunecheniv of Domesday, seems certainly to have belonged to Gorlois when Uther
was Pendragon or Head-king of Britain; it would have been a cliff-castle such as that on Pentire
Head. As years passed the rock probably became more insular, and when the Norman stronghold
was built it was connected with the mainland by a drawbridge. From earliest times the castle
attached to the Earls of Cornwall, one of whom protected David, Prince of Wales, during his
revolt against Edward I. Later it was used as a kind of prison, a Mayor of London being confined
within it. Elizabeth had some thought of restoring it, for it had already become ruinous; Leland
says: "The residue of the buildings of the Castle be sore wetherbeten, and yn ruine; but it
hath beene a large thinge." Its outworks extended to the mainland, but the great keep was on
the isolated mass of rock. Here also are the remains of St. Juliet's chapel, with its altar-slab
and stone benches. It is not easy to say much about the Juliot or Julitta to whom this chapel
was dedicated; but the chapel is certainly that mentioned in the thirteenth-century High History
of the Holy Grail. "They came into a very different land, scarce inhabited of any folk, and
found a little castle in a combe. They came thitherward and saw that the enclosure of the castle
was fallen down into an abysm, so that none might approach it on that side, but it had a right
fair gateway and a door tall and wide, whereby they entered. They beheld a chapel that was
fair and rich, and below was a great ancient hall." But the spirit of modernism now comes very
near to this sacred spot of antiquity; on an opposite headland stands a commodious hotel, and
the Tintagel golf-links come very close to the castle. A tiny port lies below, from which a
little slate is sometimes shipped. The village, whose correct name of Trevena is being displaced
by that of Tintagel, lies about a mile inland; it is clean and comfortable, but not remarkably
picturesque except for the old gabled building that was once its post-office. Those who want
the perpetual presence of the sea will not be contented with it. Its church, dedicated to SS.
Marcelliana and Materiana (of whom the latter may be the Welsh Madron), stands at a distance,
above the cliffs west of the castle; it is a stern, bare building, magnificently placed, so
fully exposed to the force of Atlantic gales that the very tombstones have been buttressed.
A portion of the walls, in their rude simplicity, appears to be Saxon, but many orders are
represented here, from the late Norman chancel-arch to the Decorated south transept and Perpendicular
screen. There is a rugged circular font, and what is supposed to be a Roman milestone. The
vestry was formerly a Lady-chapel, possibly Saxon, with a thirteenth-century door and a curious
mutilated altar. The south-transept window is to the memory of J. Douglas Cook, founder of
the Saturday Review, who returned to his native Cornwall to die. In the churchyard are the
graves of drowned seamen, British and foreign. It is a striking and solemnising little church,
quite in harmony with a district of myth and sublimity. It is possible that some who come to
Tintagel for the first time may be disappointed. If so, they have expected too much, or have
expected the wrong thing. There is no gloss of false romance about the place; the ruins have
not the hollow pretentious grandeur of some Norman castles; what we see is the unadorned, unveiled
reality of a majestic coast, the low, stark walls of ruin on an immemorial site, the naked
wind-beaten church on the heights, the sea breaking into gaunt caverns below. Sheep feed within
the enclosure to which we scramble by a ragged path. Sentiment may resent the hotel and the
golfers, but any jarring note can easily be ignored. Yet even Tennyson seems to have been disappointed
at first; afterwards, the spirit of the place sank into him and prevailed. Perhaps old Hawker
has described it best, in few pregnant words:--

    "Hark! stern Dundagel softens into song.
    They meet for solemn severance, knight and king,
    Where gate and bulwark darken o'er the sea."

He gives us the words of Arthur, when the listeners "hush their hearts to hear the king":--

    "I would not be forgotten in this land:
    I yearn that men I know not, men unborn,
    Shall find, amid these fields, King Arthur's fame.
    Here let them say, by proud Dundagel's walls--
    'They brought the Sangraal back at his command,
    They touched these rugged rocks with hues of God,'
    So shall my name have worship, and my land."

And after the king had spoken:--

    "That night Dundagel shuddered into storm--
    The deep foundations shook beneath the sea."

There was a time when Trevena, with Bossiney and Trevalga, formed a borough, and sent members
to Parliament, of whom Francis Drake was one. It needed little apology to disfranchise such
a small corporation as this, but the first Reform Bill had to deal with far greater anomalies.
Bossiney has other attractions than such memories as this, having a delightful cove protected
by the fine headland of Willapark. The fishing hamlet is close to an ancient burial-mound or
barrow, from which election writs were once read and the local mayor proclaimed. From this
cove we can pass upward into the glorious Rocky Valley, with its broken crags, its tangled
foliage and rushing stream, its old mill. It is just a little like the gorge at Lynmouth, but
wilder. This is the stream forming the famous cascade known as Knighton's (or St. Nectan's)
Kieve. It is not very easy to find, and, here as at Tintagel, a key must be procured before
its beauties can be examined. The Kieve is a basin of rock, into which the water has a fall
of about 40 feet. St. Nectan is supposed to have been a brother of Morwenna, of Morwenstow;
it is said he had an oratory here, and when he was dying he threw its silver bell into the
waterfall. But Mr. Baring-Gould says that he died at Hartland. Following the usual guide-book
convention, this would be the right moment for quoting Hawker's ballad, "The Sisters of Glen
Nectan," but that piece is not one of his happiest efforts, and the legend is at least dubious.
Those who journey afoot from Bossiney to Boscastle will find it almost impossible to keep to
the coast, as the Rocky Valley forms an impediment, especially when its stream is in flood
after heavy rains. But they can find a tolerable road to Trevalga, crossing the stream at the
Long Bridge, and at Trevalga they will find an interesting little church. The shore here is
broken into some small creeks of great beauty, but one chasm is so dark and sombre that it
has won the name of Blackapit. There are dangers along these wild beaches; the poet Swinburne,
when a boy, was almost cut off by the tide near Tintagel. From Blackapit we rise to Willapark
Point and the church of Forrabury. The view from the Point is very fine, covering the ravine
and haven of Boscastle on the east, and looking towards Tintagel on the west. Forrabury, the
parish church of Boscastle, is dedicated to St. Symphorian, whoever that saint be (perhaps
St. Veryan); and in situation it much resembles that of Tintagel. The pulpit and the woodwork
of the altar date from the fifteenth century. There is a good granite cross in the churchyard.
Here again there is a temptation, into which most writers fall, of quoting from Hawker, with
his poem, "The Silent Tower of Bottreaux," in which he gives us a legend accounting for the
fact that this church has only a single bell. But as he frankly confessed, in after life, that
he had invented the story on the very slightest foundation, it is better to avoid quoting from
the ballad, except solely for the melodious smoothness of its burden:--

    "Come to thy God in time,
    Thus saith the ocean chime;
    Storm, whirlwind, billow past,
    Come to thy God at last."

Boscastle, taking its name from the old Norman family of Bottreaux (though there are many other
place-names in Cornwall beginning with bos, which means abode or dwelling-place), is certainly
the most romantic and picturesque haven in the Duchy, though there may be others that surpass
it in actual beauty. The coast has a wild grandeur rather than loveliness, and in dismal or
stormy weather there is a weird, solemn gloom. The little town lies sheltered at the head of
a gorge in which two rivulets meet and form the haven. Old Leland in his graphic manner mentions
one only of these brooks: "There cummith down a little broke from South-Est out of the Hilles
thereby, and so renning by the West side of the Towne goith into Severn Se betwixt two hilles,
and there maketh a pore Havenet, but of no certaine salvegarde." It is the river Valency of
which he speaks, the more important of the streams that join just above the haven. This is
a tiny land-locked harbour with stone piers, at which some coal, lime, and general merchandise
are imported; the entrance is very difficult to make, and vessels that succeed in doing so
have to be warped in by immense hawsers. Seeing this, and the small haven at Bude, one realises
the wildness of this unsheltered coast, where such perilous places are called harbours. The
village, though not large, is a long one, straggling down a hill and along the narrow ravine.
Its activity is maintained by the daily arrival and departure of cars from Camelford, Bude,
Otterham, and Tintagel, bringing many visitors in the summer season. Some come to stay, but
most make only a fleeting call; Nature has placed grave obstacles in the way of Boscastle's
ever becoming a fashionable watering-place. Its charm is unique and undeniable; but it appeals
to the artist, the sturdy pedestrian and climber, the lover of solitude that at times is absolute
desolation, rather than to the parent of a family. But the desolation, if that is not too stern
a word to use, only applies to the coast; the Valency Valley is verdant and beautiful. It runs
among furze and bracken by the riverside, and by this path we can reach the quiet, lovely vale
in which Minster stands, so named from a former monastic establishment. Like the church at
Tintagel, this of Minster is dedicated to St. Materiana, whom Mr. Baring-Gould identifies with
the Welsh Madrun. The tower is of a single stage; there are good bench-ends and roof-carvings.
A portion of the church having fallen in one Sunday, after morning service, it was rebuilt
about forty years since. The priory was founded by William de Bottreaux in the reign of Richard
I., but does not seem to have had a long existence. Minster is a large parish, but Forrabury
is one of the smallest in Cornwall.

Pentargon, the bay and headland beyond the Boscastle golf-links, is sometimes interpreted as
"Arthur's Head," but this is doubtful. The caves here, and those below Willapark, were once
much haunted by seals; the coast being absolutely honeycombed by the constant fretting of the
waves. At times, but rarely, the Cornish chough may be seen on the cliffs, recalling the old
tradition that the spirit of Arthur lingers around his native rocks in this form--a tradition
that was even familiar to Cervantes, though he knew the Welsh version of it, which makes Arthur
a raven. Eastward past Beeny the cliffs gradually rise, till at High Cliff they reach the height
of 700 feet; it needs some enthusiasm for a pedestrian to keep to the coast-line, though every
mile has its grandeur. Beyond Cambeak lies the delightful Crackington Cove, which will some
day become a watering-place; it stands at the mouth of a verdant valley with a stream like
that of the Valency. It is in the parish of St. Genny's, whose church is dedicated to St. Genesius
of Auvergne, of whom it is related that after being beheaded he walked about with his head
under his arm. The saints of Cornwall are reported to have done some extraordinary things,
but they do not usually descend to absurd actions of this nature; and there may be a shrewd
suspicion that Genesius has no business here at all. William Braddon, a Parliamentary officer
and member in the time of the Civil War, lived at Treworgye in this parish, and was buried
in the church; some have supposed that he was vicar here. Pencannow Head, the north limit of
Crackington Cove, rises sheer from the shore to the height of 400 feet. Dizzard Point is far
less precipitous. A few miles further east the cliffs break to allow room for a fine stretch
of sands at Widemouth Bay, and here we have another spot that is certain to develop into a
pleasure-resort of the future. It cannot, of course, compare with the coast magnificence of
the shore from Pentire to Boscastle, but it has what these wilder spots lack--a possibility
of conventional settlement and expansion in the style of watering-place that the British public
chiefly loves.

CHAPTER XVII

BUDE

We read in the memoir of Tennyson that in the year 1848 he felt a craving to make a lonely
sojourn at Bude. "I hear," he said, "that there are larger waves there than on any other part
of the British coast, and must go thither and be alone with God." So he came, with the subject
of his Idylls simmering in his mind. He found the great rollers, the grand, open coast, the
solitude; these are still there, to be found of all that seek. There may be some lessening
of the solitude, but only in parts; Bude has not yet become widely popular; it is the haunt
of those who love bracing air and quiet. It grows, but grows slowly; old friends may return
to it without being tortured by too glaring a change.

The coast must indeed be destitute of harbours that can call Bude a haven; yet the name Bude
Haven stands, as if in deadly irony. This whole north coast of Cornwall and Devon has little
enough of refuge for seamen in distress; and if they endeavour to make Bude when seas are running
high they are simply courting disaster; it were better to stay far out, if the cruel Atlantic
will let them. Yet a rumour of history says that Agricola landed here. It is not impossible,
though accredited history tells nothing of such a visit; seas are not always stormy, even on
the shores of North Cornwall--there are days when the waters from St. Ives to Lundy are peaceful
as a child asleep. But such slumbering is not their characteristic mood; there is generally
a strong ocean swell, and when westerly winds chafe the tide its force and fury are tremendous.
Hawker, who was familiar with every yard of the district, has a ballad to the purpose:--

    "Thus said the rushing raven
    Unto his hungry mate:
    'Ho! gossip! for Bude Haven;
    There be corpses six or eight.
    Cawk, cawk! the crew and skipper
    Are wallowing in the sea;
    So there's a savoury supper
    For my old dame and me.'

    .     .     .     .     .     .

    'Cawk, cawk!' then said the raven;
    'I am fourscore years and ten;
    Yet never in Bude Haven
    Did I croak for rescued men.--
    They will save the captain's girdle,
    And shirt, if shirt there be;
    But leave his blood to curdle
    For my old dame and me.'"

The graveyards, the fields, the farmyards, will bear out this grim character; there are traces
of shipwreck everywhere--memorials of drowned seamen in the burial-ground, figure-heads of
shattered vessels placed here and there, beams and spars applied to unintended agricultural
uses. One such figure-head is that of the Bencoolen, in the churchyard, reminding us of a vessel
wrecked in 1862, when only six were saved from its crew of thirty-five. The Bencoolen was trading
from Liverpool to Bombay. We may take Hawker's description of the disaster, recollecting, however,
that he wrote in great excitement, and that he was a little unjust to the men of Bude. The
wreck took place towards the end of October, after a hurricane that "lasted seven days and
nights. On Tuesday at two o'clock afternoon a hull was seen off Bude wallowing in the billows.
All rushed to the shore. At three she struck on the sand close to the breakwater--not 300 yards
from the rocks. Manby's apparatus was brought down--a rocket fired and a rope carried over
to the ship. The mate sprang to clutch it--missed--and fell into the sea, to be seen no more
alive. 'Another rope!' was the cry. But from the mismanagement of those in charge there was
no other there. They then saw the poor fellows constructing a raft and launching it. A call
for the lifeboat, one of large cost, provided with all good gear, kept close by. She was run
down to the water. A shout for men--none--a few of the Hovillers, pilotmen, got on board, but
refused to put off--all Bude lining the cliffs and shore--Well, well--to abbreviate a horror,
the raft was tossed over. About six were washed ashore with life in them, four corpses, and
the rest were carried off to sea dead--26 corpses are somewhere in our water, and my men are
watching for their coming on shore. The County gives 5s. for finding each corpse, and I give
5s. more. Therefore they are generally found and brought here to the vicarage, where the inquest
and the attendant events nearly kill me.... Hordes of people picking up--salvors with carts
and horses--and lookers on. It reminded me of old Holingshed's definition, 'a place called
Bedes Haven (Bede, a grave).' When the masts went over the captain, married a fortnight before,
rushed down into his cabin, drank a bottle of brandy, and was seen no more. The country rings
with cries of shame on the dastards of Bude." A calmer eyewitness quite absolves the Bude men
from all blame--to render more help had been impossible. The vessel was being steered skilfully
to take the haven, but she was too large for its mouth. But, unjust or not, we must love Parson
Hawker. He tells of his procedure when a corpse was reported: "I go out into the moonlight
bareheaded, and when I come near I greet the nameless dead with the sentences 'I am the Resurrection
and the Life,' &c. They lay down their burthen at my feet--I look upon the dead--tall--stout--well-grown--boots
on, elastic, and socks--girded with a rope round the waist. I give him in charge to the sexton
and his wife to cleanse, to arrange, to clothe the dead. I order a strong coffin, and the corpse
is locked in for the night. I write a letter to the coroner and deliver it for transit to the
police. And here the misery begins." To every corpse discovered Hawker gave burial in consecrated
ground; it was not many years since the law had forbidden this. The few graphic words quoted
give us an idea of his days spent on this lonely, pitiless coast--days which he varied by acts
of beneficence to his parishioners, and by the writing of much beautiful poetry. Close to the
mouth of this perilous haven is the low breakwater, built to connect an outlying mass of rock
that was formerly insular with every tide. Carew (1602) speaks of this rock; he says: "We meete
with Bude, an open sandie bay, in whose mouth riseth a little hill, by euerie sea-floud made
an Iland, and thereon a decayed chapell: it spareth roade only to such small shipping as bring
their tide with them, and leaveth them drie, when the ebb hath carried away the salt water."
He tells how Arundel of Trerice had a house here named Efford, now the Bude vicarage; and how
this gentleman "builded a salt-water mill athwart this bay, whose causey serveth, as a verie
convenient bridge, to save the way-farers former trouble, let and daunger." The present church
stands near, built by Sir Thomas Acland in 1835. The chapel on the islet, decayed even in Carew's
time, was dedicated to St. Michael, its dedication being transferred to the present church;
only a few faint traces of the old building can be seen. It was this same Sir Thomas Ackland
who constructed the bathing-pool at the end of the breakwater, where it forms a very pleasant
little swimming-bath. But in time of storm, rock and pool and breakwater are a mass of snowy,
quivering foam; even in less tempestuous times it is fine to see the waves rush seething up
the sides of the substantial little breakwater, with suggestiveness of what they can do in
wilder hours.

It must be confessed that this corner by the haven is the most interesting portion of Bude,
which some visitors have condemned as an unattractive place. Certainly the growth of lodging-houses
has not added to its charm, as these houses have all the tameness, though doubtless also the
convenience, of modern street-architecture. It is by the haven and on the banks of the now
useless canal that there is anything of an old-world atmosphere. As compared with places like
Polperro or Boscastle, Bude has a touch of the commonplace, but its coast is fine, and it is
an excellent centre for a district of supreme attraction. Readers who care to see how it figures
in modern fiction should turn to the Seaboard Parish of the late George Macdonald, in which
Bude is the Kilkhaven of the story. Even here the novelist had to borrow another church for
his setting; the present Bude Church is by no means that of the romance. The town is now reaching
from the canal banks to the breezy Summerleaze Downs, and beyond; and of course the golfer
is here in all his glory. But if we go a little more than a mile inland we find all that may
be lacking in Bude at Stratton, which may or may not be named after an old "street" that passed
this way from Devonshire. That street was almost certainly not Roman, even if the Romans used
it. There is a little stream here called the Strat, which does not help us, for the stream
may have been called after the town. Stratton shares with Stowe in the glorious memories of
Sir Beville Grenville, his wife Grace, and his servant Anthony Payne; but Bideford has also
its claim to long association with the Grenvilles--it was from Bideford that Sir Richard sailed
the Revenge. Stowe, in the parish of Kilkhampton, a few miles north of Bude, is now a farm,
showing very few traces of the Grenville manor-house, which was one of the finest and most
extensive in the West. There were two houses, an earlier and a later, but both are now things
of the past. At Stratton, however, there is still the Tree Inn, which seems to have been the
business residence of Sir Beville, whither he came to settle matters with his tenants and followers;
and it was here that his servant, Anthony Payne, was born. Payne, who stood seven foot four
in his stockings, was devoted and loyal to his heart's core; it was he who, when Sir Beville
fell fighting for King Charles at Lansdown, led the knight's son up the hill at the head of
the gallant, irresistible Cornishmen. These Cornishmen had already proved their powers much
nearer to Stratton. The battlefield known as Stamford Hill is close by; it was here that Sir
Beville and Hopton defeated the Parliamentary forces under the Earl of Stamford and Chudleigh.
The fight took place in 1643, and was one of those Royalist victories in the West that for
a time made the cause of the King look very hopeful. The Cornish troops were outnumbered almost
by two to one; they were tired and hungry, and they had the worst of the ground, for the Roundheads
had entrenched themselves; yet they stormed the hill, routed the Parliament men, and took 1,700
prisoners. An old gun still lies there to mark the spot, and above is the inscription: "In
this place an army of ye Rebels under ye command of ye Earl of Stamford received a signal over-throw
by ye valour of Sir Bevill Grenville and ye Cornish Army." If there be ever glory attaching
to battlefields, it may be found here. While the battle was raging Grace Grenville, the wife
of Sir Beville, was waiting in anguish of heart at Stowe, only to be pacified when her husband
himself came home at night to tell her of the issue. Yet scarce two months had flown when the
sorrowful Payne wrote telling his beloved mistress the sore tidings of Lansdown, where the
Cornishmen followed their slain master's son up the hill with tears in their eyes. "They did
say they would kill a rebel for every hair of Sir Beville's beard. But I bade them remember
their good master's word when he wiped his sword after Stamford fight; how he said, when their
cry was 'stab and slay,' 'Halt, men; God will avenge.' I am coming down with the mournfullest
burden that ever a poor servant did bear, to bring the great heart that is cold to Kilkhampton
vault. Oh, my lady, how shall I ever brook your weeping face?"

Never was a sweeter communionship of husband and wife than that between Sir Beville and Lady
Grace, thus brought to an earthly end; it gives a lovely touch of domestic affection to annals
that are otherwise stern and bloody enough, with all their glory. There are some charming letters
preserved, that passed between the two; showing the beautiful simplicity of their natures and
the tone of their home life. "My dearest," wrote the knight from London, "I am exceedingly
glad to hear from you, but doe desire you not to be so passionat for my absence. I vow you
cannot more desire to have me at home than I desire to be there." And again: "Charge Postlett
and Hooper that they keepe out the Piggs and all other things out of my new nursery, and the
other orchard too. Let them use any means to keepe them safe, for my trees will all be spoild
if they com in, which I would not for a world." And the lady, addressing "Sweet Mr. Grenvile,"
adds in a postscript to her letter: "If you please to bestowe a plaine black Gownd of any cheape
stufe on me I will thank you, and some black shoes." She died about four years after her husband
fell at Lansdown. These two lie buried at Kilkhampton, but Payne, the loyal servant, is somewhere
within the noble church of Stratton; there is no monument to say where. The church is of excellent
restored Perpendicular, with fine pinnacled tower. Within are a Norman font, a Jacobean pulpit,
and the black marble tomb of Sir John Arundel (1561), whose former manor-house at Efford is
now Bude Vicarage; there are brasses of the knight, his wives and their children. The fourteenth-century
effigy of a knight in the north aisle is supposed to be that of Sir Ranulf de Blanchminster,
who is commemorated in one of Hawker's ballads. It is fitting to think of the poet-parson in
this spot; not only are we now approaching very near his own parish, but his father was Vicar
of Stratton and lies buried in the church's chancel. Hawker was often asked to preach here,
but he long declined, fearing that the associations would be too overwhelming for him. This
proved to be the case when at last, in his old age, he preached at the church. Suddenly breaking
in his sermon, he explained with faltering voice, "I stand amid the dust of those near and
dear to me." It is little wonder that his listeners shared his emotion; and some touch of it
may still come over those to whom the records of Hawker are very dear. The number of such lovers
should have been much increased by the adequate biography that is now at the service of the
public, prepared by the son-in-law of the poet; and Hawker is pre-eminently one of those whom
we learn to love even more through his memoirs than by his writings. For his life was a life
of noble deeds, not only of beautiful words.

CHAPTER XVIII

MORWENSTOW

There is a fine stretch of sands protecting the Bude shores, but the background of these sands
is cliff. It was this sand that made one of the chief uses of the canal from Bude to Holsworthy,
now superseded by the railway; containing a large proportion of lime, it is valuable for agricultural
purposes. The sands have a further use now as a playground for visitors; very few watering-places
become really popular without such a beach for the children and the bathers. But the true coast
is, of course, the background of cliff, and this continues grandly rugged and broken to the
Devon borders, and beyond. Little more than a mile north of Bude is Poughill, pronounced Puffill.
The church, dedicated to St. Olaf, is one of the few Teutonic foundations in Cornwall; but,
indeed, this northern corner of the neighbouring counties, with its "weeks" and "hams" and
"worthies," must have been largely held by settlements of Saxons. The value of place-names
in such matters is very great, though it must never be pressed too far. Poughill Church, with
a good Perpendicular tower, is chiefly notable for its frescoes, somewhat glaringly restored;
they resemble those of St. Breage, in the Helston district. Both figures represent St. Christopher
bearing his sacred burden across the tide, and the details are in an advanced stage of symbolism.
Far more pleasing, artistically, are the beautiful bench-ends of the early sixteenth century,
with their various emblems of the Crucifixion, their armorial insignia, their symbols and initials.
This church is peculiarly attractive, and its situation is delightful. From thence the road
runs to Kilkhampton, whither recollections of the Grenvilles have already carried us. We are
now getting into the heart of the Hawker district, but other associations are so numerous here
that it seems impossible to deal with them all in anything like an adequate manner. The Perpendicular
church of Kilkhampton chiefly dates from the Elizabethan days when one of the Grenvilles was
rector here; but it embodies the beautiful Norman doorway from the church supposed to have
been built in the eleventh century by another Grenville. Some other Norman traces are preserved--Rector
Grenville was a judicious restorer. Of his date are the oak bench-ends, which are as good as
Poughill's, and there is an elaborate screen. The monument of Sir Beville Grenville, erected
long after his death by his grandson, is perhaps not quite what it ought to be--it is too dismal
and conventional. It is very much in the spirit of the Calvinistic clergyman, James Hervey,
who, when curate at Bideford, was so much impressed by Kilkhampton Church that it prompted
his once famous Meditations among the Tombs. The work and others of its author's, such as Theron
and Aspasio, may still be met with occasionally on old-fashioned bookshelves, or on the second-hand
stalls; and they forcibly remind us of the style of second-rate reflection which, in a different
dress, is still dear to the average sober-minded individual. But Hervey is not at all bad,
of his sort, and our great-grandfathers thought him profound. Probably, however, he was dearer
to their wives; it is chiefly women who support this kind of moralising. To Hervey Kilkhampton
Church was "an ancient Pile, reared by Hands that ages ago moulded into Dust--the Body spacious,
the Structure lofty, the whole magnificently plain." He was at Bideford in 1740. Much more
lively in its nature was the connection with this parish of the notorious Cruel Coppinger,
smuggler, wrecker, and desperado.

    "Will you hear of Cruel Coppinger?
      He came from a foreign land;
    He was brought to us by the salt water,
      He was carried away by the wind."

Coppinger has become almost mythical, by reason of older traditions of pirate-smugglers being
attributed to him. The Rev. S. Baring-Gould himself, in his book on the Vicar of Morwenstow,
has located Coppinger in the Kilkhampton district; but his novel, In the Roar of the Sea, places
its hero, somewhat humanised, at St. Enodoc. The truth is, there are similar traditions in
several parts of the Cornish coast, and elsewhere. There was a floating mass of legend ready
to be appropriated by any character that might seem to deserve it; and we may take Coppinger
as a kind of generic title, the clustering of varying Cornish traditions of wrecking and piracy
round one name. Such being the case, he may as well be placed at Kilkhampton as anywhere else.
He is reported sometimes as a Dane, sometimes as an Irishman, who was thrown on the coast in
a tempest, who leaped upon her horse's back behind a girl who had come to witness the wreck,
and who ultimately married her. He proved to be one of the blackest villains Cornwall had ever
known, but as he had a powerful gang of followers who aided him in all his misdoings, there
must have been plenty as bad as he, though they might lack his gift of leadership and initiative.
He is said to have chopped off a gauger's hand on the gunwale of a boat--rumour reported even
worse things than this; and he once soundly horsewhipped the parson of Kilkhampton, who had
offended him. There is also a story of his carrying a terrified tailor to "mend the devil's
breeches." He departed as mysteriously as he came, after many years of vile outrage; he "who
came with the water went with the wind." It is clear that a great deal of old-time folk-lore
has gathered round this name, and probably no single man must be held answerable for all the
wild doings related of Cruel Coppinger. In all such traditions Hawker is a most unsafe guide;
he did not consciously "falsify the books," but he had misled many who came after, particularly
the popular guide-books, by his looseness and his play of fancy. But he came to this district
at a period when smuggling, if not actual wrecking and piracy, was at its height--not only
in Cornwall, be it remembered, but in many other parts of the coast, such as Sussex and Kent.
It was a time when the Cornish used to thank God for wrecks; and if they did not actually lure
vessels to destruction on their cruel coasts, which it may be feared they did sometimes, they
at least did nothing to avert the disasters which, to their mind, were sent by a merciful providence.
There was even a proverb that it was unlucky to rescue a drowning man--widespread, for Scott
mentions it in the "Pirate"; the bad luck which these coast-folk had in view being the fact
that a rescued personage could claim his property that the sea had cast up.

Hawker was born in Norley Street, Plymouth, December 29, 1803; his grandfather and uncle were
both clergy in Plymouth at the time. Thus, though he has won a world-wide fame as the Cornish
poet, Hawker was really Devonian; in this borderland of the two counties there is practically
no difference. In the same manner the Grenvilles were of Devonshire, yet Cornwall treasures
their memories with justifiable pride. In after years Hawker used to say that, could his mother
have foreseen how sorrowful his life would be, she would have given a gentle pressure to his
throat in his first hour, and so have averted all his earthly trials. He grew to be a mischievous
and daring lad. One of his pranks was to swim out to the crags at the mouth of Bude haven,
and there pose as a mermaid; which he did to the prolonged bewilderment of the countryfolk.
He was educated at Liskeard, Cheltenham, and Oxford; coming to Morwenstow in 1834 after having
held the curacy of North Tamerton. He had already married a lady who was twenty years older
than himself--a marriage of the deepest lasting affection. His second marriage, in his old
age, was to a lady forty years his junior; but by this time the poet's spirit had been broken
by solitude, grief, failure to win literary success, and by the terrible scenes of shipwreck
and death that often distracted him. He died in 1875, having been received into the Romish
Church a few hours before his death; and the remains were laid in Plymouth Cemetery. On his
tombstone is a line from his own beautiful poem, "The Quest of the Sangraal"--

    "I would not be forgotten in this land."

There is now an elaborate memorial window in Morwenstow Church, unveiled in 1904. The poet
has not been forgotten in this land, nor is he likely to be. He has impressed himself so vividly
on the district that was long his home, that we may now as justly speak of the Hawker country
as we do of the Scott or the Wordsworth country. The work was accomplished even more by the
man's personality than by his writings. If only these writings had been preserved he would
not pass to posterity quite as fully as he merited; only a portion of the man would survive.
But there was the tradition of the man himself, assisted by some inadequate memoirs; and now
we have one of the most charming biographies of recent times to bring him before us. He was
not only poet and essayist; he was cleric and mystic, preacher, prophet, symbolist, philanthropist--some
may add reactionary. His life was permeated with Catholic doctrine and colour. When he passed,
in his closing hours, to a sister communion, the step was a natural and easy one, however unnecessary
some of us may think it to have been. He loved the Church of England devotedly and unfailingly;
but he always looked upon her as the Old Church, rather than as a reformed body; and to his
unquestioning mind a few extra dogmas would never have presented any difficulty. It was disbelief,
doubt, that he abhorred. Like Sir Thomas Browne, he was greedy for more mysteries, more marvels,
more sublimities for unhesitating acceptance. He was always in sympathy both with the Roman
and the early Greek Churches, and sometimes in his own ritual he borrowed from both; yet he
could fulminate hotly enough at times against the excesses of either. He loved deeply and hated
strongly; but the love was permanent and real, the hatred transient and superficial.

He had a lifelong bitterness against Dissenters, and lived on the tenderest terms with many.
His bark was very much worse than his bite. "I understand, Mr. Hawker," once said a Nonconformist
lady to him, "that you have an objection to burying Dissenters?" "Madam," he replied, "I should
be only too delighted to bury you all." But there was no real sting behind the words, and some
of his dearest and kindest parishioners were not Churchmen. He spent his days in doing good
deeds to man and beast, saving strangers from the devouring sea, or giving their bodies Christian
burial; tutoring the rugged hearts of his people; and living himself, in spite of much sorrow,
disappointment, loss, in a world of holy dream and vision, conversing in spirit with saints
and angels. Hawker believed that his dear country was given over to doubt and laxity; and every
affliction of war, misfortune, bad weather, he interpreted as the chastening hand of God. He
would have had his world coloured entirely by faith and religious observance; stained as it
were, like the glass of church windows, by sacred image and story. But practicalities pressed
heavily upon him and almost broke his heart; his poetic impulse failed under sore discouragement;
he did not proceed with his finest poem; those of his poems that became popular did so without
the attachment of his name. Very much of this was due to his own procedure; yet the man had
much hardship, neglect, and suffering, for which he could in no sense be held responsible.
He was a true descendant of the early Cornish saints, born perhaps several centuries too late,
and thrust upon a world where he had to turn to sea and wind and woodland for the mystic symbolism
which was his life-breath, finding too little of it in the ways and words of Victorian England.

The present vicarage at Morwenstow was built by Hawker himself, there having been no vicar
in residence for long years before his coming. It was here, in 1848, that Tennyson visited
him, coming over from Bude, where he was staying at the Falcon Hotel. In stepping hastily from
the garden to reach the sea, when he first arrived, the poet had fallen; there was no protecting
rail there at that time. The injury proved so serious that he had to see a surgeon; and this
surgeon happened to be Mr. John Dinham, Hawker's brother-in-law. Two days after the accident
Tennyson drove over to Morwenstow with Dinham to see Hawker. His own note on the visit is brief
and unsatisfying: "In a gig to Rev. S. Hawker, at Morwenstow, passing Comb Valley, fine view
over sea, coldest manner of vicar till I told my name, then all heartiness. Walk on cliff with
him; told of shipwreck." This is very meagre. Happily Hawker himself wrote down a more detailed
account, and this was discovered among his brother's papers. It was headed with a cross, signifying
that it recorded what Hawker deemed a mark of divine favour. "It was in the month of June,
1848, that my brother-in-law, John Dinham, arrived at Morwenstow with a very fine-looking man
whom he had been called in to attend professionally at Bude for an injury in the knee from
a fall.... I found my guest at his entrance a tall, swarthy, Spanish-looking man, with an eye
like a sword. He sate down, and we conversed. I at once found myself with no common mind. All
poetry in particular he seemed to use like household words.... Before we left the room he said,
'Do you know my name?' I said, 'No, I have not even a guess.' 'Do you wish to know it?' 'I
don't much care--that which we call a rose, &c.' 'Well then,' said he, 'my name is Tennyson!'
'What!' said I, 'the Tennyson?' 'What do you mean by the Tennyson? I am Alfred Tennyson who
wrote Locksley Hall, which you seem to know by heart.' So we grasped hands, and the Shepherd's
heart was glad.... Then, seated on the brow of the cliff, with Dundagel full in view, he revealed
to me the purpose of his journey to the West. He is about to conceive a poem--the hero King
Arthur--the scenery in part the vanished Land of Lyonesse, between the mainland and the Scilly
Isles.... Then evening fell. He arose to go; and I agreed to drive him on his way. He demanded
a pipe, and produced a package of very common shag. By great good luck my sexton had about
him his own short black dudheen, which accordingly the Minstrel filled and fired. Wild language
occupied the way, until we shook farewell at Combe. 'This,' said Tennyson, 'has indeed been
a day to be remembered.'" Hawker had a presentiment that they would never meet again, and they
never did, though Tennyson visited Cornwall in later years. There was some slight correspondence,
and an interchange of books; but the two drifted apart in spirit--perhaps they had never been
very near. Tennyson's theology was that of Maurice, whom Hawker came to regard as an arch-enemy
of Catholic truth. On one ground they both met in later life--when they chose the subject of
the Holy Grail for poetic treatment; and on this ground the lesser poet beat the greater, as
Tennyson himself frankly acknowledged. Yet both in their different ways lived near to the spirit
that is typified by the Grail; but the one abode in solitude on his wild Cornish cliffs and
the other lived in the blaze of popular fame, visited and loved by the greatest in the land.
Who shall say that Hawker's life, after all, was not the nearest to his best ideals? Morwenstow
vicarage is curious for its chimneys, which Hawker himself designed from church-towers in his
neighbourhood and at Oxford. The church and vicarage stand in loneliness; there is no central
village at Morwenstow, but the residences are scattered about the swelling downs and high-banked
lanes. At the entrance to the graveyard is the lich-gate and mortuary, where many wrecked seamen
were taken for burial. Such burials recall the unforgettable incident that occurred during
the conveyance of one poor mangled body from the shore. "It was dark, and the party of bearers,
with the Vicar at their head, were making their way slowly up the cliff by the light of torches
and lanterns, when suddenly there arose from the sea three hearty British cheers. A vessel
had neared the shore, and the crew, discovering by night-glasses what was taking place, had
manned their yards to greet the fulfilment of duty to a brother mariner's remains." Morwenstow
is really Morwenna-stow, Morwenna being a grand-daughter of Brychan, and thus belonging to
a famous Welsh family of saints. The church is therefore a Celtic foundation, not Saxon as
Hawker believed; he was always a little shaky in such details. In some maps and old local signposts
the name is still written Moorwinstow, and was anciently Morestowe. Probably the earliest relic
in the church itself is the font, which appears to belong to the tenth century; three typical
Norman pillars support the northern arcade of the roof, and there is a very fine Norman door
at the south porch. The Vicar loved to interpret the zigzag moulding as the "ripple of the
lake of Gennesareth, the spirit breathing upon the waters of baptism"; he was doubtless more
correct in reading a symbolic meaning into the carved vine that creeps from the chancel down
the church. On the furze and bracken-clad slope above the cliffs, not far distant, is the hut
that Hawker himself constructed, building it of wreckage; this was the sanctuary to which he
loved to retreat for contemplation and literary work. It was here that he wrote his Sangraal
poem, and the strong picture of its close might apply to this scene as forcibly as it does
to its original.

In this parish is Tonacombe, a finely preserved specimen of the mediæval manor-house, its hall
containing the old minstrels' gallery. This deeply interesting house has many memories of Charles
Kingsley as well as of Hawker. Kingsley was a visitor here while writing his Westward Ho! and
Tonacombe figures in that book as "Chapel." Hawker met Kingsley at this time, and introduced
him to the Grenville localities. It is not likely that the two men got on well together; they
were complete contrasts in nature and gifts. Hawker did not care greatly for Westward Ho! when
it appeared, and thought its local colour defective. He rarely mentioned Kingsley in later
life without a note of depreciation. He was far more in sympathy, intellectually and spiritually,
with Kingsley's great antagonist, John Henry Newman. At Tonacombe are preserved a curious old
lantern and walking-stick that formerly belonged to Hawker. The lantern "was made for Thomas
Waddon of Tonacombe, who died in 1755. His brother Edward Waddon lived at Stanbury, and their
sister Honor was the wife of the Rev. Oliver Rouse, Vicar of Morwenstow. The three families
used to meet regularly at each other's houses for dice and cards. In the excess of their merriment
the cronies would dash their glasses on the table, and the broken pieces were preserved as
a record of the jest. In course of time there was a goodly collection of these fragments, and
in order that their memorial should not perish the lantern was made of solid oak, square, with
a pointed roof and little windows formed of the round bases of the broken glasses and other
pieces cut in the shape of dice, hearts, clubs, diamonds, and spades. Thereafter, when the
festive party broke up, those whose turn it was to walk homewards through the dark lanes had
their way lighted before them by this emblem of their wit and humour." Stanbury, an old manor
south of Tonacombe, claims some notice as the birthplace of John Stanbury (or Stanberry), confessor
of Henry VI., who was appointed by that king to be first Provost of Eton. From being a Carmelite
friar at Oxford he rose to be bishop, first of Bangor, finally of Hereford. He died in the
Carmelite convent at Ludlow, 1474, and was buried at Hereford. Marsland-mouth, the northward
boundary of Morwenstow parish, is also the boundary between Cornwall and Devon. Its utter loneliness
and wildness are in complete contrast to the great southward boundary at the mouth of the Three
Rivers. Here at Marsland Devon and Cornwall merge imperceptibly; the characteristics of the
one are carried over into the other; in scenery, people, dialect, no change can be noted. This
close community was emphasised, in Hawker's day, by the fact that for the last twenty-five
years of his life he held charge of Welcombe parish as well as Morwenstow, Welcombe (most suitably
named) being the first parish in Devon. In his old age, when Dr. Temple was appointed to the
diocese of Exeter, the Vicar had some fear that he would be deprived of this additional cure,
as Temple was expected to be no friend to Dr. Phillpotts' nominees; but, somewhat to his surprise,
Hawker found that he got on fairly well with the new Bishop, though he detested his theological
standpoints. Obviously, the name of Welcombe might be "Well-combe," there being a holy well
of St. Nectan here; but that derivation does not seem to be correct. In the Exeter Domesday
Book the parish is given as Walcomba, and probably the name signified Welsh-combe, marking
the juncture when Saxonised West Devon passed into "West Wales." The church is three miles'
distance from Morwenstow, and Hawker used to ride over every Sunday afternoon for service.
On one occasion he forgot to bring his watch, and he needed some guide in timing his service
so that he might return to officiate at Morwenstow in the evening. He asked the folk standing
about the church porch if they could oblige him in this particular. "But time is of no great
import at Welcombe, and no watch was to be had. At last, just as the service was beginning,
an old woman hobbled up the aisle and handed to the Vicar a large and ancient timepiece. 'Her's
only got one hand, your honour,' she said, 'but yu must just gi' a guess.'" Perhaps the name
Welsh-combe (Welsh being taken in the old sense of "foreign") denoted some survival of earlier
occupation here, some lingering neolithic remnant; the Welcombe folk are still distinguished
by their dark hair and skins, and as being somewhat of a race apart. In Hawker's day they were
very ignorant and superstitious, though sufficiently devout.