It is a queer world, a world that is past finding out. Here are two children, touching souls
in the fleetest, lightest way in the world, and the touch welds them together forever. And
along come two others, and even as the old song has it, "after touch of wedded hands," they
are strangers yet. No one knows what makes happiness in love. Certainly marriage is no part
of it. Certainly it is not first love, for first lovers often quarrel like cats. Certainly
it is not separation, for absence, alas, does not make the heart grow fonder; nor is it children--though
the good God knows that should help; for they are love incarnate. Certainly it is not respect,
for respect is a stale, cold comforter, and love is deeper than respect, and often lives without
it--let us whisper the truth in shame. What, then, is this irrational current of the stuff
of life, that carries us all in its sway, that brings us to earth, that guides our destiny
here--makes so vastly for our happiness or woe, gives us strength or makes us weak, teaches
us wisdom or leads us into folly unspeakable, and all unseen, unmeasured and infinitely mysterious?

There was young Tom Van Dorn. Love was a pleasurable emotion, and because it put a joyous fever
in his blood, it enhanced his life. But he never defined love; he merely lived on it. Then
there was Ahab Wright who regarded love as a kind of sin and when he married the pale, bloodless,
shadowy bookkeeper in Wright & Perry's store, he regarded the charivari prepared by Morty Sands
and George Brotherton as a shameful rite and tried for an hour to lecture the crowd in his
front yard on the evils of unseemly conduct before he gave them an order on the store for a
bucket of mixed candy. If Ahab had defined love he would have put cupid in side whiskers and
a white necktie and set the fat little god to measuring shingle nails, cod-fish and calico
on week days and sitting around in a tail coat and mouse-colored trousers on Sunday, reading
the Christian Evangel and the Price Current. And again there was Daniel Sands who married five
women in a long and more or less useful life. He would have defined love as the apotheosis
of comfort. Finally there was Henry Fenn to whom love became the compelling force of his being.
Love is many things: indeed only this seems sure. Love is the current of our lives, and like
minnows we run in schools through it, guided by instinct and by herd suggestions; and some
of us are washed ashore; some of us are caught and devoured, and others fare forth in joy and
reach the deep.

One rainy day when the conclave in Brotherton's cigar store was weary of discussing the quarrel
of Mr. Conklin and Mr. Blaine and the eccentricities of the old German Kaiser, the subject
of love came before the house for discussion. Dr. Nesbit, who dropped in incidentally to buy
a cigar, but primarily to see George Brotherton about some matters of state in the Third ward,
found young Tom Van Dorn stroking his new silky mustache, squinting his eyes and considering
himself generally in the attitude of little Jack Horner after the plum episode.

"Speaking broadly," squeaked the Doctor, breaking irritably into the talk, "touching the ladies,
God bless 'em--from young Tom's angle, there's nothing to 'em. Broad is the petticoat that
leadeth to destruction." The Doctor turned from young Van Dorn, and looked critically at some
obvious subject of Van Dorn's remarks as she picked her way across the muddy street, showing
something more than a wink of striped stockings, "Tom, there's nothing in it--not a thing in
the world."

"Oh,--I don't know," returned the youth, wagging an impudent, though good-natured head at the
Doctor; "what else is there in the world if not in that? The world's full of it--flowers, trees,
birds, beasts, men and women--the whole damn universe is afire with it. It's God; there is
no other God--just nature building and propagating and perpetuating herself."

"I suppose," squeaked the Doctor with a sigh, as he reached for his morning paper, "that if
I had nothing else to do for a living except practice law with Joe Calvin on the side and just
be twenty-five years old three hundred days in the year, and no other chores except to help
old man Sands rib up his waterworks deal, I would hold some such general views myself. But
when I was twenty-five, young man, Bedelia and I were running a race with the meal ticket,
and our notions as to the moral government of the universe came hard and were deepset, and
we can't change them now."

George Brotherton, Henry Fenn, Captain Morton and Amos Adams came in with a kind of Greek chorus
of general agreement with the Doctor. Van Dorn cocked his hat over his eyes and laughed, and
then the Doctor went on in his high falsetto:

"It's all right, Tom; go it while you're young. But that kind of love's young dream generally
ends in a nightmare." He hesitated a minute, and then said: "Well, so long as we're all here
in the family, I'll tell you about a case I had last night. There's an old fellow--old Dutchman
to be exact, down in Spring township; he came here with us when we founded the town; husky
old boy, that is, he used to be fifteen years ago. And he had Tom's notion about the ladies,
God bless 'em, when he was Tom's age. When I first knew him his notion was causing him trouble,
and had settled in one leg, and last night he died of the ladies, God bless 'em."

The Doctor's face flinched with pain, and his treble voice winced as he spoke: "Lord, but he
suffered, and to add to his physical torment, he knew that he had to leave his daughter all
alone in the world--and without a mother and without a dollar; but that isn't the worst, and
he knew it--at the last. This being twenty-five for a living is the hardest job on earth--when
you're sixty, and the old man knew that. The girl has missed his blood taint; she's not scarred
nor disfigured. It would be better if she were; but he gave her something worse--she's his
child!" For a moment the Doctor was silent, then he sighed deeply and shut his eyes as he said:
"Boys, for a year and more he's been seeing all that he was, bud like a glorious poison in
his daughter."

Van Dorn smiled, and asked casually, "Well, what's her name?" The rest of the group in the
store looked down their noses and the Doctor, with his paper under his arm, obviously ignored
the question and only stopped in the door to pipe out: "This wasn't the morning to talk to
me of the ladies--God bless 'em."

The men in the store watched him as he started across the street, and then saw Laura skip gayly
toward him, and the two, holding hands, crossed the muddy street together. She was laughing,
and the joy of her soul--a child's soul, shone like a white flame in the dull street and George
Brotherton, who saw the pair in the street, roared out: "Well, say--now isn't that something
worth looking at? That beats Niagara Falls and Pike's Peak--for me."

Captain Morton looked at the gay pair attentively for a moment and spoke: "And I have three
to his one; I tell you, gentlemen--three to his one; and I guess I haven't told you gentlemen
about it, but I got the exclusive agency for seven counties for Golden's Patent Self-Opening
Fruit Can, an absolute necessity for every household, and in another year my three will be
wearing their silks and diamonds!" He smiled proudly around the group and added: "My! that
doesn't make any difference. Silk or gingham, I know I've got the best girls on earth--why,
if their mother could just see 'em--see how they're unfolding--why, Emma can make every bit
as good hash as her mother," a hint of tears stood in his blue eyes. "Why--men, I tell you
sometimes I want to die and go right off to Heaven to tell mother all the fine news about 'em--eh?"
Deaf John Kollander, with his hand to his less affected ear, nodded approval and said, "That's
what I always said, James G. Blaine never was a true friend of the soldier!"

Van Dorn had been looking intently at nothing through the store window. When no one answered
Captain Morton, Van Dorn addressed the house rather impersonally:

"Man is the blindest of the mammals. You'd think as smart a man as Dr. Nesbit would see his
own vices. Here he is mayor of Harvey, boss of the town. He buys men with Morty's father's
money and sells 'em in politics like sheep--not for his own gain; not for his family's gain;
but just for the joy of the sport; just as I follow the ladies, God bless 'em; and yet he stands
up and reads me a lecture on the wickedness of a little more or less innocent flirting." The
young man lighted his cigar at the alcohol flame on the counter. "Morty," he continued, squinting
his eyes and stroking his mustache, and looking at the boy with vast vanity, "Morty, do you
know what your old dad and yon virtuous Nesbit pasha are doing? Well, I'll tell you something
you didn't learn at military school. They're putting up a deal by which we've voted one hundred
thousand dollars' worth of city bonds as bonus in aid of a system of city water works and have
given them to your dad outright, for putting in a plant that he will own and control; and that
he will build for seventy-five thousand dollars." Van Dorn smiled a placid, malevolent smile
at the group and went on: "And the sheik of the village there helped Daniel Sands put it through;
helped him buy me as city attorney, with your father's bank's legal business; helped buy Dick
Bowman, poor devil with a houseful of children for a hundred dollars for his vote in the council,
helped work George here for his vote in the council by lending money to him for his business;
and so on down the line. The Doc calls that politics, and regards it as one of his smaller
vices; but me?" scoffed the young man, "when I go gamboling down the primrose path of dalliance
with a lady on each arm--or maybe more, I am haled before the calif and sentenced to his large
and virtuous displeasure. Man,"--here young Mr. Van Dorn drummed his fingers on the showcase
and considered the universe calmly through the store window--"man is the blindest of mammals."
After which smiling deliverance, Thomas Van Dorn picked up his morning paper, and his gloves,
and stalked with some dignity into the street.

"Well, say,"--Brotherton was the first to speak--"rather cool--"

"Shame, shame!" cried John Kollander, as he buttoned up his blue coat with its brass buttons.
"Where was Blaine when the bullets were thickest? Answer me that." No one answered, but Captain
Morton began:

"Now, George, why, that's all right. Didn't the people vote the bonds after you fellows submitted
'em? Of course they did. The town wanted waterworks; Daniel Sands knew how to build 'em--eh?
The people couldn't build 'em themselves, could they?" asked the Captain triumphantly. Brotherton
laughed; Morty Sands grinned,--and, shame be to Amos Adams, the rugged Puritan, who had opposed
the bonds in his paper so boldly, he only shook a sorrowful head and lifted no voice in protest.
Such is the weakness of our thunderers without their lightning! Brotherton, who still seemed
uneasy, went on: "Say, men, didn't that franchise call for a system of electric lights and
gas in five years and a telephone system in ten years more--all for that $100,000; I'm right
here to tell you we got a lot for our money."

Again Amos Adams swallowed his Adam's apple and cut in as boldly as a man may who thinks with
his lead pencil: "And don't forget the street car franchises you gave away at the same time.
Water, light, gas, telephone and street car franchises for fifty years and one hundred thousand
to boot! It seemed to me you were giving away a good deal!"

But John Kollander's approving nod and George Brotherton's great laugh overcame the editor,
and the talk turned to other things.

There came a day in Harvey when men, looking back at events from the perspective of another
day, believed that in those old days of Harvey, Daniel Sands was master and Dr. Nesbit was
servant. And there was much evidence to indicate that Daniel's was the master spirit of those
early times. But the evidence was merely based on facts, and facts often are far from the truth.
The truth is that Daniel Sands was the beneficiary of much of the activity of Doctor Nesbit
in those days, but the truth is also that Doctor Nesbit did what he did--won the county seat
for Harvey, secured the railroad, promoted the bond election, which gave Daniel Sands the franchises
for the distribution of water, gas and electricity--not because the Doctor had any particular
regard for Daniel Sands but because, first of all, the good of the town, as the Doctor saw
it, seemed to require him to act as he acted; and second, because his triumph at any of these
elections meant power, and he was greedy for power. But he always used his power to make others
happy. No man ever came to the Doctor looking for work that he could not find work for that
man. Men in ditches, men on light poles, men in the court house, men at Daniel Sands's furnaces,
men grading new streets, men working on city or county contracts knew but one source of authority
in Harvey, and that was Doctor James Nesbit. Daniel Sands was a mere money grubbing incident
of that power. Daniel could have won no one to vote with him; the county seat would have gone
to a rival town, the railroad would not have veered five miles out of its way to reach Harvey,
and a dozen promoters would have wrangled for a dozen franchises but for Dr. Nesbit.

And if Dr. Nesbit made it his business to see that Dick Bowman had work, it was somewhat because
he knew how badly the little Bowmans needed food. And if he saw to it that Dick's vote in the
council occasionally yielded him a substantial return from those whom that vote benefited so
munificently, it was partly because the Doctor felt how sorely Lida Bowman, silently bending
over her washtub, needed the little comforts which the extra fifty-dollar bill would bring
that Dick sometimes found in his monthly pay envelope. And if the Doctor saw to it that Ira
Dooley was made foreman of the water works gang, or that Tom Williams had the contract for
the stone work on the new court house, it was largely in payment for services rendered by Ira
and Tom in bringing in the Second Ward for John Kollander for county clerk. The rewards of
Ira and Tom in working for the Doctor were virtue's own; and if re-marking a hundred ballots
was part of that blessed service, well and good. And also it must be recorded that the foremanship
and the stone contract were somewhat the Doctor's way of showing Mrs. Dooley and Mrs. Williams
that he wished them well.

Doctor Nesbit's scheme of politics included no punishments for his enemies, and he desired
every one for his friend. The round, pink face, the high-roached, yellow hair, the friendly,
blue eyes, had no place for hate in them, and in the high-pitched, soft voice was no note of
terror to evil doers. His countenance did not betray his power; that was in his tireless little
legs, his effective hands, and his shrewd brain motived by a heart too kind for the finer moral
distinctions that men must make who go far in this world. Yet because he had a heart, a keen
mind, even without much conscience, and a vision larger than those about him, Dr. Nesbit was
their leader. He did not move in a large sphere, but in his small sphere he was the central
force, the dominating spirit. And off in a dark corner, Daniel Sands, who was hunger incarnate
and nothing more, spun his web, gathered the dust and the flies and the weaker insects and
waxed fat. To say that his mind ruled Dr. Nesbit's, to say that Daniel Sands was master and
Dr. Nesbit servant in those first decades of Harvey--whatever the facts may seem in those later
days--is one of those ornately ridiculous travesties upon the truth that facts sometimes are
arranged to make. But how little did they know what they were building! For they and their
kind all over America working in the darkness of their own selfish desires, were laying footing
stones--quite substantial yet necessary--for the structure of a growing civilization which
in its time, stripped of its scaffolding and extraneous débris, was to stand among the nations
of the earth as a tower of righteousness in a stricken world.

CHAPTER IV

THE ADAMS FAMILY BIBLE LIES LIKE A GENTLEMAN

How light a line divides comedy from tragedy! When the ass speaks, or the man brays, there
is comedy. Yet fate may stop the mouth of either man or ass, and in the dumb struggle for voice,
if fate turns the screws of destiny upon duty, there is tragedy. Only the consequences of a
day or a deed can decide whether it shall have the warm blessing of our smiles or the bitter
benediction of our tears.

This, one must remember in reading the chapter of this story that shall follow. It is the close
of the story to which Mary Adams, with her memory book and notes and clippings, has contributed
much. For of the pile of envelopes all numbered in their order; the one marked "Margaret Müller"
was the last envelope that she left. Now the package that concerns Margaret Müller may not
be transcribed separately but must be woven into the woof of the tale. The package contains
a clipping, a dozen closely written pages, and a photograph--a small photograph of a girl.
The photograph is printed on the picture of a scroll, and the likeness of the girl does not
throb with life as it did thirty years ago when it was taken. Then the plump, voluptuous arm
and shoulders in the front of the picture seemed to exude life and to bristle with the temptation
that lurked under the brown lashes shading her big, innocent, brown eyes. And her hair, her
wonderful brown hair that fell in a great rope to her knees, in this photograph is hidden,
and only her frizzes, covering a fine forehead, are emphasized by the picture maker. One may
smile at the picture now, but then when it was taken it told of the red of her lips and the
pink of her flesh, and the dimples that forever went flickering across her face. In those days,
the old-fashioned picture portrayed with great clearness the joy and charm and impudence of
that beautiful face. But now the picture is only grotesque. It proves rather than discloses
that once, when she was but a young girl, Margaret Müller had wonderfully molded arms and shoulders,
regular features and enchanting eyes. But that is all the picture shows. In the photograph
is no hint of her mellow voice, of her eager expression and of the smoldering fires of passion,
ambition and purpose that smoked through those gay, bewitching eyes. The old-fashioned frizzled
hair on her forehead, the obvious pose of her hand with its cheap rings, the curious cut of
her dress, made after that travesty of the prevailing mode which country papers printed in
their fashion columns, the black court-plaster beauty spot on her cheek and the lace fichu
draped over her head and bare shoulders, all stand out like grinning gargoyles that keep much
of the charm she had in those days imprisoned from our eyes to-day. So the picture alone is
of no great service. Nor will the clipping tell much. It only records:

    "Miss Margaret Müller, daughter of the late Herman Müller of
    Spring Township, this county, will teach school in District 18,
    the Adams District in Prospect Township, this fall and winter.
    She will board with the family of ye editor."

Now the reader must know that Margaret Müller's eyes had been turned to Harvey as to a magnet
for three years. She had chosen the Adams district school in Prospect Township, because the
Adams district school was nearer than any other school district to Harvey; she had gone to
the Adamses to board because the little bleak house near the Wahoo was the nearest house in
the district to Harvey and to a social circle which she desired to enter--the best that Harvey
offered.

She saw Grant, a rough, ruddy, hardy lad, of her own time of life, moving in the very center
of the society she cherished in her dreams, and Margaret had no gay inadvertence in her scheme
of creation. So when the lank, strapping, red-headed boy of a man's height, with a man's shoulders
and a child's heart, started to Harvey for high school every morning, as she started to teach
her country school, he carried with him, beside his lunch, a definite impression that Margaret
was a fine girl. Often, indeed, he thought her an extraordinarily fine girl. Tales of prowess
he brought back from the Harvey High School, and she listened with admiring face. For they
related to youths whose names she knew as children of the socially elect.

A part of her admiration for Grant was due to the fact that Grant had leaped the social gulf--deep
even then in Harvey--between those who lived on the hill, and the dwellers in the bottoms near
the river.

This instinctively Margaret Müller knew, also--though perhaps unconsciously--that even if they
lived in the bottoms, the Adamses were of the aristoi; because they were friends of the Nesbits,
and Mrs. Nesbit of Maryland was the fountain head of all the social glory of Harvey. Thus Margaret
Müller of Spring Township came to camp before Harvey for a lifetime siege, and took her ground
where she could aim straight at the Nesbits and Kollanders and Sandses and Mortons and Calvins.
With all her banners flying, banners gaudy and beautiful, banners that flapped for men and
sometimes snapped at women, she set her forces down before Harvey, and saw the beleaguered
city through the portals of Grant's fine, wide, blue eyes, within an easy day's walk of her
own place in the world. So she hovered over Grant, played her brown eyes upon him, flattered
him, unconsciously as is the way of the female, when it would win favor, and because she was
wise, wiser than even her own head knew, she cast upon the youth a strange spell.

Those were the days when Margaret Müller came first to early bloom. They were the days when
her personality was too big for her body, so it flowed into everything she wore; on the tips
of every ribbon at her neck, she glowed with a kind of electric radiance. A flower in her hair
seemed as much a part of her as the turn of her cleft chin. A bow at her bosom was vibrant
with her. And to Grant even the things she touched, after she was gone, thrilled him as though
they were of her.

Now the pages that are to follow in this chapter are not written for him who has reached that
grand estate where he may feel disdain for the feverish follies of youth. A lad may be an ass;
doubtless he is. A maid may be as fitful as the west wind, and in the story of the fitfulness
and folly of the man and the maid, there is vast pathos and pain, from which pathos and pain
we may learn wisdom. Now the strange part of this story is not what befell the youth and the
maid; for any tragedy that befalls a youth and a maid, is natural enough and in the order of
things, as Heaven knows well. The strange part of this story is that Mary and Amos Adams were,
for all their high hopes of the sunrise, like the rest of us in this world--only human; stricken
with that inexplicable parental blindness that covers our eyes when those we love are most
needing our care.

Yet how could they know that Grant needed their care? Was he not in their eyes the fairest
of ten thousand? They enshrined him in a kind of holy vision. It seems odd that a strapping,
pimple-faced, freckled, red-headed boy, loudmouthed and husky-voiced, more or less turbulent
and generally in trouble for his insistent defense of his weaker playmates--it seems odd that
such a boy could be the center of such grand dreams as they dreamed for their boy. Yet there
was the boy and there were the dreams. If he wrote a composition for school that pleased his
parents, they were sure it foretold the future author, and among her bundle of notes for the
Book, his mother has cherished the manuscript for his complete works. If at school Friday afternoon,
he spoke a piece, "trippingly on the tongue," they harkened back over his ancestry to find
the elder Adams of Massachusetts who was a great orator. When he drove a nail and made a creditable
bobsled, they saw in him a future architect and stored the incident for the Romance that was
to be biography. When he organized a baseball club, they saw in him the budding leadership
that should make him a ruler of men. Even Grant's odd mania to take up the cause of the weak--often
foolish causes that revealed a kind of fanatic chivalry in him--Mary noted too; and saw the
youth a mailed knight in the Great Battle that should precede and usher in the sunrise.

Jasper was a little boy and his parents loved him dearly; but Grant, the child of their honeymooning
days, held their hearts. And so their vanity for him became a kind of mellow madness that separated
them from a commonsense world. And here is a curious thing also--the very facts that were making
Grant a leader of his fellows should have warned Mary and Amos that their son was setting out
on his journey from the heart of his childish paradise. He was growing tall, strong, big-voiced,
with hands, broad and muscular, that made him a baseball catcher of a reputation wider than
the school-grounds, yet he had a child's quick wit and merry heart. Such a boy dominated the
school as a matter of course, yet so completely had his parents daubed their eyes with pride
that they could not see that his leadership in school came from the fact that a man was rising
in him--the far-casting shadow of a virility deep and significant as destiny itself. They could
not see the man's body; they saw only the child's heart. It was natural that they should ask
themselves what honor could possibly come to the house of Adams or to any house, for that matter,
further than that which illumined it when Grant came home to announce that he had been elected
President of the senior class in the Harvey High School and would deliver the valedictory address
at commencement. When Mary and Amos learned that news, they had indeed found the hero for their
book. After that, even his cousin, Morty Sands, home from college for a time, little, wiry,
agile, and with a face half ferret and half angel, even Morty, who had an indefinite attachment
for glowing exuberant Laura Nesbit, felt that so long as Grant held her attention--great, hulking,
noisy, dominant Grant--even Morty arrayed in his college clothes, like Solomon, would have
to wait until the fancy for Grant had passed. So Morty backed Grant with all his pocket money
as a ball player while he fluttered rather gayly about Ave Calvin--and always with an effect
of inadvertence.

Now if a lad is an ass--and he is--how should a poor jack be supposed to know of the wisdom
of the serpent? For we must remember that early youth has been newly driven from the heart
of that paradise wherein there is no good and evil. He gropes in darkness as he comes nearer
the gates of his paradise, through an unchartered wilderness. But to Mary and Amos, Grant seemed
to be wandering in the very midst of his Eden. They did not realize how he was groping and
stumbling, nor could they know what a load he carried--this ass of a lad coming toward the
gate of the Garden. In those times when he sat in his room, trying to show his soul bashfully
to Laura Nesbit as he wrote to her in Maryland at school, Grant felt always, over and about
him, the consciousness of the spell of Margaret Müller, yet he did not know what the spell
was. He wrestled with it when finally he came rather dimly to sense it, and tried with all
the strength of his ungainly soul to be loyal to the choice of his heart. His will was loyal,
yet the smiles, the eyes, the soft tempting face of Margaret always were near him. Furious
storms of feeling swayed him. For youth is the time of tempest. In our teens come those floods
of soul stuff through the gates of heredity, swinging open for the last time in life, floods
that bring into the world the stores of the qualities of mind and heart from outside ourselves;
floods stored in Heaven's reservoir, gushing from the almost limitlessly deep springs of our
ancestry; floods which draw us in resistless currents to our destinies. And so the ass, laden
with this relay of life from the source of life, that every young, blind ass brings into the
world, floundered in the flood.

Grant thought his experience was unique. Yet it is the common lot of man. To feel his soul
exposed at a thousand new areas of sense; to see a new heaven and a new earth--strange, mysterious,
beautiful, unfolding to his eyes; to smell new scents; to hear new sounds in the woods and
fields; to look open-eyed and wondering at new relations of things that unfold in the humdrum
world about him, as he flees out of the blind paradise of childhood; to dream new dreams; to
aspire to new heights, to feel impulses coming out of the dark that tremble like the blare
of trumpets in the soul,--this is the way of youth.

With all his loyalty for Laura Nesbit--loyalty that enshrined her as a comrade and friend,
such is the contradiction of youth that he was madly jealous of every big boy at the country
school who cast eyes at Margaret Müller. And because she was ages older than he, she knew it;
and it pleased her. She knew that she could make all his combs and crests and bands and wattles
and spurs glisten, and he knew in some deep instinct that when she sang the emotion in her
voice was a call to him that he could not put into words. Thus through the autumn, Margaret
and Grant were thrown together daily in the drab little house by the river. Now a boy and a
girl thrown together commonly make the speaking donkeys of comedy. Yet one never may be sure
that they may not be the dumb struggling creatures of the tragic muse. Heaven knows Margaret
Müller was funny enough in her capers. For she related her antics--her grand pouts, her elaborate
condescensions, her crass coquetry and her hidings and seekings--into what she called a "case."
In the only wisdom she knew, to open a flirtation was to have a "case." So Margaret ogled and
laughed and touched and ran and giggled and cried and played with her prey with a practiced
lore of the heart that was far beyond the boy's knowledge. Grant did not know what spell was
upon him. He did not know that his great lithe body, his gripping hands, his firm legs and
his long arms that had in their sinews the power that challenged her to wrestle when she was
with him--he did not know what he meant to the girl who was forever teasing and bantering him
when they were alone. For it was only when Margaret and Grant were alone or when no one but
little Jasper was with them, that Margaret indulged in the joys of the chase. Yet often when
other boys came to see her--the country boys from the Prospect school district perhaps, or
lorn swains trailing up from Spring Township--Margaret did not conceal her fluttering delight
in them from Mary Adams. So the elder woman and the girl had long talks in which Margaret agreed
so entirely with Mary Adams that Mary doubted the evidence of her eyes. And Amos in those days
was much interested in certain transcendental communications coming from his Planchette board
and purporting to be from Emerson who had recently passed over. So Amos had no eyes for Margaret
and Mary was fooled by the girl's fine speech. Yet sometimes late at night when Margaret was
coming in from a walk or a ride with one of her young men, Mary heard a laugh--a high, hysterical
laugh--that disquieted Mary Adams in spite of all Margaret's fair speaking. But never once
did Mary connect in her mind Margaret's wiles with Grant. Such is the blindness of mothers;
such is the deep wisdom of women!

All the while Grant floundered more hopelessly into the quicksand of Margaret's enchantment,
and when he tried to write to Laura Nesbit, half-formed shames fluttered and flushed across
his mind. So often he sat alone for long night hours in his attic bedroom in vague agonies
and self accusations, pen in hand, trying to find honest words that would fill out his tedious
letter. Being a boy and being not entirely outside the gate of his childish paradise, he did
not understand the shadow that was clouding his heart.

But there came one day when the gate closed and looking back, he saw the angel--the angel with
the flaming sword. Then he knew. Then he saw the face that made the shadow and that day a great
trembling came into his soul, a blackness of unspeakable woe came over him, and he was ashamed
of the light. After that he never wrote to Laura Nesbit.

In May Margaret's school closed, and the Adamses asked her to remain with them for the summer,
and she consented rather listlessly. The busy days of the June harvest combined with the duties
of printing a newspaper made their Sunday visits with the Nesbits irregular. It was in July
that Mrs. Nesbit asked for Margaret, and Mary Adams remembered that Margaret, whose listlessness
had grown into sullenness, had found some excuse for being absent whenever the Nesbits came
to spend the afternoon with the Adamses. Then in August, when Amos came home one night, he
saw Margaret hurry from the front porch. He went into the house and heard Mary and Grant sobbing
inside and heard Mary's voice lifted in prayer, with agony in her voice. It was no prayer for
forgiveness nor for mercy, but for guidance and strength, and he stepped to the bedroom and
saw the two kneeling there with Margaret's shawl over the chair where Mary knelt. There he
heard Mary tell the story of her boy's shame to her God.

Death and partings have come across that threshold during these three decades. Amos Adams has
known anguish and has sat with grief many times, but nothing ever has cut him to the heart
like the dead, hopeless woe in Mary's voice as she prayed there in the bedroom with Grant that
August night. A terrible half-hour came when Mary and Amos talked with Margaret. For over their
shame at what their son had done, above their love for him, even beyond their high hope for
him, rose their sense of duty to the child who was coming. For the child they spent the passion
of their shame and love and hope as they pleaded with Margaret for a child's right to a name.
But she had hardened her heart. She shook her head and would not listen to their pleadings.
Then they sent Grant to her. It is not easy to say which was more dreadful, the impudent smile
which she turned to the parents as she shook her head at them, or the scornful laugh they heard
when Grant sat with her. That was a long and weary night they spent and the sun rose in the
morning under a cloud that never was lifted from their hearts.

In the six or seven sordid, awful weeks that followed before Kenyon was born, they turned for
comfort and for help to Dr. Nesbit. They made his plan to save the child's good name, their
plan. Of course--the Adamses were selfish. They felt a blight was on their boy's life. They
could not understand that in Heaven there is neither marriage nor giving in marriage; that
when God sends a soul through the gates of earth it comes in joy even though we greet it in
sorrow. Their gloom should have been lighted; part of its blackness was their own vain pride
in Grant. Yet they were none the less tender with Margaret, and when she went down into the
valley of the shadow, Mary went with her and stood and supported the girl in the journey.

When Doctor Nesbit was climbing into the buggy at the gate, Grant, standing by the hitching-post,
said: "Doctor--sometime--when we are both older--I mean Laura--" He got no further. The Doctor
looked at the boy's ashen face, and knew the cost of the words he was speaking. He stopped,
reached his hand out to Grant and touched his shoulder. "I think I know, Grant--some day I
shall tell her." He got into the buggy, looked at the lad a moment and said in his high, squeaky
voice: "Well, Grant, boy, you understand after all it's your burden--don't you? Your mother
has saved Margaret's good name. But son--son, don't you let the folks bear that burden." He
paused a moment further and sighed: "Well, good-by, kid--God help you, and make a man of you,"
and so turning his cramping buggy, he drove away in the dusk.

Thus came Kenyon Adams, recorded in the family Bible as the third son of Mary and Amos Adams,
into the wilderness of this world. The prairie grass was leaving Harvey when Grant Adams came,
and the meadow lark left in the year that Jasper came. When Kenyon entered, even the blue sky
that bent over it was threatened. For Dr. Nesbit returning from the Adamses the evening that
Kenyon came to Harvey found around the well-drill at Jamey McPherson's a great excited crowd.
Men were elbowing each other and craning their necks, and wagging their heads as they looked
at the core of the drill. For it contained unmistakably a long worm of coal. And that night
saw rising over Harvey such dreams as made the angels sick; for the dreams were all of money,
and its vain display and power. And when men rose after dreaming those dreams, they swept little
Jamey McPherson away in short order. For he had not the high talents of the money maker. He
had only persistence, industry and a hopeful spirit and a vague vision that he was discovering
coal for the common good. So when Daniel Sands put his mind to bear upon the worm of coal that
came wriggling up from the drilled hole on Jamey's lot, the worm crawled away from Jamey and
Jamey went to work in the shaft that Daniel sank on his vacant lot near the McPherson home.
The coal smoke from Daniel Sands's mines began to splotch the blue sky above the town, and
Kenyon Adams missed the large leisure and joyous comraderie that Grant had seen; indeed the
only leisurely person whom Kenyon saw in his life until he was--Heaven knows how old--was Rhoda
Kollander. The hum and bustle of Harvey did not ruffle the calm waters of her soul. She of
all the women in Harvey held to the early custom of the town of going out to spend the day.

"So that Margaret's gone," she was saying to Mary Adams sometime during a morning in the spring
after Kenyon was born. "Law me--I wouldn't have a boarder. I tell John, the sanctity of the
home is invaded by boarders these days; and her going out to the dances in town the way she
does, I sh'd think you'd be glad to be alone again, and to have your own little flock to do
for. And so Grant's going to be a carpenter--well, well! He didn't take to the printing trade,
did he? My, my!" she sighed, and folded her hands above her apron--the apron which she always
put on after a meal, as if to help with the dishes, but which she never soiled or wrinkled--"I
tell John I'm so thankful our little Fred has such a nice place. He waits table there at the
Palace, and gets all his meals--such nice food, and can go to school too, and you wouldn't
believe it if I'd tell you all the nice men he meets--drummers and everything, and he's getting
such good manners. I tell John there's nothing like the kind of folks a boy is with in his
teens to make him. And he sees Tom Van Dorn every day nearly and sometimes gets a dime for
serving him, and now, honest, Mary, you wouldn't believe it, but Freddie says the help around
the hotel say that Mauling girl at the cigar stand thinks Tom's going to marry her, but law
me--he's aiming higher than the Maulings. The old man is going to die--did you know it? They
came for John to sit up with him last night. John's an Odd Fellow, you know. But speaking of
that Margaret, you know she's a friend of Violet's and slips into the cigar stand sometimes
and Violet introduces Margaret to some nice drummers. And I heard John say that when Margaret
gets this term of school taught here, the Spring Township people have made Doc Jim get her
a job in the court house--register of deeds office. But I tell John--law me, you men are the
worst gossips! Talk about women!"

Little Kenyon in his crib was restless, and Mary Adams was clattering the dishes, so between
the two evils, Mrs. Kollander picked up the child, and rocked him and patted him and then went
on: "I was over and spent the day with the Sandses the other day. Poor woman, she's real puny.
Ann's such a pretty child and Mrs. Sands says that Morty's not goin' back to college again.
And she says he just moons around Laura Nesbit. Seems like the boy's got no sense. Why, Laura's
just a child--she's Grant's age, isn't she--not more than eighteen or nineteen, and Morty must
be nearly twenty-three. My--how they have sprung up. I tell John--why, I'll be thirty-six right
soon now, and here I've worked and slaved my youth away and I'll be an old woman before we
know it." She laughed good naturedly and rocked the fretting child. "Law me, Mary Adams, I
sh'd think you'd want Grant to stay with George Brotherton there in the cigar stand, instead
of carpentering. Such elegant people he can meet there, and such refined influences since Mr.
Brotherton's put in books and newspapers, and he could work in the printing office and deliver
the Kansas City and St. Louis and Chicago dailies for Mr. Brotherton, and do so much better
than he can carpentering. I tell John, if we can just keep our boy among nice people until
he's twenty-five, he'll stay with 'em. Now look at Lide Bowman. Mary Adams, we know she was
a smart woman until she married Dick and now just see her--living down there with the shanty
trash and all those ignorant foreigners, and she's growing like 'em. She's lost two of her
babies, and that seems to be weighing on her mind, and I can't persuade her to pick up and
move out of there. It's like being in another world. And Mary Adams--let me tell you--Casper
Herdicker has gone into the mine. Yes, sir, he closed his shop and is going to work in the
mine, because he can make three dollars a day. But law me! you'll not see Hildy Herdicker moving
down there. She'll keep her millinery store and live with the white folks."

The dishes were put away, and in the long afternoon Mary Adams sat sewing as Rhoda Kollander
rambled on. For the third time Rhoda came back to comment upon the fact that Grant Adams had
quit working in the printing office--a genteel trade, and had stopped delivering papers for
Mr. Brotherton's newspaper stand--a rather high vocation, and was degrading himself by learning
the carpenter's trade, when Mary Adams cut into the current of the stream of talk.

"Well, my dear, it was this way. There are two reasons why Grant is learning the carpenter's
trade. In the first place, the boy has some sort of a passion to cast his lot among the poor.
He feels they are neglected and--well, he has a sort of a fierce streak in him to fight for
the under dog, and--"

"Well, law me, Mary--don't I know that? Hasn't Freddie told me time and again how Grant used
to fight for Freddie when he was a little boy and the big boys plagued him. Grant whipped the
whole school for teasing a little half-witted boy once--did you know that?" Mary Adams shook
her head. "Well, he did, and--well now, isn't that nice. I can see just how he feels!" And
she could. Never lived a more sympathetic soul than Rhoda. And as she rocked she said: "Of
course, if that's the reason--law me, Mary, you never can tell how these children are going
to turn out. Why, I tell John--"

"And the other reason is, Rhoda, that he is earning two dollars a day as a carpenter's helper,
and since Kenyon came we seem to be miserably hard pushed for money." Let us dine on beans and
bacon." So the Ducky and the leetle Browny-Mousy and the Beetle Dined, and danced upon their
heads Till they toddled to their beds.

* * * * *

NONSENSE STORIES.

THE STORY OF THE FOUR LITTLE CHILDREN WHO WENT ROUND THE WORLD.

Once upon a time, a long while ago, there were four little people whose names were

VIOLET, SLINGSBY, GUY, and LIONEL; and they all thought they should like to see the world. So they
bought a large boat to sail quite round the world by sea, and then
they were to come back on the other side by land.

The boat was painted blue with green spots, and the sail was yellow with red stripes: and, when
they set off, they only took a small Cat to steer and look after the boat, besides an elderly Quangle-Wangle,
who had to cook the dinner and make the tea; for which purposes they took a large kettle.

For the first ten days they sailed on beautifully, and found plenty to eat, as there were lots of fish;
and they had only to take them out of the sea with a long spoon, when the Quangle-Wangle instantly
cooked them; and the Pussy-Cat was fed with the bones, with which
she expressed herself pleased, on the whole: so that all the party
were very happy.

During the daytime, Violet chiefly occupied herself in putting salt water into a churn; while
her three brothers churned it violently, in the hope that it would turn into butter, which it
seldom if ever did; and in the evening they all retired into the tea-kettle, where they all managed
to sleep very comfortably, while Pussy and the Quangle-Wangle managed the boat.

After a time, they saw some land at a distance; and, when they came to it, they found it was an
island made of water quite surrounded by earth. Besides that, it was bordered by evanescent isthmuses,
with a great gulf-stream running about all over it; so that it was perfectly beautiful, and
contained only a single tree, 503 feet high.

When they had landed, they walked about, but found, to their great
surprise, that the island was quite full of veal-cutlets and chocolate-drops,
and nothing else.

So they all climbed up the single high tree to discover, if possible, if there were any people;
but having remained on the top of the tree for a week, and not seeing anybody, they naturally concluded
that there were no inhabitants; and accordingly, when they came down,
they loaded the boat with two thousand veal-cutlets and a million
of chocolate-drops; and these afforded them sustenance for more than
a month, during which time they pursued their voyage with the utmost
delight and apathy.

After this they came to a shore where there were no less than sixty-five great red parrots with
blue tails, sitting on a rail all of a row, and all fast asleep. And I am sorry to say that the
Pussy-Cat and the Quangle-Wangle crept softly, and bit off the tail-feathers of all the sixty-five
parrots; for which Violet reproved them both severely.

Notwithstanding which, she proceeded to insert all the feathers--two hundred and sixty in number--in
her bonnet; thereby causing it to have a lovely and glittering appearance, highly prepossessing
and efficacious.

The next thing that happened to them was in a narrow part of the sea, which was so entirely full
of fishes that the boat could go on no farther: so they remained there about six weeks, till
they had eaten nearly all the fishes, which were soles, and all ready-cooked, and covered with
shrimp-sauce, so that there was no trouble whatever.

And as the few fishes who remained uneaten complained of the cold, as well as of the difficulty
they had in getting any sleep on account of the extreme noise made
by the arctic bears and the tropical turnspits, which frequented the
neighborhood in great numbers, Violet most amiably knitted a small
woollen frock for several of the fishes, and Slingsby administered
some opium-drops to them; through which kindness they became quite
warm, and slept soundly.

Then they came to a country which was wholly covered with immense orange-trees of a vast size,
and quite full of fruit. So they all landed, taking with them the tea-kettle, intending to gather
some of the oranges, and place them in it. But, while they were busy about this, a most dreadfully
high wind rose, and blew out most of the parrot-tail feathers from
Violet's bonnet.

That, however, was nothing compared with the calamity of the oranges falling down on their
heads by millions and millions, which thumped and bumped and bumped
and thumped them all so seriously, that they were obliged to run as
hard as they could for their lives; besides that the sound of the
oranges rattling on the tea-kettle was of the most fearful and amazing
nature.

Nevertheless, they got safely to the boat, although considerably vexed and hurt; and the Quangle-Wangle's
right foot was so knocked about, that he had to sit with his head
in his slipper for at least a week.

This event made them all for a time rather melancholy: and perhaps
they might never have become less so, had not Lionel, with a most
praiseworthy devotion and perseverance, continued to stand on one
leg, and whistle to them in a loud and lively manner; which diverted
the whole party so extremely that they gradually recovered their spirits,
and agreed that whenever they should reach home, they would subscribe
towards a testimonial to Lionel, entirely made of gingerbread and
raspberries, as an earnest token of their sincere and grateful infection.

After

sailing on calmly for several more days, they came to another country,
where they were much pleased and surprised to see a countless multitude
of white Mice with red eyes, all sitting in a great circle, slowly
eating custard-pudding with the most satisfactory and polite demeanor.

And as the four travellers were rather hungry, being tired of eating
nothing but soles and oranges for so long a period, they held a council
as to the propriety of asking the Mice for some of their pudding in
a humble and affecting manner, by which they could hardly be otherwise
than gratified.

It was agreed, therefore, that Guy should go and ask the Mice, which he immediately did; and the
result was, that they gave a walnut-shell only half full of custard diluted with water. Now,
this displeased Guy, who said, "Out of such a lot of pudding as you
have got, I must say, you might have spared a somewhat larger quantity."

But no sooner had he finished speaking than the Mice turned round at once, and sneezed at him
in an appalling and vindictive manner (and it is impossible to imagine a more scroobious and
unpleasant sound than that caused by the simultaneous sneezing of many millions of angry Mice);
so that Guy rushed back to the boat, having first shied his cap into
the middle of the custard-pudding, by which means he completely spoiled
the Mice's dinner.

By and by the four children came to a country where there were no houses, but only an incredibly
innumerable number of large bottles without corks, and of a dazzling and sweetly susceptible
blue color.

Each of these blue bottles contained a Blue-Bottle-Fly; and all these interesting animals live continually
together in the most copious and rural harmony: nor perhaps in many parts of the world is such
perfect and abject happiness to be found. Violet and Slingsby and Guy and Lionel were greatly
struck with this singular and instructive settlement; and, having previously asked permission
of the Blue-Bottle-Flies (which was most courteously granted), the boat was drawn up to the
shore, and they proceeded to make tea in front of the bottles: but as they had no tea-leaves, they
merely placed some pebbles in the hot water; and the Quangle-Wangle played some tunes over it on an
accordion, by which, of course, tea was made directly, and of the very best quality.

The four children then entered into conversation with the Blue-Bottle-Flies,
who discoursed in a placid and genteel manner, though with a slightly
buzzing accent, chiefly owing to the fact that they each held a small
clothes-brush between their teeth, which naturally occasioned a fizzy,
extraneous utterance.

"Why," said Violet, "would you kindly inform us, do you reside in bottles; and, if in bottles at
all, why not, rather, in green or purple, or, indeed, in yellow bottles?"

To which questions a very aged Blue-Bottle-Fly answered, "We found the bottles here all ready to
live in; that is to say, our great-great-great- great-great-grandfathers did: so we occupied
them at once.

And, when the winter comes on, we turn the bottles upside down, and consequently rarely feel
the cold at all; and you know very well that this could not be the case with bottles of any
other color than blue."

"Of course it could not," said Slingsby. "But, if we may take the liberty of inquiring, on
what do you chiefly subsist?"

"Mainly on oyster-patties," said the Blue-Bottle-Fly; "and, when these are scarce, on raspberry
vinegar and Russian leather boiled down to a jelly."

"How delicious!" said Guy.

To which Lionel added, "Huzz!" And all the Blue-Bottle-Flies said, "Buzz!"

At this time, an elderly Fly said it was the hour for the evening-song to be sung; and, on
a signal being given, all the Blue-Bottle-Flies began to buzz at once in a sumptuous and sonorous
manner, the melodious and mucilaginous sounds echoing all over the waters, and resounding across
the tumultuous tops of the transitory titmice upon the intervening and verdant mountains with
a serene and sickly suavity only known to the truly virtuous. The Moon was shining slobaciously
from the star-bespangled sky, while her light irrigated the smooth and shiny sides and wings
and backs of the Blue-Bottle-Flies with a peculiar and trivial splendor,
while all Nature cheerfully responded to the cerulean and conspicuous
circumstances.

In many long-after years, the four little travellers looked back to that evening as one of the happiest
in all their lives; and it was already past midnight when--the sail of the boat having been
set up by the Quangle-Wangle, the tea-kettle and churn placed in their respective positions,
and the Pussy-Cat stationed at the helm--the children each took a last and affectionate farewell
of the Blue-Bottle-Flies, who walked down in a body to the water's edge to see the travellers embark.

As
a token of parting respect and esteem, Violet made a courtesy quite down to the ground, and
stuck one of her few remaining parrot-tail feathers into the back hair of the most pleasing
of the Blue-Bottle-Flies; while Slingsby, Guy, and Lionel offered them three small boxes,
containing, respectively, black pins, dried figs, and Epsom salts; and thus they left that happy
shore forever.

Overcome by their feelings, the four little travellers instantly jumped into the tea-kettle, and
fell fast asleep. But all along the shore, for many hours, there was distinctly heard a sound
of severely-suppressed sobs, and of a vague multitude of living creatures using their pocket-handkerchiefs
in a subdued simultaneous snuffle, lingering sadly along the walloping
waves as the boat sailed farther and farther away from the Land of
the Happy Blue-Bottle-Flies.

Nothing particular occurred for some days after these events, except that, as the travellers were
passing a low tract of sand, they perceived an unusual and gratifying spectacle; namely, a large
number of Crabs and Crawfish--perhaps six or seven hundred--sitting by the water-side, and endeavoring
to disentangle a vast heap of pale pink worsted, which they moistened at intervals with a
fluid composed of lavender-water and white-wine negus.

"Can we be of any service to you, O crusty Crabbies?" said the four children.

"Thank you kindly," said the Crabs consecutively. "We are trying to make some worsted mittens, but
do not know how."

On which Violet, who was perfectly acquainted with the art of mitten-making, said to the Crabs, "Do
your claws unscrew, or are they fixtures?"

"They are all made to unscrew," said the Crabs; and forthwith they deposited a great pile of claws
close to the boat, with which Violet uncombed all the pale pink worsted,
and then made the loveliest mittens with it you can imagine.

These the Crabs, having resumed and screwed on their claws, placed cheerfully upon their wrists,
and walked away rapidly on their hind-legs, warbling songs with a silvery voice and in a minor key.

After
this, the four little people sailed on again till they came to a vast and wide plain of astonishing
dimensions, on which nothing whatever could be discovered at first; but, as the travellers walked
onward, there appeared in the extreme and dim distance a single object, which on a nearer approach,
and on an accurately cutaneous inspection, seemed to be somebody in a large white wig, sitting
on an arm-chair made of sponge-cakes and oyster-shells. "It does not quite look like a human
being," said Violet doubtfully; nor could they make out what it really was, till the Quangle-Wangle
(who had previously been round the world) exclaimed softly in a loud
voice, "It is the co-operative Cauliflower!"

And so, in truth, it was: and they soon found that what they had taken for an immense wig was in
reality the top of the Cauliflower; and that he had no feet at all, being able to walk tolerably
well with a fluctuating and graceful movement on a single cabbage-stalk,--an accomplishment which
naturally saved him the expense of stockings and shoes.

Presently, while the whole party from the boat was gazing at him with mingled affection and disgust,
he suddenly arose, and, in a somewhat plumdomphious manner, hurried off towards the setting sun,--his
steps supported by two superincumbent confidential Cucumbers, and a large number of Waterwagtails
proceeding in advance of him by three and three in a row,--till he finally disappeared on the
brink of the western sky in a crystal cloud of sudorific sand.

So remarkable a sight, of course, impressed the four children very deeply; and they returned
immediately to their boat with a strong sense of undeveloped asthma and a great appetite.

Shortly after this, the travellers were obliged to sail directly below some high overhanging
rocks, from the top of one of which a particularly odious little boy, dressed in rose-colored knickerbockers,
and with a pewter plate upon his head, threw an enormous pumpkin at the boat, by which it
was instantly upset.

But this upsetting was of no consequence, because all the party knew
how to swim very well: and, in fact, they preferred swimming about
till after the moon rose; when, the water growing chilly, they sponge-taneously
entered the boat.

Meanwhile the Quangle-Wangle threw back the pumpkin with immense force, so that it hit the rocks
where the malicious little boy in rose-colored knickerbockers was sitting; when, being quite
full of lucifer-matches, the pumpkin exploded surreptitiously into a thousand bits; whereon the
rocks instantly took fire, and the odious little boy became unpleasantly hotter and hotter
and hotter, till his knickerbockers were turned quite green, and his nose was burnt off.

Two or three days after this had happened, they came to another place, where they found nothing
at all except some wide and deep pits full of mulberry-jam.

This is the property of the tiny, yellow-nosed Apes who abound in these districts, and who store
up the mulberry-jam for their food in winter, when they mix it with pellucid pale periwinkle-soup,
and serve it out in wedgewood china-bowls, which grow freely all over that part of the country.
Only one of the yellow-nosed Apes was on the spot, and he was fast asleep; yet the four travellers
and the Quangle-Wangle and Pussy were so terrified by the violence and sanguinary sound of his
snoring, that they merely took a small cupful of the jam, and returned to re-embark in their boat
without delay.

What was their horror on seeing the boat (including the churn and the tea-kettle) in the mouth
of an enormous Seeze Pyder, an aquatic and ferocious creature truly dreadful to behold, and,
happily, only met with in those excessive longitudes! In a moment, the beautiful boat was bitten
into fifty-five thousand million hundred billion bits; and it instantly became quite clear that
Violet, Slingsby, Guy, and Lionel could no longer preliminate their voyage by sea.

The four travellers were therefore obliged to resolve on pursuing their wanderings by land: and,
very fortunately, there happened to pass by at that moment an elderly
Rhinoceros, on which they seized; and, all four mounting on his back,--the
Quangle-Wangle sitting on his horn, and holding on by his ears, and
the Pussy-Cat swinging at the end of his tail,--they set off, having
only four small beans and three pounds of mashed potatoes to last
through their whole journey.

They were, however, able to catch numbers of the chickens and turkeys
and other birds who incessantly alighted on the head of the Rhinoceros
for the purpose of gathering the seeds of the rhododendron-plants
which grew there; and these creatures they cooked in the most translucent
and satisfactory manner by means of a fire lighted on the end of the
Rhinoceros's back.

A crowd of Kangaroos and gigantic Cranes accompanied them, from feelings of curiosity and complacency;
so that they were never at a loss for company, and went onward, as it were, in a sort of profuse
and triumphant procession.

Thus in less than eighteen weeks they all arrived safely at home, where they were received
by their admiring relatives with joy tempered with contempt, and
where they finally resolved to carry out the rest of their travelling-plans
at some more favorable opportunity.

As for the Rhinoceros, in token of their grateful adherence, they had him killed and stuffed
directly, and then set him up outside the door of their father's house as a diaphanous doorscraper.

THE
HISTORY OF THE SEVEN FAMILIES OF THE LAKE PIPPLE-POPPLE.

CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTORY.

In former days,--that is to say, once upon a time,--there lived in the Land of Gramble-Blamble
seven families. They lived by the side of the great Lake Pipple-Popple (one of the seven families,
indeed, lived in the lake), and on the outskirts of the city of Tosh, which, excepting when
it was quite dark, they could see plainly. The names of all these places you have probably heard
of; and you have only not to look in your geography-books to find out all about them.

Now, the seven families who lived on the borders of the great Lake
Pipple-Popple were as follows in the next chapter.

CHAPTER II.

THE SEVEN FAMILIES.
There was a family of two old Parrots and seven young Parrots.

There
was a family of two old Storks and seven young Storks.

There was
a family of two old Geese and seven young Geese.

There was a family
of two old Owls and seven young Owls.

There was a family of two old
Guinea Pigs and seven young Guinea Pigs.

There was a family of two
old Cats and seven young Cats.

And there was a family of two old
Fishes and seven young Fishes.

CHAPTER III.

THE HABITS OF THE SEVEN
FAMILIES.

The Parrots lived upon the Soffsky-Poffsky trees, which
were beautiful to behold, and covered with blue leaves; and they fed
upon fruit, artichokes, and striped beetles.

The Storks walked in
and out of the Lake Pipple-Popple, and ate frogs for breakfast, and
buttered toast for tea; but on account of the extreme length of their
legs they could not sit down, and so they walked about continually.

The
Geese, having webs to their feet, caught quantities of flies, which
they ate for dinner.

The Owls anxiously looked after mice, which
they caught, and made into sago-puddings.

The Guinea Pigs toddled
about the gardens, and ate lettuces and Cheshire cheese.

The Cats
sate still in the sunshine, and fed upon sponge biscuits.

The Fishes
lived in the lake, and fed chiefly on boiled periwinkles.

And all
these seven families lived together in the utmost fun and felicity.

CHAPTER
IV.

THE CHILDREN OF THE SEVEN FAMILIES ARE SENT AWAY.

One day all
the seven fathers and the seven mothers of the seven families agreed
that they would send their children out to see the world.

So they
called them all together, and gave them each eight shillings and some
good advice, some chocolate-drops, and a small green morocco pocket-book
to set down their expenses in.

They then particularly entreated them
not to quarrel; and all the parents sent off their children with a
parting injunction.

"If," said the old Parrots, "you find a cherry,
do not fight about who should have it."

"And," said the old Storks,
"if you find a frog, divide it carefully into seven bits, but on no
account quarrel about it."

And the old Geese said to the seven young
Geese, "Whatever you do, be sure you do not touch a plum-pudding flea."

And
the old Owls said, "If you find a mouse, tear him up into seven slices,
and eat him cheerfully, but without quarrelling."

And the old Guinea
Pigs said, "Have a care that you eat your lettuces, should you find
any, not greedily, but calmly."

And the old Cats said, "Be particularly
careful not to meddle with a clangle-wangle if you should see one."

And
the old Fishes said, "Above all things, avoid eating a blue boss-woss;
for they do not agree with fishes, and give them a pain in their toes."
 And the eldest Miss Morton, swinging her legs under the piano stool and
drumming away to Mrs. Nesbit's one- and two- and three- and four-ands, peeps out of the corners
of her eyes and sees Miss Müller gobbling Mr. Fenn right down without chewing him, and whoopee
but Mrs. Nesbit is biting nails, and Mr. Brotherton, he can't hardly keep his face straight
from laughing at all, and if Ruth and Martha ever tell she will never tell them another thing
in the world. And she mustn't forget to ask Mrs. Nesbit if she's used the Peerless Cooker and
if she has, will she please say something nice about it to Mrs. Ahab Wright, for Papa is so
anxious to sell one to the Wrights!

It is nearly nine o'clock. Mr. Fenn has been eaten up these twenty times. The wandering eyes
have caressed the bric-a-brac over and over. Mrs. Nesbit's tireless index finger has marked
the time while the great hands of the tall hall clock have crept around and halfway around
again. They are upon the final rehearsal of it.

"Other refuge have I none," says the voice and the eyes say even more and are mutely answered
by another pair of eyes.

"Hangs my helpless soul on thee," says the deep passionate voice, and the eyes say things even
more tender to eyes that falter only because they are faint with joy. In the short interval
the moving finger of Mrs. Nesbit goes up, and then comes a rattling of the great front door.
A moment later it is opened and the flushed face of Grant Adams is seen. He is collarless,
and untidy; he rushes into the room crying, "O, doctor--doctor, come--our baby--he is choking."
The youth sees Margaret, and with passion cries: "Kenyon--Kenyon--the baby, he is dying; for
God's sake--Mag, where is the Doctor?"

In an instant the little figure of the Doctor is in the room. He stares at the red-faced boy,
and quick as a flash he sees the open mouth, the dazed, gaping eyes, the graying face of Margaret
as she leans heavily upon George Brotherton. In another instant the Doctor sees her rally,
grapple with herself, bring back the slow color as if by main strength, and smile a hard forced
smile, as the boy stands in impotent anguish before them.

"I have the spring wagon here, Doctor--hurry--hurry please," expostulates the youth, as the
Doctor climbs into his overcoat, and then looking at Margaret the boy exclaims wildly--"Wouldn't
you like to go, too, Maggie? Wouldn't you?"

She has hold of herself now and replies: "No, Grant, I don't think your mother will need me,"
but she almost loses her grip as she asks weakly, "Do you?"

In another second they are gone, the boy and the Doctor, out into the night, and the horse's
hoofs, clattering fainter and fainter as they hurry down the road, bring to her the sound of
a little heart beating fainter and fainter, and she holds on to her soul with a hard hand.

Before long Margaret Müller and Henry Fenn are alone in a buggy driving to Prospect township.

She sees above her on the hill the lights in the great house of her desire. And she knows that
down in the valley where shimmers a single light is a little body choking for breath, fighting
for life.

"Hangs my helpless soul on thee," swirls through her brain, and she is cold--very cold, and
sits aloof and will not talk, cannot talk. Ever the patter of the horse's feet in the valley
is borne upward by the wind, and she feels in her soul the faltering of a little heart. She
dares not hope that it will start up again; she cannot bear the fear that it will stop.

So she leaves the man who knew her inmost soul but an hour ago; hardly a word she speaks at
parting; hardly she turns to him as she slips into the house, cold and shivering with the sound
of every hoof-beat on the road in the night, bringing her back to the helpless soul fluttering
in the little body that once she warmed in hers.

Thus the watchers watched the fighting through the night, the child fighting so hard to live.
For life is dear to a child--even though its life perpetuates shame and brings only sorrow--life
still is dear to that struggling little body there under that humble roof, where even those
that love it, and hover in agony over it in its bed of torture, feel that if it goes out into
the great mystery from whence it came, it will take a sad blot from the world with it. And
so hope and fear and love and tenderness and grief are all mingled in the horror that it may
die, in the mute question that asks if death would not be merciful and kind. And all night
the watchers watched, and the watcher who was absent was afraid to pray, and as the daylight
came in, wan and gray, the child on the rack of misery sank to sleep, and smiled a little smile
of peace at victory.

Then in the pale dawn, a weary man, trudging afoot slowly up the hill into Harvey, met another
going out into the fields. The Doctor looked up and was astonished to see Henry Fenn, with
hard drawn features, trembling limbs, hollow eyes and set lips. He too had been fighting hard
and he also had won his victory. The Doctor met the man's furtive, burning eyes and piped out
softly:

"Stick to it, Henry--by God, stick hard," and trudged on into the morning gloaming.

CHAPTER VI

ENTER THE BEAUTY AND CHIVALRY OF HARVEY; ALSO HEREIN WE BREAK OUR FIRST HEART

Towns are curiously like individuals. They take their character largely from their experiences,
laid layer upon layer in their consciousnesses, as time moves, and though the experiences are
seemingly forgotten, the results of those experiences are ineffaceably written into the towns.
Four or five towns lie buried under the Harvey that is to-day, each one possible only as the
other upholds it, and all inexorably pointing to the destiny of the Harvey that is, and to
the many other Harveys yet to rise upon the townsite--the Harveys that shall be. There was,
of course, heredity before the town was; the strong New England strain of blood that was mixed
in the Ohio Valley and about the Great Lakes and changed by the upheaval of the Civil War.
Then came the hegira across the Mississippi and the infant town in the Missouri Valley--the
town of the pioneers--the town that only obeyed its call and sought instinctively the school
house, the newspaper, orderly government, real estate gambling and "the distant church that
topt the neighboring hill." In the childhood of the town the cattle trail appeared and with
the cattle trade came wild days and sad disorder. But the railroad moved westward and the cattle
trail moved with the railroad and then in the early adolescence of the town came coal and gas
and oil. And suddenly Harvey blossomed into youth.

It was a place of adventure; men were made rich overnight by the blow of a drill in a well.
Then was the time for that equality of opportunity to come which the pioneers sought if ever
it was coming. But alas, even in matters of sheer luck, the fates played favorites. In those
fat years it began raining red-wheeled buggies on Sundays, and smart traps drawn by horses
harnessed gaudily in white or tan appeared on the streets. Morty Sands often hired a band from
Omaha or Kansas City, and held high revel in the Sands opera house, where all the new dances
of that halcyon day were tripped. The waters of the Wahoo echoed with the sounds of boating
parties--also frequently given by Morty Sands, and his mandolin twittered gayly on a dozen
porches during the summer evenings of that period. It was Morty who enticed Henry Fenn into
the second suit of evening clothes ever displayed in Harvey, though Tom Van Dorn and George
Brotherton appeared a week later in evening clothes plus white gloves and took much of the
shine from Henry and Morty's splendor. Those were the days when Nate Perry and young Joe Calvin
and Freddie Kollander organized the little crowd--the Spring Chickens, they called themselves--and
the little crowd was wont to ape its elders and peek through the fence at the grandeur of the
grown-ups. But alas for the little crowd, month by month it was doomed to see its little girls
kidnaped to bloom in the upper gardens. Thus Emma Morton went; thus Ave Calvin disappeared,
and so Laura Nesbit vanished from the Spring Chickens and appeared in Morty Sands's bower!
Doctor Nesbit in those days called Morty the "head gardener in the 'rosebud garden of girls!'"
And a lovely garden it was. Of course, it was more or less democratic; for every one was going
to be rich; every one was indeed just on the verge of riches, and lines of caste were loosely
drawn. For wealth was the only line that marked the social differences. So when Henry Fenn,
the young county attorney, in his new evening clothes brought Margaret Müller of the Register
of Deeds office to Morty Sands's dances, Margaret had whatever social distinction her wits
gave her; which upon the whole was as much distinction as Rhoda Kollander had whose husband
employed Margaret. The press of the social duties in that day weighed heavily upon Rhoda, who
was not the woman to neglect her larger responsibilities to so good a husband as John Kollander,
by selfishly staying at home and keeping house for him. She had a place in society to maintain,
that the flag of her country might not be sullied by barring John from a county office.

The real queen-rose in the garden was Laura Nesbit. How vivid she was! What lips she had in
those days of her first full bloom, and what frank, searching eyes! And her laugh--that chimed
like bells through the merriment of the youth that always was gathered about her--her laugh
could start a reaction in Morty Sands's heart as far as he could hear the chime. It was a matter
of common knowledge in the "crowd," that Morty Sands had one supreme aim in life: the courtship
of Laura Nesbit. For her he lavished clothes upon himself until he became known as the iridescent
dream! For her he bought a high-seated cart of great price, drawn by a black horse in white
kid harness! For her he learned a whole concert of Schubert's songs upon the mandolin and organized
a serenading quartette that wore the grass smooth under her window. For her candy, flowers,
books--usually gift books with padded covers, or with handpainted decorations, or with sumptuous
engravings upon them or in them, sifted into the Nesbits' front room, and lay in a thick coating
upon the parlor table.

Someway these votive offerings didn't reach the heart of the goddess. She rode beside him in
his stanhope, and she wore his bouquets and read his books, such as were intended for reading;
and alas for her figure, she ate his candy. But these things did not prosper his suit. She
was just looking around in the market of life. Pippa was forever passing through her heart
singing, "God's in his heaven--all's right with the world." She did not blink at evil; she
knew it, abhorred it, but challenged it with love. She had a vague idea that evil could be
vanquished by inviting it out to dinner and having it in for tea frequently and she believed
if it still refused to transform itself into good, that the thing to do with evil was to be
a sister to it.

The closest she ever came to overcoming evil with evil was when she spanked little Joe Calvin
for persisting in tying cans to the Morton cat's tail, whereupon Morty Sands rose and gave
the girl nine rahs, exhibiting an enthusiasm that inspired him for a year. So Laura thought
that if the spanking had not helped much the soul of little Joe, it had put something worth
while into Morty Sands. The thought cheered her. For Morty was her problem. During the first
months after her return from boarding school, she had broken him--excepting upon minor moonlight
relapses--of trying to kiss her, and she had sufficiently discouraged his declarations of undying
devotion, so that they came only at weddings, or after other mitigating circumstances which,
after pinching his ear, she was able to overlook.

But she could not get him to work for a living. He wouldn't even keep office hours. Lecturing
settled nothing. Lecturing a youth in a black and gold blazer, duck trousers and a silk shirt
and a red sash, with socks and hat to match his coat, lecturing a youth who plays the mandolin
while you talk, and looks at you through hazel eyes with all the intelligence of an affectionate
pup, lecturing a youth who you know would be kissing you at the moment if you weren't twenty
pounds heavier and twice as strong--someway doesn't arouse enthusiasm. So Morty Sands remained
a problem.

Now an affair of the heart when a man is in his twenties and a girl is just passing out of
her teens, is never static; it is dynamic and always there is something doing.

It was after one of Morty's innumerable summer dances in the Sands Opera House, that Fate cast
her dies for the final throw. Morty had filled Laura Nesbit's program scandalously full. Two
Newports, three military schottisches, the York, the Racket--ask grandpa and grammer about
these dances, ye who gyrate in to-day's mazes--two waltz quadrilles and a reel. And when you
have danced half the evening with a beautiful girl, Fate is liable to be thumping vigorously
on the door of your heart. So Morty walking home under a drooping August moon with Laura Nesbit
that night determined to bring matters to a decision. As they came up the walk to the Nesbit
home, the girl was humming the tune that beat upon his heart, and almost unconsciously they
fell to waltzing. At the veranda steps they paused, and his arm was around her. She tried to
move away from him, and cuffed him as she cried: "Now Morty--you know--you know very well what
I've always--"

"Laura--Laura--" he cried, as he held her hand to his face and tried to focus her soul with
his brown eyes, "Laura," he faltered, then words deserted him: the fine speech he had planned
melted into, "O, my dear--my dear!" But he kept her hand. The pain and passion in his voice
cut into the girl's heart. She was not frightened. She did not care to run. She did not even
take his persisting arm from about her. She let him kiss her hand reverently, then she sat
with him on the veranda step and as they sat she drew his arm from her waist until it was hooked
in her arm, and her hand held his.

"Oh, I'm in earnest to-night, Laura," said Morty, gripping her hand. "I'm staking my whole
life to-night, Laura. I'm deadly--oh, quite deadly serious, Laura, and oh--"

"And I'm serious too, Morty," said the girl--"just as serious as you!" She slipped her hand
away from his and put her hand upon his shoulder gently, almost tenderly. But the youth felt
a certain calmness in her touch that disheartened him.

In a storm of despair he spoke: "Laura--Laura, can't you see--how can you let me go on loving
you as I do until I am mad! Can't you see that my soul is yours and always has been! You can
call it into heights it will never know without you! You--you--O, sometimes I feel that I could
pray to you as to God!" He turned to her a face glowing with a white and holy passion, and
dropped her hand from his shoulder and did not touch her as he spoke. Their eyes met steadfastly
in a silence. Then the girl bowed her head and sobbed. For she knew, even in her teens, she
knew with the intuitions that are old as human love upon the planet that she was in the naked
presence of an adoring soul. When she could speak she picked up the man's soft white hand,
and kissed it. She could not have voiced her eternal denial more certainly. And Morty Sands
lifted an agonized face to the stars and his jaws trembled. He had lighted his altar fire and
it was quenched. The girl, still holding his hand, said tenderly:

"I'm so sorry--so sorry, Morty. But I can't! I never--never--never can!" She hesitated, and
repeated, shaking her head sadly, "I never, never can love you, Morty--never! And it's kind--"

"Yes, yes," he answered as one who realizes a finality. "It's kind enough--yes, I know you're
kind, Laura!" He stopped and gazed at her in the moonlight--and it was as if a flame on the
charred altar of his heart had sprung up for a second as he spoke: "And I never--never shall--I
never shall love any one else--I never, never shall!"

The girl rose. A moment later the youth followed her. Back into its sheath under his countenance
his soul slipped, and he stood before the girl smiling a half deprecatory smile. But the girl's
face was racked with sorrow. She had seen tragedy. Her pain wounded him and he winced in his
heart. Wherefore he smiled quite genuinely, and stepped back, and threw a kiss at the girl
as he said: "It's nothing, Laura! Don't mind! It's nothing at all and we'll forget it! Won't we?"

And turning away, he tripped down the walk, leaving her gazing after him in the moonlight.
At the street he turned back with a gay little gesture, blew a kiss from his white finger tips
and cried, "It's nothing at all--nothing at all!" And as she went indoors she heard him call,
"It's nothing at all!"

She heard him lift his whistle to the tune of the waltz quadrille, but she stood with tears
in her eyes until the brave tune died in the distance.

CHAPTER VII

IN WHICH WE SEE HOW LIFE TRANSLATES ITSELF INTO THE MATERIALISM AROUND IT

Coal and oil and gas and lead and zinc. The black sprite, the brown sprite, the invisible sprite,
the two gray sprites--elemental sprites they were--destined to be bound servants of man. Yet
when they came rushing out of the earth there at Harvey, man groveled before them, and sold
his immortal soul to these trolls. Naturally enough Daniel Sands was the high priest at their
altar. It was fitting that a devil worship which prostrated itself before coal and oil and
gas and lead and zinc should make a spider the symbol of its servility. So the spider's web,
all iron and steel in pipes below ground, all steel and iron and copper in wires and rails
above ground, spread out over the town, over the country near the town, and all the pipes and
tubes and rails and wires led to the dingy little room where Daniel Sands sat spinning his
web. He was the town god. Even the gilded heifer of Baal was a nobler one. And the curious
thing about this orgy of materialism, was that Harvey and all the thousands of Harveys great
and small that filled America in those decades believed with all their hearts--and they were
essentially kind hearts--that quick, easy and exorbitant profits, really made the equality
of opportunity which every one desired. They thought in terms of democracy--which is at bottom
a spiritual estate,--and they acted like gross materialists. So they fooled the world, while
they deceived themselves. For the soul of America was not reflected in that debauch of gross
profit making. The soul of America still aspired for justice; but in the folly of the day,
believed quite complacently because a few men got rich quick (stupid men too,) and many men
were well-to-do, that justice was achieved, and the world ready for the millennium. But there
came a day when Harvey, and all its kind saw the truth in shame.

And life in Harvey shaped itself into a vast greedy dream. A hard, metallic timbre came into
the soft, high voice of Dr. James Nesbit, but did not warn men of the metallic plate that was
galvanizing the Doctor's soul; nor did it disturb the Doctor. Amos Adams saw the tinplate covering,
heard the sounding brass, and Mary his wife saw and heard too; but they were only two fools
and the Doctor who loved them laughed at them and turned to the healing of the sick and the
subjugation of his county. So men sent him to the state Senate. Curiously Mrs. Nesbit--she
whom George Brotherton always called the General--she did not shake the spell of the trolls
from her heart. They were building wings and ells and lean-tos on the house that she called
her home, and she came to love the witchery of the time and place and did not see its folly.
Yet there walked between these two entranced ones, another who should have awakened. For she
was young, fresh from the gods of life. Her eyes, unflinching, glorious eyes, should have seen
through the dream of that day. But they were only a girl's eyes and were happy, so they could
not see beyond the spell that fell around them. And alas, even when the prince arrived, his
kiss was poisoned too.

When young Thomas Van Dorn came to the Nesbit house on a voyage of exploration and discovery--came
in a handsome suit of gray, with hat and handkerchief to match, and a flowing crepe tie, black
to harmonize with his flowing mustache and his wing of fine jet black hair above his ivory
tinted face, Laura Nesbit considered him reflectively, and catalogued him.

"Tom," explained the daughter to her father rather coldly one morning, after the young man
had been reading Swinburne in his deep, mellow pipe-organ of a voice to the family until bedtime
the night before, "Tom Van Dorn, father, is the kind of a man who needs the influence of some
strong woman!"

Mrs. Nesbit glanced at her husband furtively and caught his grin as he piped gayly:

"Who also must carry the night key!"

The three laughed but the daughter went on with the cataloguing: "He is a young man of strong
predilections, of definite purpose and more than ordinary intellectual capacity."

"And so far as I have counted, Laura," her father interrupted again, "I haven't found an honest
hair in his handsome head; though I haven't completed the count yet!" The father smiled amiably
as he made the final qualification.

The girl caught the mother's look of approval shimmering across the table and laughed her gay,
bell-like chime. "O, you've made a bad guess, mother."

Again she laughed gayly: "It's not for me to open a school for the Direction of Miscalculated
Purposes. Still," this she said seriously, "a strong woman is what he needs."

"Not omitting the latch-key," gibed her father, and the talk drifted into another current.

The next Sunday afternoon young Tom Van Dorn appeared with Rossetti added to his Swinburne,
and crowded Morty Sands clear out of the hammock so that Morty had to sleep in a porch chair,
and woke up frequently and was unhappy. While the gilded youth slept the Woman woke and listened,
and Morty was left disconsolate.

The shadows were long and deep when Tom Van Dorn rose from the hammock, closed his book, and
stood beside the girl, looking with a gentle tenderness from the burning depths of his black
eyes into her eyes. He paused before starting away, and held up a hand so that she could see,
wound about it, a flaxen hair, probably drawn from the hammock pillow. He smiled rather sadly,
dropped his eyes to the book closed in his hands, and quoted softly:

    "'And around his heart, one strangling golden hair!'"

He did not speak again, but walked off at a great stride down the stone path to the street.
The next day Rossetti's sonnets came to Laura Nesbit in a box of roses.

The Sunday following Laura Nesbit made it a point to go with her parents to spend the day with
the Adamses down by the river on their farm. But not until the Nesbits piled into their phaëton
to leave did Grant appear. He met the visitors at the gate with a great bouquet of woods flowers,
saying, "Here, Mrs. Nesbit--I thought you might like them." But they found Laura's hands, and
he smiled gratefully at her for taking them. As they drove off, leaving him looking eagerly
after them, Dr. Nesbit said when they were out of hearing, "I tell you, girls--there's the
makings of a man--a real man!"

That night Laura Nesbit in her room looking at the stars, rose and smelled the woods flowers
on her table beside some fading roses.

As her day dreams merged into vague pictures flitting through her drowsy brain, she heard the
plaintive, trembling voice of Morty Sands's mandolin, coming nearer and nearer, and his lower
whistle taking the tune while the E string crooned an obligato; he passed the house, went down
the street to the Mortons' and came back and went home again, still trilling his heart out
like a bird. As the chirping faded into the night sounds, the girl smiled compassionately and
slept.

As she slept young Thomas Van Dorn walked alone under the elm trees that plumed over the sidewalks
in those environs with hands clasped behind him, occasionally gazing into the twinkling stars
of the summer night, considering rather seriously many things. He had come out to think over
his speech to the jury the next day in a murder case pending in the court. But the murderer
kept sinking from his consciousness; the speech would not shape itself to please him, and the
young lawyer was forever meeting rather squarely and abruptly the vision of Laura Nesbit, who
seemed to be asking him disagreeable and conclusive questions, which he did not like to answer.
Was she worth it--the sacrifice that marriage would require of him? Was he in love with her?
What is love anyway? Wherein did it differ from certain other pleasurable emotions, to which
he was not a stranger? And why was the consciousness of her growing larger and larger in his
life? He tried to whistle reflectively, but he had no music in his soul and whistling gave
him no solace.

It was midnight when he found himself walking past the Nesbit home, looking toward it and wondering
which of the open windows was nearest to her. He flinched with shame when he recollected himself
before other houses gazing at other windows, and he unpursed his lips that were wont to whistle
a signal, and went down the street shuddering. Then after an impulse in which some good angel
of remorse shook his teeth to rouse his soul, he lifted his face to the sky and would have
cried in his heart for help, but instead he smiled and went on, trying to think of his speech
and resolving mightily to put Laura Nesbit out of his heart finally for the night. He held
himself to his high resolve for four or five minutes. It is only fair to say that the white
clad figure of the Doctor coming clicking up the street with his cane keeping time to a merry
air that he hummed as he walked distracted the young man. His first thought was to turn off
and avoid the Doctor who came along swinging his medicine case gayly. But there rushed over
Van Dorn a feeling that he would like to meet the Doctor. He recognized that he would like
to see any one who was near to Her. It was a pleasing sensation. He coddled it. He was proud
of it; he knew what it meant. So he stopped the preoccupied figure in white, and cried, "Doctor--we're
late to-night!"

"Well, Tom, I've got a right to be! Two more people in Harvey to-night than were here at five
o'clock this afternoon because I am a trifle behindhand. Girl at your partner's--Joe Calvin's,
and a boy down at Dick Bowman's!" He paused and smiled and added musingly, "And they're as
tickled down at Dick's as though he was heir to a kingdom!"

"And Joe--I suppose--not quite--"

"Oh, Joe, he's still in the barn, I dropped in to tell him it was a girl. But he won't venture
into the house to see the mother before noon to-morrow! Then he'll go when she's asleep!"

"Dick really isn't more than two jumps ahead of the wolf, is he, Doctor?"

"Well," grinned the elder man, "maybe a jump-and-a-half or two jumps."

The young man exclaimed, "Say, Doctor! I think it would be a pious act to make the fellows
put up fifty dollars for Dick to-night. I'll just go down and raid a few poker games and make
them do it."

The Doctor stopped him: "Better let me give it to Dick if you get it, Tom!" Then he added,
"Why don't you keep Christian hours, boy? You can't try that Yengst case to-morrow and be up
all night!"

"That's just what I'm out here for, Doctor--to get my head in shape for the closing speech."

"Well," sniffed the Doctor, "I wish you no bad luck, but I hope you lose. Yengst is guilty,
and you've no business--"

"Doctor," cut in Van Dorn, "there's not a penny in the Yengst case for me! He was a poor devil
in trouble and he came to my office for help! Do you consider the morals of your sick folks--whether
they have lived virtuous and upright lives when they come to you stricken and in pain? They're
just sick folks to you in your office, and they're just poor devils in trouble for me."

The Doctor cocked his head on one side, sparrow-wise, looked for a moment at the young man
and piped, "You're a brassy pup, aren't you!"

A second later the Doctor was trudging up the street, homeward, humming his bee-like song.
Van Dorn watched him until his white clothes faded into the shades of the night, then he turned
and walked slowly townward, with his hands behind him and his eyes on the ground. He forgot
the Yengst case, and everything else in the universe except a girl's gray eyes, her radiant
face, and the glory of her aspiring soul. It was calling with all its power to Tom Van Dorn
to rise and shine and take up the journey to the stars. And when one hears that call, whether
it come from man or maid, from friend or brother, or sweetheart or child, or from the challenge
within him of the holy spirit, when he heeds its call, no matter where he is while he hears,
he walks with God!

So it came to pass the next day that Thomas Van Dorn went before the jury and pleaded for the
murderer in the Yengst case with the tongue of men and of angels. For he knew that Dr. Nesbit
was loitering in the clerk's office, adjoining the courtroom to listen to the plea. Every faculty
of his mind and every capacity of his body was awake, and they said around the court house
that it was "the speech of Tom's life!" The Doctor on the front steps of the courthouse met
the young man in the daze that follows an oratorical flight, munching a sandwich to relieve
his brain, while the multitude made way for him as he went to his office.

"Well, Tom--" piped the Doctor as he grasped the sweaty, cold hands of the young orator, "if
Yengst had been innocent do you suppose you could have done as well?"

Van Dora, gave his sandwich to a passing dog, and took the Doctor's arm as they walked to their
common stairway. Before they had walked a dozen steps the Doctor had unfolded a situation in
local politics that needed attention, and Van Dorn could not lead the elder man back to further
praises of his speech. Yet the young lawyer knew that he had moved the Doctor deeply.

That night in his office Tom Van Dorn and Henry Fenn sat with their feet in the window sill,
looking through the open window into the moon. In their discourse they used that elaborate,
impersonal anonymity that youth engages to carry the baggage of its intimate confidences.

"I've got to have a pretty woman, Henry," quoth the lawyer to his friend, while the moon blushed
behind a cloud. "She must have beauty above everything, and after that good manners, and after
that good blood."

The moon came out and smiled at Henry. "Tom, let me tell you something, I don't care! I used
to think I'd be pickey and choosey. But I know my own heart. I don't care! I'm the kind of
fellow, I guess, who just gets it bad and comes down all broken out with it." He turned his
glowing smile into Tom Van Dorn's face, and finding no quick response smiled whimsically back
at the moon.

"Some fellows are that way, Henry," assented Van Dorn, "but not I! I couldn't love a servant
girl no matter how pretty she was--not for keeps, and I couldn't love an ugly princess, and
I'd leave a bluestocking and elope with a chorus girl if I found the bluestocking crocked or
faded in the wash! Yet a beautiful woman, who remained a woman and didn't become a moral guide--"
he stared brazenly at the moon and in the cloud that whisked by he saw a score of fancies of
other women whose faces had shone there, and had passed. He went on: "Oh, she could hold me--she
could hold me--I think!"

The street noises below filled the pause. Henry rose, looked eagerly into the sky and wistfully
at the moon as he spoke, "Hold me? Hold me?" he cried. "Why, Tom, though I'd fall into hell
myself a thousand times--she couldn't lose me! I'd still--still," he faltered, "I'd still--"
He did not finish, but sat down and putting his hand on the arm of his friend's chair, he bent
forward, smiled into the handsome young face in the moonlight and said: "Well--you know the
kind of a fool I am, Tom--now!"

"That's what you say, Henry--that's what you say now." Van Dorn turned and looked at his friend.
"You're sticking it out all right, Henry--against the rum fiend--I presume? When does your
sentence expire?"

"Next October," answered Fenn.

"Going to make it then?"

"That's the understanding," returned Fenn.

"And you say you've got it bad," laughed Van Dorn. "And yet--say, Henry--why didn't you do
better with the jury this afternoon in the Yengst case? Doesn't it--I mean that tremendous
case you have on with the Duchess of Müller--doesn't it put an edge on you? What was the matter
with you to-day?"

Fenn shook his head slowly and said: "It's different with me. I just couldn't help feeling
that if I was worth any woman's giving herself--was worth anything as a man, I'd want to be
dead square with that Yengst creature--and I got to thinking, maybe in his place, drunk and
hungry--well, I just couldn't, Tom--because--because of--well, I wanted her to marry a human
being first--not a county attorney!"

"You're a damn fool!" retorted Van Dorn. "Do you think you'll succeed in this world on that
basis! I tell you if I was in love with a woman I'd want to take that Yengst case and lay it
before her as a trophy I'd won--lay it before her like a dog!"

Fenn hesitated. He disliked to give pain. But finally he said, "I suppose, Tom, I'd like to
lay it before her--like a man!"

"Hell's delight!" sneered Van Dorn, and they turned off the subject of the tender passion,
and went to considering certain stipulations that Van Dorn was asking of the county attorney
in another matter before the court.

The next day young Thomas Van Dorn began rather definitely to prepare his pleading in still
another suit in another court, and before the summer's end, Morty Sands's mandolin was wrapped
in its chamois skin bag and locked in its mahogany case. Sometimes Morty, whistling softly
and dolefully, would pass the Nesbit home late at night, hoping that his chirping might reach
her heart; at times he made a rather formal call upon the entire Nesbit family, which he was
obviously encouraged to repeat by the elders. But Morty was inclined to hide in the thicket
of his sorrow and twitter his heart out to the cold stars. Tom Van Dorn pervaded the Nesbit
home by day with his flowers and books and candy, and by night--as many nights a week as he
could buy, beg or steal--by night he pervaded the Nesbit home like an obstinate haunt.

He fell upon the whole family and made violent love to the Doctor and Mrs. Nesbit. He read
Browning to the Doctor and did his errands in politics like a retrieving dog. Mrs. Nesbit learned
through him to her great joy that the Satterthwaite, who was the maternal grandfather of the
Tory governor of Maryland, was not descended from the same Satterlee hanged by King John in
his war with the barons, but from the Sussex branch of the family that remained loyal to the
Crown. But Tom Van Dorn wasted no time or strength in foolishness with the daughter of the
house. His attack upon her heart was direct and unhalting. He fended off other suitors with
a kind of animal jealousy. He drove her even from so unimportant a family friend as Grant Adams.

Gradually, as the autumn deepened into winter and Tom Van Dorn found himself spending more
and more time in the girl's company he had glimpses of his own low estate through the contrast
forced upon him daily by his knowledge of what a good woman's soul was. The self-revelation
frightened him; he was afraid of what he saw inside himself in those days, and there can be
no doubt that for a season his soul was wrestling with its doom for release. No make-believe
passion was it that spurred him forward in his attack upon the heart of Laura Nesbit. Within
him, there raged the fierce battle between the spirit of the times--crass, material and ruthless--and
the spirit of things as they should be. It was the old fight between compromise and the ideal.

As for the girl, she was in that unsettled mind in which young women in their first twenties
often find themselves when sensing by an instinct new to them the coming of a grown-up man
with real matrimonial intentions. Given a girl somewhat above the middle height, with a slim,
full-blown figure, with fair hair, curling and blowing about a pink and white face, and with
solemn eyes--prematurely gray eyes, her father called them--with red lips, with white teeth
that flashed when she smiled, and with a laugh like the murmur of gay waters; given a more
than usual amount of inherited good sense, and combine that with a world of sentiment that
perfect health can bring to a girl of twenty-two; then add one exceptionally fascinating man
of thirty--more or less--a handsome young man; a successful man as young men go, with the oratorical
temperament and enough of a head to be a good consulting lawyer as well as a jury lawyer with
more than local reputation; add to the young man that vague social iridescence, or aura or
halo that young men wear in glamor, and that old men wear in shame--a past; and then let public
opinion agree that he is his own worst enemy and declare that if he only had some strong woman
to take hold of him--and behold there are the ingredients of human gunpowder!

Doctor Nesbit smelled the burning powder. Vainly he tried to stamp out the fire before the
explosion.

"Bedelia," said the Doctor one day, as the parents heard the girl talking eagerly with the
young man, "what do you make out of this everlasting 'Tom, Tom, Tom,' out there in the living
room?"

Mrs. Nesbit rocked in her chair and shook an ominous head. Finally she said: "I wish he'd Tom
himself home and stay there, Doctor." The wife spoke as an oracle with emphasis and authority.
"You must speak to the child!"

The little man puckered his loose-skinned face into a sad, absurdly pitiful smile and shrilled
back:

"Yes--I did speak to her. And she--" he paused.

"Well?" demanded the mother.

"She just fed me back all the decent things I have said of Tom when he has done my errands."
He drummed his fingers helplessly on his chair and sighed mournfully: "I wonder why I said
those things! I really wonder!"

But the voices of the young people rose gayly and disturbed his musings.

It is easy now after a quarter of a century has unfolded its events for us to lay blame and
grow wise in retrospect. It is easy to say that what happened was foredoomed to happen; and
yet here was a man, walking up and down the curved verandahs that Mrs. Nesbit had added to
the house at odd times, walking up and down, and speaking to a girl in the moonlight, with
much power and fire, of life and his dreams and his aspirations.

Over and over he had sung his mating song. Formerly he had made love as he tried lawsuits,
exhibiting only such fervor as the case required. There can be no doubt, however, that when
he made love to Laura Nesbit, it was with all the powers of his heart and mind. If he could
plead with a jury for hire, if he could argue with the court and wrangle with council, how
could he meet reason, combat objections, and present the case of his soul and make up the brief
for his own destiny?

He did not try to shield himself when he wooed Laura Nesbit, but she saw all that he could
be. A woman has her vanity of sex, her elaborate, prematernal pride in her powers, and when
man appeals to a woman's powers for saving him, when he submits the proofs that he is worth
saving, and when he is handsome, with an education in the lore of the heart that gives him
charm and breaks down reserves and barriers--but these are bygones now--bygones these twenty-five
years and more. What was to be had to be, and what might have been never was, and what their
hopes and high aims were, whose hearts glowed in the fires of life in Harvey so long ago--and
what all our vain, unfruited hopes are worth, only a just God who reads us truly may say. And
a just God would give to the time and the place, the spirit of the age, its share in all that
followed. Spring opened formally for the Nesbits with crocuses and hyacinths; smiled genially
in golden forsythia, bridal wreath and tulips, preened itself in flags and lilacs before glowing
in roses and peonies. Now the spring is always wise; for it knows what the winter only hopes
or fears. Events burst forth in spring that have been hidden since their seedtime. And it was
with the coming of the first crocuses that Dr. Nesbit found in his daughter's eyes a joyous
look, new and exultant--a look which never had been inspired by the love he lavished upon her.
It was not meant for him. Yet it was as truly a spring blossom as any that blushed in the garden.
When it came and when the father realized that the mother also saw it, they feared to speak
of it--even to themselves and by indirection.

For they knew their winter conspiracies had failed. In vain was the trip to Baltimore; in vain
was the week with grand opera in New York, and they both knew that the proposed trip to Europe
never would occur. When the parents saw that look of triumphant joy in their daughter's face,
when they saw how it lighted up her countenance like a flame when Tom Van Dorn was near or
was on his way to her, they knew that from the secret recesses of her heart, from the depths
of her being, love was springing. They knew that they could not uproot it, and they had no
heart to try. For they accepted love as a fact of life, and felt that when once it has seeded
and grown upon a heart, it is a part of that heart and only God's own wisdom and mercy may
change the destiny that love has written upon the life in which love rests. So in the wisdom
of the spring, the parents were mute and sad.

There was no hint of anger in their sorrow. They realized that if she was wrong, and they were
right, she needed them vastly more than if they were wrong and she was right, and so they tried
to rejoice with her--not of course expressly and baldly, but in a thousand ways that lay about
them, they made her as happy as they could. Their sweet acquiescence in what she knew was cutting
the elders to the quick, gave the girl many an hour of poignant distress. Yet the purpose of
her heart was not moved. The Satterthwaite in her was dominant.

"Doctor," spoke the wife one morning as they sat alone over their breakfast, "I think--" She
stopped, and he knew she was listening to the daughter, who was singing in an undertone in
the garden.

"Yes," he answered, "so do I. I think they have settled it."

The man dropped his glance to the table before him, where his hands rested helplessly and cried,
"Bedelia--I don't--I don't like it!"

The color of her woe darkened Mrs. Nesbit's face as her features trembled for a second, before
she controlled herself. "No, Jim--no--no! I don't--I'm afraid--afraid, of I don't know what!"

"Of course, he's of excellent family--the very best!" the wife ventured.

"And he's making money--and has lots of money from his people!" returned the father.

"And he's a man among men!" added the mother.

"Oh, yes--very much that,--and he's trying to be decent! Honestly, Bedelia, I believe the fellow's
got a new grip on himself!" The Doctor's voice had regained its timbre; it was just a little
hard, and it broke an instant later as he cried: "O Lord, Lord, mother--we can't fool ourselves;
let's not try!" They looked into the garden, where the girl stood by the blooming lilacs with
her arms filled with blossoms.

At length the mother spoke, "What shall we do?"

"What can we do?" the Doctor echoed. "What can any human creatures do in these cases! To interfere
does no good! The thing is here. Why has it come? I don't know." He repeated the last sentence
piteously, and went on gently:

"'They say it was a stolen tide--the Lord who sent it, He knows all!' But why--why--why--did
it wash in here? What does it mean? What have we done--and what--what has she done?"

The little Doctor looked up into the strong face of his wife rather helplessly, then the time
spirit that is after all our sanity--touched them, and they smiled. "Perhaps, Jim," the smile
broke into something almost like a laugh, "father said something like that to mother the day
I stood among the magnolias trying to pluck courage with the flowers to tell him that I was
going with you!"

They succeeded in raising a miserable little laugh, and he squeezed her hand.

The girl moved toward the house. The father turned and put on his hat as he went to meet her.
She was a hesitant, self-conscious girl in pink, who stopped her father as he toddled down
the front steps with his medicine case, and she put her hand upon him, saying:

"Father," she paused, looking eagerly at him, then continued, "there's the loveliest yellow
flag over here." The father smiled, put his arm about the girl and piped: "So the pink rosebud
will take us to the yellow flag!" They walked across the garden to the flower and she exclaimed:
"Oh, father--isn't it lovely!"

The father looked tenderly into her gray eyes, patted her on the shoulder and with his arm
still about her, he led her to a seat under the lilacs before the yellow flower. He looked
from the flower to her face and then kissed her as he whispered: "Oh my dear, my dear." She
threw her arms about him and buried her face, all flushed, upon his shoulder. He felt her quiver
under the pressure of his arm and before she could look at him, she spoke:

"Oh, father! Father! You--you won't--you won't blame--" Then she lifted up her face to his
and cried passionately: "But all the world could not stop it now--not now! But, oh, father,
I want you with me," and she shook his arm. "You must understand. You must see Tom as I see
him, father." She looked the question of her soul in an anxious, searching glance. Her father
reached for one of her hands and patted it. He gazed downward at the yellow iris, but did not
see it.

"Yes, dear, I know--I understand."

"I was sure that you would know without my spelling it all out to you. But, oh, father," she
cried, "I don't want you and mother to feel as you do about Tom, for you are wrong. You are
all--all wrong!"

The Doctor's fat hand pressed the strong hand of the girl. "Well," he began slowly, his high-keyed
voice was pitched to a soft tone and he spoke with a woman's gentleness, "Tom's quite a man,
but--" he could only repeat, "quite a man." Then he added gently: "And I feel that he thinks
it's genuine now--his--love for you, daughter." The Doctor's face twitched, and he swallowed
a convulsive little sob as he said, "Laura--child--can't you see, it really makes no difference
about Tom--not finally!" He blinked and gulped and went on with renewed courage. "Can't you
see, child--you're all we've got--mother and I--and if you want Tom--why--" his face began
to crumple, but he controlled it, and blurted out, "Why by johnnie you can have him. And what's
more," his voice creaked with emotion as he brought his hand down on his knee, "I'm going to
make Tom the best father-in-law in the whole United States." His body rocked for a moment as
he spurred himself to a last effort. Then he said: "And mother--mother'll be--mother will--she'll
make him--" he could get no further, but he felt the pressure of her hand, and knew that she
understood. "Mother and I just want you to be happy and if it takes Tom for that--why Tom's
what it takes, I guess--and that's all we want to know!"

The girl felt the tears on his face as she laid her cheek against his.

Then she spoke: "But you don't know him, father! You don't understand him! It's beautiful to
be able to do what I can do--but," she shuddered, "it's so awful--I mean all that devil that
used to be in him. He is so ashamed, so sorry--and it's gone--all gone--all, every bit of it
gone, father!" She put her father's hand to her flaming cheek and whispered, "You think so,
don't you, father?"

The father's eyes filled again and his throat choked. "Laura," he said very gently, "my professional
opinion is this: You've a fighting chance with Tom Van Dorn--about one in ten. He's young.
You're a strong, forceful woman--lots of good Satterthwaite in you, and precious little of
the obliging Nesbits. Now I'll tell you the truth, Laura; Tom's got a typical cancer on his
soul. But he's young; and you're young, and just now he's undergoing a moral regeneration.
You are new blood. You may purify him. If the moral tissue isn't all rotten, you may cure him."

The girl gripped her father's hand and cried: "But you think I can--father, you think I can?"

"No," piped the little man sadly, "no, daughter, I don't think you can. But I hope you can;
and if you'd like to know, I'm going to pray the God that sent me to your mother to give you
the sense and power He gave her." The Doctor smiled, withdrew his arm, and started for the
street. He turned, "And if you do save him, Laura, I'll be mighty proud of you. For," he squeaked
good naturedly, "it's a big job--but when you've done it you'll have something to show for
it--I'll say that for him--you'll certainly have something to show for it," he repeated. He
did not whistle as he walked down the street and the daughter thought that he kept his eyes
upon the ground. As he was about to pass from her view, he turned, waved his hand and threw
her a kiss, and with it she felt a blessing.

But curiously enough she saw only one of the goodly company of Doctor Nesbits that trudged
down the hill in his white linen suit, under his broad-brimmed panama hat. Naturally she hardly
might be expected to see the conscienceless boss of Hancock and Greely counties, who handled
the money of privilege seekers and bought and sold men gayly as a part of the day's work. Nor
could she be expected to see the helpless little man whose face crumpled, whose heart sank
and whose courage melted as he stood beside her in the garden, the sad, hopeless little man
who, as he went down the hill was captain of the groups that walked under his hat that hour.
The amiable Doctor, who was everybody's friend and was loyal to those who served him, the daughter
neglected that day; and the State Senator did not attract her. She saw only a gentle, tender,
understanding father, whose love shone out of his face like a beacon and who threw merry kisses
as he disappeared down the hill--a ruddy-faced, white phantom in a golden spring day!

Some place between his home and Market Street the father retired and the politician took command
of Dr. Nesbit's soul. And he gave thought to the Nesbit machine. The job of the moment before
the machine was to make George Brotherton, who had the strength of a man who belonged to all
the lodges in town, mayor of Harvey. "Help Harvey Hump" was George's alliterative slogan, and
the translation of the slogan into terms of Nesbitese was found in a rather elaborate plan
to legalize the issuance of bonds by the coal and oil towns adjacent to Harvey, so that Daniel
Sands could spin out his web of iron and copper and steel,--rails and wires and pipes into
these huddles of shanties that he might sell them light and heat and power and communication
and transportation.

Even the boss--even Old Linen Pants--was not without his sense of humor, nor without his joyous
moments when he relished human nature in large, raw portions. As he walked down the hill there
flashed across his mind a consciousness of the pride of George Brotherton in his candidacy.
That pride expressed itself in a feud George had with Violet Mauling who, having achieved stenography,
was installed in the offices of Calvin & Van Dorn as a stenographer--the stenographer in fact.
She on her part was profoundly proud of her job and expressed her pride in overhanging and
exceeding mischievous looking bangs upon her low and rather narrow brow. In the feud between
George and Violet, it was her consecrated task to keep him waiting as long as possible before
admitting him to Van Dorn's inner room, and it was Mr. Brotherton's idea never to call her
by her right name, nor by any name twice in succession. She was Inez or Maude or Mabel or Gwendolyn
or Pet or Sweetheart or Dearest, in rapid succession, and in return for his pseudonymnal attentions,
Mr. Brotherton always was sure of receiving from Miss Mauling upon leaving the office, an elaborately
turned-up nose. For Miss Mauling was peevish and far from happy. She had been conscious for
nearly a year that her power over young Mr. Van Dorn was failing, or that her charms were waning,
or that something was happening to clog or cloy her romance. On a certain May morning she had
sat industriously writing, "When in the course of human events," "When in the course of human
events it becomes necessary," "When in the course of human events it becomes necessary for
a people to separate--" upon her typewriter, over and over and over again, while she listened
to Captain Morton selling young Mr. Van Dorn a patent churn, and from the winks and nods and
sly digs and nudges the Captain distributed through his canvass, it was obvious to Miss Mauling
that affairs in certain quarters had reached a point.

That evening at Brotherton's Amen corner, where the gay young blades of the village were gathered--Captain
Morton decided that as court herald of the community he should proclaim the banns between Thomas
Van Dorn and Laura Nesbit. Naturally he desired a proper entrance into the conversation for
his proclamation, but with the everlasting ting-aling and tym-ty-tum of Nathan Perry's mandolin
and the jangling accompaniment of Morty's mandolin, opening for the court herald was not easy.
Grant Adams was sitting at the opposite end of the bench from the Captain, deep in one of Mr.
Brotherton's paper bound books--to-wit, "The Stones of Venice," and young Joe Calvin sadly
smoking his first stogy, though still in his knickerbockers, was greedily feasting his eyes
upon a copy of the pink Police Gazette hanging upon a rack above the counter. Henry Fenn and
Mr. Brotherton were lounging over the cigar case, discussing matters of state as they affected
a county attorney and a mayor, when the Captain, clearing his throat, addressed Mr. Brotherton
thus:

"George--I sold two patent churns to two bridegrooms to-day--eh?" As the music stopped the
Captain, looking at Henry Fenn, added reflectively: "Bet you four bits, George, you can't name
the other one--what say?" No one said and the Captain took up his solo. "Well--it's this-away:
I see what I see next door. And I hear what my girls say. So this morning I sashays around
the yard till I meets a certain young lady a standing by the yaller rose bush next to our line
fence and I says: 'Good morning madam,' I says, 'from what I see and hear and cogitate,' I
says, 'it's getting about time for you to join my list of regular customers.' And she kind
of laughs like a Swiss bellringer's chime--the way she laughs; and she pretended she didn't
understand. So I broadens out and says, 'I sold Rhody Kollander her first patent rocker the
day she came to town to begin housekeeping with. I sold your pa and ma a patent gate before
they had a fence. I sold Joe Calvin's woman her first apple corer, and I started Ahab Wright
up in housekeeping by selling him a Peerless cooker. I've sold household necessities to every
one of the Mrs. Sandses' and 'y gory, madam,' I says, 'next to the probate court and the preacher,
I'm about the first necessity of a happy marriage in this man's town,' I says, 'and it looks
to me,' I says, 'it certainly looks to me--' And I laughs and she laughs, all redded up and
asts: 'Well, what are you selling this spring, Captain?' And I says, 'The Appomattox churn,'
and then one word brought on another and she says finally, 'You just tell Tom to buy one for
the first of our Lares and Penates,' though I got the last word wrong and tried to sell him
Lares and spuds and then Lares and Murphies before he got what I was drivin' at. But I certainly
sold the other bridegroom, Henry--eh?"

A silence greeted the Captain's remarks. In it the "Stones of Venice" grew bleak and cold for
Grant Adams. He rose and walked rather aimlessly toward the water cooler in the rear of the
store and gulped down two cups of water. When he came back to the bench the group there was
busy with the Captain's news. But the music did not start again. Morty Sands sat staring into
the pearl inlaid ring around the hole in his mandolin, and his chin trembled. The talk drifted
away from the Captain's announcement in a moment, and Morty saw Grant Adams standing by the
door, looking through a window into the street. Grant seemed a tower of strength. For a few
minutes Morty tried to restore his soul by thrumming a tune--a sweet, tinkly little tune, whose
words kept dinging in his head:

    "Love comes like a summer sigh, softly o'er us stealing;
    Love comes and we wonder why, at love's shrine we're kneeling!"

But that only unsteadied his chin further. So he tucked his mandolin under his arm, and moved
rather stupidly over to Grant Adams. To Morty, Grant Adams, even though half a dozen years
his junior, represented cousinship and fellowship. As Morty rose Grant stepped through the
open door into the street and stood on the curb. Morty came tiptoeing up to the great rawboned
youth and whispered:

"Grant--Grant--I'm so--so damned unhappy! You don't mind my telling you--do you?" Grant felt
the arm of his cousin tighten around his own arm. Grant stared at the stars, and Morty gazed
at the curb; presently he drew a deep sigh and said: "Thank you, Grant." He relaxed his hold
of the boy's arm and walked away with his head down, and disappeared around the corner into
the night. Slowly Grant followed him. Once or twice or perhaps three times he heard Morty trying
vainly to thrum the sad little tune about the waywardness of love.

CHAPTER IX

WHEREIN HENRY FENN MAKES AN INTERESTING EXPERIMENT

The formal announcement of the engagement of Laura Nesbit and Thomas Van Dorn came when Mrs.
Nesbit began tearing out the old floors on the second story of the Nesbit home and replacing
them with hardwood floors. Having the carpenters handy she added a round tower with which to
impress the Schenectady Van Dorns with the importance of the Maryland Satterthwaites. In this
architectural outburst the town read the news of the engagement. The town was so moved by the
news that Mrs. Hilda Herdicker was able to sell to the young women of her millinery suzerainty
sixty-three hats, which had been ordered "especially for Laura Nesbit," at prices ranging from
$2.00 to $57. Each hat was carefully, indeed furtively, brought from under the counter, or
from the back room of the shop or from a box on a high shelf and secretly exhibited and sold
with injunctions that the Nesbits must not be told what Mrs. Herdicker had done. One of these
hats was in reach of Violet Mauling's humble twenty dollars! Poor Violet was having a sad time
in those days. No candy, no soda water, no ice cream, no flowers; no buggy rides, however clandestine,
nor fervid glances--nothing but hard work was her unhappy lot and an occasional clash with
Mr. Brotherton. Thus the morning after the newly elected Mayor had heard the formal announcement
of the engagement, he hurried to the offices of Calvin & Van Dorn to congratulate his friend:

"Hello, Maudie," said Mr. Brotherton. "Oh, it isn't Maudie--well then, Trilby, tell Mr. Van
Dorn the handsome gentleman has came."

Hearing Brotherton's noise Van Dorn appeared, to summon his guest to the private office.

"Well, you lucky old dog!" was Mr. Brotherton's greeting. "Well, say--this is his honor, the
Mayor, come up to collect your dog tax! Well, say!" As he walked into the office all the secret
society pins and charms and signets--the Shriners' charm, the Odd Fellows' links, the Woodmen's
ax, the Elks' tooth, the Masons' square and compass, the Knights Templars' arms, were glistening
upon his wrinkled front like a mosaic of jewels!

Mr. Brotherton shook his friend's hand, repeating over and over, "Well, say--" After the congratulatory
ceremony was finished Mr. Brotherton cried, "You old scoundrel--I'd rather have your luck than
a license to steal in a mint!" Then with an eye to business, he suggested: "I'll just about
open a box of ten centers down at my home of the letters and arts for you when the boys drop
around!" He backed out of the room still shaking Mr. Van Dorn's hand, and still roaring, "Well,
say!" In the outer office he waved a gracious hand at Miss Mauling and cried, "Three sugars,
please, Sadie--that will do for cream!" and went laughing his seismic laugh down the stairs.

That evening the cigar box stood on the counter in Brotherton's store. It was wreathed in smilax
like a votive offering and on a card back of the box Mr. Brotherton had written these pious words:

    "In loving memory of the late Tom Van Dorn,
                    Recently engaged.
    For here, kind friends, we all must lie;
    Turn, Sinner, turn before ye die!
                   Take one."

Seeing the box in the cloister and the brotherhood assembled upon the walnut bench Dr. Nesbit,
who came in on a political errand, sniffed, and turned to Amos Adams. "Well, Amos," piped the
Doctor, "how's Lincoln this evening?"

The editor looked up amiably at the pudgy, white-clad figure of the Doctor, and replied casually
though earnestly, "Well, Doc Jim, I couldn't seem to get Lincoln to-day. But I did have a nice
chat with Beecher last night and he said: 'Your friend, Dr. Nesbit, I observe, is a low church
Congregationalist.' And when I asked what he meant Beecher replied, 'High church Congregationalists
believe in New England; low church Congregationalists believe in God!' Sounds like him--I could
just see him twitching his lips and twinkling his eyes when it came!" Captain Morton looked
suspiciously over his steel-bowed glasses to say testily:

"'Y gory, Amos--that thing will get you yet--what say?" he asked, turning for confirmation
to the Doctor.

Amos Adams smiled gently at the Captain, but addressed the Doctor eagerly, as one more capable
of understanding matters occult: "And I'll tell you another thing--Mr. Left is coming regularly
now."

"Mr. Left?" sniffed the Captain.

"Yes," explained the editor carefully, "I was telling the Doctor last week that if I go into
a dark room and blindfold myself and put a pencil in my left hand, a control who calls himself
Mr. Left comes and writes messages from the Other Side."

"Any more sense to 'em than your crazy planchette?" scoffed Captain Morton.

The editor closed his eyes in triumph. "Read our editorial this week on President Cleveland
and the Money Power?" he asked. The Captain nodded. "Mr. Left got it without the scratch of
a 't' or the dot of an 'i' from Samuel J. Tilden." He opened his eyes to catch the astonishment
of the listeners.

"Humph!" snorted the Doctor in his high, thin voice, "Old Tilden seems to have got terribly
chummy with Karl Marx in the last two years."

"Well, I didn't write it, and Mary says it's not even like my handwrite. And that reminds me,
Doctor, I got to get her prescription filled again. That tonic you give her seems to be kind
of wearing off. The baby you know--" he stopped a moment vaguely. "Someway she doesn't seem
strong."

Only the Doctor caught Grant's troubled look.

The Doctor snapped his watch, and looked at Brotherton. The Doctor was not the man to loaf
long of an autumn evening before any election, and he turned to Amos and said: "All right,
Amos--we'll fix up something for Mary a little later. Now, George--get out that Fourth Ward
voters' list and let's get to work!"

The group turned to the opening door and saw Henry Fenn, resplendent in a high silk hat and
a conspicuously Sunday best suit, which advertised his condition, standing in the open door.
"Good evening, gentlemen," he said slowly.

A look of common recognition of Fenn's case passed around the group in the corner. Fenn saw
the look as he came in. He was walking painfully straight. "I may," he said, lapsing into the
poetry that came welling from his memory and marked him for a drunken fool, "I may," opening
his ardent eyes and glancing affectionately about, "have been toying with 'lucent syrups tinct
with cinnamon' and my feet may be 'uncertain, coy and hard to please,'" he grinned with wide
amiability, "but my head is clear as a bell." His eyes flashed nervously about the shop, resting
upon nothing, seeing everything. He spied Grant, "Hello, Red," exclaimed Mr. Fenn, "glad to
see you back again. 'M back again myself. Ye crags 'n' peaks 'm with you once again." As he
nourished his silk hat he saw the consternation on Brotherton's big, moon face. Walking behind
the counter he clapped both hands down on Brotherton's big shoulders. "Georgy, Georgy," he
repeated mournfully:

"Old story, Georgy. Fight--fight, fight, then just a little, just a very little surrender;
not going to give in, but just a nip for old sake's sake. Whoo-oo-oo-oo-p the skyrocket blazes
and is gone, and then just another nip to cool the first and then a God damn big drink and--and--"

He laughed foolishly and leaned forward on the counter. As his arm touched the counter it brushed
the smilax covered cigar box and sent the box and the cigars to the floor.

"Henry, you fool--you poor fool," cried Brotherton; but his voice was not angry as he said:
"If you must mess up your own affairs for Heaven's sake have some respect for Tom's!"

"Tom's love affairs and mine," sneered the maudlin man. "'They grew in beauty side by side.'
But don't you fool yourself," and Fenn wagged a drunken head, "Tom's devil isn't, dead, she
sleepeth, that's what she does. The maiden is not dead she sleepeth, and some day she'll wake
up and then Tom's love affair will be where my love affair is." His eyes met the doctor's.
Fenn sighed and laughed fatuously and then he straightened up and said: "Mr. George Brotherton,
most worshipful master, Senior Warden, Grand High Potentate, Keeper of the Records and Seals--hear
me. I'm going out to No. 826 Congress Street to see the fairest of her sex--the fairest of
her sex." Then he smiled like the flash of a burning soul and continued:

    "'The cold, the changed, perchance the dead anew,
    The mourned, the loved, the lost.'"

And sighing a deep sigh, and again waving his silk hat in a profound bow, he was gone. The
group in the store saw him step lightly into a waiting hack, and drive away out of their reach.
Brotherton stood at the door and watched the carriage turn off Market Street, then came back,
shaking a sorrowful head. He looked up at the Doctor and said: "She's bluffing--say, Doctor,
you know her, what do you think?"

"Bluffing," returned the Doctor absently, then added quickly: "Come now, George, get your voters'
list! It's getting late!"

George Brotherton looked blankly at the group. In every face but the Doctor's a genuine sorrow
for their friend was marked. "Doc," Brotherton began apologetically, "I guess I'll just have
to get you to let me off to-night!" He hesitated; then as he saw the company around him backing
him up, "Why, Doc, the way I feel right now I don't care if the whole county ticket is licked!
I can't work to-night, Doc--I just can't!"

The Doctor's face as he listened, changed. It was as though another soul had come upon the
deck of his countenance. He answered softly in his piping voice, "No man could, George--after
that!" Then turning to Grant the Doctor said gently, as one reminded of a forgotten purpose:

"Come along with me, Grant." They mounted the stairs to the Doctor's office and when the door
was closed the Doctor motioned Grant to a chair and piped sharply: "Grant, Kenyon is wearing
your mother's life out. I've just been down to see her. Look here, Grant, I want to know about
Margaret? Does she ever come to see you folks--how does she treat Kenyon?"

Looking at the floor, Grant answered slowly, "Well she rode down on her wheel on his first
birthday--slipped in when we were all out but mother, and cried and went on about her poor
child, mother said, and left him a pair of little knit slippers. And she wrote him a birthday
card the second time, but we didn't hear from her this time." He paused. "She never looks at
him on the street, and she's just about quit speaking to me. But last winter, she came down
and cried around one afternoon. Mother sent for her, I think."

"Why!" asked the Doctor quickly.

"Well," hesitated Grant, "it was when mother was first taken sick. I think father and mother
thought maybe Maggie might see things different--well, about Kenyon." He stopped.

"Maggie and you?" prompted the Doctor.

"Well, something like that, perhaps," replied the boy.

The Doctor pushed back in his chair abruptly and cut in shrilly, "They still think you and
Margaret should marry on account of Kenyon?" Grant nodded. "Do you want to marry her?" The
Doctor leaned forward in his chair, watching the boy. The Doctor saw the flash of revulsion
that spread over the youth's face before Grant raised his head, and met the Doctor's keen gaze
and answered soberly, "I would if it was best."

"Well," the Doctor returned as if to himself. "I suppose so." To the younger man, he said:
"Grant, she wouldn't marry you. She is after bigger game. As far as reforming Henry Fenn's
concerned, she's bluffing. It doesn't interest her any more than Kenyon's lack of a mother."

The Doctor rose and Grant saw that the interview was over. The Doctor left the youth at the
foot of the stairway and went out into the autumn night, where the stars could blink at all
his wisdom. Though he, poor man, did not know that they were winking. For often men who know
good women and love them well, are as unjust to weak women as men are who know only those women
who are frail.

That night Margaret Müller sat on the porch, where Henry Fenn left her, considering her problem.
Now this problem did not remotely concern the Adamses--nor even Kenyon Adams. Margaret Müller's
problem was centered in Henry Fenn, County Attorney of Greeley County; Henry Fenn, who had
visited her gorgeously drunk; Henry Fenn on whose handsome shoulder she had enjoyed rather
keenly shedding some virtuous tears in chiding him for his broken promise. Yet she knew that
she would take him back. And she knew that he knew that he might come back. For she had moved
far forward in the siege of Harvey. She was well within the walls of the beleaguered city,
and was planning for the larger siege of life and destiny.

About all there is in life is one's fundamental choice between the spiritual and the material.
After that choice is made, the die of life is cast. Events play upon that choice their curious
pattern, bringing such griefs and joys, such calamities and winnings as every life must have.
For that choice makes character, and character makes happiness. Margaret Müller sitting there
in the night long after the last step of Henry Fenn had died away, thought of her lover's arms,
remembered her lover's lips, but clearer and more moving than these vain things, her mind showed
her what his hands could bring her and if her soul waved a duty signal, for the salvation of
Henry Fenn, she shut her eyes to the signal and hurried into the house.

She was one of God's miracles of beauty the next day as she passed Grant Adams on the street,
with his carpenter's box on his arm, going from the mine shaft to do some work in the office
of the attorney for the mines. She barely nodded to Grant, yet the radiance of her beauty made
him turn his head to gaze at her. Doctor Nesbit did that, and Captain Morton, and Dick Bowman,--even
John Kollander turned, putting up his ear trumpet as if to hear the glory of her presence;
the whole street turned after her as though some high wind had blown human heads backward when
she passed. They saw a lithe, exquisite animal figure, poised strongly on her feet, walking
as in the very pride of sex, radiating charms consciously, but with all the grace of a flower
in the breeze. Her bright eyes, her masses of dark hair, her dimpled face and neck, her lips
that flamed with the joy of life, the enchantment of her whole body, was so complete a thing
that morning, that she might well have told her story to the world. The little Doctor knew
what her answer to Henry Fenn had been and always would be. He knew as well as though she had
told him. In spite of himself, his heart melted a little and he had consciously to stop arguing
with himself that she had done the wise thing; that to throw Henry over would only hasten an
end, which her powerful personality might finally avert. But George Brotherton--when he saw
the light in her eyes, was sad. In the core of him, because he loved his friend, he knew what
had happened to that friend. He was sad--sad and resentful, vaguely and without reason, at
the mien and bearing of Margaret Müller as she went to her work that morning.

Brotherton remembered her an hour later when, in the back part of the bookstore Henry Fenn
sat, jaded, haggard, and with his dull face drawn with remorse,--a burned-out sky rocket. Brotherton
was busy with his customers, but in a lull, and between sales as the trade passed in and out,
they talked. Sometimes a customer coming in would interrupt them, but the talk went on as trade
flowed by. It ran thus:

"Yes, George, but it's my salvation. She's the only anchor I have on earth."

"But she didn't hold you yesterday."

"I know, but God, George, it was terrific, the way that thing grabbed me yesterday. But it's
all gone now."

"I know, Henry, but it will come back--can't you see what you'll be doing to her?"

Fenn, gray of face, with his straight, colorless hair, with his staring eyes, with his listless
form, sat head in hands, gazing at the floor. He did not look up as he replied: "George, I
just can't give her up; I won't give her up," he cried. "I believe, after the depths of love
she showed me in her soul last night, I'd take her, if I knew I was taking us both to hell.
Just let me have a home, George,--and her and children--George, I know children would hold
me--lots of children--I can make money. I've got money--all I need to marry on, and we'll have
a home and children and they will hold me--keep me up."

In Volume XXI of the "Psychological Society's Publications," page 374, will be found a part
of the observations of "Mr. Left," together with copious notes upon the Adams case by an eminent
authority. The excerpt herewith printed is attributed by Mr. Left to Darwin or Huxley or perhaps
one of the Brownings--it is unimportant to note just which one, for Mr. Left gleaned from a
wide circle of intellects. The interesting thing is that about the time these love affairs
we are considering were brewing, Mr. Left wrote: "If the natural selection of love is the triumph
of evolution on this planet, if the free choice of youth and maiden, unhampered by class or
nationality, or wealth, or age, or parental interference, or thought of material advantage,
is the greatest step taken by life since it came mysteriously into this earth, how much of
the importance of the natural selection of youth in love hangs upon full and free access to
all the data necessary for choice."

What irony was in the free choice of these lovers here in Harvey that day when Mr. Left wrote
this. What did Henry Fenn know of the heart or the soul of the woman he adored? What did Laura
Nesbit know of her lover and what did he know of her? They all four walked blindfolded. Free
choice for them was as remote and impossible as it would have been if they had been auctioned
into bondage.

CHAPTER X

IN WHICH MARY ADAMS TAKES A MUCH NEEDED REST

The changing seasons moved from autumn to winter, from winter to spring. One gray, wet March
day, Grant Adams stood by the counter asking Mr. Brotherton to send to the city for roses.

"White roses, a dozen white roses." Mr. Brotherton turned his broad back as he wrote the order,
and said gently: "They'll be down on No. 11 to-night, Grant; I'll send 'em right out."

As Grant stood hesitating, ready to go, but dreading the street, Dr. Nesbit came in. He pressed
the youth's hand and did not speak. He bought his tobacco and stood cleaning his pipe. "Could
your father sleep any after--when I left, Grant?" asked the Doctor.

The young man shook his head. "Mrs. Nesbit is out there, isn't she?" the Doctor asked again.

"Yes," replied the youth, "she and Laura came out before we had breakfast. And Mrs. Dexter
is there."

"Has any one else come?" asked the Doctor, looking up sharply from his pipe, and added, "I
sent word to Margaret Müller."

Grant shook his head and the Doctor left the shop. At the doorway he met Captain Morton, and
seemed to be telling him the news, for the Captain's face showed the sorrow and concern that
he felt. He hurried in and took Grant's hand and held it affectionately.

"Grant, your mother was with my wife her last night on earth; I wish I could help you, son.
I'll run right down to your father."

And the Captain left in the corner of the store the model of a patent coffee pot he was handling
at the time and went away without his morning paper. Mr. Van Dorn came in, picked up his paper,
snipped off the end of his cigar at the machine, lighted the cigar, considered his fine raiment
a moment, adjusted his soft hat at a proper angle, pulled up his tie, and seeing the youth,
said: "By George, young man, this is sad news I hear; give the good father my sympathy. Too bad."

When Grant went home, the silence of death hung over the little house, in spite of the bustling
of Mrs. Nesbit. And Grant sat outside on a stone by his father under the gray sky.

In the house the prattle of the child with the women made the house seem pitifully lonesome.
Jasper was expressing his sorrow by chopping wood down in the timber. Jasper was an odd sheep
in the flock; he was a Sands after Daniel's own heart. So Grant and his father sat together
mourning in silence. Finally the father drew in a deep broken breath, and spoke with his eyes
on the ground:

"'These also died in the faith, without having received the promise!'" Then he lifted up his
face and mourned, "Mary--Mary--" and again, "Oh, Mary, we need--" The child's voice inside
the house calling fretfully, "Mother! mother!" came to the two and brought a quick cramp to
the older man's throat and tears to his eyes. Finally, Amos found voice to say:

"I was thinking how we--you and I and Jasper need mother! But our need is as nothing compared
with the baby's. Poor--lonely little thing! I don't know what to do for him, Grant." He turned
to his son helplessly.

Again the little voice was lifted, and Laura Nesbit could be heard hushing the child's complaint.
Not looking at his father, Grant spoke: "Dr. Nesbit said he had let Margaret know--"

The father shook his head and returned, "I presumed he would!" He looked into his son's face
and said: "Maggie doesn't see things as we do, son. But, oh--what can we do! And the little
fellow needs her--needs some one, who will love him and take care of him. Oh, Mary--Mary--"
he cried from his bewildered heart. "Be with us, Mary, and show us what to do!"

Grant rose, went into the house, bundled up Kenyon and between showers carried him and walked
with him through the bleak woods of March, where the red bird's joyous song only cut into his
heart and made the young man press closer to him the little form that snuggled in his arms.

At night Jasper went to his room above the kitchen and the father turned to his lonely bed.
In the cold parlor Mary Adams lay. Grant sat in the kitchen by the stove, pressing to his face
his mother's apron, only three days before left hanging by her own hands on the kitchen door.
He clung to this last touch of her fingers, through the long night, and as he sat there his
heart filled with a blind, vague, rather impotent purpose to take his mother's place with Kenyon.
From time to time he rose to put wood in the stove, but always when he went back to his chair,
and stroked the apron with his face, the baby seemed to be clinging to him. The thought of
the little hands forever tugging at her apron racked him with sobs long after his tears were gone.

And so as responsibility rose in him he stepped across the border from youth to manhood.

They made him dress in his Sunday best the next morning and he was still so close to that borderland
of boyhood that he was standing about the yard near the gate, looking rather lost and awkward
when the Nesbits drove up with Kenyon, whom they had taken for the night. When the others had
gone into the house the Doctor asked:

"Did she come, Grant?"

The youth lifted his face to the Doctor and looked him squarely in the eye as man to man and
answered sharply, "No."

The Doctor cocked one eye reflectively and said slowly, "So--" and drove away.

It was nearly dusk when the Adamses came back from the cemetery to the empty house. But a bright
fire was burning in the kitchen stove and the kettle was boiling and the odor of food cooking
in the oven was in the air. Kenyon was moving fitfully about the front room. Mrs. Dexter was
quietly setting the table. Amos Adams hung up his hat, took off his coat, and went to his rocker
by the kitchen door; Jasper sat stiffly in the front room. Grant met Mrs. Dexter in the dining
room, and she saw that the child had hold of the young man's finger and she heard the baby
calling, "Mother--mother! Grant, I want mother!" with a plaintive little cry, over and over
again. Grant played with the child, showed the little fellow his toys and tried to stop the
incessant call of "Mother--mother--where's mother!" At last the boy's eyes filled. He picked
up the child, knocking his own new hat roughly to the floor. He drew up his chin, straightened
his trembling jaw, batted his eyes so that the moisture left them and said to his father in
a hard, low voice--a man's voice:

"I am going to Margaret; she must help."

It was dark when he came to town and walked up Congress Street with the little one snuggled
in his arms. Just before he arrived at the house, the restless child had asked to walk, and
they went hand in hand up the steps of the house where Margaret Müller lived. She was sitting
alone on the veranda--clearly waiting for some one, and when she saw who was coming up the
steps she rose and hurried to them, greeting them on the very threshold of the veranda. She
was white and her bosom was fluttering as she asked in a tense whisper:

"What do you want--quick, what do you want?"

She stood before Grant, as if stopping his progress. The child's plaintive cry, "Mother--Grant,
I want mother!" not in grief, but in a great question, was the answer.

He looked into her staring, terror-stricken eyes until they drooped and for a moment he dominated
her. But she came back from some outpost of her nature with reënforcements.

"Get out of here--get out of here. Don't come here with your brat--get out," she snarled in
a whisper. The child went to her, plucked her skirts and cried, "Mother, mother." Grant pointed
to the baby and broke out: "Oh, Maggie--what's to become of Kenyon?--what can I do! He's only
got you now. Oh, Maggie, won't you come?" He saw fear flit across her face in a tense second
before she answered. Then fear left and she crouched at him trembling, red-eyed, gaping, mouthed,
the embodiment of determined hate; swiping the child's little hands away from her, she snapped:

"Get out of here!--leave! quick!" He stood stubbornly before her and only the child's voice
crying, "Grant, Grant, I want to go home to mother," filled the silence. Finally she spoke
again, cutting through the baby's complaint. "I shall never, never, never take that child;
I loathe him, and I hate you and I want both of you always to keep away from me."

Without looking at her again, he caught up the toddling child, lifted it to his shoulder and
walked down the steps. As they turned into the street they ran into Henry Fenn, who in his
free choice of a mate was hurrying to one who he thought would give him a home--a home and
children, many children to stand between him and his own insatiate devil. Henry greeted Grant:

"Why, boy--oh, yes, been to see Maggie? I wish she could help you, Grant."

And from the veranda came a sweet, rich voice, crying:

"Yes, Henry--do you know where they can get a good nurse girl?"

CHAPTER XI

HERE OUR FOOL GROPES FOR A SPIRIT AND CAN FIND ONLY DUST

Henry Fenn and Margaret Müller sat naming their wedding day, while Grant Adams walked home
with his burden. Henry Fenn had been fighting through a long winter, against the lust for liquor
that was consuming his flesh. At times it seemed to him that her presence as he fought his
battle, helped him; but there were phases of his fight, when she too fashioned herself in his
imagination as a temptress, and she seemed to blow upon the coals that were searing his weak flesh.

At such times he was taciturn, and went about his day's work as one who is busy at a serious
task. He smiled his amiable smile, he played his man's part in the world without whimpering,
and fought on like a gentleman. The night he met Grant and the child at the steps of the house
where Margaret lived, he had called to set the day for their marriage. And that night she glowed
before him and in his arms like a very brand of a woman blown upon by some wind from another
world. When he left her his throat grew parched and dry and his lips quivered with a desire
for liquor that seemed to simmer in his vitals. But he set his teeth, and ran to his room,
and locked himself in, throwing the key out of the window into the yard. He sat shivering and
whimpering and fighting, by turns conquering his devil, and panting under its weight, but always
with the figure and face of his beloved in his eyes, sometimes beckoning him to fight on, sometimes
coaxing him to yield and stop the struggle. But as the day came in he fell asleep with one
more battle to his credit.

In Harvey for many years Henry Fenn's name was a byword; but the pitying angels who have seen
him fight in the days of his strength and manhood--they looked at Henry Fenn, and touched reverent
foreheads in his high honor. Then why did they who know our hearts so well, let the blow fall
upon him, you ask. But there you trespass upon that old question that the Doctor and Amos Adams
have thrashed out so long. Has man a free will, or has the illusion of time and space wound
him up in its predestined tangle, to act as he must and be what he is without appeal or resistance,
or even hope of a pardon?

Doctor Nesbit and Amos Adams were trying to solve the mystery of human destiny at the gate
of the Adams' home the day after the funeral. Amos had his foot on the hub of the Doctor's
buggy and was saying: "But Doctor, can't you see that it isn't all material? Suppose that every
atom of the universe does affect every other atom, and that the accumulated effect of past
action holds the stars in their courses, and that if we knew what all the past was we should
be able to foretell the future, because it would be mathematically calculable--what of it?
That does not prove your case, man! Can't you see that in free will another element enters--the
spiritual, if you please, that is not amenable to atomic action past or present?" Amos smiled
deprecatingly and added sadly: "Got that last night from Schopenhauer." The Doctor, clearly
unawed by Schopenhauer, broke out: "Aye, there I have you, Amos. Isn't the brain matter, and
doesn't the brain secrete consciousness?"

"Does this buggy secrete distance, Jim? Go 'long with you, man." Before the Doctor could reply,
around the corner of the house, bringing little Kenyon Adams in his best bib and tucker, came
the lofty figure of Mrs. Nesbit. With her came her daughter. Then up spoke Mrs. Bedelia Satterthwaite
Nesbit of the Maryland Satterthwaites, "Look here, Amos Adams--I don't care what you say, I'm
going to take this baby." There was strong emphasis upon the "I'm," and she went on: "You can
have him every night, and Grant can take care of the child after supper when he comes home
from work. But every morning at eight I'm going to have this baby." Further emphasis upon the
first person. "I'm not going to see a child turned over to a hired girl all day and me with
a big house and no baby and a daughter about to marry and leave me and a houseful of help,
if I needed it, which thank Heavens I don't." She put her lips together sternly, and, "Not
a word, Amos Adams," she said to Amos, who had not opened his mouth. "Not another word. Kenyon
will be home at six o'clock."

She put the child into the Doctor's submissive arms--helped her daughter into the buggy, and
when she had climbed in herself, she glared triumphantly over her glasses and above her Roman
nose, as she said: "Now, Amos--have some sense. Doctor,--go on." And in a moment the buggy
was spinning up the hill toward the town.

Thus it was that every day, rain or shine, until the day of her wedding, Laura Nesbit drove
her dog cart to the Adamses before the men went to their work and took little Kenyon home with
her and brought him back in the evening. And always she took him from the arms of Grant--Grant,
red-headed, freckled, blue-eyed, who was hardening into manhood and premature maturity so fast
that he did not realize the change that it made in his face. It grew set, but not hard, a woman's
tenderness crept into the features, and with that tenderness came at times a look of petulant
impatience. It was a sad face--a sadly fanatic face--yet one that lighted with human feeling
under a smile.

Little by little, meeting daily--often meeting morning and evening, Grant and Laura established
a homely, wholesome, comfortable relation.

One evening while Laura was waiting for Tom Van Dorn and Grant was waiting for Kenyon she and
Grant sitting upon the veranda steps of the Nesbit home, looked into the serene, wide lawn
that topped the hill above the quiet town. They could look across the white and green of the
trees and houses, across the prosperous, solid, red roofs of the stone and brick stores and
offices on Market Street, into the black smudge of smoke and the gray, unpainted, sprawling
rows of ill-kept tenements around the coal mines, that was South Harvey. They could see even
then the sky stains far down the Wahoo Valley, where the villages of Foley and Magnus rose
and duplicated the ugliness of South Harvey.

The drift of the conversation was personal. The thoughts of youth are largely personal. The
universe is measured by one's own thumb in the twenties. "Funny, isn't it," said Grant, playing
with a honeysuckle vine that climbed the post beside him, "I guess I'm the only one of the
old crowd who is outlawed in overalls. There's Freddie Kollander and Nate Perry and cousin
Morty and little Joe Calvin, all up town counterjumping or working in offices. The girls all
getting married." He paused. "But as far as that goes I'm making more money than any of the
fellows!" He paused again a moment and added as he gazed moodily into the pillars of smoke
rising above South Harvey, "Gee, but I'll miss you when you're gone--"

The girl's silvery laugh greeted his words. "Now, Grant," she said, "where do you think I'm
going? Why, Tom and I will be only a block from here--just over on Tenth Street in the Perry
House."

Grant grinned as he shook his head. "You're lost and gone forever, just the same, Miss Clementine.
In about three years I'll probably be that 'red-headed boss carpenter in the mine----let me
see, what's his name?'"

"Oh, Grant," scoffed the girl. She saw that his heart was sadder than his face.

She took courage and said: "Grant, you never can know how often I think of you--how much I
want you to win everything worth while in this world, how much I want you to be happy--how
I believe in you and--and--bet on you, Grant--bet on you!"

Grant did not answer her. Presently he looked up and over the broad valley below them. The
sun behind the house was touching the limestone ledge far across the valley with golden rays.
The smoke from South Harvey on their right was lighted also. The youth looked into the smoke.
Then he turned his eyes back from the glowing smoke and spoke.

"This is how I look at it. I don't mean you're any different from any one else. What I was
trying to say was that I'm the only one of our old crowd in the High School you know that used
to have parties and go together in the old days--I'm the only one that's wearing overalls,
and my way is down there"; he nodded his head toward the mines and smelters and factories in
the valley.

"Look at these hands," he said, solemnly spreading out his wide, muscular hands on his knees;
showing one bruised blue-black finger nail. The hands were flinty and hairy and brown, but
they looked effective with an intelligence almost apart from the body which they served.

"I'm cut out for work. It's all right. That's my job, and I'm proud of it so far as that goes.
I could get a place clerking if I wanted to, and be in the dancing crowd in six months, and
be out to the Van Dorns for dinner in a year." He paused and looked into the distant valley
and cried. "But I tell you--my job is down there. And I'm not going to quit them. God knows
they're getting the rough end of it. If you knew," his voice raised slightly and a petulant
indignation tempered it. "If you knew the gouging and pocket picking and meanness that is done
by the people up town to the people down there in the smoke, you'd be one of those howling
red-mouthed anarchists you read about."

The girl looked at him silently and at length asked: "For instance--what's just one thing?"

"Well, for instance--in the mines where I work all the men come up grimy and greasy and vile.
They have to wash. In Europe we roughnecks know that wash-houses are provided by the company,
but here," he cried excitedly, "the company doesn't provide even a faucet; instead the men--father
and son and maybe a boarder or two have to go home--into those little one and two roomed houses
the company has built, and strip to the hide with the house full of children and wash. What
if your girlhood had been used to seeing things like that--could you laugh as you laugh now?"
He looked up at her savagely. "Oh, I know they're ignorant foreigners and little better than
animals and those things don't hurt them--only if you had a little girl who had to be in and
out of the single room of your home when the men came home to wash up--"

He broke off, and then began again, "Why, I was talking to a dago last night at the shaft mouth
going down to work on the graveyard shift and he said that he came here believing he would
find a free, beautiful country in which his children could grow up self-respecting men and
women, and then he told me about his little girls living down there where all the vice is scattered
through the tenements, and--about this washing up proposition, and now one of the girls is
gone and they can't find her." He threw out a despairing hand; "So I'm a roughneck, Laura--I'm
a jay, and I'm going to stay with them."

"But your people," she urged. "What about them--your father and brothers?"

"Jap's climbing out. Father's too old to get in. And Kenyon--" he flinched, "I hope to God
I'll have the nerve to stay when the test on him comes." He turned to the girl passionately:
"But you--you--oh, you--I want you to know--" He did not finish the sentence, but rose and
walked into the house and called: "Dad--Kenyon--come on, it's getting late. Stars are coming out."

Half an hour later Tom Van Dorn, in white flannels, with a red silk tie, and with a white hat
and shoes, came striding across the lawn. His black silky mustache, his soft black hair, his
olive skin, his shining black eyes, his alert emotional face, dark and swarthy, was heightened
even in the twilight by the soft white clothes he wore.

"Hello, popper-in-law," he cried. "Any room left on the veranda?"

"Come in, Thomas," piped the older man. "The girls are doing the dishes, Bedelia and Laura,
and we'll just sit out two or three dances."

The young man lolled in the hammock shaded by the vines. The elder smoked and reflected. Then
slowly and by degrees, as men who are feeling their way to conversation, they began talking
of local politics. They were going at a high rate when the talk turned to Henry Fenn. "Doing
pretty well, Doctor," put in the younger man. "Only broke over once in eighteen months--that's
the record for Henry. Shows what a woman can do for a man." He looked up sympathetically, and
caught the Doctor's curious eyes.

The Doctor puffed, cleaned out his pipe, absently put it away, then rose and deliberately pulled
his chair over to the hammock: "Tom--I'm a generation older than you--nearly. I want to tell
you something--" He smiled. "Boy--you've got the devil's own fight ahead of you--did you know
it--I mean," he paused, "the--well, the woman proposition."

Van Dorn fingered his mustache, and looked serious.

"Tom," the elder man chirped, "you're a handsome pup--a damn handsome, lovable pup. Sometimes."
He let his voice run whimsically into its mocking falsetto, "I almost catch myself getting
fooled too."

They laughed.

"Boy, the thing's in your blood. Did you realize that you've got just as hard a fight as poor
Henry Fenn? It's all right now--for a while; but the time will come--we might just as well
look this thing squarely in the face now, Tom--the time will come in a few years when the devil
will build the same kind of a fire under you he is building under Henry Fenn--only it won't
be whisky; it will be the woman proposition. Damn it, boy," cried the elder man squeakily,
"it's in your blood; you've let it grow in your very blood. I've known you ten years now, and
I've seen it grow. Tom--when the time comes, can you stand up and fight like Henry Fenn--can
you, Tom? And will you?" he cried with a piteous fierceness that stirred all the sympathy in
the young man's heart.

He rose to the height of the Doctor's passion. Tears came into Van Dorn's bright eyes. His
breast expanded emotionally and he exclaimed: "I know what I am, oh, I know it. But for her--you
and I together--you'll help and we'll stand together and fight it out for her." The father
looked at the mobile features of his companion, and sensed the thin plating of emotion under
the vain voice. Whereupon the Doctor heaved a deep, troubled sigh.

"Heigh-ho, heigh-ho." He put his arm upon the broad, handsome, young shoulder. "But you'll
try to be a good boy, won't you--" he repeated. "Just try hard to be a good boy, Tom--that's
all any of us can do," and turning away he whistled into the house and a girlish trill answered
him.

After the Doctor had jogged down the hill behind his old horse making his evening professional
visits, Mrs. Nesbit came out and made a show of sitting with the young people for a time. And
not until she left did they go into those things that were near their hearts.

When Mrs. Nesbit left the veranda the young man moved over to the girl and she asked: "Tom,
I wonder--oh, so much and so often--about the soul of us and the body of us--about the justice
of things." She was speaking out of the heart that Grant had touched to the quick with his
outburst about the poor. But Tom Van Dorn could not know what was moving within her and if
he had known, perhaps he would have had small sympathy with her feeling. Then she said: "Oh,
Tom, Tom, tell me--don't you suppose that our souls pay for the bodies that we crush--I mean
all of us--all of us--every one in the world?"

The man looked at her blankly. Then he put his arm tenderly about her and answered: "I don't
know about our souls--much--" He kissed her. "But I do know about you--your wonderful eyes--and
your magic hair, and your soft cheek!" He left her in no doubt as to her lover's mood.

Vaguely the girl felt unsatisfied with his words. Not that she doubted the truth of them; but
as she drew back from him she said softly: "But if I were not beautiful, what then?"

"Ah, but you are--you are; in all the world there is not another like you for me." In the rapture
that followed, her soul grew in a wave of joy, yet she spoke shyly.

"Tom," she said wistfully, "how can you fail to see it--this great, beautiful truth that makes
me glad: That the miracle of our love proves God."

He caressed her hands and pressed closer to her. "Call it what you will, little girl: God if
it pleases you, I call it nature."

"Oh, it's bigger than that, Tom," and she shook a stubborn Satterthwaite head, "and it makes
me so happy and makes me so humble that I want to share it with all the world." She laid an
abashed cheek on his hands that were still fondling hers.

But young Mr. Van Dorn spoke up manfully, "Well, don't you try sharing it. I want all of it,
every bit of it." He played with her hair, and relaxed in a languor of complete possession of her.

"Doesn't love," she questioned, "lift you? Doesn't it make you love every living thing?" she urged.

"I love only you--only you in all the world--your eyes thrill me; when your body is near I
am mad with delight; when I touch you I am in heaven. When I close my eyes before the jury
I see you and I put the bliss of my vision into my voice, and," he clinched his hands, "all
the devils of hell couldn't win that jury away from me. You spur me to my best, put springs
in every muscle, put power in my blood."

"But, Tom, tell me this?" Still wistfully, she came close to him, and put her chin on her clasped
hands that rested on his shoulder. "Love makes me want to be so good, so loyal, so brave, so
kind--isn't it that way with you? Isn't love the miracle that brings the soul out into the
world through the senses." She did not wait for his answer. She clasped her hands tighter on
his shoulder. "I feel that I'm literally stealing when I have a single thought that I do not
bring to you. In every thrill of my heart about the humblest thing, I find joy in knowing that
we shall enjoy it together. Let me tell you something. Grant Adams and his father were here
to-day for dinner. Well, you know Grant is in a kind of obsession of love for that little motherless
child Mrs. Adams left; Grant mothers him and fathers him and literally loves him to distraction.
And Grant's growing so manly, and so loyal and so strong in the love of that little boy--he
doesn't realize it; but I can see it in him. Oh, Tom, can you see it in me?"

Before her mood had changed she told him all that Grant Adams had said; and her voice broke
when she retold the Italian's story. Tears were in her eyes when she finished. And young Mr.
Van Dorn was emotionally touched also, but not in sympathy with the story the girl was telling.
She ended it:

"And then I looked at Grant's big rough hands--bony and hairy, and Tom, they told me the whole
story of his destiny; just as your soft, effective, gentle white hands prophesy our destiny.
Oh, why--why--I am beginning to wonder why, Tom, why things must be so. Why do some of us have
to do all the world's rough, hard, soul-killing work, and others of us have lives that are
beautiful, aspiring, glorious? How can we let such injustices be, and not try to undo them!"

In his face an indignation was rising which she could not comprehend. Finally he found words
to say:

"So that's what that Adams boy is putting in your head! Why do you want to bother with such
nonsense?"

But the girl stopped him: "Tom, it's not nonsense. They do work and dig and grind down there
in a way which we up here know nothing about. It's real--this--this miserable unfair way things
are done in the world. O my dear, my dear, it's because I love you so, it's because I know
now what love really is that it hurts to see--" He took her face in his hands caressingly,
and tried to put an added tenderness into his voice that his affection might blunt the sharpness
of his words.

"Well, it's nonsense I tell you! Look here, Laura, if there is a God, he's put those dagos
and ignorant foreigners down there to work; just as he's put the fish in the sea to be caught,
and the beasts of the field to be eaten, and it's none of my business to ask why! My job is
myself--myself and you! I refuse to bear burdens for people. I love you with all the intensity
of my nature--but it's my nature--not human nature--not any common, socialized, diluted love;
it's individual and it's forever between you and me! What do I care for the rest of the world!
And if you love me as you will some day, you'll love me so that they can't set you off mooning
about other people's troubles. I tell you, Laura, I'm going to make you love me so you can't
think of anything day or night but me--and what I am to you! That's my idea of love! It's individual,
intimate, restricted, qualified and absolutely personal--and some day you'll see that!"

As he tripped down the hill from the Nesbit home that spring night, he wondered what Laura
Nesbit meant when she spoke of Grant Adams, and his love for the motherless baby. The idea
that this love bore any sort of resemblance to the love of educated, cultivated people as found
in the love that Laura and her intended husband bore toward each other, puzzled the young lawyer.
Being restless, he turned off his homeward route, and walked under the freshly leaved trees.
Over and over again the foolish phrases and sentences from Laura Nesbit's love making, many
other nights in which she seemed to assume the unquestioned truth of the hypothesis of God,
also puzzled him. Whatever his books had taught him, and whatever life had taught him, convinced
him that God was a polite word for explaining one's failure. Yet, here was a woman whose mind
he had to respect, using the term as a proved theorem. He looked at the stars, wheeling about
with the monstrous pulleys of gravitation and attraction, and the certain laws of motion. A
moment later he looked southward in the sky to that flaming, raging, splotched patch where
the blue and green and yellow flames from the smelters and the belching black smoke from the
factories hid the low-hanging stars and marked the seething hell of injustice and vice and
want and woe that he knew was in South Harvey, and he held the glowing cigarette stub in his
hand and laughed when he thought of God. "Free will," says "Mr. Left" in one of his rather
hazy and unconvincing observations, "is of limited range. Man faces two buttons. He must choose
the material or the spiritual--and when he has chosen fate plays upon his choice the grotesque
variation of human destiny. But when the cloth of life is finished, the pattern of the passing
events may be the same in either choice, riches or poverty, misery or power, only the color
of the cloth differs; in one piece, however rich, the pattern is drab with despair, the other
cloth sheens in happiness." Which Mr. Van Dorn in later life, reading the Psychological Journal,
turned back to a second time, and threw aside with a casual and unappreciative, "Oh hell,"
as his only comment.

CHAPTER XII

IN WHICH WE LEARN THAT LOVE IS THE LEVER THAT MOVES THE WORLD

Mrs. Nesbit tried to put the Doctor into his Sunday blacks the day of her daughter's wedding,
but he would have none of them. He appeared on Market Street and went his rounds among the
sick in his linen clothes with his Panama hat and his pleated white shirt. He did not propose
to have the visiting princes, political and commercial, who had been summoned to honor the
occasion, find him in his suzerainty without the insignia of his power. For it was "Old Linen
Pants," not Dr. James Nesbit, who was the boss of the northern district and a member of the
State's triumvirate. So the Doctor in the phaëton, drawn by his amiable, motherly, sorrel mare,
the Doctor, white and resplendent in a suit that shimmered in the hot June sun, flaxed around
town, from his office to the hotel, from the hotel to the bank, from the bank to South Harvey.
As a part of the day's work he did the honors of the town, soothed the woes of the weary, healed
the sick, closed a dying man's eyes, held a mother's hands away from death as she brought life
into the world, made a governor, paid his overdue note, got a laborer work, gave a lift to
a fallen woman, made two casual purchases: a councilman and a new silk vest, with cash in hand;
lent a drunkard's wife the money for a sack of flour, showed three Maryland Satterthwaites
where to fish for bass in the Wahoo, took four Schenectady Van Dorns out to lunch, and was
everywhere at once doing everything, clicking his cane, whistling gently or humming a low,
crooning tune, smiling for the most part, keeping his own counsel and exhibiting no more in
his face of what was in his heart than the pink and dimpled back of a six-months' baby.

To say that the Doctor was everywhere in Harvey is inexact. He was everywhere except on Quality
Hill in Elm Street. There, from the big, bulging house with its towers and minarets and bow
windows and lean-tos, ells and additions, the Doctor was barred. There was chaos, and the spirit
that breathed on the face of the waters was the Harvey representative of the Maryland Satterthwaites,
with her crimping pins bristling like miniature gun barrels, and with the look of command upon
her face, giving orders in a firm, cool voice and then executing the orders herself before
any one else could turn around. She could call the spirits from the vasty deep of the front
hall or the back porch and they came, or she knew the reason why. With an imperial wave of
her hand she sent her daughter off to some social wilderness of monkeys with all the female
Satterthwaites and Van Dorns and Mrs. Senators and Miss Governors and Misses Congressmen, and
with the offices of Mrs. John Dexter, Mrs. Herdicker, the ladies' hatter, and two Senegambian
slaveys, Mrs. Nesbit brought order out of what at one o'clock seemed without form and void.

It was late in the afternoon, almost evening, though the sun still was high enough in the heavens
to throw cloud shadows upon the hills across the valley when the Doctor stabled his mare and
came edging into the house from the barn. He could hear the clamor of many voices; for the
Maryland Satterthwaites had come home from the afternoon's festivity. He slipped into his office-study,
and as it was stuffy there he opened the side door that let out upon the veranda. He sat alone
behind the vines, not wishing to be a part of the milling in the rooms. His heart was heavy.
He blinked and sighed and looked across the valley, and crooned his old-fashioned tune while
he tried to remember all of the life of the little girl who had come out of the mystery of
birth into his life when Elm Street was a pair of furrows on a barren, wind-swept prairie hill;
tried to remember how she had romped in girlhood under the wide sunshine in the prairie grass,
how her little playhouse had sat where the new dining-room now stood, how her dolls used to
litter the narrow porch that grew into the winding, serpentine veranda that belted the house,
how she read his books, how she went about with him on his daily rounds, and how she had suddenly
bloomed into a womanhood that made him feel shy and abashed in her presence. He wondered where
it was upon the way that he had lost clasp of her hand: where did it drop from him? How did
the little fingers that he used to hold so tightly, slip into another's hand? Her life's great
decision had been made without consulting him; when did he lose her confidence? She had gone
her way an independent soul--flown like a bird from the cage, he thought, and was going a way
that he felt would be a way of pain, and probably sorrow, yet he could not stop her. All the
experience of his life was worthless to her. All that he knew of men, all that he feared of
her lover, were as chaff in the scales for her.

The Doctor, the boss, the friend, the man, withdrew from his consciousness as he sat behind
the vines and he became the impersonal, universal father, wondering at the mystery of life.
As he sat musing, he heard a step behind him, and saw his daughter coming across the porch
to greet him. "Father," she said, "I have just this half hour that's to be ours. I've planned
for it all day. Mother has promised to keep every one away."

The father's jaw began to tremble and his cherubic face to wrinkle in an emotional pucker.
He put the girl's arm about his neck, and rubbed her hand upon his cheek. Then the father said
softly:

"I never felt poor before until this minute." The girl looked inquiringly at him and was about
to protest. He stopped her: "Money wouldn't do you much good--not all the money in the world."

"Well, father, I don't want money: we don't need it," said the girl. "Why, we have a beautiful
home and Tom is making--"

"It's not that, my dear--not that." He played with her hand a moment longer. "I feel that I
ought to give you something better than money; my--my--well, my view of life--what they call
philosophy of life. It's the accumulation of fifty years of living." He fumbled in his pocket
for his pipe. "Let me smoke, and maybe I can talk."

"Laura--girl--" He puffed bashfully in a pause, and began again: "There's a lot of Indiana--real
common Eendiany," he mocked, "about your father, and I just some way can't talk under pressure."
He caressed the girl's hand and pulled at his pipe as one giving birth to a system of philosophy.
Yet he was dumb as he sat before the warm glow of the passing torch of life which was shining
from his daughter's face. Finally he burst forth, piping impatience at his own embarrassment.

"I tell you, daughter, it's just naturally hell to be pore." The girl saw his twitching mouth
and the impotence of his swimming eyes; but before she could protest he checked her.

"Pore! Pore!" he repeated hopelessly. "Why, if we had a million, I would still be just common,
ornery, doless pore folks--tongue-tied and helpless, and I couldn't give you nothin--nothin!"
he cried, "but just rubbish! Yet there are so many things I'd like to give you, Laura--so many,
many things!" he repeated. "God Almighty's put a terrible hog-tight inheritance tax on experience,
girl!" He smiled a crooked, tearful little smile--looked up into her eyes in dog-like wistfulness
as he continued: "I'd like to give you some of mine--some of the wisdom I've got one way and
another--but, Lord, Lord," he wailed, "I can't. The divine inheritance tax bars me." He patted
her with one hand, holding his smoldering pipe in the other. Then he shrilled out in the impotence
of his pain: "I just must give you this, Laura: Whatever comes and whatever goes--and lots
of sad things will come and lots of sad things will go, too, for that matter--always remember
this: Happiness is from the heart out--not from the world in! Do you understand, child--do you?"

The girl smiled and petted him, but he saw that he hadn't reached her consciousness. He puffed
at a dead pipe a moment, then he cried as he beat his hands together in despair: "I suppose
it's no use. It's no use. But you can at least remember these words, Laura, and some time the
meaning will get to you. Always carry your happiness under your bonnet! It's the only thing
I can give you--out of all my store!"

The girl put her arm about him and pressed closely to him, and they rose, as she said: "Why,
father--I understand. Of course I understand. Don't you see I understand, father?"

She spoke eagerly and clasped her arms tighter about the pudgy little figure. They stood quietly
a moment, as the father looked earnestly, dog-wise, up into her face, as if trying by his very
gaze to transmit his loving wisdom. Then, as he found voice: "No, Laura, probably you'll need
fifty years to understand; but look over on the hill across the valley at the moving cloud
shadows. They are only shadows--not realities. They are just unrealities that prove the real--just
trailing anchors of the sun!" He had pocketed his pipe and his hand came up from his pocket
as he waved to the distant shadows and piped: "Trouble--heartaches--all the host of clouds
that cover life--are only--only--" he let his voice drop gently as he sighed: "only anchors
of the sun; Laura, they only prove--just prove--"

She did not let him finish, but bent to kiss him and she could feel the shudder of a smothered
sob rack him as she touched his cheek.

Then he smiled at her and chirped: "Just Eendiany--sis'. Just pore, dumb Eendiany! Hi, ho!
Now run and be a good girl! And here's a jim-crack your daddy got you!"

From his pocket he drew out a little package, and dangled a sparkling jewel in his hands. He
saw a flash of pleasure on her face. But his heart was full, and he turned away his head as
he handed the gift to her. Her eyes were upon the sparkling jewel, as he led her into the house,
saying with a great sigh: "Come on, my dear--let's go in."

At nine o'clock that night, the great foundry of a house, with its half a score of chimneys,
marking its various epochs of growth, literally was stuffed with smilax, ferns, roses, orange
blossoms, and daisy chains. In the mazes of these aisles of verdure, a labyrinth of Van Dorns
and Satterthwaites and visiting statesmen with highly powdered womankind was packed securely.
George Brotherton, who was born a drum major, wearing all of his glittering insignia of a long
line of secret societies, moved as though the welding humanity were fluid. He had presided
at too many funerals not to know the vast importance of keeping the bride's kin from the groom's
kin, and when he saw that they were ushered into the wedding supper, in due form and order,
it was with the fine abandon of a grand duke lording it over the populace. Senators, Supreme
Court justices, proud Satterthwaites, haughty Van Dorns, Congressmen, governors, local gentry,
were packed neatly but firmly in their proper boxes.

The old families of Harvey--Captain Morton and his little flock, the Kollanders, Ahab Wright
with his flaring side-whiskers, his white necktie and his shadow of a wife; Joseph Calvin and
his daughter in pigtails, Mrs. Calvin having written Mrs. Nesbit that it seemed that she just
never did get to go anywhere and be anybody, having said as much and more to Mr. Calvin with
emphasis; Mrs. Brotherton, mother of George, beaming with pride at her son's part; stuttering
Kyle Perry and his hatchet-faced son, the Adamses all starched for the occasion, Daniel Sands,
a widower pro tem. with a broadening interest in school teachers, Mrs. Herdicker, the ladies'
hatter, classifying the Satterthwaites and the Van Dorns according to the millinery of their
womenkind; Morty Sands wearing the first white silk vest exhibited in Harvey and making violent
eyes at a daughter of the railroad aristocracy--either a general manager's daughter or a general
superintendent's, and for the life of her Mrs. Nesbit couldn't say; for she had not the highest
opinion in the world of the railroad aristocracy, but took them, president, first, second and
third vice, general managers, ticket and passenger agents, and superintendents, as a sort of
social job-lot because they came in private cars, and the Doctor desired them, to add to his
trophies of the occasion,--Henry Fenn, wearing soberly the suit in which he appeared when he
rode the skyrocket, and forming part of the bridal chorus, stationed in the cigar-box of a
sewing-room on the second floor to sing, "Oh, Day So Dear," as the happy couple came down the
stairs--the old families of Harvey were all invited to the wedding. And the old and the new
and most of the intermediary families of no particular caste or standing, came to the reception
after the ceremony. But because she had the best voice in town, Margaret Müller sang "Oh, Promise
Me," in a remote bedroom--to give the effect of distant music, low and sweet, and after that
song was over, and after Henry Fenn's great pride had been fairly sated, Margaret Müller mingled
with the guests and knew more of the names and stations of the visiting nobility from the state
house and railroad offices than any other person present. And such is the perversity of the
male sex that there were more "by Georges," and more "Look--look, looks," and more faint whistles,
and more "Tch--tch tchs," and more nudging and pointing among the men when Margaret appeared
than when the bride herself, pink and white and beautiful, came down the stairs. Even the eyes
of the groom, as he stood beside the bride, tall, youthful, strong, and handsome as a man may
dare to be and earn an honest living, even his eyes sometimes found themselves straying toward
the figure and face of the beautiful girl whom he had scarcely noticed while she worked in
the court house. But this may be said for the groom, that when his eyes did wander, he pulled
them back with an almost irritated jerk, and seemed determined to keep them upon the girl by
his side.

As for the wedding ceremony itself--it was like all others. The women looked exultant, and
the men--the groom, the bride's father, the groomsmen, and even Rev. John Dexter, had a sort
of captured look and went through the service as though they wished that marriages which are
made in Heaven were celebrated there also. But after the service was actually accomplished,
after the bride and groom had been properly congratulated, after the multitude had been fed
in serried ranks according to social precedence, after the band on the lawn outside had serenaded
the happy couple, and after further interminable handshaking and congratulations, from those
outside, after the long line of invited guests had filed past the imposing vista of pickle
dishes, cutlery, butter dishes and cake plates, reaching around the walls of three bedrooms,--to
say nothing of an elaborate wax representation of nesting cupids bearing the card of the Belgian
Society from the glass works and sent, according to the card, to "Mlle. Lille'n'en Pense";
after the carriage, bedecked and bedizened with rice and shoes and ribbons, that was supposed
to bear away the bride and groom, had gone amid the shouting and the tumult of the populace,
and after the phaëton and the sorrel mare had actually taken the bride and groom from the barn
to the railway station, after the fiddle and the bassoon and the horn and the tinkling cymbal
at Morty Sands's dance had frayed and torn the sleep of those pale souls who would sleep on
such a night in Harvey, Grant Adams and his father, leaving Jasper to trip whatever fantastic
toes he might have, in the opera house, drove down the hill through the glare of the furnaces,
the creaking of the oil derricks and the smell of the straw paper mill through the heart of
South Harvey.

They made little talk as they rode. Their way led them through the street which is shaded and
ashamed by day, and which glows and flaunts itself by night. Men and women, gambling, drinking,
carousing, rioted through the street, in and out of doors that spilled puddles of yellow light
on the board sidewalks and dirt streets; screaming laughter, hoarse calls, the stench of liquor,
the muffled noises of gambling, sputter of electric lights and the flash of glimmering reflections
from bar mirrors rasped their senses and kept the father and son silent as they rode. When
they had passed into the slumbering tenements, the father spoke: "Well, son, here it is--the
two kinds of playing, and here we have what they call the bad people playing. The Van Dorns
and the Satterthwaites will tell you that vice is the recreation of the poor. And it's more
or less true." The elder man scratched his beard and faced the stars: "It's a devilish puzzle.
Character makes happiness; I've got that down fine. But what makes character? Why is vice the
recreation of the poor? Why do we recruit most of our bad boys and all of our wayward girls
from those neighborhoods in every city where the poor live? Why does the clerk on $12 a week
uptown crowd into Doctor Jim's wedding party, and the glass blower at $4 a day down here crowd
into 'Big Em's' and 'Joe's Place' and the 'Crescent'? Is poverty caused by vice; or is vice
a symptom of poverty? And why does the clerk's wife move in 'our best circles' and the miner's
wife, with exactly the same money to spend, live in outer social darkness?"

"I've asked myself that question lots of times," exclaimed the youth. "I can't make it work
out on any theory. But I tell you, father," the son clinched the hand that was free from the
lines, and shook it, "it's wrong--some way, somehow, it's wrong, way down at the bottom of
things--I don't know how nor why--but as sure as I live, I'll try to find out."

The clang of an engine bell in the South Harvey railroad yards drowned the son's answer. The
two were crossing the track and turning the corner that led to the South Harvey station. The
midnight train was about due. As the buggy came near the little gray box of a station a voice
called, "Adams--Adams," and a woman's voice, "Oh, Grant."

"Why," exclaimed the father, "it's the happy couple." Grant stopped the horse and climbed out
over the sleeping body of little Kenyon. "In a moment," replied Grant. Then he came to a shadow
under the station eaves and saw the young people hiding. "Adams, you can help us," said Van
Dorn. "We slipped off in the Doctor's phaëton, to get away from the guying crowd and we have
tried to get the house on the 'phone, and in some way they don't answer. The horse is tied
over by the lumber yard there. Will you take it home with you to-night, and deliver it to the
Doctor in the morning--whatever--" But Grant cut in:

"Why, of course. Glad to have the chance." He was awkward and ill at ease, and repeated, "Why,
of course, anything." But Van Dorn interjected: "You understand, I'll pay for it--" Grant Adams
stared at him. "Why--why--no--" stammered Grant in confusion, while Van Dorn thrust a five-dollar
bill upon him. He tried to return it, but the bride and groom ran to the train, leaving the
young man alone and hurt in his heart. The father from the buggy saw what had happened. In
a few minutes they were leading the Doctor's horse behind the Adams buggy. "I didn't want their
money," exclaimed Grant, "I wanted their--their--"

"You wanted their friendship, Grant--that's what you wanted," said the father.

"And he wanted a hired man," cried Grant. "Just a hired man, and she--why, didn't she understand?
She knew I would have carried the old horse on my back clear to town, if she'd let me, just
to hear her laugh once. Father," the son's voice was bitter as he spoke, "why didn't she understand----why
did she side with him?"

The father smiled. "Perhaps, on your wedding trip, Grant, your wife will agree with you too, son."

As they rode home in silence, the young man asked himself over and over again, what lines divided
the world into classes; why manual toil shuts off the toilers from those who serve the world
otherwise. Youth is sensitive; often it is supersensitive, and Grant Adams saw or thought he
saw in the little byplay of Tom Van Dorn the caste prod of society jabbing labor back into
its place.

"Tom," said the bride as they watched Grant Adams unhitch the horse by the lumber yard, "why
did you force that money on Grant----he would have much preferred to have your hand when he
said good-by."

"He's not my kind of folks, Laura," replied Van Dorn. "I know you like him. But that five will
do him lots more good than my shaking his hand, and if that youth wasn't as proud as Lucifer
he'd rather have five dollars than any man's hand. I would----if it comes to that."

"But, Tom," answered the girl, "that wasn't pride, that was self-respect."

"Well, my dear," he squeezed her gloved hand and in the darkness put his arm about her, "let's
not worry about him. All I know is that I wanted to square it with him for taking care of the
horse and five dollars won't hurt his self-respect. And," said the bridegroom as he pressed
the bride very close to his heart, "what is it to us? We have each other, so what do we care----what
is all the world to us?"

As the midnight train whistled out of South Harvey Grant Adams sitting on a bedside was fondly
unbuttoning a small body from its clothes, ready to hear a sleepy child's voice say its evening
prayers. In his heart there flamed the love for the child that was beckoning him into love
for every sentient thing. And as Laura Van Dorn, bride of Thomas of that name, heard the whistle,
her being was flooded with a love high and marvelous, washing in from the infinite love that
moves the universe and carrying her soul in aspiring thrills of joy out to ride upon the mysterious
currents that we know are not of ourselves, and so have called divine.

In the morning, in the early gray of morning, when Grant Adams rose to make the fire for breakfast,
he found his father, sitting by the kitchen table, half clad as he had risen from a restless
bed. Scrawled sheets of white paper lay around him on the floor and the table. He said sadly:

"She can't come, Grant--she can't come. I dreamed of her last night; it was all so real--just
as she was when we were young, and I thought--I was sure she was near." He sighed as he leaned
back in his chair. "But they've looked for her--all of them have looked for her. She knows
I'm calling--but she can't come." The father fumbled the papers, rubbed his gray beard, and
shut his fine eyes as he shook his head, and whispered: "What holds her--what keeps her? They
all come but her."

"What's this, father?" asked Grant, as a page closely written in a fine hand fluttered to the
floor.

"Oh, nothing--much--just Mr. Left bringing me some message from Victor Hugo. It isn't much."

But the Eminent Authority who put it into the Proceedings of the Psychological Society laid
more store by it than he did by the scraps and incoherent bits of jargon which pictured the
old man's lonely grief. They are not preserved for us, but in the Proceedings, on page 1125,
we have this from Mr. Left:

"The vice of the poor is crass and palpable. It carries a quick and deadly corrective poison.
But the vices of the well-to-do are none the less deadly. To dine in comfort and know your
brother is starving; to sleep in peace and know that he is wronged and oppressed by laws that
we sanction, to gather one's family in contentment around a hearth, while the poor dwell in
a habitat of vice that kills their souls, to live without bleeding hearts for the wrong on
this earth--that is the vice of the well-to-do. And so it shall come to pass that when the
day of reckoning appears it shall be a day of wrath. For when God gives the poor the strength
to rise (and they are waxing stronger every hour), they will meet not a brother's hand but
a glutton's--the hard, dead hand of a hard, dead soul. Then will the vicious poor and the vicious
well-to-do, each crippled by his own vices, the blind leading the blind, fall to in a merciless
conflict, mad and meaningless, born of a sad, unnecessary hate that shall terrorize the earth,
unless God sends us another miracle of love like Christ or some vast chastening scourge of
war, to turn aside the fateful blow."

CHAPTER XIII

IN WHICH WE OBSERVE THE INTERIOR OF A DESERTED HOUSE

An empty, lonely house was that on Quality Hill in Elm Street after the daughter's marriage.
It was not that the Doctor and Mrs. Nesbit did not see their daughter often; but whether she
came every day or twice a week or every week, always she came as a visitor. No one may have
two homes. And the daughter of the house of Nesbit had her own home;--a home wherein she was
striving to bind her husband to a domesticity which in itself did not interest him. But with
her added charm to it, she believed that she could lure him into an acceptance of her ideal
of marriage. So with all her powers she fell to her task. Consciously or unconsciously, directly
or by indirection, but always with the joy of adventure in her heart, whether with books or
with music or with comradeship, she was bending herself to the business of wifehood, so that
her own home filled her life and the Nesbit home was lonely; so lonely was it that by way of
solace and diversion, Mrs. Nesbit had all the woodwork downstairs "done over" in quarter-sawed
oak with elaborate carvings. Ferocious gargoyles, highly excited dolphins, improper, pot-bellied
little cupids, and mermaids without a shred of character, seemed about to pounce out from banister,
alcove, bookcase, cozy corner and china closet.

George Brotherton pretended to find resemblances in the effigies to people about Harvey, and
to the town's echoing delight he began to name the figures after their friends, and always
saluted the figures intimately, as Maggie, or Henry, or the Captain, or John Kollander, or
Lady Herdicker. But through the wooden menagerie in the big house the Doctor whistled and hummed
and smoked and chirruped more or less drearily. To him the Japanese screens, the huge blue
vases, the ponderous high-backed chairs crawly with meaningless carvings, the mantels full
of jars and pots and statuettes, brought no comfort. He was forever putting his cane over his
arm and clicking down the street to the Van Dorn home; but he felt in spite of all his daughter's
efforts to welcome him--and perhaps because of them--that he was a stranger there. So slowly
and rather imperceptibly to him, certainly without any conscious desire for it, a fondness
for Kenyon Adams sprang up in the Doctor's heart. For it was exceedingly soft in spots and
those spots were near his home. He was domestic and he was fond of home joys. So when Mrs.
Nesbit put aside the encyclopedia, from which she was getting the awful truth about Babylonian
Art for her paper to be read before the Shakespeare Club, and going to the piano, brought from
the bottom of a pile of yellow music a tattered sheet, played a Chopin nocturne in a rolling
and rather grand style that young women affected before the Civil War, the Doctor's joy was
scarcely less keen than the child's. Then came rare occasions when Laura, being there for the
night while her husband was away on business, would play melodies that cut the child's heart
to the quick and brought tears of joy to his big eyes. It seemed to him at those times as if
Heaven itself were opened for him, and for days the melodies she played would come ringing
through his heart. Often he would sit absorbed at the piano when he should have been practicing
his lesson, picking out those melodies and trying with a poignant yearning for perfection to
find their proper harmonies. But at such times after he had frittered away a few minutes, Mrs.
Nesbit would call down to him, "You, Kenyon," and he would sigh and take up his scales and
runs and arpeggios.

Kenyon was developing into a shy, lovely child of few noises; he seemed to love to listen to
every continuous sound--a creaking gate, a waterdrip from the eaves, a whistling wind--a humming
wire. Sometimes the Doctor would watch Kenyon long minutes, as the child listened to the fire's
low murmur in the grate, and would wonder what the little fellow made of it all. But above
everything else about the child the Doctor was interested in watching his eyes develop into
the great, liquid, soulful orbs that marked his mother. To the Doctor the resemblance was rather
weird. But he could see no other point in the child's body or mind or soul whereon Margaret
Müller had left a token. The Doctor liked to discuss Kenyon with his wife from the standpoint
of ancestry. He took a sort of fiendish delight--if one may imagine a fiend with a seraphic
face and dancing blue eyes and a mouth that loved to pucker in a pensive whistle--in Mrs. Nesbit's
never failing stumble over the child's eyes.

Any evening he would lay aside his Browning----even in a knotty passage wherein the Doctor
was wont to take much pleasure, and revert to type thus:

"Yes, I guess there's something in blood as you say! The child shows it! But where do you suppose
he gets those eyes?" His wife would answer energetically, "They aren't like Amos's and they
certainly are not much like Mary's! Yet those eyes show that somewhere in the line there was
fine blood and high breeding."

And the Doctor, remembering the kraut-peddling Müller, who used to live back in Indiana, and
who was Kenyon's great-grandfather, would shake a wise head and answer:

"Them eyes is certainly a throw-back to the angel choir, my dear--a sure and certain throw-back!"

And while Mrs. Nesbit was climbing the Sands family tree, from Mary Adams back to certain Irish
Sandses of the late eighteenth century, the Doctor would flit back to "Paracelsus," to be awakened
from its spell by: "Only the Irish have such eyes! They are the mark of the Celt all over the
world! But it's curious that neither Mary nor Daniel had those eyes!"

"It's certainly curious like," squeaked the Doctor amicably--"certainly curious like, as the
treetoad said when he couldn't holler up a rain. But it only proves that blood always tells!
Bedelia, there's really nothing so true in this world as blood!"

And Mrs. Nesbit would ask him a moment later what he could find so amusing in "Paracelsus"?
She certainly never had found anything but headaches in it.

Yet there came a time when the pudgy little stomach of the Doctor did not shake in merriment.
For he also had his problem of blood to solve. Tom Van Dorn was, after all, the famous Van
Dorn baby!

One evening in the late winter as the Doctor was trudging home from a belated call, he saw
the light in Brotherton's window marking a yellow bar across the dark street. As he stepped
in for a word with Mr. Brotherton about the coming spring city election, he saw quickly that
the laugh was in some way on Tom Van Dorn, who rose rather guiltily and hurried out of the shop.

"Seegars on George!" exclaimed Captain Morton; then answered the Doctor's gay, inquiring stare:
"Henry bet George a box of Perfectos Tom wouldn't be a year from his wedding asking 'what's
her name' when the boys were discussing some girl or other, and they've laid for Tom ever since
and got him to-night, eh?"

The Captain laughed, and then remembering the Doctor's relationship with the Van Dorns, colored
and tried to cover his blunder with: "Just boys, you know, Doc--just their way."

The Doctor grinned and piped back, "Oh, yes--yes--Cap--I know, boys will be dogs!"

Toddling home that night the Doctor passed the Van Dorn house. He saw through the window the
young couple in their living-room. The doctor had a feeling that he could sense the emotions
of his daughter's heart. It was as though he could see her trying in vain to fasten the steel
grippers of her soul into the heart and life of the man she loved. Over and over the father
asked himself if in Tom Van Dorn's heart was any essential loyalty upon which the hooks and
bonds of the friendship and fellowship of a home could fasten and hold. The father could see
the handsome young face of Van Dorn in the gas light, aflame with the joy of her presence,
but Dr. Nesbit realized that it was a passing flame--that in the core of the husband was nothing
to which a wife might anchor her life; and as the Doctor clicked his cane on the sidewalk vigorously
he whispered to himself: "Peth--peth--nothing in his heart but peth."

A day came when the parents stood watching their daughter as she went down the street through
the dusk, after she had kissed them both and told them, and after they had all said they were
very happy over it. But when she was out of sight the hands of the parents met and the Doctor
saw fear in Bedelia Nesbit's face for the first time. But neither spoke of the fear. It took
its place by the vague uneasiness in their hearts, and two spectral sentinels stood guard over
their speech.

Thus their talk came to be of those things which lay remote from their hearts. It was Mrs.
Nesbit's habit to read the paper and repeat the news to the Doctor, who sat beside her with
a book. He jabbed in comments; she ignored them. Thus: "I see Grant Adams has been made head
carpenter for all the Wahoo Fuel Companies mines and properties." To which the Doctor replied:
"Grant, my dear, is an unusual young man. He'll have ten regular men under him--and I claim
that's fine for a boy in his twenties--with no better show in life than Grant has had." But
Mrs. Nesbit had in general a low opinion of the Doctor's estimates of men. She held that no
man who came from Indiana and was fooled by men who wore cotton in their ears and were addicted
to chilblains, could be trusted in appraising humanity.

So she answered, "Yes," dryly. It was her custom when he began to bestow knighthood upon common
clay to divert him with some new and irrelevant subject. "Here's an item in the Times this
morning I fancy you didn't read. After describing the bride's dress and her beauty, it says,
'And the bride is a daughter of the late H. M. Von Müller, who was an exile from his native
land and gave up a large estate and a title because of his participation in the revolution
of '48. Miss Müller might properly be called the Countess Von Müller, if she chose to claim
her rightful title!'--what is there to that?"

The Doctor threw back his head and chuckled:

"Pennsylvania Dutch for three generations--I knew old Herman Müller's father--before I came
West--when he used to sell kraut and cheese around Vincennes before the war, and Herman's grandfather
came from Pennsylvania."

"I thought so," sniffed Mrs. Nesbit. And then she added: "Doctor, that girl is a minx."

"Yes, my dear," chirped the Doctor. "Yes, she's a minx; but this isn't the open season for
minxes, so we must let her go. And," he added after a pause, during which he read the wedding
notice carefully, "she may put a brace under Henry--the blessed Lord knows Henry will need
something, though he's done mighty well for a year--only twice in eighteen months. Poor fellow--poor
fellow!" mused the Doctor. Mrs. Nesbit blinked at her husband for a minute in sputtering indignation.
Then she exclaimed: "Brace under Henry!" And to make it more emphatic, repeated it and then
exploded: "The cat's foot--brace for Henry, indeed--that piece!"

And Mrs. Nesbit stalked out of the room, brought back a little dress--a very minute dress--she
was making and sat rocking almost imperceptibly while her husband read. Finally, after a calming
interval, she said in a more amiable tone, "Doctor Nesbit, if you've cut up all the women you
claim to have dissected in medical school, you know precious little about what's in them, if
you get fooled in that Margaret woman."

"The only kind we ever cut up," returned the Doctor in a mild, conciliatory treble, "were perfect--all
Satterthwaites."

And when the Doctor fell back to his book, Mrs. Nesbit spent some time reflecting upon the
virtues of her liege lord and wondering how such a paragon ever came from so common a State
as Indiana, where so far as any one ever knew there was never a family in the whole commonwealth,
and the entire population as she understood it carried potatoes in their pockets to keep away
rheumatism.

The evening wore away and Dr. and Mrs. Nesbit were alone by the ashes in the smoldering fire
in the grate. They were about to go up stairs when the Doctor, who had been looking absent-mindedly
into the embers, began meditating aloud about local politics while his wife sewed. His meditation
concerned a certain trade between the city and Daniel Sands wherein the city parted with its
stock in Sands's public utilities with a face value of something like a million dollars. The
stocks were to go to Mr. Sands, while the city received therefor a ten-acre tract east of town
on the Wahoo, called Sands Park. After bursting into the Doctor's political nocturne rather
suddenly and violently with her feminine disapproval, Mrs. Nesbit sat rocking, and finally
she exclaimed: "Good Lord, Jim Nesbit, I wish I was a man."

"I've long suspected it, my dear," piped her husband,

"Oh, it isn't that--not your politics," retorted Mrs. Nesbit, "though that made me think of
it. Do you know what else old Dan Sands is doing?"

The Doctor bent over the fire, stirred it up and replied, "Well, not in particular."

"Philandering," sniffed Mrs. Nesbit.

"Again?" returned the Doctor.

"No," snapped Mrs. Nesbit--"as usual!"

The Doctor had no opinion to express; one of the family specters was engaging his attention
at the moment. Presently his wife put down her paper and sat as one wrestling with an impulse.
The specter on her side of the hearth was trying to keep her lips sealed. They sat while the
mantel clock ticked off five minutes.

"What are you thinking?" the Doctor asked.

"I'm thinking of Dan Sands," replied the wife with some emotion in her voice.

The foot tap of Mrs. Nesbit became audible. She shook her head with some force and exclaimed:
"O Jim, wouldn't I like to have that man--just for one day."

"I've noticed," cut in the Doctor, "regarding such propositions from the gentler sex, that
the Lord generally tempers the wind to the shorn lamb."

"The shorn lamb--the shorn lamb," retorted Mrs. Nesbit. "The shorn tom-cat! I'd like to shear
him." Wherewith she rose and putting out the light led the Doctor to the stairs.

Both knew that the spectral sentinels had used Daniel Sands and his amours only as a seal upon
their lips.

The parents could speak in parables about what they felt or fancied because there was so little
that was tangible and substantial for them to see. Of all the institutions man has made--the
state, the church, his commerce, his schools,--the home is by far the most spiritual. Its successes
and its failures are never material. They are never evidenced in any sort of worldly goods.
Only in the hearts of those who dwell in a home, or of those to whom it is dear, do its triumphs
and its defeats register themselves. But in Tom Van Dorn's philosophy of life small space was
left for things of the spirit alone, to register. He was trying with all his might to build
a home upon material things. So above all he built his home around a beautiful woman. Then
he lavished upon her and about the house wherein she dwelled, beautiful objects. He was proud
of their cost. Their value in dollars and cents gave these objects their chief value in his
balance sheet of gain or less in footing up his account with his home. And because what he
had was expensive, he prized it. Possibly because he had bought his wife's devotion, at some
material sacrifice to his own natural inclinations toward the feminine world, he listed her
high in the assets of the home; and so in the only way he could love, he loved her jealously.
She and the rugs and pictures and furniture--all were dear to him, as chattels which he had
bought and paid for and could brag about. And because he was too well bred to brag, the repression
of that natural instinct he added to the cost of the items listed,--rugs, pictures, wife, furniture,
house, trees, lot, and blue grass lawn. So when toward the end of the first year of his marriage,
he found that actually he could turn his head and follow with his eyes a pretty petticoat going
down Market Street, and still fool his wife; when he found he could pry open the eyes of Miss
Mauling at the office again with his old ogle, and still have the beautiful love which he had
bought with self-denial, its value dropped.

And his wife, who felt in her soul her value passing in the heart she loved, strove to find
her fault and to correct it. Daily her devotion manifested itself more plainly. Daily she lived
more singly to the purpose of her soul. And daily she saw that purpose becoming a vain pursuit.

Outwardly the home was unchanged as this tragedy was played within the two hearts. The same
scenery surrounded the players. The same voices spoke, in the same tones, the same words of
endearment, and the same hours brought the same routine as the days passed. Yet the home was
slowly sinking into failure. And the specters that sealed the lips of the parents who stood
by and mutely watched the inner drama unfold, watched it unfold and translate itself into life
without words, without deeds, without superficial tremor or flinching of any kind--the specters
passed the sad story from heart to heart in those mysterious silences wherein souls in this
world learn their surest truths.

CHAPTER XIV

IN WHICH OUR HERO STROLLS OUT WITH THE DEVIL TO LOOK AT THE HIGH MOUNTAIN

The soup had come and gone; great platters of fried chicken had disappeared, with incidental
spinach and new peas and potatoes. A bowl of lettuce splashed with a French dressing had been
mowed down as the grass, and the goodly company was surveying something less than an acre of
strawberry shortcake at the close of a rather hilarious dinner--a spring dinner, to be exact.
Rhoda Kollander was reciting with enthusiasm an elaborate and impossible travesty of a recipe
for strawberry shortcake, which she had read somewhere, when the Doctor, in his nankeens, putting
his hands on the table cloth as one who was about to deliver an oracle, ran his merry eyes
down the table, gathering up the Adamses and Mortons and Mayor Brotherton and Morty Sands;
fastened his glance upon the Van Dorns and cut in on the interminable shortcake recipe rather
ruthlessly thus in his gay falsetto:

"Tom, here--thinks he's pretty smart. And George Brotherton, Mayor of all the Harveys, thinks
he is a pretty smooth article; and the Honorable Lady Satterthwaite here, she's got a Maryland
notion that she has second sight into the doings of her prince consort." He chuckled and grinned
as he beamed at his daughter: "And there is the princess imperial--she thinks she's mighty
knolledgeous about her father--but," he cocked his head on one side, enjoying the suspense
he was creating as he paused, drawling his words, "I'm just going to show you how I've got
'em all fooled."

He pulled from his pocket a long, official envelope, pulled from the envelope an official document,
and also a letter. He laid the official document down before him and opened the letter.

"Kind o' seems to be signed by the Governor of the State," he drolled: "And seems like the
more I look at it the surer I am it's addressed to Tom Van Dorn. I'm not much of an elocutionist
and never could read at sight, having come from Eendiany, and I guess Rhody here, she's kind
of elocutionary and I'll jest about ask her to read it to the ladies and gentlemen!" He handed
Mrs. Kollander the letter and passed the sealed document to his son-in-law.

Mrs. Kollander read aloud:

"I take pleasure in handing you through the kindness of Senator James Nesbit your appointment
to fill the vacancy in your judicial district created to-day by the resignation of Judge Arbuckle
of your district to fill a vacancy in the Supreme Court of this State created there by the
resignation of Justice Worrell."

Looking over his wife's shoulder and seeing the significance of the letter, John Kollander
threw back his head and began singing in his roaring voice, "For we'll rally round the flag,
boys, we'll rally once again, shouting the battle cry of freedom," and the company at the table
clapped its hands. And while George Brotherton was bellowing, "Well--say!" Judge Thomas Van
Dorn kissed his wife and beamed his satisfaction upon the company.

When the commotion had subsided the chuckling little man, all a-beam with happiness, his pink,
smooth face shining like a headlight, explained thus:

"I jest thought these Maryland Satterthwaites and Schenectady Van Dorns was a-gittin' too top-lofty,
and I'd have to register one for the Grand Duke of Griggsby's Station, to sort of put 'em in
their place!" He was happy; and his vernacular, which always was his pose under emotional stress,
was broad, as he went on: "So I says to myself, the Corn Belt Railroad is mighty keen for a
Supreme Court decision in the Missouri River rate case, and I says, Worrell J., he's the boy
to write it, but I says to the Corn Belt folks, says I, 'It would shatter the respect of the
people for their courts if Worrell J. should stay on the bench after writing the kind of a
decision you want, so we'll just put him in your law offices at twelve thousand per, which
is three times what he is getting now, and then one idear brought on another and here's Tom's
commission and three men and a railroad all made happy!" He threw back his head and laughed
silently as he finished, "and all the justices concurring!" After the hubbub of congratulations
had passed and the guests had moved into the parlor of the Nesbit home, the little Doctor,
standing among them, regaled himself thus:

"Politics is jobs. Jobs is friends. Friends is politics. The reason why the reformers don't
get anywhere is that they have no friends in politics. They regard the people as sticky and
smelly and low. Bedelia has that notion. But I love 'em! Love 'em and vote 'em!"

Amos Adams opened his mouth to protest, but the Doctor waved him into silence. "I know your
idear, Amos! But when the folks get tired of politics that is jobs and want politics that is
principles, I'll open as fine a line of principles as ever was shown in this market!"

After the company had gone, Mrs. Nesbit faced her husband with a peremptory: "Well--will you
tell me why, Jim Nesbit?" And he sighed and dropped into a chair.

"To save his self-respect! Self-respect grows on what it feeds on, my dear, and I thought maybe
if he was a judge"--he looked into the anxious eyes of his wife and went on--"that might hold
him!" He rested his head on a hand and drew in a deep breath. "'Vanity, vanity,' saith the
Preacher--'all is vanity!' And I thought I'd hitch it to something that might pull him out
of the swamp! And I happened to know that he had a sneaking notion of running for Judge this
fall, so I thought I'd slip up and help him."

He sighed again and his tone changed. "I did it primarily for Laura," he said wearily, and:
"Mother, we might as well face it."

Mrs. Nesbit looked intently at her husband in understanding silence and asked: "Is it any one
in particular, Jim--"

He hesitated, then exclaimed: "Oh, I may be wrong, but somehow I don't like the air--the way
that Mauling girl assumes authority at the office. Why, she's made me wait in the outer office
twice now--for nothing except to show that she could!"

"Yes, Jim--but what good will this judgeship do? How will it solve anything?" persisted the
wife. The Doctor let his sigh precede his words: "The office will make him realize that the
eyes of the community are on him, that he is in a way a marked man. And then the place will
keep him busy and spur on his ambition. And these things should help."

He looked tenderly into the worried face of his wife and smiled. "Perhaps we're both wrong.
We don't know. Tom's young and--" He ended the sentence in a "Ho--ho--ho--hum!" and yawned
and rose, leading the way up stairs.

In the Van Dorn home a young wife was trying to define herself in the new relation to the community
in which the evening's news had placed her. She had no idea of divorcing the judgeship from
her life. She felt that marriage was a full partnership and that the judgeship meant much to
her. She realized that as a judge's wife her life and her duties--and she was eager always
to acquire new duties--would be different from her life and her duties as a lawyer's wife or
a doctor's wife or a merchant's wife, for example. For Laura Van Dorn was in the wife business
with a consuming ardor, and the whole universe was related to her wifehood. To her marriage
was the development of a two-phase soul with but one will. As the young couple entered their
home, the wife was saying:

"Tom, isn't it fine to think of the good you can do--these poor folk in the Valley don't really
get justice. And they're your friends. They always help you and father in the election, and
now you can see that they have their rights. Oh, I'm so glad--so glad father did it. That was
his way to show them how he really loves them."

The husband smiled, a husbandly and superior smile, and said absently, "Oh, well, I presume
they don't get much out of the courts, but they should learn to keep away from litigation.
It's a rich man's game anyway!" He was thinking of the steps before him which might lead him
to a higher court and still higher. His ambition vaulted as he spoke. "Laura, Father Jim wouldn't
mind having a son-in-law on the United States Supreme Court, and I believe we can work together
and make it in twenty years more!"

As the young wife saw the glow of ambition in his fine, mobile face she stifled the altruistic
yearnings, which she had come to feel made her husband uncomfortable, and joined him as he
gazed into the crystal ball of the future and saw its glistening chimera.

Perhaps the preceding dialogue wherein Dr. James Nesbit, his wife, his daughter and his son-in-law
have spoken may indicate that politics as the Doctor played it was an exceedingly personal
chess game. We see him here blithely taking from the people of his state, their rights to justice
and trading those rights cheerfully for his personal happiness as it was represented in the
possible reformation of his daughter's husband. He thought it would work--this curious bartering
of public rights for private ends. He could not see that a man who could accept a judgeship
as it had come to Tom Van Dorn, in the nature of things could not take out an essential self-respect
which he had forfeited when he took the place. The Doctor was as blind as Tom Van Dorn, as
blind as his times. Government was a personal matter in that day; public place was a personal
perquisite.

As for the reformation of Tom Van Dorn, for which all this juggling with sacred things was
done, he had no idea that his moral regeneration was concerned in the deal, and never in all
the years of his service did the vaguest hint come to him that the outrage of justice had been
accomplished for his own soul's good.

The next morning Tom Van Dorn read of his appointment as Judge in the morning papers, and he
pranced twice the length of Market Street, up one side and down the other, to let the populace
congratulate him. Then with a fat box of candy he went to his office, where he gave the candy
and certain other tokens of esteem to Miss Mauling, and at noon after the partnership of Calvin
& Van Dorn had been dissolved, with the understanding that the young Judge was to keep his
law books in Calvin's office, and was to have a private office there--for certain intangible
considerations. Then after the business with Joseph Calvin was concluded, the young Judge in
his private office with his hands under his coattails preened before Miss Mauling and talked
from a shameless soul of his greed for power! The girl before him gave him what he could not
get at home, an abject adoration, uncritical, unabashed, unrestrained.

The young man whom the newly qualified Judge had inherited as court stenographer was a sadly
unemotional, rather methodical, old maid of a person, and Tom Van Dorn could not open his soul
to this youth, so he was wont to stray back to the offices of Joseph Calvin to dictate his
instructions to juries, and to look over the books in his own library in making up his decisions.
The office came to be known as the Judge's Chambers and the town cocked a gay and suspicious
eye at the young Judge. Mr. Calvin's practice doubled and trebled and Miss Mauling lost small
caste with the nobility and gentry. And as the summer deepened, Dr. James Nesbit began to see
that vanity does not build self-respect.

When the young Judge announced his candidacy for election to fill out the two years' unexpired
term of his predecessor, no one opposed Van Dorn in his party convention; but the Doctor had
little liking for the young man's intimacy in the office of Joseph Calvin and less liking for
the scandal of that intimacy which arose when the rich litigants in the Judge's court crowded
into Calvin's office for counsel. The Doctor wondered if he was squeamish about certain matters,
merely because it was his own son-in-law who was the subject of the disquieting gossip connected
with Calvin's practice in Van Dorn's court. Then there was the other matter. The Doctor could
notice that the town was having its smile--not a malicious nor condemning smile, but a tolerant,
amused smile about Van Dorn and the Mauling girl; and the Doctor didn't like that. It cut deeply
into the Doctor's heart that as the town's smile broadened, his daughter's face was growing
perceptibly more serious. The joy she had shown when first she told him of the baby's coming
did not illumine her face; and her laughter--her never failing well of gayety--was in some
way being sealed. The Doctor determined to talk with Tom on the Good of the Order and to talk
man-wise--without feeling of course but without guile.

So one autumn afternoon when the Doctor heard the light, firm step of the young man in the
common hallway that led to their offices over the Traders' Bank, the Doctor tuned himself up
to the meeting and cheerily called through his open door:

"Tom--Tom, you young scoundrel--come in here and let's talk it all over."

The young man slipped a package into his pocket, and came lightly into the office. He waved
his hand gayly and called: "Well--well, pater familias, what's on your chest to-day?" His slim
figure was clad in gray--a gray suit, gray shirt, gray tie, gray shoes and a crimson rose bud
in his coat lapel. As he slid into a chair and crossed his lean legs the Doctor looked him
over. The young Judge's corroding pride in his job was written smartly all over his face and
figure. "The fairest of ten thousand, the bright and morning star, Tom," piped the Doctor.
Then added briskly, "I want to talk to you about Joe Calvin." The young man lifted a surprised
eyebrow. The Doctor pushed ahead as he pulled the county bar docket from his desk and pointed
to it. "Joe Calvin's business has increased nearly fifty per cent. in less than six months!
And he has the money side of eighty per cent. of the cases in your court!"

"Well--" replied Van Dorn in the mushy drawl that he used with juries, "that's enough! Joe
couldn't ask more." Then he added, eying the Doctor closely, "Though I can't say that what
you tell me startles me with its suddenness."

"That's just my point," cried the Doctor in his high, shrill voice. "That's just my point,
Thomas," he repeated, "and here's where I come in. I got you this job. I am standing for you
before the district and I am standing for you now for this election." The Doctor wagged his
head at the young man as he said, "But the truth is, Tom, I had some trouble getting you the
solid delegation."

"Ah?" questioned the suave young Judge.

"Yes, Tom--my own delegation," replied the Doctor. "You see, Tom, there is a lot of me. There
is the one they call Doc Jim; then there's Mrs. Nesbit's husband and there's your father-in-law,
and then there's Old Linen Pants. The old man was for you from the jump. Doc Jim was for you
and Mrs. Nesbit's husband was willing to go with the majority of the delegation, though he
wasn't strong for you. But I'll tell you, Tom," piped the Doctor, "I did have the devil of
a time ironing out the troubles of your father-in-law."

The Doctor leaned forward and pointed a fat, stern finger at his son-in-law. "Tom," the Doctor's
voice was shrill and steely, "I don't like your didos with Violet Mauling!" The face above
the crimson flower did not flinch.

"I don't suppose you're making love to her. But you have no business fooling around Joe Calvin's
office on general principles. Keep out, and keep away from her." And then the Doctor's patience
slipped and his voice rose: "What do you want to give her the household bills for? Pay 'em
yourself or let Laura send her checks!" The Doctor's tones were harsh, and with the amiable
cast off his face his graying blond pompadour hair seemed to bristle militantly. The effect
gave the Doctor a fighting face as he barked, "You can't afford it. You must stop it. It's
no way to do. I didn't think it of you, Tom!"

After Van Dorn had touched his black wing of hair, his soft mustache and the crimson flower
on his coat, he had himself well in hand and had planned his defense and counter attacks. He
spoke softly:

"Now, Father Jim--I'm not--" he put a touch of feeling in the "not," "going to give up the
Mauling girl. When I'm elected next month, I'm going to make her my court stenographer!" He
looked the Doctor squarely in the face and paused for the explosion which came in an excited,
piping cry:

"Why, Tom, are you crazy! Take her all over the three counties of this district with you? Why,
boy--" But Judge Van Dorn continued evenly: "I don't like a man stenographer. Men make me nervous
and self-conscious, and I can't give a man the best that's in me. And I propose to give my
best to this job--in justice to myself. And Violet Mauling knows my ways. She doesn't interpose
herself between me and my ideas, so I am going to make her court stenographer next month right
after the election."

When the Doctor drew in a breath to speak, Van Dorn put out a hand, checked the elder man and
said blandly and smilingly, "And, Father Jim, I'm going to be elected--I'm dead sure of election."

The Doctor thought he saw a glint of sheer malicious impudence in Van Dorn's smile as he finished
speaking: "And anyway, pater, we mustn't quarrel right now--Just at this time, Laura--"

"You're a sly dog, now, ain't you! Ain't you a sly dog?" shrilled the Doctor in sputtering
rage. Then the blaze in his eyes faded and he cried in despair: "Tom, Tom, isn't there any
way I can put the fear of God into you?"

Van Dorn realized that he had won the contest. So he forbore to strike again.

"Doctor Jim, I'm afraid you can't jar me much with the fear of God. You have a God that sneaks
in the back door of matter as a kind of a divine immanence that makes for progress and Joe
Calvin in there has a God with whiskers who sits on a throne and runs a sort of police court;
but one's as impossible as the other. I have no God at all," his chest swelled magnificently,
"and here's what happens":

He was talking against time and the Doctor realized it. But his scorn was crusting over his
anger and he listened as the young Judge amused himself: "I've defended gamblers and thugs--and
crooks, some rich, some poor, mostly poor and mostly guilty. And Joe has been free attorney
for the law and order league and has given the church free advice and entertained preachers
when he wasn't hiding out from his wife. And he's gone to conference and been a deacon and
given to the Lord all his life. And now that it's good business for him to have me elected,
can he get a vote out of all his God-and-morality crowd? Not a vote. And all I have to do is
to wiggle my finger and the whole crowd of thugs and blacklegs and hoodlums and rich and poor
line up for me--no matter how pious I talk. I tell you, Father Jim--there's nothing in your
God theory. It doesn't work. My job is to get the best out of myself possible." But this was
harking back to Violet Mauling and the young Judge smiled with bland impertinence as he finished,
"The fittest survive, my dear pater, and I propose to keep fit--to keep fit--and survive!"

The Doctor's anger cooled, but the pain still twinged his heart, the pain that came as he saw
clearly and surely that his daughter's life was bound to the futile task of making bricks without
straw. Deep in his soul he knew the anguish before her and its vain, continual round of fallen
hopes. As the young Judge strutted up and down the Doctor's office, the father in the elder
man dominated him and a kind of contemptuous pity seized him. Pity overcame rage, and the Doctor
could not even sputter at his son-in-law. "Fit and survive" kept repeating themselves over
in Dr. Nesbit's mind, and it was from a sad, hurt heart that he spoke almost kindly: "Tom--Tom,
my boy, don't be too sure of yourself. You may keep fit and you may survive--but Tom, Tom--"
the Doctor looked steadily into the bold, black eyes before him and fancied they were being
held consciously from dropping and shifting as the Doctor cried: "For God's sake, Tom, don't
let up! Keep on fighting, son, God or no God--you've got a devil--keep on fighting him!"

The olive cheeks flushed for a fleeting second. Van Dorn laughed an irritated little laugh.
"Well," he said, turning to the door, "be over to-night?--or shall we come over? Anything good
for dinner?"

A minute later he came swinging into his own office. He pulled a package from his pocket. "Violet,"
he said, going up to her writing desk and half sitting upon it, as he put the package before
her, "here's the candy."

He picked up her little round desk mirror, smiled at her in it, and played rather idly about
the desk for a foolish moment before going to his own desk. He sat looking into the street,
folding a sheet of blank paper. When it became a wad he snapped it at the young woman. It hit
her round, beautiful neck and disappeared into her square-cut bodice.

"Get it out for you if you want it?" He laughed fatuously.

The girl flashed quick eyes at him, and said, "Oh, I don't know," and went on with her work.
He began to read, but in a few minutes laid his book down.

"How'd you like to be a court stenographer?" The girl kept on writing. "Honest now I mean it.
If I win this election and get this job for the two years of unexpired term, you'll be court
stenographer--pays fifteen hundred a year." The girl glanced quickly at him again, with fire
in her eyes, then looked conspicuously down at the keyboard of the writing machine.

"I couldn't leave home," she said finally, as she pulled out a sheet of paper. "It wouldn't
be the thing--do you think so?"

He put his feet on the desk, showing his ankles of pride, and fingering his mustache, smiling
a squinty smile with his handsome, beady eyes as he said: "Oh, I'd take care of you. You aren't
afraid of me, are you?"

They both laughed. And the girl came over with a sheet of paper. "Here is that Midland Valley
letter. Will you sign it now?"

He managed to touch her hand as she handed him the sheet, and again to touch her bare forearm
as he handed it back after signing it. For which he got two darts from her eyes.

A client came in. Joseph Calvin hurried in and out, a busy little rat of a man who always wore
shiny clothes that bagged at the knees and elbows. George Brotherton crashed in through the
office on city business, and so the afternoon wore away. At the end of the day, Thomas Van
Dorn and Miss Mauling locked up the office and went down the hall and the stairs to the street
together. He released her arm as they came to the street, and tipped his hat as she rounded
the corner for home. He saw the white-clad Doctor trudging up the low incline that led to Elm
Street. 

One advantage which an airplane mechanic has is standardization, which has reached a high point
with Liberty, Hispano-Suiza, and Curtiss engines. Once a mechanic has learned his type he has
learned practically every engine of that type.
 There was Captain Morton
with his one talent, pottering up and down the town talking all kinds of weather, and all kinds
of rebuffs that he might keep the girls in school and make them ready to serve society; yet
according to Tom's standards of success the Captain was unfit; and there was George Brotherton,
ignorant, but loyal, foolishly blind, of a tender heart, yet compared with those who used his
ignorance and played upon his blindness (and the Doctor winced at his part in that game) Mr.
Brotherton was cast aside among the world's unfit; and so was Henry Fenn, fighting with his
devil like a soldier; and so was Dick Bowman going into the mines for his family, sacrificing
light and air and the joy of a free life that the wife and children might be clad, housed and
fed and that they might enjoy something of the comforts of the great civilization which his
toil was helping to build up around them; yet in his grime Dick was accounted exceedingly unfit.
Dick only had a number on the company's books and his number corresponded to a share of stock
and it was the business of the share of stock to get as much out of Dick and give him back
as little, and to take as much from society in passing for coal as it could, and being without
soul or conscience or feeling of any kind, the share of stock put the automatic screws on Dick--as
their numbers corresponded. And for squeezing the sweat out of him the share was accounted
unusually fit, while poor Dick--why he was merely a number on the books and was called a unit
of labor. Then there was Daniel Sands. He had spread his web all over the town. It ran in the
pipes under ground that brought water and gas, and the wires above ground, that brought light
and power and communication. The web found its way into the earth--through deep cuts in the
earth, worming along caverns where it held men at work; then the web ran into foul dens where
the toilers were robbed of their health and strength and happiness and even of the money the
toilers toiled for, and the web brought it all back slimey and stinking from unclean hands
into the place where the spider sat spinning. And there was his son and daughter; Mr. Sands
had married at least four estimable ladies with the plausible excuse that he was doing it only
to give his children a home. Mr. Sands had given his son a home, to be sure; but his son had
not taken a conscience from the home--for who was there at home to give it? Not the estimable
ladies who had married Mr. Sands, for they had none or they would have been somewhere else,
to be sure; not Mr. Sands himself, for he was busy with his web, and conscience rips such webs
as his endways, and Daniel would have none of that. And the servants who had reared the youth
had no conscience to give him; for it was made definite and certain in that home that they
were paid for what they did, so they did what they were paid for, and bestowing consciences
upon young gentlemen is no part of the duty of the "help" in a home like that.

As for his daughter, Anne, again one of God's miracles was wrought. There she was growing in
the dead atmosphere of that home--where she had known two mothers before she was ten and she
saw with a child's shrewd eyes that another was coming. Yet in some subsoil of the life about
her the roots of her life were finding a moral sense. Her hazel eyes were questioning so curiously
the old man who fathered her that he felt uncomfortable when she was near him. Yet for all
the money he had won and all that money had made him, he was reckoned among the fit. Then there
was the fit Mr. Van Dorn and the fit Mr. Calvin. Mr. Calvin never missed a Sunday in church,
gave his tithe, and revered the law. He adjusted his halo and sang feelingly in prayer meeting
about his cross and hoped ultimately for his crown as full and complete payment and return,
the same being the legal and just equivalent for said hereinbefore named cross as aforesaid,
and Mr. Calvin was counted among the fit, and the Doctor smiled as he put him in the list.
And Mr. Van Dorn had confessed that he was among the fit and his fitness consisted in getting
everything that he could without being caught.

But these reflections were vain and unprofitable to Dr. Nesbit, and so he turned himself to
the consideration of the business in hand: namely, to make his calling and reëlection sure
to the State Senate that November. So he went over Greeley County behind his motherly sorrel
mare, visiting the people, telling them stories, prescribing for their ailments, eating their
fried chicken, cream gravy and mashed potatoes, and putting to rout the forces of the loathed
opposition who maintained that the Doctor beat his wife, by sometimes showing said wife as
exhibit "A" without comment in those remote parts of the county where her proud figure was unknown.

In November he was reëlected, and there was a torchlight procession up the aisle of elms and
all the neighbors stood on the front porch, including the Van Dorns and the Mortons and John
Kollander in his blue soldier clothes, carrying the flag into another county office, and the
Henry Fenns, while the Doctor addressed the multitude! And there was cheering, whereupon Mr.
Van Dorn, Judge pro tem and Judge-elect, made a speech with eloquence and fire in it; John
Kollander made his well-known flag speech, and Captain Morton got some comfort out of the election
of Comrade Nesbit, who had stood where bullets were thickest and as a boy had bared his breast
to the foe to save his country, and drawing the Doctor into the corner, filed early application
to be made sergeant-at-arms of the State Senate and was promised that or Something Equally
Good. The hungry friends of the new Senator so loaded him with obligations that blessed night
that he again sold his soul to the devil, went in with the organization, got all the places
for all his people, and being something of an organizer himself, distributed the patronage
for half the State.

Ten days later--or perhaps it may have been two weeks later, at half past five in the evening--the
Judge-elect was sitting at his desk, handsomely dressed in black--as befitting the dignity
of his office. He and his newly appointed court stenographer had returned the hour before from
an adjoining county where they had been holding court. The Judge was alone, if one excepts
the young woman at the typewriting desk, before whom he was preening, as though she were a
mere impersonal mirror. It was estimated that it took ten mechanics of various kinds on the ground
to keep one airplane pilot flying in the air, and the experience of the United States has
shown that there must be a large force of trained men to keep up flying. The present leaders
of the automobile world and the aeronautical world are men who got their first interest in mechanics
in some little shop. Glenn H. Curtiss and Harry G. Hawker, the Australian pilot, both owned
little bicycle-repair shops before they saw their opportunity in flying.


"Gee, but you're swell," said Miss Mauling. "You look good enough to eat."

"Might try a bite--if you feel that way about it," replied the Judge. He put his hands in his
pockets, tried them under his long coat tails, buttoned the coat and thrust one hand between
the buttons, put one hand in a trousers' pocket, letting the other fall at his side, put both
hands behind him, and posed for a few minutes exchanging more or less fervent glances with
the girl. A step sounded in the hallway. The man and woman obviously listened. It was a heavy
tread; it was coming to the office door. The man and woman slipped into Judge Van Dorn's private
office. When the outer door opened, and it was apparent that some one was in the outer office,
Miss Mauling appeared, note book in hand, quite brisk and businesslike with a question in her
good afternoon.

"Where's Van Dorn?" The visitor was tall, rawboned, and of that physical cast known as lanky.
His face was flinty, and his red hair was untrimmed at the neck and ears.

"The Judge is engaged just now," smiled Miss Mauling. "Will you wait?" She was careful not
to ask him to sit. Grant Adams looked at the girl with a fretful stare. He did not take off
his hat, and he shook his head toward Van Dorn's office door as he said brusquely, "Tell him
to come out. It's important." The square shoulders of the tall man gave a lunge or hunch toward
the door. "I tell you it's important."

Miss Mauling smiled. "But he can't come out just now. He's busy. Any message I can give him?"

The man was excited, and his voice and manner showed his temper.

"Now, look here--I have no message; tell Van Dorn I want him quick."

"What name, please?" responded Miss Mauling, who knew that the visitor knew she was playing.

"Grant Adams--tell him it's his business and not mine--except--"

But the girl had gone. It was several minutes before Tom Van Dorn moved gracefully and elegantly
into the room. "Ah," he began. Grant glared at him.

"I've just driven down from Nesbit's with Kenyon, and Mrs. Nesbit says to tell you Laura's
there--came over this morning, and you're to come just as quick as you can. They tried to get
you on the 'phone, but you weren't here. Do you understand? You're to come quick, and I've
left my horse out here for you. Kenyon and I'll catch a car home."

The pose with one hand in his trousers pocket and the other hanging loosely suited the Judge-elect
as he answered: "Is that all?" Then he added, as his eyes went over the blue overalls: "I presume
Mrs. Nesbit advised you as to the reason for--for, well--for haste?"

Grant saw Van Dorn's eyes wander to the girl's for approval. "I shall not need your horse,
Adams," Van Dorn went on without waiting for a reply to his question. Then again turning his
eyes to the girl, he asked: "Adams, anything I can do to repay your kindness?"

"No--" growled Adams, turning to go.

"Say, Adams," called Van Dorn, rubbing his hands and still smiling at the girl, "you wouldn't
take a cigar in--in anticipation of the happy--"

Adams whirled around. His big jaw muscles worked in knots before he spoke; his blue eyes were
set and raging. But he looked at the floor an instant before crying:

"You go to hell!" And an instant later, the lank figure had left the room, slamming the door
after him. Grant heard the telephone bell ringing, and heard the girl's voice answering it,
then he went to the doctor's office. As he was writing the words "At Home" on the slate on
the door, he could hear Miss Mauling at the telephone.

"Yes," and again, "Yes," and then, "Is there any message," and finally she giggled, "All right,
I'll call him." Then Grant stalked down the stairs. The receiver was hanging down. The Doctor
at the other end of the wire could hear a man and a woman laughing. Van Dorn stepped to the
instrument and said: "Yes, Doctor."

Then, "What--well, you don't say!"

And still again, "Yes, he was just here this minute; shall I call him back?" And before hanging
up the receiver, he said, "Why, of course, I'll come right out."

The Judge-elect turned gracefully around, smiling complacently: "Well, Violet--it's your bet.
It's a girl!"

The court stenographer poked a teasing forefinger at him and whittled it with another in glee.
Then, as if remembering something, she asked: "How's your wife?"

Van Dorn's face was blank for an instant. "By George--that's so. I forgot to ask." He started
to pick up the telephone receiver, but checked himself. He pulled his broad-brimmed hat over
his eyes, and started for the door, waving merrily and rubbing his chin with his flower.

"Ta ta," he called as he saw the last of her flashing smile through the closing door.

And thus into a world where only the fittest survive that day came Lila Van Dorn,--the child
of a mother's love.

CHAPTER XV

WHEREIN WE WELCOME IN A NEW YEAR AND CONSIDER A SERIOUS QUESTION

The journey around the sun is a long and tumultuous one. Many of us jolt off the earth as we
ride, others of us are turned over and thrown into strange and absurd positions, and a few
of us sit tight and edge along, a little further toward the soft seats. But as we whirl by
the stations, returning ever and again to the days that are precious in our lives, to the seasons
that give us greatest joy, we measure our gains, on the long journey, in terms of what we love.
"A little over a year ago to-night, my dear," chirruped Dr. Nesbit, pulling a gray hair from
his temple where hairs of any kind were becoming scarce enough. "A year, a month, and a week
and a day ago to-night the town and the Harvey brass band came out here and they tramped up
the blue grass so that it won't get back in a dozen years.

"Well," he mused, as the fire burned, "I got 'em all their jobs, I got two or three good medical
laws passed, and I hope I have made some people happy." 

This type of engine is not likely to be used to any extent for commercial flying, or even flying
for sport. It is expensive, very wasteful of gasolene and oil, and
difficult to keep in repair.

For men who may have had some experience in the assembly of airplanes at factories, or of rigging
them at flying-fields, there is great opportunity.

Expert riggers who know their craft are few and hard to get. They are invaluable for maintaining
a machine in flying condition. The use of airplanes in this country
will require men for rigging, for truing up the wires and struts.
Each airplane must be overhauled after a few hours of flight to discover
hidden weaknesses and to tighten sagging wires.

Rigging an airplane
has some resemblance to rigging a ship for sailing.

And the handsome Miss Morton added, "My goodness, Emma Morton, if I didn't have anything to
do but draw forty dollars every month for yanking a lot of little kids around and teaching
them the multiplication tables, I wouldn't say much. Why, we've come through algebra into geometry
and half way through Cicero, while you've been fussing with that old principal--and Mrs. Herdicker's
got a new trimmer, and we girls down at the shop have to put up with her didoes. Talk of trouble,
gee!"

"Martha, you make me weary," said the youngest Miss Morton, eating an apple. "If you'd had
scarlet fever and measles the same year, and your old dress just turned and your same old hat,
you'd have something to talk about."

"Well," remarked His Honor the Mayor to Henry Fenn and Morty Sands as they sat in the Amen
Corner New Year's eve, looking at the backs of a shelf of late books and viewing several shelves
of standard sets with highly gilded backs, "it's more'n a year since election--and well, say--I've
got all my election bets paid now and am out of debt again, and the book store's gradually
coming along. By next year this time I expect to put four more shelves of copyrighted books
in and cut down the paper backs to a stack on the counter. But old Lady Nicotine is still the
patron of the fine arts--say, if it wasn't for the 'baccy little Georgie would be so far behind
with his rent that he would knock off a year and start over."

Young Mr. Sands rolled a cigarette and lighted it and said: "It's a whole year--and Pop's gone
a long time without a wife; it'll be two years next March since the last one went over the
hill who was brought out to make a home for little Morty, and I saw Dad peeking out of the
hack window as we were standing waiting for the hearse, and wondered which one of the old girls
present he'd pick on. But," mused Morty, "I guess it's Anne's eyes. Every time he edges around
to the subject of our need of a mother, Anne turns her eyes on him and he changes the subject."
Morty laughed quietly and added: "When Anne gets out of her 'teens she'll put father in a monastery!"

"Honeymoon's kind of waning--eh, Henry?" asked Judge Van Dorn, who dropped in for a magazine
and heard the conversation about the passing of the year. He added: "I see you've been coming
down here pretty regularly for three or four months!" Henry looked up sadly and shook his head.
"You can't break the habit of a dozen years. And I got to coming here back in the days when
George ran a pool and billiard hall, and I suppose I'll come until I die, and then George will
bring his wheezy old quartette around and sing over me, and probably act as pall-bearer too--if
he doesn't read the burial service of the lodge in addition."

"Well, a year's a year," said the suave Judge Van Dorn. "A year ago you boys were smoking on
me as the new judge of this judicial district. All hail Thane of Cawdor--" He smiled his princely
smile, taking every one in with his frank, bold eyes, and waved himself into the blustery night.
There he met Mr. Calvin, who, owing to a turn matters had taken at home, was just beginning
another long period of exile from the hearthstone. He walked the night like a ghost, silent
and grim. His thin little neck, furrowed behind by the sunken road between his arteries, was
adorned by two tufts of straggling hair, and as his overcoat collar was rolled and wrinkled,
he had an appearance of extreme neglect and dejection. "Did you realize that it's over a year
since election?" said Van Dorn. "We might as well begin looking out for next year, Joe," he
added, "if you've got nothing better to do. I wish you'd go down the row to-night and see the
boys and tell them I want to talk to them in the next ten days or so; a man never can be too
early in these things; and say--if you happen in the Company store down there and see Violet
Mauling, slip her a ten and charge it to me on the books; I wonder how she's doing--I haven't
heard of her for three months. Nice girl, Violet."

And Mrs. Herdicker hadn't heard of Miss Mauling for some time, and sitting in her little office
back of the millinery store, sorting over her old bills, she came to a bill badly dog-eared
with Miss Mauling's name on it. The bill called for something like $75 and the last payment
on it had been made nearly half a year ago. So she looked at that bill and added ten dollars
to Mrs. Van Dorn's bill for the last hat she bought, and did what she could to resign herself
to the injustices of a cruel world. But it had been a good year for Mrs. Herdicker. V

QUALIFICATIONS OF AN AIRPLANE MECHANIC
What chance has a good automobile man who knows his engine thoroughly
to become an airplane mechanic? There can be only one answer to this
question which men ask themselves daily--there is every chance in
the world. So the ladies who are no better than they
should be and the ladies who are much better than they should be, and the ladies who will stand
for a turned ribbon, and a revived feather, and are just about what they may be expected to
be, all came in and spent their money like the princesses that they were. And Mrs. Herdicker
figured in going over her stock just which hat she could sell to Mrs. Nesbit as a model hat
from the Paris exhibit at the World's Fair, and which one she could put on Mrs. Fenn as a New
York sample, and as she built her castles the loss of the $75 to Miss Mauling had its compensating
returns, and she smiled and thought that just a year ago she had offered that same World's
Fair Model to the wife of the newly elected State Senator and she must put on a new bunch of
flowers and bend down the brim.

The Dexters were sitting by the stove in the living-room with Amos Adams; they had come down
to the lonely little home to prepare a good dinner for the men. "A year ago to-day," said the
minister to the group as he put down the newspaper, "Kenyon got his new fiddle."

"The year has brought me something--I tell you," Jasper said. "I've bought a horse with my
money I earned as page in the State Senate and I've got a milk route, and have all the milk
in the neighborhood to distribute. That's what the year has done for me."

