"Anything particularly wrong?" he asked her in a lowered voice, as they neared the house. At
the same time, he could not help wondering whether, under all circumstances--if her nearest
and dearest were made mincemeat in a railway accident, or crushed by an earth-quake--this fair-haired,
rosy-cheeked lady would still keep her perennial smile. He had never yet seen her without it.

Miss Field replied in a joking tone that Lord Dunstable was depressed because the graceless
Herbert had promised his parents a visit--a whole week--in August, and had now cried off on
some excuse or other. Meadows inquired if Lady Dunstable minded as much as her husband.

"Quite!" laughed Miss Field. "It is not so much that she wants to see Herbert as that she's
found someone to marry him to. You'll see the lady this afternoon. She comes with the Duke's
party, to be looked at."

"But I understand that the young man is by no means manageable?"

Miss Field's amusement increased.

"That's Rachel's delusion. She knows very well that she hasn't been able to manage him so far;
but she's always full of fresh schemes for managing him. She thinks, if she could once marry
him to the right wife, she and the wife between them could get the whip hand of him."

"Does she care for him?" said Meadows, bluntly.

Miss Field considered the question, and for the first time Meadows perceived a grain of seriousness
in her expression. But she emerged from her meditations, smiling as usual.

"She'd be hard hit if anything very bad happened!"

"What could happen?"

"Well, of course they never know whether he won't marry to please himself--produce somebody
impossible!"

"And Lady Dunstable would suffer?"

Miss Field chuckled.

"I really believe you think her a kind of griffin--a stony creature with a hole where her heart
ought to be. Most of her friends do. Rachel, of course, goes through life assuming that none
of the disagreeable things that happen to other people will ever happen to her. But if they
ever did happen--"

"The very stones would cry out? But hasn't she lost all influence with the youth?"

"She won't believe it. She's always scheming for him. And when he's not here she feels so affectionate
and so good! And directly he comes--"

"I see! A tragedy--and a common one! Well, in half an hour I shall be ready for his lordship.
Will you arrange it? I must write a letter first."

Miss Field nodded and departed. Meadows honestly meant to follow her into the house and write
some pressing business letters. But the sunshine was so delightful, the sight of the empty
bench and the abandoned novel on the other side of the lawn so beguiling, that after all he
turned his lazy steps thither-ward, half ashamed, half amused to think how well Lady Dunstable
had read his character.

The guests had all disappeared. Meadows had the garden to himself, and all its summer prospect
of moor and stream. It was close on noon--a hot and heavenly day! And again he thought of Doris
cooped up in London. Perhaps, after all, he would get out of that cruise!

Ah! there was the morning train--the midnight express from King's Cross just arriving in the
busy little town lying in the valley at his feet. He watched it gliding along the valley, and
heard the noise of the brakes. Were any new guests expected by it? he wondered. Hardly! The
Lodge seemed quite full.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty minutes later he threw away the novel impatiently. Midway, the story had gone to pieces.
He rose from his feet, intending this time to tackle his neglected duties in earnest. As he
did so, he heard a motor climbing the steep drive, and in front of it a lady, walking.

He stood arrested--in a stupor of astonishment.

Doris!--by all the gods!--Doris!

It was indeed Doris. She came wearily, looking from side to side, like one uncertain of her
way. Then she too perceived Meadows, and stopped.

Meadows was conscious of two mixed feelings--first, a very lively pleasure at the sight of
her, and then annoyance. What on earth had she come for? To recover him?--to protest against
his not writing?--to make a scene, in short? His guilty imagination in a flash showed her to
him throwing herself into his arms--weeping--on this wide lawn--for all the world to see.

But she did nothing of the kind. She directed the motor, which was really a taxi from the station,
to stop without approaching the front door, and then she herself walked quickly towards her
husband.

"Arthur!--you got my letter? I could only write yesterday."

She had reached him, and they had joined hands mechanically.

"Letter?--I got no letter! If you posted one, it has probably arrived by your train. What on
earth, Doris, is the meaning of this? Is there anything wrong?"

His expression was half angry, half concerned, for he saw plainly that she was tired and jaded.
Of course! Long journeys always knocked her up. She meanwhile stood looking at him as though
trying to read the impression produced on him by her escapade. Something evidently in his manner
hurt her, for she withdrew her hand, and her face stiffened.

"There is nothing wrong with me, thank you! Of course I did not come without good reason."

"But, my dear, are you come to stay?" cried Meadows, looking helplessly at the taxi. "And you
never wrote to Lady Dunstable?"

For he could only imagine that Doris had reconsidered her refusal of the invitation which had
originally included them both, and--either tired of being left alone, or angry with him for
not writing--had devised this coup de main, this violent shake to the kaleidoscope. But what
an extraordinary step! It could only cover them both with ridicule. His cheeks were already
burning.

Doris surveyed him very quietly.

"No--I didn't write to Lady Dunstable--I wrote to you--and sent her a message. I suppose--I
shall have to stay the night."

"But what on earth are we to say to her?" cried Meadows in desperation. "They're out walking
now--but she'll be back directly. There isn't a corner in the house! I've got a little bachelor
room in the attics. Really, Doris, if you were going to do this, you should have given both
her and me notice! There is a crowd of people here!"

Frown and voice were Jovian indeed. Doris, however, showed no tremors.

"Lady Dunstable will find somewhere to put me up," she said, half scornfully. "Is there a telegram
for me?"

"A telegram? Why should there be a telegram? What is the meaning of all this? For heaven's
sake, explain!"

Doris, however, did not attempt to explain. Her mood had been very soft on the journey. But
Arthur's reception of her had suddenly stirred the root of bitterness again; and it was shooting
fast and high. Whatever she had done or left undone, he ought not to have been able to conceal
that he was glad to see her--he ought not to have been able to think of Lady Dunstable first!
She began to take a pleasure in mystifying him.

"I expected a telegram. I daresay it will come soon. You see I've asked someone else to come
this afternoon--and she'll have to be put up too."

"Asked someone else!--to Lady Dunstable's house!" Meadows stood bewildered. "Really, Doris,
have you taken leave of your senses?"

She stood with shining eyes, apparently enjoying his astonishment. Then she suddenly bethought
herself.

"I must go and pay the taxi." Turning round, she coolly surveyed the "fortified post." "It
looks big enough to take me in. Arthur!--I think you may pay the man. Just take out my bag,
and tell the footman to put it in your room. That will do for the present. I shall sit down
here and wait for Lady Dunstable. I'm pretty tired."

The thought of what the magnificent gentleman presiding over Lady Dunstable's hall would say
to the unexpected irruption of Mrs. Meadows, and Mrs. Meadows's bag, upon the "fortified post"
he controlled, was simply beyond expressing. Meadows tried to face his wife with dignity.

"I think we'd better keep the taxi, Doris. Then you and I can go back to the hotel together.
We can't force ourselves upon Lady Dunstable like this, my dear. I'd better go and tell someone
to pack my things. But we must, of course, wait and see Lady Dunstable--though how you will
explain your coming, and get yourself--and me--out of this absurd predicament, I cannot even
pretend to imagine!"

Doris sat down--wearily.

"Don't keep the taxi, Arthur. I assure you Lady Dunstable will be very glad to keep both me--and
my bag. Or if she won't--Lord Dunstable will."

Meadows came nearer--bent down to study her tired face.

"There's some mystery, of course, Doris, in all this! Aren't you going to tell me what it means?"

His wife's pale cheeks flushed.

"I would have told you--if you'd been the least bit glad to see me! But--if you don't pay the
taxi, Arthur, it will run up like anything!"

She pointed peremptorily to the ticking vehicle and the impatient driver. Meadows went mechanically,
paid the driver, shouldered the bag, and carried it into the hall of the Lodge. He then perceived
that two grinning and evidently inquisitive footmen, waiting in the hall for anything that
might turn up for them to do, had been watching the whole scene--the arrival of the taxi, and
the meeting between the unknown lady and himself, through a side window.

Burning to box someone's ears, Meadows loftily gave the bag to one of them with instructions
that it should be taken to his room, and then turned to rejoin his wife.

As he crossed the gravel in front of the house, his mind ran through all possible hypotheses.
But he was entirely without a clue--except the clue of jealousy. He could not hide from himself
that Doris had been jealous of Lady Dunstable, and had perhaps been hurt by his rather too
numerous incursions into the great world without her, his apparent readiness to desert her
for cleverer women. "Little goose!--as if I ever cared twopence for any of them!"--he thought
angrily. "And now she makes us both laughing-stocks!"

And yet, Doris being Doris--a proud, self-contained, well-bred little person, particularly
sensitive to ridicule--the whole proceeding became the more incredible the more he faced it.

One o'clock!--striking from the church tower in the valley! He hurried towards the slight figure
on the distant seat. Lady Dunstable might return at any moment. He foresaw the encounter--the
great lady's insolence--Doris's humiliation--and his own. Well, at least let him agree with
Doris on a common story, before his hostess arrived.

He sped across the grass, very conscious, as he approached the seat, of Doris's drooping look
and attitude. Travelling all those hours!--and no doubt without any proper breakfast! However
Lady Dunstable might behave, he would carry Doris into the Lodge directly, and have her properly
looked after. Miss Field and he would see to that.

Suddenly--a sound of talk and laughter, from the shrubbery which divided the flower garden
from the woods and the moor. Lady Dunstable emerged, with her two companions on either hand.
Her vivid, masculine face was flushed with exercise and discussion. She seemed to be attacking
the Under-Secretary, who, however, was clearly enjoying himself; while Sir Luke, walking a
little apart, threw in an occasional gibe.

"I tell you your land policy here in Scotland will gain you nothing; and in England it will
lose you everything.--Hullo!"

Lady Dunstable's exclamation, as she came to a stop and put up a tortoise-shell eyeglass, was
clearly audible.

