She was slenderly made, with a small face and head round which the abundant hair was very smoothly
and closely wound. The hair was of a delicate brown, the complexion clear, but rather colourless.
Among other young and handsome women, Elizabeth Merton made little effect; like a fine pencil
drawing, she required an attentive eye. The modelling of the features, of the brow, the cheeks,
the throat, was singularly refined, though without a touch of severity; her hands, with their
very long and slender fingers, conveyed the same impression. Her dress, though dainty, was
simple and inconspicuous, and her movements, light, graceful, self-controlled, seemed to show
a person of equable temperament, without any strong emotions. In her light cheerfulness, her
perpetual interest in the things about her, she might have reminded a spectator of some of
the smaller sea-birds that flit endlessly from wave to wave, for whom the business of life
appears to be summed up in flitting and poising.

The comparison would have been an inadequate one. But Elizabeth Merton's secrets were not easily
known. She could rave of Canada; she rarely talked of herself. She had married, at the age
of nineteen, a young Cavalry officer, Sir Francis Merton, who had died of fever within a year
of their wedding, on a small West African expedition for which he had eagerly offered himself.
Out of the ten months of their marriage, they had spent four together. Elizabeth was now twenty-seven,
and her married life had become to her an insubstantial memory. She had been happy, but in
the depths of the mind she knew that she might not have been happy very long. Her husband's
piteous death had stamped upon her, indeed, a few sharp memories; she saw him always,--as the
report of a brother officer, present at his funeral, had described him--wrapped in the Flag,
and so lowered to his grave, in a desert land. This image effaced everything else; the weaknesses
she knew, and those she had begun to guess at. But at the same time she had not been crushed
by the tragedy; she had often scourged herself in secret for the rapidity with which, after
it, life had once more become agreeable to her. She knew that many people thought her incapable
of deep feeling. She supposed it must be true. And yet there were moments when a self within
herself surprised and startled her; not so much, as yet, in connection with persons, as with
ideas, causes--oppressions, injustices, helpless suffering; or, as now, with a new nation,
visibly striking its "being into bounds."

During her widowhood she had lived much with her mother, and had devoted herself particularly
to this only brother, a delicate lad--lovable, self-indulgent and provoking--for whom the unquestioning
devotion of two women had not been the best of schools. An attack of rheumatic fever which
had seized him on leaving Christchurch had scared both mother and sister. He had recovered,
but his health was not yet what it had been; and as at home it was impossible to keep him from
playing golf all day, and bridge all night, the family doctor, in despair, recommended travel,
and Elizabeth had offered to take charge of him. It was not an easy task, for although Philip
was extremely fond of his sister, as the male head of the family since his father's death he
held strong convictions with regard to the natural supremacy of man, and would probably never
"double Cape Turk." In another year's time, at the age of four and twenty, he would inherit
the family estate, and his mother's guardianship would come to an end. He then intended to
be done with petticoat government, and to show these two dear women a thing or two.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dinner was good, as usual; in Elizabeth's eyes, monstrously good. There was to her something
repellent in such luxurious fare enjoyed by strangers, on this tourist-flight through a country
so eloquent of man's hard wrestle with rock and soil, with winter and the wilderness. The blinds
of the car towards the next carriage were rigorously closed, that no one might interfere with
the privacy of the rich; but Elizabeth had drawn up the blind beside her, and looked occasionally
into the evening, and that endless medley of rock and forest and lake which lay there outside,
under the sunset. Once she gazed out upon a great gorge, through which ran a noble river, bathed
in crimson light; on its way, no doubt, to Lake Superior, the vast, crescent-shaped lake she
had dreamed of in her school-room days, over her geography lessons, and was soon to see with
her own eyes. She thought of the uncompanioned beauty of the streams, as it would be when the
thunder of the train had gone by, of its distant sources in the wild, and the loneliness of
its long, long journey. A little shiver stole upon her, the old tremor of man in presence of
a nature not yet tamed to his needs, not yet identified with his feelings, still full therefore
of stealthy and hostile powers, creeping unawares upon his life.

"This champagne is not nearly as good as last night," said Philip discontentedly. "Yerkes must
really try for something better at Winnipeg. When do we arrive?"

"Oh, some time to-morrow evening."

"What a blessing we're going to bed!" said the boy, lighting his cigarette. "You won't be able
to bother me about lakes, Lisa."

But he smiled at her as he spoke, and Elizabeth was so enchanted to notice the gradual passing
away of the look of illness, the brightening of the eye, and slight filling out of the face,
that he might tease her as he pleased.

Within an hour Philip Gaddesden was stretched on a comfortable bed sound asleep. The two servants
had made up berths in the dining-room; Elizabeth's maid slept in the saloon. Elizabeth herself,
wrapped in a large cloak, sat awhile outside, waiting for the first sight of Lake Superior.

It came at last. A gleam of silver on the left--a line of purple islands--frowning headlands
in front--and out of the interminable shadow of the forests, they swept into a broad moonlight.
Over high bridges and the roar of rivers, threading innumerable bays, burrowing through headlands
and peninsulas, now hanging over the cold shining of the water, now lost again in the woods,
the train sped on its wonderful way. Elizabeth on her platform at its rear was conscious of
no other living creature. She seemed to be alone with the night and the vastness of the lake,
the awfulness of its black and purple coast. As far as she could see, the trees on its shores
were still bare; they had temporarily left the spring behind; the North seemed to have rushed
upon her in its terror and desolation. She found herself imagining the storms that sweep the
lake in winter, measuring her frail life against the loneliness and boundlessness around her.
No sign of man, save in the few lights of these scattered stations; and yet, for long, her
main impression was one of exultation in man's power and skill, which bore her on and on, safe,
through the conquered wilderness.

Gradually, however, this note of feeling slid down into something much softer and sadder. She
became conscious of herself, and her personal life; and little by little her exultation passed
into yearning; her eyes grew wet. For she had no one beside her with whom to share these secret
thoughts and passions--these fresh contacts with life and nature. Was it always to be so? There
was in her a longing, a "sehnsucht," for she knew not what.

She could marry, of course, if she wished. There was a possibility in front of her, of which
she sometimes thought. She thought of it now, wistfully and kindly; but it scarcely availed
against the sudden melancholy, the passion of indefinite yearning which had assailed her.

The night began to cloud rapidly. The moonlight died from the lake and the coast. Soon a wind
sprang up, lashing the young spruce and birch growing among the charred wreck of the older
forest, through which the railway had been driven. Elizabeth went within, and she was no sooner
in bed than the rain came pelting on her window.

She lay sleepless for a long time, thinking now, not of the world outside, or of herself, but
of the long train in front of her, and its freight of lives; especially of the two emigrant
cars, full, as she had seen at North Bay, of Galicians and Russian Poles. She remembered the
women's faces, and the babies at their breasts. Were they all asleep, tired out perhaps by
long journeying, and soothed by the noise of the train? Or were there hearts among them aching
for some poor hovel left behind, for a dead child in a Carpathian graveyard?--for a lover?--a
father?--some bowed and wrinkled Galician peasant whom the next winter would kill? And were
the strong, swarthy men dreaming of wealth, of the broad land waiting, the free country, and
the equal laws?

       *       *       *       *       *

Elizabeth awoke. It was light in her little room. The train was at a standstill. Winnipeg?

A subtle sense of something wrong stole upon her. Why this murmur of voices round the train?
She pushed aside a corner of the blind beside her. Outside a railway cutting, filled with misty
rain--many persons walking up and down, and a babel of talk--

Bewildered, she rang for her maid, an elderly and precise person who had accompanied her on
many wanderings.

"Simpson, what's the matter? Are we near Winnipeg?"

"We've been standing here for the last two hours, my lady. I've been expecting to hear you
ring long ago."

Simpson's tone implied that her mistress had been somewhat crassly sleeping while more sensitive
persons had been awake and suffering.

Elizabeth rubbed her eyes. "But what's wrong, Simpson, and where are we?"

"Goodness knows, my lady. We're hours away from Winnipeg--that's all I know--and we're likely
to stay here, by what Yerkes says."

"Has there been an accident?"

Simpson replied--sombrely--that something had happened, she didn't know what--that Yerkes put
it down to "the sink-hole," which according to him was "always doing it"--that there were two
trains in front of them at a standstill, and trains coming up every minute behind them.

"My dear Simpson!--that must be an exaggeration. There aren't trains every minute on the C.P.R.
Is Mr. Philip awake?"

"Not yet, my lady."

"And what on earth is a sink-hole?" asked Elizabeth.

CHAPTER II

Elizabeth had ample time during the ensuing sixteen hours for inquiry as to the nature of sink-holes.

When she emerged, dressed, into the saloon--she found Yerkes looking out of the window in a
brown study. He was armed with a dusting brush and a white apron, but it did not seem to her
that he had been making much use of them.

"Whatever is the matter, Yerkes? What is a sink-hole?"

Yerkes looked round.

"A sink-hole, my lady?" he said slowly--"A sink-hole, well, it's as you may say--a muskeg."

"A what?"

"A place where you can't find no bottom, my lady. This one's a vixen, she is! What she's cost
the C.P.R.!"--he threw up his hands. "And there's no contenting her--the more you give her
the more she wants. They give her ten trainloads of stuff a couple of months ago. No good!
A bit of moist weather and there she is at it again. Let an engine and two carriages through
last night--ten o'clock!"

"Gracious! Was anybody hurt? What--a kind of bog?--a quicksand?"

"Well," said Yerkes, resuming his dusting, and speaking with polite obstinacy, "muskegs is
what they call 'em in these parts. They'll have to divert the line. I tell 'em so, scores of
times. She was at this game last year. Held me up twenty-one hours last fall."

When Yerkes was travelling he spoke in a representative capacity. He was the line.

"How many trains ahead of us are there? Yerkes?"

"Two as I know on--may be more."

"And behind?"

"Three or four, my lady."

"And how long are we likely to be kept?"

"Can't say. They've been at her ten hours. She don't generally let anyone over her under a
good twenty--or twenty-four."

"Yerkes!--what will Mr. Gaddesden say? And it's so damp and horrid."

Elizabeth looked at the outside prospect in dismay. The rain was drizzling down. The passengers
walking up and down the line were in heavy overcoats with their collars turned up. To the left
of the line there was a misty glimpse of water over a foreground of charred stumps. On the
other side rose a bank of scrubby wood, broken by a patch of clearing, which held a rude log-cabin.
What was she to do with Philip all day?

Suddenly a cow appeared on the patch of grass round the log hut. With a sound of jubilation,
Yerkes threw down his dusting brush and rushed out of the car. Elizabeth watched him pursue
the cow, and disappear round a corner. What on earth was he about?

Philip had apparently not yet been called. He was asleep, and Yerkes had let well alone. But
he must soon awake to the situation, and the problem of his entertainment would begin. Elizabeth
took up the guide-book and with difficulty made out that they were about a hundred miles from
Winnipeg. Somewhere near Rainy Lake apparently. What a foolishly appropriate name!

"Hi!--hi!--"

The shout startled her. Looking out she saw a group of passengers grinning, and Yerkes running
hard for the car, holding something in his hand, and pursued by a man in a slouch hat, who
seemed to be swearing. Yerkes dashed into the car, deposited his booty in the kitchen, and
standing in the doorway faced the enemy. A terrific babel arose.

Elizabeth appeared in the passage and demanded to know what had happened.

"All right, my lady," said Yerkes, mopping his forehead. "I've only been and milked his cow.
No saying where I'd have got any milk this side of Winnipeg if I hadn't."

"But, Yerkes, he doesn't seem to like it."

"Oh, that's all right, my lady."

But the settler was now on the steps of the car gesticulating and scolding, in what Elizabeth
guessed to be a Scandinavian tongue. He was indeed a gigantic Swede, furiously angry, and Elizabeth
had thoughts of bearding him herself and restoring the milk, when some mysterious transaction
involving coin passed suddenly between the two men. The Swede stopped short in the midst of
a sentence, pocketed something, and made off sulkily for the log hut. Yerkes, with a smile,
and a wink to the bystanders, retired triumphant on his prey.

Elizabeth, standing at the door of the kitchen, inquired if supplies were likely to run short.

"Not in this car," said Yerkes, with emphasis. "What they'll do"--a jerk of his thumb towards
the rest of the train in front--"can't say."

"Of course we shall have to give them food!" cried Lady Merton, delighted at the thought of
getting rid of some of their superfluities.

Yerkes showed a stolid face.

"The C.P.R.'ll have to feed 'em--must. That's the regulation. Accident--free meals. That hasn't
nothing to do with me. They don't come poaching on my ground. I say, look out! Do yer call
that bacon, or buffaler steaks?"

And Yerkes rushed upon his subordinate, Bettany, who was cutting the breakfast bacon with undue
thickness, and took the thing in hand himself. The crushed Bettany, who was never allowed to
finish anything, disappeared hastily in order to answer the electric bell which was ringing
madly from Philip Gaddesden's berth.

"Conductor!" cried a voice from the inner platform outside the dining-room and next the train.

"And what might you be wanting, sir?" said Bettany jauntily, opening the door to the visitor.
Bettany was a small man, with thin harrassed features and a fragment of beard, glib of speech
towards everybody but Yerkes.

"Your conductor got some milk, I think, from that cabin."

"He did--but only enough for ourselves. Sorry we can't oblige you."

"All the same, I am going to beg some of it. May I speak to the gentleman?"

"Mr. Gaddesden, sir, is dressing. The steward will attend to you."

And Bettany retired ceremoniously in favour of Yerkes, who hearing voices had come out of his den.

"I have come to ask for some fresh milk for a baby in the emigrant car," said the stranger.
"Looks sick, and the mother's been crying. They've only got tinned milk in the restaurant and
the child won't touch it."

"Sorry it's that particular, sir. But I've got only what I want."

"Yerkes!" cried Elizabeth Merton, in the background. "Of course the baby must have it. Give
it to the gentleman, please, at once."

The stranger removed his hat and stepped into the tiny dining-room where Elizabeth was standing.
He was tall and fair-skinned, with a blonde moustache, and very blue eyes. He spoke--for an
English ear--with the slight accent which on the Canadian side of the border still proclaims
the neighbourhood of the States.

"I am sorry to trouble you, madam," he said, with deference. "But the child seems very weakly,
and the mother herself has nothing to give it. It was the conductor of the restaurant car who
sent me here."

"We shall be delighted," said Lady Merton, eagerly. "May I come with you, if you are going
to take it? Perhaps I could do something for the mother."

The stranger hesitated a moment.

"An emigrant car full of Galicians is rather a rough sort of place--especially at this early
hour in the morning. But if you don't mind--"

"I don't mind anything. Yerkes, is that all the milk?".

"All to speak of, my lady," said Yerkes, nimbly retreating to his den.

Elizabeth shook her head as she looked at the milk. But her visitor laughed.

"The baby won't get through that to-day. It's a regular little scarecrow. I shouldn't think
the mother'll rear it."

They stepped out on to the line. The drizzle descended on Lady Merton's bare head and grey
travelling dress.

"You ought to have an umbrella," said the Canadian, looking at her in some embarrassment. And
he ran back to the car for one. Then, while she carried the milk carefully in both hands, he
held the umbrella over her, and they passed through the groups of passengers who were strolling
disconsolately up and down the line in spite of the wet, or exchanging lamentations with others
from two more stranded trains, one drawn up alongside, the other behind.

Many glances were levelled at the slight Englishwoman, with the delicately pale face, and at
the man escorting her. Elizabeth meanwhile was putting questions. How long would they be detained?
Her brother with whom she was travelling was not at all strong. Unconsciously, perhaps, her
voice took a note of complaint.

"Well, we can't any of us cross--can we?--till they come to some bottom in the sink-hole,"
said the Canadian, interrupting her a trifle bluntly.

Elizabeth laughed. "We may be here then till night."

"Possibly. But you'll be the first over."

"How? There are some trains in front."

"That doesn't matter. They'll move you up. They're very vexed it should have happened to you."

Elizabeth felt a trifle uncomfortable. Was the dear young man tilting at the idle rich--and
the corrupt Old World? She stole a glance at him, but perceived only that in his own tanned
and sunburnt way he was a remarkably handsome well-made fellow, built on a rather larger scale
than the Canadians she had so far seen. A farmer? His manners were not countrified. But a farmer
in Canada or the States may be of all social grades.

By this time they had reached the emigrant car, the conductor of which was standing on the
steps. He was loth to allow Lady Merton to enter, but Elizabeth persisted. Her companion led
the way, pushing through a smoking group of dark-faced men hanging round the entrance.

Inside, the car was thick, indeed, with smoke and the heavy exhalations of the night. Men and
women were sitting on the wooden benches; some women were cooking in the tiny stove-room attached
to the car; children, half naked and unwashed, were playing on the floor; here and there a
man was still asleep; while one old man was painfully conning a paper of "Homestead Regulations"
which had been given him at Montreal, a lad of eighteen helping him; and close by another lad
was writing a letter, his eyes passing dreamily from the paper to the Canadian landscape outside,
of which he was clearly not conscious. In a corner, surrounded by three or four other women,
was the mother they had come to seek. She held a wailing baby of about a year old in her arms.
At the sight of Elizabeth, the child stopped its wailing, and lay breathing fast and feebly,
its large bright eyes fixed on the new-comer. The mother turned away abruptly. It was not unusual
for persons from the parlour-cars to ask leave to walk through the emigrants'.

But Elizabeth's companion said a few words to her, apparently in Russian, and Elizabeth, stooping
over her, held out the milk. Then a dark face reluctantly showed itself, and great black eyes,
in deep, lined sockets; eyes rather of a race than a person, hardly conscious, hardly individualised,
yet most poignant, expressing some feeling, remote and inarticulate, that roused Elizabeth's.
She called to the conductor for a cup and a spoon; she made her way into the malodorous kitchen,
and got some warm water and sugar; then kneeling by the child, she put a spoonful of the diluted
and sweetened milk into the mother's hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Was it foolish of me to offer her that money?" said Elizabeth with flushed cheeks as they
walked back through the rain. "They looked so terribly poor."

The Canadian smiled.

"I daresay it didn't do any harm," he said indulgently. "But they are probably not poor at
all. The Galicians generally bring in quite a fair sum. And after a year or two they begin
to be rich. They never spend a farthing they can help. It costs money--or time--to be clean,
so they remain dirty. Perhaps we shall teach them--after a bit."

His companion looked at him with a shy but friendly curiosity.

"How did you come to know Russian?"

"When I was a child there were some Russian Poles on the next farm to us. I used to play with
the boys, and learnt a little. The conductor called me in this morning to interpret. These
people come from the Russian side of the Carpathians."

"Then you are a Canadian yourself?--from the West?"

"I was born in Manitoba."

"I am quite in love with your country!"

Elizabeth paused beside the steps leading to their car. As she spoke, her brown eyes lit up,
and all her small features ran over, suddenly, with life and charm.

"Yes, it's a good country," said the Canadian, rather drily. "It's going to be a great country.
Is this your first visit?"

But the conversation was interrupted by a reproachful appeal from Yerkes.

"Breakfast, my lady, has been hotted twice."

The Canadian looked at Elizabeth curiously, lifted his hat, and went away.

"Well, if this doesn't take the cake!" said Philip Gaddesden, throwing himself disconsolately
into an armchair. "I bet you, Elizabeth, we shall be here forty-eight hours. And this damp
goes through one."

The young man shivered, as he looked petulantly out through the open doorway of the car to
the wet woods beyond. Elizabeth surveyed him with some anxiety. Like herself he was small,
and lightly built. But his features were much less regular than hers; the chin and nose were
childishly tilted, the eyes too prominent. His bright colour, however--(mother and sister could
well have dispensed with that touch of vivid red on the cheeks!)--his curly hair, and his boyish
ways made him personally attractive; while in his moments of physical weakness, his evident
resentment of Nature's treatment of him, and angry determination to get the best of her, had
a touch of something that was pathetic--that appealed.

Elizabeth brought a rug and wrapped it round him. But she did not try to console him; she looked
round for something or someone to amuse him.

On the line, just beyond the railed platform of the car, a group of men were lounging and smoking.
One of them was her acquaintance of the morning. Elizabeth, standing on the platform waited
till he turned in her direction--caught his eye, and beckoned. He came with alacrity. She stooped
over the rail to speak to him.

"I'm afraid you'll think it very absurd"--her shy smile broke again--"but do you think there's
anyone in this train who plays bridge?"

He laughed.

"Certainly. There is a game going on at this moment in the car behind you."

"Is it--is it anybody--we could ask to luncheon?--who'd come, I mean," she added, hurriedly.

"I should think they'd come--I should think they'd be glad. Your cook, Yerkes, is famous on
the line. I know two of the people playing. They are Members of Parliament."

"Oh! then perhaps I know them too," cried Elizabeth, brightening.

He laughed again.

"The Dominion Parliament, I mean." He named two towns in Manitoba, while Lady Merton's pink
flush showed her conscious of having betrayed her English insularity. "Shall I introduce you?"

"Please!--if you find an opportunity. It's for my brother. He's recovering from an illness."

"And you want to cheer him up. Of course. Well, he'll want it to-day." The young man looked
round him, at the line strewn with unsightly débris, the ugly cutting which blocked the view,
and the mists up-curling from the woods; then at the slight figure beside him. The corners
of his mouth tried not to laugh. "I am afraid you are not going to like Canada, if it treats
you like this."

"I've liked every minute of it up till now," said Elizabeth warmly. "Can you tell me--I should
like to know--who all these people are?" She waved her hand towards the groups walking up and down.

"Well, you see," said the Canadian after a moment's hesitation, "Canada's a big place!"

He looked round on her with a smile so broad and sudden that Elizabeth felt a heat rising in
her cheeks. Her question had no doubt been a little naïve.

But the young man hurried on, composing his face quickly.

"Some of them, of course, are tourists like yourselves. But I do know a few of them. That man
in the clerical coat, and the round collar, is Father Henty--a Jesuit well known in Winnipeg--a
great man among the Catholics here."

"But a disappointed one," said Lady Merton.

The Canadian looked surprised. Elizabeth, proud of her knowledge, went on:

"Isn't it true the Catholics hoped to conquer the Northwest--and so--with Quebec--to govern
you all? And now the English and American immigration has spoilt all their chances--poor things!"

"That's about it. Did they tell you that in Toronto?"

Elizabeth stiffened. The slight persistent tone of mockery in the young man's voice was beginning
to offend her.

"And the others?" she said, without noticing his question.

It was the Canadian's turn to redden. He changed his tone.

"--The man next him is a professor at the Manitoba University. The gentleman in the brown suit
is going to Vancouver to look after some big lumber leases he took out last year. And that
little man in the Panama hat has been keeping us all alive. He's been prospecting for silver
in New Ontario--thinks he's going to make his fortune in a week."

"Oh, but that will do exactly for my brother!" cried Elizabeth, delighted. "Please introduce us."

And hurrying back into the car she burst upon the discontented gentleman within. Philip, who
was just about to sally forth into the damp, against the entreaties of his servant, and take
his turn at shying stones at a bottle on the line, was appeased by her report, and was soon
seated, talking toy speculation, with a bronzed and brawny person, who watched the young Englishman,
as they chatted, out of a pair of humorous eyes. Philip believed himself a great financier,
but was not in truth either very shrewd or very daring, and his various coups or losses generally
left his exchequer at the end of the year pretty much what it had been the year before. But
the stranger, who seemed to have staked out claims at one time or another, across the whole
face of the continent, from Klondyke to Nova Scotia, kept up a mining talk that held him enthralled;
and Elizabeth breathed freely.

She returned to the platform. The scene was triste, but the rain had for the moment stopped.
She hailed an official passing by, and asked if there was any chance of their soon going on.
The man smiled and shook his head.

Her Canadian acquaintance, who was standing near, came up to the car as he heard her question.

"I have just seen a divisional superintendent. We may get on about nine o'clock to-night."

"And it is now eleven o'clock in the morning," sighed Lady Merton. "Well!--I think a little
exercise would be a good thing."

And she descended the steps of the car. The Canadian hesitated.

"Would you allow me to walk with you?" he said, with formality. "I might perhaps be able to
tell you a few things. I belong to the railway."

"I shall be greatly obliged," said Elizabeth, cordially. "Do you mean that you are an official?"

"I am an engineer--in charge of some construction work in the Rockies."

Lady Merton's face brightened.

"Indeed! I think that must be one of the most interesting things in the world to be."

The Canadian's eyebrows lifted a little.

"I don't know that I ever thought of it like that," he said, half smiling. "It's good work--but
I've done things a good deal livelier in my time."

"You've not always been an engineer?"

"Very few people are always 'anything' in Canada," he said, laughing. "It's like the States.
One tries a lot of things. Oh, I was trained as an engineer--at Montreal. But directly I had
finished with that I went off to Klondyke. I made a bit of money--came back--and lost it all,
in a milling business--over there"--he pointed eastwards--"on the Lake of the Woods. My partner
cheated me. Then I went exploring to the north, and took a Government job at the same time--paying
treaty money to the Indians. Then, five years ago, I got work for the C.P.R. But I shall cut
it before long. I've saved some money again. I shall take up land, and go into politics."

"Politics?" repeated Elizabeth, wishing she might some day know what politics meant in Canada.
"You're not married?" she added pleasantly.

"I am not married."

"And may I ask your name?"

His name, it seemed, was George Anderson, and presently as they walked up and down he became
somewhat communicative about himself, though always within the limits, as it seemed to her,
of a natural dignity, which developed indeed as their acquaintance progressed. He told her
tales, especially, of his Indian journeys through the wilds about the Athabasca and Mackenzie
rivers, in search of remote Indian settlements--that the word of England to the red man might
be kept; and his graphic talk called up before her the vision of a northern wilderness, even
wilder and remoter than that she had just passed through, where yet the earth teemed with lakes
and timber and trout-bearing streams, and where--"we shall grow corn some day," as he presently
informed her. "In twenty years they will have developed seed that will ripen three weeks earlier
than wheat does now in Manitoba. Then we shall settle that country--right away!--to the far
north." His tone stirred and deepened. A little while before, it had seemed to her that her
tourist enthusiasm amused him. Yet by flashes, she began to feel in him something, beside which
her own raptures fell silent. Had she, after all, hit upon a man--a practical man--who was
yet conscious of the romance of Canada?

Presently she asked him if there was no one dependent on him--no mother?--or sisters?

"I have two brothers--in the Government service at Ottawa. I had four sisters."

"Are they married?"

"They are dead," he said, slowly. "They and my mother were burnt to death."

She exclaimed. Her brown eyes turned upon him--all sudden horror and compassion.

"It was a farmhouse where we were living--and it took fire. Mother and sisters had no time
to escape. It was early morning. I was a boy of eighteen, and was out on the farm doing my
chores. When I saw smoke and came back, the house was a burning mass, and--it was all over."

"Where was your father?"

"My father is dead."

"But he was there--at the time of the fire?"

"Yes. He was there."

He had suddenly ceased to be communicative, and she instinctively asked no more questions,
except as to the cause of the conflagration.

"Probably an explosion of coal-oil. It was sometimes used to light the fire with in the morning."

"How very, very terrible!" she said gently, after a moment, as though she felt it. "Did you
stay on at the farm?"

"I brought up my two brothers. They were on a visit to some neighbours at the time of the fire.
We stayed on three years."

"With your father?"

"No; we three alone."

She felt vaguely puzzled; but before she could turn to another subject, he had added--

"There was nothing else for us to do. We had no money and no relations--nothing but the land.
So we had to work it--and we managed. But after three years we'd saved a little money, and
we wanted to get a bit more education. So we sold the land and moved up to Montreal."

"How old were the brothers when you took on the farm?"

"Thirteen--and fifteen."

"Wonderful!" she exclaimed. "You must be proud."

He laughed out.

"Why, that kind of thing's done every day in this country! You can't idle in Canada."

They had turned back towards the train. In the doorway of the car sat Philip Gaddesden lounging
and smoking, enveloped in a fur coat, his knees covered with a magnificent fur rug. A whisky
and soda had just been placed at his right hand. Elizabeth thought--"He said that because he
had seen Philip." But when she looked at him, she withdrew her supposition. His eyes were not
on the car, and he was evidently thinking of something else.

"I hope your brother will take no harm," he said to her, as they approached the car. "Can I
be of any service to you in Winnipeg?"

"Oh, thank you. We have some introductions--"

"Of course. But if I can--let me know."

An official came along the line, with a packet in his hand. At sight of Elizabeth he stopped
and raised his hat.

"Am I speaking to Lady Merton? I have some letters here, that have been waiting for you at
Winnipeg, and they've sent them out to you."

He placed the packet in her hand. The Canadian moved away, but not before Elizabeth had seen
again the veiled amusement in his eyes. It seemed to him comic, no doubt, that the idlers of
the world should be so royally treated. But after all--she drew herself up--her father had
been no idler.

She hastened to her brother; and they fell upon their letters.

"Oh, Philip!"--she said presently, looking up--"Philip! Arthur Delaine meets us at Winnipeg."

"Does he? Does he?" repeated the young man, laughing. "I say, Lisa!--"

Elizabeth took no notice of her brother's teasing tone. Nor did her voice, as she proceeded
to read him the letter she held in her hand, throw any light upon her own feelings with regard
to it.

