D.W.]

IN THE FIRE OF THE FORGE

A ROMANCE OF OLD NUREMBERG

By Georg Ebers

Volume 8.

CHAPTER XV.

Day followed day, a week elapsed, and no message had reached Schweinau from Heinz Schorlin
or Katterle.

The magistrate had learned that the Siebenburg brothers, with the robber knights who had joined
them, were obstinately defending their castles and making it difficult for Heinz Schorlin to
perform his task.  The day before news had come that the Absbach's strong mountain fortress
had fallen; that the allied knights, in a sortie which merged into a miniature battle, had
been defeated, and the Siebenburgs could not hold out much longer; but in the stress of his
duties the knight seemed to have forgotten to make the slightest effort in behalf of his faithful
servant.  At least the protonotary Gottlieb, a friend of Herr Berthold, through whose hands
passed all letters addressed to the Emperor, positively assured them that, though plenty of
military reports had arrived, in not a single one had the young commander mentioned his servant
even by a word.  He, the protonotary, had taken advantage of a favourable hour to urge his
royal master, as a reward for Biberli's rare fidelity, to protect him from further persecution
by the citizens of Nuremberg; but the Emperor Rudolph did not even allow him to finish, because,
as a matter of principle, he refrained from interference in matters whose settlement rightfully
pertained to the Honourable Council.

When soon after Herr Pfinzing availed himself of a report which he had to deliver to the Emperor
to intercede himself for the valiant fellow, the Hapsburg, with the ruler's strong memory,
recalled the protonotary's plea and referred Herr Berthold to the answer the former had received,
remarking, less graciously than usual, that the imperial magistrate ought to know that he would
be the last to assail the privileges which he had himself bestowed upon the city.

Finally even Burgrave Frederick, whose sympathy had been enlisted in Biberli's behalf by Herr
Berthold, fared no better.

His interests were often opposed to those of the Council and, kindly as was his disposition,
disputes concerning many questions of law were constantly occurring between him and the Honourables.
When he began to persuade the Emperor to prevent by a pardon the cruelty which the Council
intended to practise upon a servant of Sir Heinz Schorlin, who was doing such good service
in the field, the sovereign told even him, his friend and brother-in-law, who had toiled so
energetically to secure him the crown, that he would not interfere, though it were in behalf
of a beloved brother, with the decrees of the Council, and the noble petitioner was silenced
by the reasons which he gave.  The Burgrave deemed the Emperor's desire to maintain the Honourables'
willingness to grant the large loan he intended to ask to fill his empty treasury still more
weighty than those with which he had repulsed Herr Pfinzing.

On the other hand, the pardon granted to Ernst Ortlieb and Wolff Eysvogel could only tend to
increase the good will of the Council.  The former was given at once, the latter only conditionally
after the First Losunger of the city, with several other Honourables, had recommended it. 
The Emperor thought it advisable to defer this act of clemency.  A violation of the peace of
the country committed under his own eyes ought not to be pardoned during his stay in the place
where the bloody deed was committed.  It would have cast a doubt upon the serious intent of
the important measure which threatened with the severest punishment any attempt upon the lives
and property of others.

So long as the Emperor held his court at Nuremberg, Wolff, against whom no accuser had yet
appeared, must remain concealed.  When the sovereign had left the city he might again mingle
with his fellow-citizens.  An imperial letter alluding to the gratitude which Rudolph owed
to the soldiers of Marchfield, to whose band the evildoer belonged, and the whole good city
of Nuremberg for the hospitable reception tendered to him and his household, should shield
from punishment the young patrician who had only drawn his sword in self-defence, and fulfil
the petition of the Council for Wolff Eysvogel's restoration to the rights which he had forfeited.

The news of this promise gave Els the first happy hour after long days of discomfort and the
most arduous mental conflict.  True, the measures adopted by her friends seemed to have guarded
her from the attacks of the old Countess Rotterbach; but Fran Rosalinde, since she had been
allowed more freedom to move about than her mother, who had been confined to the upper story,
felt like a boat drifting rudderless down the stream.  She needed guidance and, as Els now
ruled the house, asked direction from her for even the most simple matters.  Clinging to her
like a child deserted by its nurse, she told her the most hostile and spiteful remarks which
the countess never failed to make whenever it suited her daughter to bear her company.  During
the last few days the old lady had again won Rosalinde over to her side, and in consequence
an enmity towards Els had sprung up, which was often very spiteful in its manifestations, and
was the more difficult to bear, the more rigidly her position as daughter of the house forbade
energetic resistance.

But most painful of all to the volunteer nurse was the sick man's manner; for though Herr Casper
rarely regained perfect consciousness, he showed his unfriendly disposition often enough by
glances, gestures, and words stammered with painful effort.

Yet the brave girl's patience seemed inexhaustible, and she resolutely performed even the most
arduous tasks imposed by nursing the sufferer. Nay, the thought that Wolff owed his life to
him aided her always to be kind to her father-in-law, no matter how much he wounded her, and
to tend him no less carefully than she had formerly cared for her invalid mother.

So she had held out valiantly until, at the end of a long, torturing week, something occurred
which destroyed her courage.  On returning from an errand in the city, she was received at
the door of the sick-room by her future mother-in-law with the statement that she would take
charge of her husband herself, and no longer allow the intruder to keep her from the place
which belonged to her alone.  The old countess's power of persuasion had strengthened her courage,
and the unwonted energy of the weak, more than yielding woman, exerted so startling and at
the same time disheartening an effect upon the wearied, tortured young creature that she attempted
no resistance.  The entreaties of the leech and kind Herr Teufel, however, induced her to persist
a short time longer.

But when, soon after, the same incident occurred a second time, it seemed impossible to remain
in their house even another day.

Without opposing her lover's mother, she retired to her chamber and, weeping silently, spite
of the earnest entreaties of the Sister of Charity, packed the few articles she had brought
with her and prepared to leave the post maintained with so much difficulty.  To be again with
Eva under the protection of her uncle and aunt now seemed the highest goal of her longing.
She did not wish to go home; for after his liberation from the tower her father had had a long
conversation with Wolff and old Berthold Vorchtel, and then, at the desire of the Council,
had ridden to Augsburg and Ulm to arrange the affairs of the Eysvogel firm.  He had felt that
he could be spared by his family, knowing that his younger daughter was safe at Schweinau,
and having heard that Wolff's pardon would not be long delayed.

Eva, too, had experienced toilsome days and many an anxious night. It was in this region, says the observer,
that the Germans, after the battle of the Marne, look up a position on a summit commanding
the surrounding countryside. This hill was Height 627, which is known as Fontenelle.

On June 22, after severe losses, the enemy succeeded in occupying Fontenelle, says the observer.
Although we counter-attacked vigorously, taking 142 prisoners, the enemy held the summit. General
Van Kuderzen, in a report dated July 3, said that after a careful inspection of the German works
and trenches he finally believed that the hill had been transformed into an impregnable fortress,
and that its capture would necessitate tremendous losses.

On July 8 all necessary preparations for the attack had been completed.

The same day, at nightfall, three columns, aided by a remarkably accurate artillery fire, took
a portion of the enemy's trenches. In the center we also attacked, forcing the enemy to the
west of Launois in ten minutes. The attack on the left proceeded more slowly, but, aided by
gathering darkness, we took possession of the northwestern portion of the hill.

At daybreak not only the whole of the summit had been retaken, but
a majority of the German defenses as far as the road from Launois
to Moyen-Moutier.

Thanks to our artillery, all preparations for counter-attacks were immediately stopped.

During the battles of July 8 and 9 we took 881 prisoners, including 21 officers. When questioned
the prisoners gave great praise to our excellent artillery marksmanship, saying: "We did not
believe there could be such a hell of fire."

BETWEEN BETHUNE AND ARRAS

An Associated Press dispatch dated on the
heights of Notre Dame de Lorette, near Arras, July 10, gave the following
account of the 120 days' fight ended successfully by the use of high
explosives:

After fighting 120 days for the hill country between
Bethune and Arras, the French forces are in possession of all the
eminences looking out upon the plain of Flanders.

Lille, Douai, and Chambrai all are visible from here.

Every position along the broad national road between Arras and Bethune has been won except Souchez,
and last night another quarter mile of trenches in the Souchez web
was torn away.

The attack was made under parachute rocket lights, the French burning bluish white and the Germans
greenish white, covering the scene of the desperate conflict with a ghastly glow.

The most desperate fighting has been along the short ten-mile front from Arras to Aix-Noulette,
which began March 9 with the taking of a few hundred yards of trenches on the watershed of
Notre Dame de Lorette, where there are the ruins of an old Merovingian military road. Every
day since then some section of the German trenches has been taken, lost, or retaken.

Each side has been employing formidable artillery both of small and heavy calibre, the French
guns being somewhat more numerous and served with unlimited quantities of high explosive shells.

A
correspondent of The Associated Press today went through five or six miles of the trenches formerly
held by the Germans and reconstructed by the French, who now have abandoned them to move forward.
Upward of 100,000 Germans have fallen or been captured in these trenches,
according to the French official count, since the second week of March.

The French losses, the correspondent was confidentially informed, while serious, have been
much smaller than those of the Germans. There are thickets of little crosses made of twigs tied
together, marking the graves between the trenches. Some of these graves have been torn up by
the shell fire.

Almost every square yard of this region is marked by miniature craters caused by exploding shells.
Spots where shells penetrated the earth without exploding are indicated by signs bearing the words
"Live Shell."

One line of the German works was just below the summit of a steep slope which, from the nature
of the ground, could not be shelled without danger to the French position a little higher up.
The Germans were sheltered in dugouts under the hillside, and their French assailants, sliding
or jumping down into the trenches, were shot or bayoneted from caves. The line was finally
taken by tossing grenades by the basketful into the trenches until most of the defenders in
the concaved shelters were killed or wounded. Every curve or angle in the miles of labyrinthine
cuttings has its story of tragedy and heroism.

In the party which went over this ground and into the firing trenches
within calling distance of the German lines with The Associated Press
correspondent were Owen Johnson, Arnold Bennett, Walter Hale and George
H. Mair, the last representing the British Foreign Office.

As they approached the lines one shell from a four-inch gun burst within twenty-five yards
of them, while others exploded only thirty or forty yards away. This incident seemed greatly to amuse
the soldiers in the trenches, who laughed heartily at the embarrassment of the civilians.

The visitors were invited by the soldiers into their shelters, which are dry caves with narrow
entrances and with clay floors covered with matting or sacking and faintly illuminated by the
light which filters in from the entrance or by bits of candle on the inside. Men who had been on duty
throughout the night were sleeping in these caves.

The men on the firing line express the utmost confidence that what was done yesterday and this
morning they can keep on doing until the war has been won. They never hear the vague, unverified reports
circulated in Paris, sometimes of tremendous and impossible victories, sometimes sinister hints
of disaster. They know what they have done since March 9, when they were ordered to act on this
part of the Aisne. They talk as a matter of course of another winter campaign, because, they
say, it will take another year to break the German power.

ARRAS' GRASS-GROWN STREETS

An Associated Press dispatch of July 9 from Arras via Paris reads:

Shells
have been dropping into Arras at intervals today, as they have been
for 250 days.

Each twenty-four hours a few more buildings crumple or burn, although the Fire Department still
is efficient in extinguishing flames.

One thousand civilians out of a former population of 35,000 are still here. There were 4,000 in
December when The Associated Press correspondent first visited the town. A few scores of the
inhabitants have been killed or wounded, while the others have been
persuaded by the military authorities to go away.

None of those remaining thinks of sleeping anywhere except in a cellar. The rest of their time
they spend out of doors, when no shells are falling.

The streets, which formerly were filled with traffic, are now grass-grown. Two postmen deliver the
mail, which comes regularly once a day by military post.

Several shops located underground are open for business. Displayed on cellar doors are baskets
of fresh vegetables, which can be bought at about the same prices as in Paris. Inside the
principal grocery are many standard brands of American, French, and British canned goods.

About half the outer walls of the beautiful City Hall are still standing, but there remains
only one jagged corner of the imposing belfry which once adorned the great square of Arras.
A citizen occupying a cellar on the other side of the square counted the shells which struck
the belfry, and says it took 360 to shatter the beautiful bit of architecture.

ARRAS CATHEDRAL

An Associated Press dispatch from Paris dated July 13 reports:

Since June 27 the Germans have systematically bombarded various parts of Arras with projectiles
of all calibres, says an official communication given out today by the French War Department.

On
June 27 the bombardment was extremely violent and was executed by six-inch, eight-inch and seventeen-inch
guns, between the hours of 8 A.M. and 2 P.M., and between 6 P.M. and 7:30 P.M. The fire was
directed particularly at the citadel and neighboring streets.

On July 3, toward 6:30 o'clock in the evening, a further bombardment took place in which incendiary
shells were used, and they started a most violent fire.

On July 5 at 4:30 P.M., the statement continues, the enemy recommenced its bombardment of the
city, concentrating its fire upon the environs of the cathedral,
more especially upon St. Vaast, the ancient Bishop's palace, which
had been transformed into a museum.

Incendiary shells set the building on fire, and the use of fuse shells from three-inch and four-inch
guns prevented our organizing to combat the fire, which soon assumed great proportions and completely
destroyed the palace. During the night there was an intermittent bombardment.

On July 6, about 7 A.M., shells fell on the Cathedral, the roof of which took fire, and, despite
the efforts of our troops, was entirely consumed, as were the Cathedral organs.

The departmental archives, which had been deposited in the Palace of St. Vaast, had been placed
in the cellar of the palace before the bombardment and were saved.

The sacred ornaments and part of the furnishings in the Cathedral were removed.

IN THE FECHT VALLEY

The French official "Eyewitness" reported on July 15 the French victory in the battle of Metzeral
in upper Alsace, as follows:

The operations by which our troops captured the towns of Metzeral and Sondernach, which are situated
in the Fecht Valley, have been remarkable because of the means employed and the results obtained,
and as the Alpine troops have been forced to surmount all possible difficulties.

Metzeral, the eyewitness explains, is situated in a valley surrounded by high hills, the sides
of which dropped precipitously down to the Fecht region. On these hills was stationed artillery,
to the rear of which, within easy access, large reinforcements could be massed and brought
to the front when needed. He continued:

From prisoners we learned that the Germans considered their position impregnable. It was surrounded
by several lines of trenches and barbed wire entanglements. We made long preparations for the
attack, concentrating troops and bringing supplies up the Vosges through winding, narrow,
and hastily constructed roads, twenty miles in length. New trenches were dug, mines laid, and various
other details attended to.

On June 15, after prolonged and heavy artillery fire on both sides of the valley, the attack
was begun against Hill 830, on which we captured trenches situated on the slopes, taking two companies
prisoners.

A portion of the trenches on Braunkopf also fell into our hands.

At Eichwald we gained less, as here the German fortifications were strongest. At Anlass, also, although
many grenades were thrown, the fortifications were of such a character
as to make it impossible to break through.

On the day following the attack was resumed, with the purpose of gaining us all the positions
on Braunkopf and Hill 830.

We began at this point to encircle Eichwald, as the road to Metzeral now lay open. The Germans remained
at Anlass, where our attack always stopped, and with their fire across the valley on Braunkopf
made it impossible for us to proceed.

All our efforts were now concentrated on Anlass. We attacked on June 18 and 19, and on the 20th the
German positions fell into our hands.

Our troops continued on down the valley, capturing 6 officers, 11
non-commissioned officers, and 140 men.

An attack directed at the same time against Winterhagel, situated
to the south of Anlass, was marked by a sad incident.

A small group of chasseurs who succeeded in breaking through the barbed-wire entanglements
found themselves under a crossfire of quick-firers. The men tried to construct a shelter with
the tools they carried. The Germans cried "Surrender!" Not one man answered. The quick-firers
accomplished their work, and the men were found lying with faces
to the ground, as if they had dropped when drawn up in line for parade.

Our

attacks were now centred on Metzeral. The factory at Steinbruck was taken on the night of June
17, and a battalion entered Altenkof the day following. On June 21 our men came down from Braunkopf,
surrounded the village on the north, and took the railway station. The Germans in Metzeral,
threatened with capture, placed quick-firers in several houses to
protect their retreat and prepared to set the place on fire.

Our artillery quickly demolished the houses in which German artillery had been placed, and our
troops entered the flaming streets from the north and west. The village was burned.

On the two following nights, while our troops harassed the retreating enemy, Winterhagel and Sondernach
fell into our hands and our line was established along the length
of the valley of the Fecht as far as Sondernach.

The action resulted in the capture of 20 officers, 53 non-commissioned officers, and 638 men.

The
Crown Prince in the Argonne

An Associated Press dispatch from Paris stated on June 30 that the German attempt to divert the attention
of the French from the latter's offensive in the region north of Arras has been productive of
gains in the Argonne, where a three-days' bombardment of the French trenches was followed
by the capture of French positions near Bagatelle. Elsewhere, particularly on the Yser, to
the north of Arras, north of Verdun and near Metzeral in Alsace, there have been artillery
exchanges without notable results.

The dispatch recorded the following French official communication, issued June 30:

In the Argonne, after a bombardment lasting three days, the Germans attacked our positions on the road
between Binarville and Le Four de Paris, but were twice repulsed. They succeeded only in their
third attack in gaining a foothold in some parts of our lines near Bagatelle, and they were
everywhere else thrown back after a violent engagement.

There has been a bombardment on the front north of Verdun, in the Bois d'Ailly, as well as
in the region of Metzeral.

On July 4 Berlin's official report said:

In the Argonne the Germans continue their offensive. Our booty has increased considerably,
and amounted on July 1 and 2 to 2,556 prisoners--among them 37 officers--25 machine guns, 72
mine throwers, and one revolver gun.

It was reported from London on July 14 that the attack of the German Crown Prince's army in the
Argonne, having for its objective the investment of the French forts of the Verdun area, had
resulted in an advance of two-thirds of a mile and the capture of
2,581 prisoners and several pieces of artillery, according to German
official reports.

A communique issued in Paris, while admitting the German success, asserts that nowhere did the assailants
gain more than a quarter of a mile and announces that the Crown Prince's
offensive had been definitely checked.

Following is the text of the German official statement of July 14:

In
the Argonne a German attack resulted in complete success northeast
of Vienne-le-Château. Our troops took by storm the enemy positions
in the hills extending over a width of three kilometers (about a mile
and three-quarters) and a depth of one kilometer. Hill No. 285, La
Fille Morte, is in our possession. Two thousand five hundred and eighty-one
uninjured prisoners, including fifty-one officers, fell into our hands.
In addition, 300 wounded were taken under our care. Two field cannon,
two revolver cannon, six machine guns, and a large quantity of tools
were captured. Our troops advanced as far as the positions of the
French artillery and rendered eight cannon useless. These are now
standing between the French and German lines.

The official statement
issued at Berlin on July 15 says:

The French made repeated attempts
yesterday, which lasted into the night, to recapture the positions
we took from them in the Forest of Argonne. Notwithstanding the employment
of large quantities of ammunition and of strong forces recently brought
up, all their attacks broke down. In many places there was bitter
fighting with hand grenades and encounters at close quarters.

The
enemy paid for his unsuccessful efforts with extraordinarily heavy
losses. The number of French prisoners has been increased to 68 officers
and 3,688 men.

The success of our troops was all the more remarkable
as, according to corresponding statements made by prisoners, the French
had prepared for a great attack against our positions on the Argonne
front on July 14, their national festival day.

The text of the German
official statement published July 16 is as follows:

French attacks
delivered yesterday and the day before to the west of the Argonne
Forest failed in the face of the North German Landwehr, who inflicted
large and sanguinary losses on the enemy in bitter hand-to-hand fighting.
We captured 462 prisoners.

Since June 20 our troops have fought continually
in the Argonne and to the west of that forest, with the exception
of short interruptions. In addition to the gain in territory and booty
in materials a total of 116 officers and 7,009 French prisoners has
been reached up to the present.

On our front which joins the Argonne
to the east, lively artillery battles are in progress. Attacks made
by the enemy in this region were repulsed without difficulty.

In
a dispatch from Berlin, dated July 16, by Wireless to Sayville, N.Y.,
it is reported that in the news items given out by the Overseas News
Agency was the following:

German military tacticians point out that
the German victory in the Forest of Argonne, in France, is of special
importance, as it shows that the connections toward Western France
are gradually being cut.

The large amount of war materials captured
by the Germans in the last battle illustrates the importance attributed
to the positions by the French commanders. The French, however, were
unable to resist the terrific offensive of the Crown Prince's army.

Gallipoli's
Shambles

Allied Operations Around the Turks' Fortress of Achi Baba

The
subjoined narratives, official and semi-official, show clearly the
formidable nature of the Allies' land undertaking in the attempt to
force the passage of the Dardanelles. It will be noted that Compton
Mackenzie, the novelist, has temporarily replaced E. Ashmead-Bartlett
as the British press "eyewitness" on the peninsula, and that General
Sir Ian Hamilton's reports have for the first time begun to appear.
A notable sketch of his career appears in the Atlantic Monthly for
July by the pen of Alfred G. Gardiner. A poet and a man of romantic
ancestry and taste, experienced in commands in India, in Egypt, and
in South Africa, General Hamilton was called by the late Lord Roberts
the ablest commander in the field.

When she returned from the Minorite's room to Biberli's the lovers were no longer alone.  The
fresh, pleasant face of a vigorous woman, who had already visited the sufferer several times,
greeted her beside his couch.

When, in the exchange of salutations, her eyes met Eva's the latter suddenly found the plan
of action she had vainly sought.  Gertrude of Berne could help her take the chance which, in
the last extremity, she meant to risk, for she was the wife of the Swiss warder in the Burgrave's
castle.  It certainly would not be difficult for her to procure her an interview with the Burgravine
Elizabeth.  If the noble lady could not aid herself, she could--her cheeks paled at the thought,
yet she resolutely clung to it--present her to her brother, the Emperor.

When Eva, in a low tone, told Frau Gertrude what she hoped to accomplish at the castle, she
learned that the Emperor had ridden with the Archduchess Agnes and a numerous train to the
imperial forest, to show his Bohemian daughter-in-law the beekeeper's hives, and would scarcely
return before sunset; but the Burgravine had remained at home on account of a slight illness.

Nevertheless Eva wished to go to the castle, and, whatever reception the noble lady bestowed
upon her, she would return to Schweinau as soon as possible.  Father Benedictus was so ill
that she could not remain away from him long.

If the Burgravine could do nothing for Biberli, she would undertake the risk which made her
tremble, because it compelled her, the young girl, to appear alone at the court with all its
watchful eyes and sharp tongues. She would go to the fortress to beseech the Emperor herself
for pardon.

She could act with entire freedom to-day, for her uncle had ridden to the city and, Frau Gertrude
said, was one of the party who accompanied the Emperor to the beekeeper's, whilst her aunt
had just gone to Nuremberg to see Els, who had besought her, in a despairing letter, to let
her come to Schweinau, for her power of endurance was exhausted.

How gladly Eva would have accompanied her aunt to her sister to exhort her to take courage!
What a strange transformation of affairs!  Ever since she could think Els had sustained her
by her superior strength and perseverance.  Now she was to be the stronger, and teach her to
exercise patience.

She thought she had gained the right to do so.  Whilst Eva was still explaining her plan to
Frau Gertrude, she herself perceived that she had taken no account of time.

It was nearly noon, and if she ordered a sedan-chair to convey her to the city and back again
to Schweinau, it would be too late to approach the Emperor as a petitioner.  She could fulfil
her design only by riding; but the warder's wife reminded her that it would be contrary to
custom--nay, scarcely possible--to appear before the Emperor, or even his sister, in a riding
habit.

But the young girl speedily found a way to fulfil her ardent wish to aid. On her swift palfrey,
which her uncle had sent to Schweinau long before that she might refresh herself, after her
arduous duties, by a ride, she would go to the city, stop at her own home, and have her new
expensive mourning clothes taken to the castle.  The only doubt was whether she could change
her garments in the quarters of the Swiss, and whether Frau Gertrude would help her do so.

The latter gladly assented.  There was no lack of room in her apartments, nor did Frau Gertrude,
who had served the Burgravine as waiting maid many years before her marriage, lack either skill
or good will.

So she went directly home on her mule; but Eva, after promising her patients to return soon,
hastened to her uncle's residence.

There she mounted the palfrey and reached the city gate a long time before the Swiss.  The
clothes she needed were soon found in the Ortlieb mansion, and she was then carried in a sedan-chair
to the castle with her wardrobe, whilst the groom led her palfrey after her.  Countess Cordula
was not at home; she, too, had ridden to the forest with the Emperor.

The Burgravine Elizabeth willingly consented to receive the charming child whose fate had awakened
her warm interest.  She had just been hearing the best and most beautiful things about Eva,
for the leech Otto had been called to visit her in her attack of illness, and the old man was
overflowing with praises of both sisters.  He indignantly mentioned the vile calumnies with
which Heinz Schorlin's name was associated, and which base slander had fixed upon the innocent
girls whose pure morality he would guarantee.

The great lady, who probably remembered having directed Heinz's attention to Eva at the dance,
understood very clearly that they could not fail to attract each other.  Of all the knights
in her imperial brother's train, none seemed to the Burgravine more worthy of her favour than
her gay young countryman, whose mother had been one of the friends of her youth. She would
gladly have rendered him a service and, in this case, not only for his own sake but still more
on account of the rare fidelity of his servant, who was also a native of her beloved Swiss
mountains.  Yet, notwithstanding all this, it seemed impossible to bring this matter again
before the Emperor.  She knew her husband, and after the rebuff he had received on account
of the tortured man he would be angry if she should plead his cause with her royal brother.

But her kind heart, and the regard which both Eva and Heinz Schorlin had inspired, strengthened
her desire to aid, as far as lay in her power, the brave maiden who urged her suit with such
honest warmth, and the petitioner's avowal of her intention, as a last resort, of appealing
to the Emperor in person showed her how to convert her kind wishes into deeds.

Let Eva's youth and beauty try to persuade the Emperor to an act of clemency which he had refused
to wisdom and power.

After supper her brother received various guests, and she could present the daughter of a Nuremberg
patrician whom he already knew, and whose rare charms had attracted his notice.

Though she had been compelled to forego the ride to the forest, she was well enough to appear
at supper in the Emperor's residence, which was close to her own castle.  When the meal was
over she would take Eva herself to her royal brother.

She told her this, and the gratitude which she received was so warm and earnest that it touched
her heart, and as she bade the beautiful, brave child farewell she clasped her in her arms
and kissed her.

CHAPTER XVI.

Encouraged and hopeful, Eva again mounted her palfrey, and urged the swift animal outside the
city to so rapid a pace that the old groom on his well-fed bay was left far behind.  But the
change of dress, the waiting, and the numerous questions asked by the Burgravine had consumed
so much time that the poplars were already casting long shadows when she dismounted before
the hospital.

Sister Hildegard received her with an embarrassment by no means usual, but which Eva thought
natural when the former told her that the dying Father Benedictus had asked for her impatiently.
The widow was doing well, and Biberli would hardly need her; for the wife of a Swabian knight
in whose service he had formerly been was sitting by his couch with her young daughter, and
their visit seemed to please him.

Eva remarked in surprise that she thought the sick man had never served any one except the
Schurlins, but she was in too much haste for further questions, and entered the room where
Biberli lay.

Her face was flushed by the rapid ride; her thick, fair hair, which usually fell loosely on
her shoulders, had been hastily braided before she mounted her horse, but the long, heavy braids
had become unfastened on the way, and now hung in tresses round her face and pliant figure.

She waved her hand gaily from the threshold to the patient for whom she had done and dared
so much; but ere approaching his couch she modestly saluted the stately matron who was with
Biberli, and nodded a pleasant welcome to her daughter, whose pretty, frank face attracted
her.  After the Swabians had cordially returned her greeting, she briefly excused herself,
as an urgent duty would not permit her to yield to her desire to remain with them.

Lastly, she addressed a few hasty questions to the squire about his health, kissed little Walpurga,
who had nestled to her side, bade her tell her another that she would come to her later, and
entered the next room.

"Well?" Biberli asked his visitors eagerly, after the door had closed behind her.

"Oh, how beautiful she is!" cried the younger lady quickly, but her mother's voice trembled
with deep emotion as she answered: "How I objected to my son's marriage with the daughter of
a city family!  Nay, I intended to cast all the weight of my maternal influence between Heinz
and the Nuremberg maiden.  Yet you did not say too much, my friend, and what your praise began
Eva's own appearance has finished.  She will be welcome to me as a daughter.  I have scarcely
ever seen anything more lovely.  That she is devout and charitable and, moreover, has a clear
intellect and resolute energy, can be plainly perceived in spite of the few minutes which she
could spare us.  If Heaven would really suffer our Heinz to win the heart of this rare creature----"

"Every fibre of it is his already," interrupted Biberli.  "The rub-- pardon me, noble lady!--is
somewhere else.  Whether he--whether Heinz can be induced to renounce the thought of the monastery,
is the question."

He sighed faintly as he gazed into the still beautiful, strong, and yet kindly face of the
Lady Wendula Schorlin, Sir Heinz's mother, for she was the older visitor.

"We ought not to doubt that," replied the matron firmly.  "As the last of his ancient race,
it is his duty to provide for its continuance, not solely for his own salvation.  He was always
a dutiful son."

"Yet," replied Biberli thoughtfully, "'Away with those who gave us life!' was the exhortation
of Father Benedictus in the next room.  'Away with the service of sovereign and woman!' he
cried to our knight.  'Away with everything that stands in the way of your own salvation!'
And," Biberli added, "St. Francis was not the first to devise that.  Our Lord and Saviour commanded
His disciples to leave father and mother and to follow Him."

"Who will prevent his walking in the paths of Jesus Christ?" replied the Lady Wendula?  "Yet,
though he follows His footsteps, he must and can do so as a scion of a noble race, as a knight
and the brave soldier and true servant of his Emperor, which he is, as a good son and, God
willing, as a husband and father.  He is sure of my blessing if he wields his sword as a champion
of his holy faith.  When my two daughters took the veil I submissively yielded.  They can pray
for heavenly bliss for their brother and ourselves.  My only son, the last Schorlin, I neither
can nor will permit to renounce the world, in which he has tasks to perform which God Himself
assigned him by his birth."

"And how could Heinz part from this angel," cried Maria--to whom, next to her mother, her brother
was the dearest person on earth--"if he is really sure of her love!"

She herself had not yet opened her heart to love.  To wander through forest and field with
the aged head of her family, assist her mother in housekeeping, and nurse the sick poor in
the village, had hitherto been the joy and duty of her life.  Gaily, often with a song upon
her lips, she had carelessly seen one day follow another until Schorlin Castle was besieged
and destroyed, and her dear uncle, the Knight Ramsweg, was slain in the defence of the fortress
confided to his care.  Then she and her mother were taken to the convent at Constance.  Both
remained there in perfect freedom, as welcome guests of the nuns, until the mounted courier
brought a letter from the Knight Maier of Silenen, her cousin, who wrote from Nuremberg that
Heinz, like his sisters, intended to renounce the world.

Lady Schorlin set out at once, and with an anxious heart rode to Nuremberg with her daughter
as fast as possible.

They had arrived a few hours before and gone to their cousin from Silenen.  From him the Lady
Wendula learned what her maternal love desired to know.  Biberli's fate brought her, after
a brief rest, to the hospital, and how it comforted the faithful fellow's heart to see the
noble lady who had confided his master to his care, and in whose house the T and St had been
embroidered on his long coat and cap!

Lady Wendula had remembered these letters, and when she spoke of them he replied that since
he had partially verified what the T and St had announced to people concerning his character,
and to which the letters had themselves incited him, he no longer needed them.

Then he lapsed into silence, and at last, as the result of his meditations, told his mistress
that there was something unusual about his insignificant self, because he earnestly desired
to practise the virtues whose possession he claimed before the eyes of the people.  He had
usually found the worst wine in the taverns with showy signs, and when the Lady Wendula's daughter
had embroidered those letters on the cloth for him, what he furnished the guests was also of
very doubtful quality. On his sick bed he had been obliged to place no curb upon his proneness
to reflection, and in doing so had discovered that there was no virtue which can be owned like
a house or a steed, but that each must be constantly gained anew, often amidst toil and suffering.
One thing, however, was now firmly established in his belief: that his favourite virtues were
really the fairest of all, because--one will answer for all --man never felt happier than when
he had succeeded in keeping his fidelity inviolate and maintaining his steadfastness.  He had
learned, too, from Fraulein Eva that the Redeemer Himself promised the crown of eternal life
to those who remain faithful unto death.  In this confidence he awaited the jailers, who perhaps
would come very soon to lead him into the most joyless of all apartments--the Nuremberg torture
chamber.

Then he told the ladies what he knew of the love which united Heinz and Eva.  The four Fs which
he had advised his master to heed in his wooing --Family, Figure, Favor, and Fortune--he no
longer deemed the right touch-tones.  Whilst he was forced to lie idly here he had found that
they should rather be exchanged for four Ss--Spirituality, Steadfastness, Stimulation, and
Solace--for the eyes and the heart.

All these were united in Eva and, moreover, there could be no objection to the family to which
she belonged.

Thereupon he had commenced so enthusiastic a eulogy of his beloved nurse and preserver that
more than once Lady Wendula, smiling, stopped him, accusing him of permitting his grateful
heart to lead him to such exaggeration that the maiden he wished to serve would scarcely thank him.

Yet Eva's personal appearance had disappointed neither the experienced mother nor the easily
won daughter.  Nay, when Maria Schorlin gazed at her through the half-open door of the Minorite's
room, because she did not want to lose sight of the girl who had already attracted her on account
of her hard battle in the cause of love, and who specially charmed her because it was her Heinz
whom she loved, she thought no human being could resist the spell which emanated from Eva.

With her finger on her lip she beckoned to her mother, and she, too, could not avert her eyes
from the wonderful creature whom she hoped soon to call daughter, as she saw Eva standing,
with eyes uplifted to heaven, beside the old man's couch, and heard her, in compliance with
his wish, as she had often done before, half recite, half sing in a low voice the Song of the
Sun, the finest work of St. Francis.

The words were in the Italian language, in which this song had flowed from the poet heart of
the Saint of Assisi, so rich in love to God and all animate nature; for she had learned to
speak Italian in the Convent of St. Clare, to which several Italians had been transferred from
their own home and that of their order and its founder.

Lady Wendula and her daughter could also follow the song; for the mother had learned the beautiful
language of the Saint of Assisi from the minnesingers in her youth, and in the early years
of her marriage had accompanied the Emperor Frederick, with her husband, across the Alps. So
she had taught Maria.

         "By one most humble, useful, precious, chaste,
          By sister Water, O my Lord, thou art praised.

         "And praised is my Lord
          By brother Fire-he who lights up the night;
          Jocund, robust is he, and strong and bright.

         "Praised art Thou, my Lord, by mother Earth,
          Thou who sustainest her and governest,
          And to her flowers, fruit, herbs, dost colour give and birth.

         "And praised is my Lord
          By those who, for Thy love, can pardon give
          And bear the weakness and the wrongs of men.

         "Blessed are those who suffer thus in peace,
          By Thee, the Highest, to be crowned in heaven.

         "Praised by our sister Death, my Lord, art Thou,
          From whom no living man escapes.
          Who die in mortal sin have mortal woe,
          But blessed are they who die doing Thy will;
          The second death can strike at them no blow.

         "Praises and thanks and blessing to my Master be!
          Serve ye Him all, with great humility."

How God was loved by this saint, who beheld in everything the Most High had created kindred
whom he loved and held intercourse with as with brother and sister!  Whatever the divine Father's
love had formed--the sun, the moon and stars, the wood, water and fire, the earth and her fair
children, the various flowers and plants--he made proclaim, each for itself and all in common,
like a mighty chorus, the praise of God.  Even death joins in the hymn, and all these sons
and daughters of the same exalted Father call to the minds of men the omnipotent, beneficent
rule of the Lord.  They help mortals to appreciate God's majesty, fill their hearts with gratitude,
and summon them to praise His sublimity and greatness.  In death, whom the poet also calls
his sister, he sees no cruel murderer, because she, too, comes from the Most High.  "And what
sister," asks the saint, "could more surely rescue the brother from sorrow and suffering?"
Whoever, as a child of God, feels like the loving Saint of Assisi, will gratefully suffer death
to lead him to union with the Father.

Benedictus had followed the magnificent poem with rapture.  At the lines,

         "But blessed are they who die doing Thy will;
          The second death can strike at them no blow,"

he nodded gently, as if sure that the close of his earthly pilgrimage meant nothing to him
except the beginning of a new and happy life; but when Eva ended with the command to serve
the Lord with great humility, he lowered his eyes to the floor hesitatingly, as if not sure
of himself.

But he soon raised them again and fixed them on the young girl. They seemed to ask the question
whether this noble hymn did not draw his nurse also to him who had sung it; whether, in spite
of it, she still persisted, with sorrowful blindness, in her refusal to join the Sisters of
St. Clare, whom the saintly singer also numbered amongst his followers.  Yet he felt too feeble
to appeal to her conscience now, as he had often done, and bear the replies with which this
highly gifted, peculiar creature, in every conversation his increasing weakness permitted him
to share with her, had pressed him hard and sometimes even silenced him.

True, they fought with unequal weapons.  Pain and illness paralysed his keen intellect, and
difficulty of breathing often checked the eloquent tongue, both of which had served him so
readily in his intercourse with Heinz Schorlin.  She contended with the most precious goal
of youth before her eyes, fresh and healthy in mind and body, conscious, in the midst of the
struggle, against doubt and suffering, for what she held dearest of her own vigorous energy,
panoplied by the talisman of the last mandate from the lips of her dying mother.

Benedictus, during a long life devoted to the highest aims, had battled enough.  He already
saw Sister Death upon the threshold, and he wished to depart in peace and reap the reward for
so much conflict, pain, and sacrifice.  The Lord Himself had broken his weapons.  The Minorite
Egidius, his friend and companion in years, must carry on with Eva, Father Ignatius, the most
eloquent member of the order in Nuremberg, with Heinz Schorlin, the work which he, Benedictus,
had begun.  Though he himself must retire from the battlefield, he was sure that his post would
not remain empty.

The chant had placed him in the right mood to take leave of the Brothers, whose arrival Sister
Hildegard had just announced.

Since yesterday he had seen the Saviour constantly before his mental vision.  Sometimes he
imagined that he beheld Him beckoning to him; sometimes that He extended His arms to him; sometimes
he even fancied that he heard His voice, or that of St. Francis, and both invited him to approach.

To-day-the leech had admitted it, and he himself felt it by his fevered brow, the failing pulsations
of the heart, and the chill in the cold feet, perhaps already dead--he might expect to leave
the dust of the world and behold those for whom he longed face to face in a purer light.

He wished to await the end surrounded only by the Brothers, who were fighting the same battle,
reminded by nothing of the world, as if in the outer court of heaven.

Eva, the beautiful yet perverse woman, was one of the last persons whom he would have desired
to have near him when he took the step into the other world.

Speech was difficult.  A brief admonition to renounce her earthly love in order to share the
divine one whose rich joys he hoped to taste that very day was the farewell greeting he vouchsafed
Eva.  When she tried to kiss his hand he withdrew it as quickly as his weakness permitted.

Then she retired, and Father AEgidius led the Brothers of the order in Nuremberg into the room.
Meanwhile it had grown dark, and the Beguine Paulina brought in a two-branched candelabrum
with burning candles.  Eva took it from her hand and placed it so that the light should not
dazzle her patient; but he saw her and, by pointing with a frowning brow to the door, commanded
her to leave the room.

She gladly obeyed.  When she had passed the Brothers, however, she paused on the threshold
before going into the entry and again gazed at the old man's noble, pallid features illumined
by the candlelight.

She had never seen him look so.  He was gazing, radiant with joy, at the monks, who were to
give him the benediction at his departure.  Then he raised his dark eyes as if transfigured;
he was thanking Heaven for so much mercy, but the other Minorites fell on their knees beside
the bed and prayed with him.

How lovingly the old man looked into each face!  He had never favoured her with such a glance.
Yet no other nursing had been so difficult and often so painful.  At first he had shown a positive
enmity to her, and even asked Sister Hildegard for another nurse; but no suitable substitute
for Eva could be found.  Then he had earnestly desired to be removed to the Franciscan monastery
in Nuremberg; this, however, could not be done because it would have hastened his death.  So
he was forced to remain, and Eva felt that her presence was not the least thing which rendered
the hospital distasteful.

Yet, as his aged eyes refused their service and he liked to have someone read aloud from the
gospels which he carried with him, or from notes written by his own hand, which also comprised
some of the poems of St. Francis, and no one else in the house was capable of performing this
office, he at last explicitly desired to keep her for his nurse.

To anoint and bandage, according to the physician's prescription, his sore feet and the deep
scars made on his back by severe scourging, which had reopened, became more difficult the more
plainly he showed his aversion to her touch, because she--he had told her so himself--was a
woman.  She certainly had not found it easy to keep awake and wear a pleasant expression when,
after a toilsome day, he woke her at midnight and forced her to read aloud until the grey dawn
of morning.  But hardest of all for Eva to bear were the bitter words with which he wounded
her, and which sounded specially sharp and hostile when he reproached her for standing between
Heinz Schorlin and the eternal salvation for which the knight so eagerly longed.  He seemed
to bear her a grudge like that which the artist feels towards the culprit who has destroyed
one of his masterpieces.

Often, too, a chance word betrayed that he blamed Heaven for having denied him victory in the
battle for the soul of Heinz.  Schorlin which he had begun to wage in its name.  True, such
murmuring was always followed by deep repentance.  But in every mood he still strove to persuade
Eva to renounce the world.

When she confessed what withheld her from doing so, he at first tried to convince her by opposing
reasons, but usually strength to continue the interchange of thought soon failed him.  Then
he confined himself to condemning with harsh words her perverse spirit and worldly nature,
and threatening her with the vengeance of Heaven.

Once, after repeating the Song of the Sun, as she had done just now, he asked whether she,
too, felt that nothing save the peace of the cloister would afford the possibility of feeling
the greatness and love of the Most High as warmly and fully as this majestic song commands
us to do.

Then, summoning her courage, she assured him of the contrary.  Though but a simple girl, she,
who had often been the guest of the abbess, felt the grandeur and glory of God as much more
deeply in the world and during the fulfilment of the hardest duties which life imposed than
with the Sisters of St. Clare, as the forests and fields were wider than the little convent garden.

The old man, in a rage, upbraided her with being a blinded fool, and asked her whether she
did not know that the world was finite and limited, whilst what the convent contained was eternal
and boundless.

Another time he had wounded her so deeply by his severity that she had found it impossible
to restrain her tears.  But he had scarcely perceived this ere he repented his harshness. 
Nothing but love ought to move his heart on the eve of a union with Him whom he had just called
Love itself, and with earnest and tender entreaties he besought Eva to forgive him for the
censure which was also a work of love.  Throughout the day he had treated her with affectionate,
almost humble, kindness.

All these things returned to Eva's thoughts as she left her grey-haired patient.

He was standing on the threshold of the other world, and it was easy for her to think of him
kindly, deeply as he had often wounded her.  Nay, her heart swelled with grateful joy because
she had been so patient and suffered nothing to divert her from the arduous duty which she
had undertaken in nursing the old man, who regarded her with such disfavour.

A light had been brought into Biberli's room too.  When Eva entered with glowing cheeks she
found the Swabians still sitting beside his couch. The door leading into the chamber of the
dying man had been closed long before, yet the notes of pious litanies came from the adjoining
room. Lady Schorlin noticed her deep emotion with sympathy, and asked her to sit down by her
side.  Maria offered her own low stool, but Eva declined its use, because she would soon be
obliged to ride back to the city.  She pressed her hand upon her burning brow, sighing, "Now,
now--after such an hour, at court!"

Lady Wendula urged her with such kindly maternal solicitude to take a little rest that the
young girl yielded.

The matron's remark that she, too, was invited to the reception at the imperial residence that
evening brought an earnest entreaty from Eva to accept the invitation for her sake, and the
Swabian promised to gratify her if nothing occurred to prevent.  At any rate, they would ride
to the city together.

Biberli's astonished enquiry concerning the cause of Eva's visit to the fortress was answered
evasively, and she was glad when the singing in the next room led the Swabian to ask whether
it was true that the master of her suffering friend on the couch, who intended to devote himself
to a monastic life, meant to enter the order of the Minorite whom she had just left and become
a mendicant friar.  When Eva assented, the lady remarked that members of this brotherhood had
rarely come to her castle; but Biberli said that they were quiet, devout men who, content with
the alms they begged, preached, and performed other religious duties.  They were recruited
more from the people than from the aristocratic classes.  Many, however, joined them in order
to live an idle life, supported by the gifts of others.

Eva eagerly opposed this view, maintaining that true piety could be most surely found in the
order of St. Francis.  Then, with warm enthusiasm, she praised its founder, asserting that,
on the contrary, the Saint of Assisi had enjoined labour upon his followers.  For instance,
one of his favourite disciples was willing to shake the nuts from the rotten branches of a
nut tree which no one dared to climb if he might have half the harvest.  This was granted,
but he made a sack of his wide brown cowl, filled it with the nuts, and distributed them amongst
his poor.

This  pleased the mother and daughter; yet when the former remarked that work of this kind
seemed to her too easy for a young, noble, and powerful knight, Eva agreed, but added that
the saint also required an activity in which the hands, it is true, remained idle, but which
heavily taxed even the strongest soul.  St. Francis himself had set the example of performing
this toil cheerfully and gladly.

Whilst giving this information she had again risen.  Sister Hildegard had announced that her
palfrey and the horses of the guests had been led up.

Finally Eva promised to mount at the same time as the Swabians, bade farewell to Biberli, who
looked after her with surprise, yet silently conjectured that this errand to the Emperor was
in his behalf, and then went into the entry, where Sister Hildegard told her that Father Benedictus
had just died.

The monks were still chanting beside his deathbed.  Brother AEgidius, the friend and comrade
of the dead man, however, had left them and approached Eva.

Deeply agitated, he struggled to repress his sobs as he told her that the old man's longing
was fulfilled and his Saviour had summoned him.  To die thus, richly outweighed the many sacrifices
he had so willingly made here below during a long life.  If Eva had witnessed his death she
would have perceived the aptness of the saying that a monk's life is bitter, but his death
is sweet.  Such an end was granted only to those who cast the world aside.  Let her consider
this once more, ere she renounced the eternal bliss for which formerly she had so devoutly yearned.

Eva's only answer was the expression of her grief for his friend's decease.  But whilst passing
out into the darkness she thought: the holy Brother certainly had a beautiful and happy death,
yet how gently, trusting in the mercy of her Redeemer, my mother also passed away, though during
her life and on her deathbed she remained in the world.  And then --whilst Father Benedictus
was closing his eyes--what concern did he probably have for aught save his own salvation, but
my mother forgot herself and thought only of others, of those whom she loved, whilst the Saviour
summoned her to Himself.  Her eyes were already dim and her tongue faltered when she uttered
the words which had guided her daughter until now.  The forge fire of life burns fiercely,
yet to it my gratitude is due if the resolutions I formed in the forest after I had gathered
the flowers for her and saw Heinz kneeling in prayer have not been vain, but have changed the
capricious, selfish child into a woman who can render some service to others.

If Heinz comes now and seeks me, I think I can say trustingly, "Here I am!"  We have both striven
for the divine Love and recognised its glorious beauty.  If later, hand in hand, we can interweave
it with the earthly one, why should it not be acceptable to the Saviour?  If Heinz offers me
his affection I will greet it as "Sister Love," and it will certainly summon me with no lower
voice to praise the Father from whom it comes and who has bestowed it upon me, as do the sun,
the moon and stars, the fire and water.

Whilst speaking she went out, and after learning that Frau Christine and her husband had not
yet returned, she rode with the Swabians towards the city.

In order not to pass through the whole length of Nuremberg, Eva guided her friends around the
fortifications.  Their destination was almost the same, and they chose to enter at the Thiergartnerthor,
which was in the northwestern part of the city, under the hill crowned by the castle, whilst
the road to Schweinau usually led through the Spitalthor.

On the way Lady Wendula induced Eva to tell her many things about herself, urging her to describe
her father and her dead mother.  Her daughter Maria, on the other hand, was most interested
in her sister Els, who, as she had heard from Biberli, was the second beautiful E.

Eva liked to talk about her relatives, but her depression continued and she spoke only in reply
to questions, for the Minorite's death had affected her, and her heart throbbed anxiously when
she thought of the moment that she must appear amongst the courtiers and see the Emperor.

Would her errand be vain?  Must poor Biberli pay for his resolute fidelity with his life? 
What pain it would cause her, and how heavily it would burden his master's soul that he had
failed to intercede for him!

Not until Lady Schorlin questioned her did Eva confess what troubled her, and how she dreaded
the venture which she had undertaken on her own responsibility.

They were obliged to wait outside the Thiergartnerthor, for it had just been opened to admit
a train of freight waggons.

Whilst Eva remained on the high-road, with the castle before her eyes, she sighed from the
depths of her troubled heart: "Why should the Emperor Rudolph grant me, an insignificant girl,
what he refused his sister's husband, the powerful Burgrave, to whom he is so greatly indebted?
Oh, suppose he should treat me harshly and bid me go back to my spinning wheel!"

Then she felt the arm of the dignified lady at her side pass round her and heard her say: "Cheer
up, my dear girl.  The blessing of a woman who feels as kindly towards you as to her own daughter
will accompany you, and no Emperor will ungraciously rebuff you, you lovely, loyal, charitable
child."

At these words from her kind friend Eva's heart opened as if the dear mother whom death had
snatched from her had inspired her with fresh courage, and from the very depths of her soul
rose the cry, "Oh, how I thank you!"

She urged her nimble palfrey nearer the lady's horse to kiss her left hand, which held the
bridle, but Lady Wendula would not permit it and, drawing her towards her, exclaimed, "Your
lips, dear one," and as her red mouth pressed the kind lady's, Eva felt as if the caress had
sealed an old and faithful friendship.  But this was not all.  Maria also wished to show the
affection she had won, and begged for a kiss too.

Without suspecting it, Eva, on the way to an enterprise she dreaded, received the proof that
her lover's dearest relatives welcomed her with their whole hearts as a new member of the family.

On the other side of the gate she was obliged to part from the Swabians.

Lady Wendula bade her farewell with an affectionate "until we meet again," and promised positively
to go to the reception at the castle.

Eva uttered a sigh of relief.  It seemed like an omen of success that this lady, who had so
quickly inspired her with such perfect confidence, was to witness her difficult undertaking.
She felt like a leader who takes the field with a scanty band of soldiers and is unexpectedly
joined by the troops of a firm friend.

CHAPTER XVII

When Arnold, the warder from Berne, helped Eva from the saddle, a blaze of light greeted her
from the imperial residence.  The banquet was just beginning.

Frau Gertrude had more than one piece of good news to tell while assisting the young girl.
Among the sovereign's guests was her uncle the magistrate, who had accompanied the Emperor
to the beekeeper's, and with his wife, whom she would also find there, had been invited to
the banquet.  Besides--this, as the best, she told her last--her father, Herr Ernst Ortlieb,
had returned from Ulm and Augsburg, and a short time before had come to the fortress to conduct
Jungfrau Els, by the Burgrave's gracious permission, to her betrothed husband's hiding place.
Fran Gertrude had lighted her way, and a long separation might be borne for such a meeting.

The ex-maid was obliged to bestir herself that Eva might have a few minutes for her sister
and Wolff, yet she would fain have spent a much longer time over the long, thick, fair hair,
which with increasing pleasure she combed until it flowed in beautiful waving tresses over
the rich Florentine stuff of her plain white mourning robe.

The Swiss had also provided white roses from the Burgrave's garden to fasten at the square
neck of Eva's dress.  The latter permitted her to do this, but her wish to put a wreath of
roses on the young girl's head, according to the fashion of the day, was denied, because Eva
thought it more seemly to appear unadorned, and not as if decked for a festival when she approached
the Emperor as a petitioner.  The woman whose life had been spent at court perceived the wisdom
of this idea, and at last rejoiced that she had not obtained her wish; for when her work was
finished Eva looked so bewitching and yet so pure and modest, that nothing could be removed
or--even were it the wreath of roses--added without injuring the perfect success of her masterpiece.

Lack of time soon compelled the young girl to interrupt the exclamations of admiration uttered
by the skilful tiring woman herself, her little daughter, the maidservant, and the friend whom
Fran Gertrude had invited to come in as if by accident.

While following the warder's wife through various corridors and rooms, Eva thought of the hour
in her own home before the dance at the Town Hall, and it seemed as if not days but a whole
life intervened, and she was a different person, a complete contrast in most respects to the
Eva of that time.

Before the dance she had secretly rejoiced in the applause elicited by her appearance; now
she was indifferent to it--nay, the more eagerly the spectators expressed their delight the
more she grieved that the only person whom she desired to please was not among them.

How easy it had been to be led to the dance, and how hard was the errand awaiting her!  Her
heart shrank before the doubt awakened by the flood of light pouring from the windows of the
imperial residence; the doubt whether her lover would not avoid her if--ah, had it only been
possible! --if he should meet her among the guests yonder; whether the eloquent Father  Ignatius,
who had followed him, might not already have won from the knight a vow compelling him to turn
from her and summon all his strength of will to forget her.

But, no!  He could no more renounce his love than she hers.  She would not, dare not, let such
terrible thoughts torture her now.

Heinz was far away, and the fate of her love would be decided later. The cause of her presence
here was something very different, and the conviction that it was good, right, and certain
of his approval, dispelled the pain that had overpowered her, and raised her courage.

Unspeakably hard trials lay behind her, and harder ones must, perhaps, yet be vanquished. 
But she no longer needed to fear them, for she felt that the strength which had awakened within
her after she became conscious of her love was still sustaining and directing her, and would
enable her to govern matters which she could not help believing that she herself would be too
weak to guide to their goal.  She felt freed from her former wavering and hesitation, and as
formerly in the modest house of the Beguines, now in the stately citadel she realised that,
in sorrow and severe trial, she had learned to assert her position in life by her own strength.
Her father, whom she was to meet presently, would find little outward change in her, but when
he had perceived the transformation wrought in the character of his helpless "little saint"
it would please him to hear from her how wonderfully her mother's last prophetic words were
being fulfilled.

She was emerging from the forge fire of life, steeled for every conflict, yet those would be
wrong who believed that, trusting to her own newly won strength, she had forgotten to look
heavenward.  On the contrary, never had she felt nearer to her God, her Saviour, and the gracious
Virgin. Without them she could accomplish nothing, yet for the first time she had undertaken
tasks and sought to win goals which were worthy of beseeching them for aid.  Love had taught
her to be faithful in worldly life, and she said to herself, "Better, far better I can certainly
become; but firmer faith cannot be kept."

Wolff's hiding place was a large, airy room, affording a view of the Frank country, with its
meadows, fields, and forests.  Eva saw there by the light of the blazing pine chips her father,
sister, and brother-in- law.

Yet the meeting between all these beloved ones after a long separation partook more of sorrow
than of joy.  Els had really resolved to leave the Eysvogel mansion, yet she met her Aunt Christine
with the joyful cry: "I shall stay!  Wolff's father and I have become good friends."

In fact, a few hours before Herr Casper had looked at her kindly and gratefully, and when she
showed him how happy this rendered her, warmly entreated her in a broken voice not to leave
him.  She had proved herself to be his good angel, and the sight of her was the only bright
spot in his clouded life.  Then she had gladly promised to stay, and intended to keep her word.
She had only accompanied her father, who had unexpectedly returned for a short time, because
she could trust the nun who shared her nursing of the paralysed patient, and he rarely recognised
his watcher at night.

How long Els had been separated from her lover!  When Eva greeted the reunited pair they had
already poured forth to each other the events which had driven them to the verge of despair,
and which now once more permitted them with budding hope to anticipate new happiness.

Eva had little time, yet the sisters found an opportunity to confide many things to each other,
though at first their father often interrupted them by opposing his younger daughter's intention
of going to the Emperor as a supplicant.

The girl whose wishes but a short time ago he had refused or gratified, according to the mood
of the moment, like those of a child, had since gained, even in his eyes, so well founded a
claim to respect, she opposed him in her courteous, modest way with such definiteness of purpose,
Biberli's fate interested him so much, and the prospect of seeing his daughters brought before
the court was so painful, that he admitted the force of Eva's reasons and let her set forth
on her difficult mission accompanied by his good wishes.

Els had dropped her maternal manner; nay, she received her sister as her superior, and began
to describe her work in the hospital to Wolff in such vivid colours that Eva laid her hand
on her lips and hurried out of the room with the exclamation, "If you insist upon our changing
places, we will stand in future side by side and shoulder to shoulder!  Farewell till after
the battle!"

She could not have given much more time to her relatives under any circumstances, for the Burgravine's
maid of honour who was to attend her to the reception was already waiting somewhat impatiently
in Frau Gertrude's room, and took her to the castle without delay.

The place where they were to stay was the large apartment adjoining the dining hall.

The confidence which Eva had regained on her way to her relatives vanished only too quickly
in the neighbourhood of the sovereign and the sight of the formal reception bestowed on all
who entered.  Her heart throbbed more and more anxiously as she realised for the first time
how serious a step she had taken; nay, it was long ere she succeeded in calming herself sufficiently
to notice the clatter of the metal vessels and the Emperor's deep voice, which often drowned
the lower tones of the guests.  Reverence for royalty was apparent everywhere.

How much quieter this banquet was than those of the princes and nobles! The guests knew that
the Emperor Rudolph disliked the boisterous manners of the German nobility.  Besides, the sovereign's
mourning exerted a restraint upon mirth and recklessness.  All avoided loud laughter, though
the monarch was fond of gaiety and heroically concealed the deep grief of his own soul.

When the lord high steward announced to the maid of honour who had brought Eva here that dessert
was served, the latter believed that the dreaded moment when she would be presented to the
Emperor was close at hand, but quarter of an hour after quarter of an hour passed and she still
heard the clanking of metal and the voices of the guests, which now began to grow louder, and
amidst which she sometimes distinguished the strident tones of the court fool, Eyebolt, and
the high ones of the Countess Cordula.

Time moved at a snail's pace, and she already fancied her heart could no longer endure its
violent throbbing, when at last--at last--the heavy oak chairs were pushed noisily back over
the stone floor of the dining hall.

From the balcony of the audience chamber a flourish of trumpets echoed loudly along the arches
of the lofty, vaulted ceiling of the apartment, and the Emperor, leading the company, crossed
the threshold attended by several dignitaries, the court jesters, and some pages.

His august sister, the Burgravine Elizabeth, leaned on his arm.  The papal ambassador, Doria,
in the brilliant robe of a cardinal, followed, escorting the Duchess Agnes, but he parted from
her in the hall.  Among many other secular and ecclesiastical princes and dignitaries appeared
also Count von Montfort and his daughter, the old First Losunger of Nuremberg, Berthold Vorchtel,
and Herr Pfinzing with his wife.

Several guests from the city entered at the same time through another door, among whom, robed
in handsome festal garments, were Eva's new Swabian acquaintances.  How gladly she would have
hastened to them!  But a grey-haired stately man of portly figure, whose fur-trimmed cloak
hung to his ankles--Sir Arnold Maier of Silenen, led them to a part of the hall very distant
from where she was standing.

To make amends, Count von Montfort and Cordula came very near her; but she could not greet
them.  Each person--she felt it--must remain in his or her place.  And the restraint became
stronger as the Duchess Agnes, giving one guest a nod, another a few words, advanced nearer
and nearer, pausing at last beside Count von Montfort.

The old huntsman advanced respectfully towards the Bohemian princess, and Eva heard the fourteen-year-old
wife ask, "Well, Count, how fares your wish to find the right husband for your wilful daughter?"

"Of course it must be fulfilled, Duchess, since your Highness deigned to approve it," he answered,
with his hand upon his heart.

"And may his name be known?" she queried with evident eagerness, her dark eyes sparkling brightly
and a faint flush tingeing the slight shade of tan on her child face.

"The duty of a knight and paternal weakness unfortunately still seal my lips," he answered.
"Your Highness knows best that a lady's wish--even if she is your own child--is a command."

"You are praised as an obedient father," replied the Bohemian with a slight shrug of the shoulders.
"Yet you probably need not conceal whether the happy man, who is not only encouraged, but this
time also chosen by the charming huntress of many kinds of game, is numbered among our guests."

"Unfortunately he is denied the pleasure, your Highness," replied the count; but Cordula, who
had noticed Eva, and had heard the Duchess Agnes's last words, approached her royal foe, and
with a low, reverential bow, said: "My poor heart must imagine him far away from here amid
peril and privation.  Instead of breaking ladies' hearts, he is destroying the castles of robber
knights and disturbers of the peace of the country."

The duchess, in silent rage, clenched her white teeth upon her quivering lips, and was about
to make an answer which would scarcely have flattered Cordula, when the Emperor, who had left
his distinguished attendants, approached Eva, with the Burgravine still leaning on his arm.

She did not notice it; she was vainly trying to interpret the meaning of Cordula's words. 
True, she did not know that when no messenger brought Heinz Schorlin's intercession for Biberli,
in whose fate the countess felt a sincere interest, she had commanded her own betrothed husband
to ride his horse to death in order to tell the master of the sorely imperilled man what danger
threatened his faithful servant, and remind him, in her name, that gratitude was one of the
virtues which beseemed a true knight, even though the matter in question concerned only a servant
Boemund Altrosen had obeyed, and must have overtaken Heinz long ago and probably aided him
to rout the Siebenburgs and their followers.  But Cordula read the young Bohemian's child heart,
and it afforded her special pleasure to deal her a heavy blow in the warfare they were waging,
which perhaps might aid another purpose.

The surprise and bewilderment which the countess's answer had aroused in Eva heightened the
spell of her beauty.

Had she heard aright?  Could Heinz really have sued for the countess's hand and been accepted?
Surely, surely not!  Neither was capable of such perfidy, such breach of faith.  Spite of the
testimony of her own ears, she would not believe it.  But when she at last saw the Emperor's
tall figure before her, and he gazed down at her with a kind, fatherly glance, she answered
it with her large blue eyes uplifted beseechingly, and withal as trustilly, as if she sought
to remind him that, if he only chose to do so, his power made it possible to convert everything
which troubled and oppressed her to good.

The tearful yet bright gaze of those resistless eyes pierced the Emperor's very soul, and he
imagined how this lovely vision of purity and innocence, this rare creature, of whom he had
heard such marvellous things from Herr Pfinzing during their ride through the forest, would
have fired the heart of his eighteen-year-old son, so sensitive to every impression, whom death
had snatched from him so suddenly.  And whilst remembering Hartmann, he also thought of his
dead son's most loyal and dearest friend, Heinz Schorlin, who was again showing such prowess
in his service, and had earned a right to recognition and reward.

He did not know his young favourite's present state of mind concerning his desire for a monastic
life, but he had probably become aware that his swiftly kindled, ardent love for yonder lovely
child had led him into an act of culpable imprudence.  Besides, that very day many things had
reached his ears concerning these two who suited each other as perfectly as Heinz Schorlin
seemed--even to the Hapsburg, who was loyally devoted to the Holy Church--unfit for a religious
life.

The Emperor could do much to further the union of this pair, yet he too was obliged to exercise
caution.  If he joined them in wedlock as though they were his own children he might be sure
of causing loud complaints from the priesthood, and especially the Dominicans, who were very
influential at the court of Rome--nay, he must be prepared for opposition directed against
himself as well as the young pair.  The prior of the order had already complained to the nuncio
of the lukewarmness of the Superior of the Sisters of St. Clare, who idly witnessed the estrangement
from the Church of the soul of a maiden belonging to a distinguished family; and Doria had
told the sovereign of this provoking matter, and expressed the prior's hope that Sir Heinz
Schorlin, who enjoyed the monarch's favour, would be won for the monastic life.  Opposition
to this marriage, which he approved, and therefore desired to favour, was also to be expected
from another quarter.  Therefore he must act with the utmost caution, and in a manner which
his antagonists could not oppose.

At this reflection a peculiar smile, familiar to the courtiers as an omen of a gracious impulse,
hovered around his lips, which during the past month had usually revealed by their expression
the grief that burdened his soul and, raising his long forefinger in playful menace, he began:

"Aha, Jungfrau Eva Ortlieb!  What have you been doing since I had the boon of meeting so rare
a beauty at the dance?  Do you know that you have caused a turmoil amongst both ecclesiastical
and secular authorities, and that many a precious hour has been shortened for me on your account?
You have disturbed both the austere Dominican Fathers and the devout Sisters of St. Clare.
The former think the gentle nuns treat you too indulgently, and the latter charge the zealous
followers of St. Domingo with too much strictness concerning you.

"And, besides, if you were not so well aware of it yourself, you would scarcely believe it:
for the sake of an insignificant serving man, who is under your special protection, I, who
carry the burden of so many serious and weighty affairs, am beset by those of high and low
degree.  How much, too, I have also suffered on account of his master, Sir Heinz Schorlin--
again in connection with you, you lovely disturber of the peace!  To say nothing of the rest,
your own father brings a charge against him.  The accusation is made in a letter which Meister
Gottlieb, our protonotary, was to withhold by Herr Ortlieb's desire, but through a welcome
accident it fell into my hands.  This letter contains statements, my lovely child, which I--Nay,
don't be troubled; the roses on your cheeks are glowing enough already, and for their sake
I will not mention its contents; only they force me to ask the question--come nearer--whether,
though it caused you great annoyance that a certain young Swiss knight forced his way into
your father's house under cover of the darkness, you do not hope with me, the more experienced
friend, that this foolhardy fellow, misguided by ardent love, with the aid of the saints to
whom he is beginning to turn, may be converted to greater caution and praiseworthy virtue?
Whether, in your great charity--which I have heard so highly praised--you would be capable"--Here
he paused and, lowering his voice to a whisper, added:

"Do me the favour to lend your ear--what a well-formed little thing it is!--a short time longer,
to confide to the elderly man who feels a father's affection for you whether you would be wholly
reluctant to attempt the reformation of the daring evil-doer yourself were he to offer, not
only his heart, but the little ring with--I will guarantee it --his honourable, knightly hand?"

"Oh, your Majesty!" cried Eva, gazing at the gracious sovereign with an expression of such
imploring entreaty in her large, tearful blue eyes that, as if regretting his hasty question,
he added soothingly:

"Well, well, we will reach the goal, I think, at a slower pace.  Such a confession will probably
flow more easily from the lips when sought by the person for whom it means happiness or despair,
than when a stranger --even one as old and friendly as I--seeks to draw it from a modest maiden."

Here he paused; he had just recognised Lady Wendula Schorlin.  Waving his hand to her in joyous
greeting, he ordered a page to conduct her to him and, again turning to Eva, said: "Look yonder,
my beautiful child: there is someone in whom you would confide more willingly than in me. 
I think Sir Heinz's mother, who is worthy of all reverence and love--"

Here surprise and joy forced from Eva's lips the question, "His mother?" and there was such
amazement in the tone that, as the Lady Wendula, bowing low, approached the Emperor, after
exchanging the first greetings which pass between old friends who have been long separated,
he asked how it happened that though Eva seemed to have already met the matron, she heard with
such surprise that she was the mother of his brave favourite. 

Bath.

* * * * *

SCARFS WORN BY CLERGYMEN.

(Vol. vii., p. 269.)

The mention of the distinction between the broad and narrow scarf, alluded to by me (Vol. vii.,
p. 215.), was made above thirty years ago, and in Ireland. I have a distinct recollection of the
statement as to what had been the practice, then going out of use. I am sorry that I cannot,
in answer to C.'s inquiry, recollect who the person was who made it.

Nor am I able to specify instances of the partial observance of the distinction, as I had
not till long after learned the wisdom of "making a note:" but I had occasion to remark that
dignitaries, &c. frequently wore wider scarfs than other clergymen (not however that the narrower
one was ever that slender strip so improperly and servilely adopted of late from the corrupt
custom of Rome, which has curtailed all ecclesiastical vestments); so that when the discussion
upon this subject was revived by others some years ago, it was one
to which my mind had been long familiar, independently of any ritual
authority.

I hope C. will understand my real object in interfering in this subject. It is solely that I
may do a little (what others, I hope, can do more effectually) towards
correcting the very injurious, and, I repeat, inadequate statement
of the Quart.

Review for June, 1851, p. 222. However trifling the matter may be in itself, it is no trifling
matter to involve a considerable portion of the clergy, and among them many who are most desirous
to uphold both the letter and the spirit of the Church of England,
and to resist all real innovation, in a charge of lawlessness.

Before the episcopal authority, there so confidently invoked, be interposed, let it be proved
that this is not a badge of the clerical order, common to all the churches of Christendom, and actually
recognised by the rules, in every respect so truly Catholic, of our own Church. The matter does
not, I apprehend, admit of demonstration one way or the other, at
least till we have fresh evidence.

But to me, as to many others, analogies seem all in favour of the scarf being such a badge; and
not only this, but the very regulation of our royal ecclesiastical authorities. The injunctions of
Queen Elizabeth, in 1564, seem to mark the tippet as a distinction between clergymen and laymen, who
otherwise, in colleges and choirs at least, would have none. I also am strongly of opinion that
the tippets mentioned in the 58th and 74th English canons are the
two scarfs referred to: the silken tippet (or broad scarf) being for
such priests or deacons as hold certain offices, or are M.A., LL.B.,
or of superior degree; the plain tippet (or narrow scarf) being for
all ministers who are non-graduates (Bachelors of Arts were not anciently
considered as graduates, but rather as candidates for a degree, as
they are still styled in many places abroad); so that all in orders
may have tippets.

This notion is confirmed by the fact, that the scarf was frequently called a tippet in Ireland
within memory. And in a letter, discussing this very subject, in the Gentleman's Mag. (for
1818, part ii. p. 218.[7]), the testimony of one is given who had for upwards of fifty years considered
the two words as identical, and had heard them in his youth used indiscriminately by aged clergymen.
It is notorious that in Ireland, time out of mind, tippets have been
more generally worn than hoods in parish churches there.

I am not sure (though I lay no stress on the conjecture) whether this may not have been in
{337} consequence of the option apparently given by the Canons of
wearing either hood or tippet.

It is not correct to restrict the customary use of the scarf to doctors, prebendaries, and chaplains.
In some cathedrals the immemorial custom has been to assign it to minor canons and clerical vicars
also. At Canterbury, indeed, the minor canons, except otherwise qualified,
do not wear it.

(But is not this an exception?

Was it always so? And, by the way, can any cathedral member of old standing testify as to the
customary distinction in his church between the two scarfs, either as to size or materials?)
The very general use of it in towns cannot be denied.

I may add, that Bishop Jebb used to disapprove of its disuse by country clergymen. In his Charge
he requests that "all beneficed clergymen" of his diocese "who are Masters of Arts, or of any superior
degree, and who by chaplaincies or otherwise are entitled to the
distinction, may with their surplices wear scarfs or tippets."

This apparently was his construction of the Canons.

JOHN JEBB.

[Footnote 7: See also p. 315.; and 1819, part i. p. 593.]

The
narrow scarf, called the stole or orarium, is one of the most ancient
vestments used by the Christian clergy, representing in its mystical
signification the yoke of Christ. Though it may be true that its use
is not enjoined by any modern rubric or canon, custom, I think, fully
warrants the clergy in wearing it.

He now knew that Boemund and Cordula had plighted their troth, what the faithful Biberli had
done and suffered for him, and lastly--even to the minutest detail--the wonderful transformation
in Eva.

When he had ridden forth he had hoped to learn to renounce her whom he loved with all the might
of his fervid soul, and to bring himself to close his career as a soldier with this successful
campaign; but whilst he destroyed castles and attacked the foe, former wishes were stilled,
and a new desire and new convictions took their place.  He could not give up the profession
of arms, which all who bore the name of Schorlin had practised from time immemorial, and to
resign the love which united him to Eva was impossible.  She must become his, though she resembled
an April day, and Biberli's tales of the danger which threatened the husband from a sleep-walking
wife returned more than once to his memory.

Yet what beautiful April days he had experienced, and though Eva might have many faults, the
devout child, with her angel beauty, certainly did not lack the will to do what was right and
pleasing to God.  When she was once his she should become so good that even his mother at home
would approve his choice.

He had wholly renounced the idea of going into the monastery.  The Minorite Ignatius, whom
Father Benedictus had sent after him that he might finish the work which the latter had begun,
was a man who lacked neither intellect nor eloquence; but he did not possess the fiery enthusiasm
and aristocratic confidence of the dead man.  Yet when the zealous monks, whom the prior of
the Dominicans had despatched to complete Heinz's conversion, opposed him, the former entered
into such sharp and angry arguments with them that the young knight, who witnessed more than
one of their quarrels, startled and repelled, soon held aloof from all three and told them
that he had resolved to remain in the world, and his onerous office gave him no time to listen
to their well-meant admonitions.

He was not created for the monastery.  If Heaven had vouchsafed him a miracle, it was done
to preserve his life that--as Eva desired--he might fight to the last drop of his blood for
the Church, his holy faith, and the beloved Emperor.  But if he remained in the world, Eva
would do the same; they belonged to each other inseparably.  Why, he could not have explained,
but the voice which constantly reiterated it could not lie.

After he had slain Seitz Siebenburg in the sword combat, and destroyed his brother's castle,
his resolve to woo Eva became absolutely fixed.

His heart dictated this, but honour, too, commanded him to restore to the maiden and her sister
the fair fame which his passionate impetuosity had injured.

During the rapid ride which he and Boemund Altrosen took to Nuremberg he had stopped at Schweinau
hospital, and found in Biberli, Eva's former enemy, her most enthusiastic panegyrist.  Heinz
also heard from him how quickly she had won the hearts of his mother and Maria, and that he
would find all three at the fortress.

Lastly, Sister Hildegard had informed him of the great peril threatening his beloved faithful
servant and companion, "old Biber," which had led Eva there to appeal to the Emperor.

Beside the body of Father Benedictus he learned how beautiful had been the death of the old
man who had so honestly striven to lead him into the path which he believed was the right one
for him to tread.  In a brief prayer beside his devout friend Heinz expressed his gratitude,
and called upon him to witness that, even in the world, he would not forget the shortness of
this earthly pilgrimage, but would also provide for the other life which endured forever. 
True, Heinz had but a few short moments to devote to this farewell, the cause of the faithful
follower who, unasked, had unselfishly endured unutterable tortures for him, took precedence
of everything else and would permit no delay.

When the knight, with his figure drawn up to its full height, strode hastily into the royal
hall, he beheld with joyful emotion those who were most dear to him, for whose presence he
had longed most fervently during the ride--his mother, Eva, his sister, and the imperial friend
he loved so warmly.

Overwhelmed by agitation, he flung himself on his knees before his master, kissing his hand
and his robe, but the Emperor ordered him to rise and cordially greeted him.

Before speaking to his relatives, Heinz informed the monarch that he had successfully executed
his commission and, receiving a few words of thanks and appreciation, modestly but with urgent
warmth entreated the Emperor, if he was satisfied with his work, instead of any other reward,
to save from further persecution the faithful servant who for his sake had borne the most terrible
torture.

The face of the sovereign, who had welcomed Heinz as if he were a long- absent son, assumed
a graver expression, and his tone seemed to vibrate with a slight touch of indignation, as
he exclaimed: "First, let us settle your own affairs.  Serious charges have been made against
you, my son, as well as against your servant, on whose account I have been so tormented.  A
father, who is one of the leading men in this city, accuses you of having destroyed his daughter's
good name by forcing yourself into his house after assuring his child of your love."

Heinz turned to Eva, to protest that he was here to atone for the wrong he had done her, but
the Emperor would not permit him to speak.  It was important to silence at once any objection
which could be made against the marriage by ecclesiastical and secular foes; therefore, eagerly
as he desired to enjoy the happiness of the young pair, he forced himself to maintain the expression
of grave dissatisfaction which he had assumed, and ordered a page to summon the imperial magistrate,
the First Losunger of the city, and his protonotary, who were all amongst the guests, and,
lastly, the Duchess Agnes.

He could read the latter's child eyes like the clear characters of a book, and neither the
radiant glow on her face at Heinz Schorlin's entrance nor her hostile glance at the Countess
von Montfort had escaped his notice.  Both her affection and her jealous resentment should
serve him.

The young Bohemian now thought herself certain that Heinz Schorlin, and no other, was Cordula's
chosen knight; the countess, at his entrance, had exclaimed to her father loudly enough, "Here
he is again!"

When the princess stood before the Emperor, with the gentlemen whom he had summoned, he asked
her to decide the important question.

"Yonder knight--he motioned towards Heinz--had been guilty of an act which could scarcely be
justified.  Though he had wooed the daughter of a noble Nuremberg family, and even forced his
way into her father's house, he had apparently forgotten the poor girl.

"And," cried the young wife indignantly, "the unprincipled man has not only made a declaration
of love to another, but formally asked her hand."

"That would seem like him," said the Emperor.  "But we must not close our ears to the charge
of the Nuremberg Honourable.  His daughter, a lovely, modest maiden of excellent repute, has
been seriously injured by Heinz Schorlin, and so I beg you, child, to tell us, with the keen
appreciation of the rights and duties of a lady which is peculiar to you, what sentence, in
your opinion, should be imposed upon Sir Heinz Schorlin to atone for the wrong he has done
to the young Nuremberg maiden."

He beckoned to the protonotary, as he spoke, to command him to show Ernst Ortlieb's accusation
to the duchess, but she seemed to have practised the art of reading admirably; for, more quickly
than it would otherwise have appeared possible to grasp the meaning of even the first sentences,
she exclaimed, drawing herself up to her full height and gazing at Cordula with haughty superiority:
"There is but one decision here, if the morality of this noble city is to be preserved and
the maiden daughters of her patrician families secured henceforward from the misfortune of
being a plaything for the wanton levity of reckless heart breakers.  But this decision, on
which I firmly and resolutely insist, as lady and princess, in the name of my whole sex and
of all knightly men who, with me, prize the reverence and inviolable fidelity due a lady, is:
Sir Heinz Schorlin must ask the honourable gentleman who, with full justice, brought this complaint
to your imperial Majesty, for his daughter's hand and, if the sorely injured maiden vouchsafes
to accept it, lead her to the marriage altar before God and the world."

"Spoken according to the feelings of my own heart," replied the Emperor and, turning to the
citizens of Nuremberg, he added: "So I ask you, gentlemen, who are familiar with the laws and
customs of this good city and direct the administration of her justice, will such a marriage
remove the complaint made against Sir Heinz Schorlin and his servant?"

"It will," replied old Herr Berthold Vorchtel, gravely and firmly.

Herr Pfinzing also assented, it is true, but added earnestly that an unfortunate meeting had
caused another to suffer even more severely than Eva from the knight's imprudence.  This was
her older sister, the betrothed bride of young Eysvogel.  For her sake, as well as to make
the bond between Sir Heinz Schorlin and the younger Jungfrau Ortlieb valid, the father's consent
was necessary.  If his imperial Majesty desired to bring to a beautiful end, that very day,
the gracious work so auspiciously commenced there was no obstacle in the way, for Ernst Ortlieb
was at the von Zollern Castle with the daughter who had been so basely slandered.

The Emperor asked in surprise how they came there, and then ordered Eva's father and sister
to be brought to him.  He was eager to make the acquaintance of the second beautiful E.

"And Wolff Eysvogel?" asked the magistrate.

"We agreed to release him after we had turned our back on Nuremberg," replied the sovereign.
"Much as we have heard in praise of this young man, gladly as we have shown him how gratefully
we prize the blood a brave man shed for us upon the Marchfield, no change can be made in what,
by virtue of our imperial word----"

"Certainly not, little brother," interrupted the court fool, Eyebolt, "but for that very reason
you must open the Eysvogel's cage as quickly as possible and let him fly hither, for on the
ride to the beekeeper's you crossed in your own seven-foot tall body the limits of this good
city, whose length does not greatly surpass it--your imperial person, I mean.  So you as certainly
turned your back upon it as you stand in front of things which lie behind you.  And as an emperor's
word cannot have as much added or subtracted as a fly carries off on its tail, if it has one,
you, little brother, are obliged and bound to have the strange monster, which is at once a
wolf and a bird, immediately released and summoned hither."

"Not amiss," laughed the  Emperor, "if the boundaries of Nuremberg saw our back for even so
brief a space as it needs to make a wise man a fool.

"We will follow your counsel, Eyebolt.--Herr Pfinzing, tell young Eysvogel that the Emperor's
pardon has ended his punishment.  The breach of the country's peace may be forgiven the man
who so heroically aided the battle for peace."

Then turning to Meister Gottlieb, the protonotary, he whispered so low that he alone could
hear the command, that he should commit to paper a form of words which would give the bond
between Heinz Schorlin and Eva Ortlieb sufficient legal power to resist both secular authority
and that of the Dominicans and Sisters of St. Clare.

During this conference court etiquette had prevented the company from exchanging any remarks.
Whatever one person might desire to say to another he was forced to entrust to the mute language
of the eyes, and a sportive impulse induced Emperor Rudolph to maintain the spell which held
apart those who were most strongly attracted to each other.

Meantime, whilst he was talking with the protonotary, the bolder guests ventured to move about
more freely, and of them all Cordula imposed the least restraint upon herself.

Ere Heinz had found time to address a word to Eva or to greet his mother she glided swiftly
to his side and, with an angry expression on her face, whispered: "If Heaven bestowed the greatest
happiness upon the most deserving, you must be the most favoured of mortals, for a more exquisite
masterpiece than your future wife--I know her--was never created.  But now open your ears and
follow my advice: Do not reveal the state of your heart until you have left the castle so far
behind that you are out of sight of the Bohemian princess, or your ship of happiness may be
wrecked within sight of port."

Then, with a well-assumed air of indignation, she abruptly turned her back upon him.

After moving away, she intentionally remained standing near the duchess, with drooping head.
The latter hastily approached her, saying with admirably simulated earnestness: "You, Countess,
will probably be the last to refuse your approval of my interference against our knightly butterfly
and in behalf of the poor inexperienced girl, his victim."

"If that is your Highness's opinion," replied Cordula, shrugging her shoulders as if it were
necessary to submit to the inevitable, "for my part I fear your kind solicitude may send me
behind convent walls."

"Countess von Montfort a nun!"  cried the child wife, laughing.  "If it were Sir Heinz Schorlin
to whom you just alluded, you, too, are among the deluded ones whom we must pity, yet with
prudent foresight you provided compensation long ago.  Instead of burying yourself in a convent,
you, whom so many desire, would do better to beckon to one of your admirers and bestow on him
the happiness of which the other was not worthy."

Cordula fixed her eyes thoughtfully on the floor a short time, then, as if the advice had met
with her approval, exclaimed: "Your Royal Highness's mature wisdom has found the right expedient
this time also. I am not fit for the veil.  Perhaps you may hear news of me to-morrow. By that
time my choice will be determined.  What would you say to the dark-haired Altrosen?"

"A brave champion!" replied the Bohemian, and this time the laugh which accompanied her words
came from the heart.  "Try him, in the name of all the saints!  But look at Sir Heinz Schorlin!
A gloomy face for a happy man!  He does not seem quite pleased with our verdict."

She beckoned, as she spoke, to her chamberlain and the high steward, took leave of her imperial
father-in-law and, with her pretty little head flung proudly back, rustled out of the hall.

Soon after Herr Pfinzing ushered Ernst Ortlieb, his daughter, and Wolff into the presence of
the sovereign, who gazed as if restored to youth at the handsome couple whose weal or woe was
in his hands.  This consciousness afforded him one of the moments when he gratefully felt the
full beauty and dignity of his responsible position.

With friendly words he restored Wolff's liberty, and expressed the expectation that, with such
a companion, he would raise the noble house of his ancestors to fresh prosperity.

When he at last turned to Heinz again he asked in a low tone: "Do you know what this day means
to me?"

"Nineteen years ago it gave you poor Hartmann," replied the knight, his downcast eyes resting
sadly on the floor.

The kind-hearted sovereign nodded significantly, and said, "Then it must benefit those who,
so long as he lives, may expect his father's favour."

He gazed thoughtfully into vacancy and, faithful to his habit of fixing his eye on a goal,
often distant, and then carefully carrying out the details which were to ensure success, ere
he turned to the next one, he summoned the imperial magistrate and the First Losunger to his side.

After disclosing to them his desire to allow the judges to decide and, should the verdict go
against Biberli, release him from punishment by a pardon, both undertook to justify the absence
of the accused from the trial.  The wise caution with which the Emperor Rudolph avoided interfering
with the rights of the Honourable Council afforded old Herr Berthold Vorchtel great satisfaction. He
had pity upon him, and gave him to understand that he was of his kindred. After that, he was elected
to be Emperor of Rome. But he would not be Emperor lest he should be reproached of his birth
that had before been concealed from him. He departed thence, and lived afterwards within yonder.
Now is it said that he is one of the best knights in the world, insomuch
that none durst take possession of this castle for dread of him, nor
of this great forest that lieth round about it.

For, when the vavasour that dwelt here was dead, he left to Messire Gawain, his foster-son, this
castle, and made me guardian thereof until such time as Messire Gawain should return."

II.

The King looketh at Messire Gawain, and seeth him stoop his head toward the ground for shame.

"Fair
nephew, be not ashamed, for as well might you reproach me of the same. Of your birth hath there
been great joy, and dearly ought one to love the place and honour
it, where so good a knight as are you was born."

When the priest understood that it was Messire Gawain, he made great cheer to him, and was
all ashamed of that he had recorded as concerning his birth. But he saith to him: "Sir, small
blame ought you to have herein, for you were confirmed in the law that God hath established and
in loyalty of marriage of King Lot and your mother. This thing King Arthur well knoweth, and
our Lord God be praised for that, you have come hither!"

BRANCH XXIV.

TITLE I.

Here the story is silent of the kingdom, and of King Arthur and Messire Gawain that remain in
the castle to maintain and guard it until they shall have garnished it of folk. Here speaketh
it word of the knight's son of the Waste Manor, there whither the brachet led Messire Gawain
where he found the knight that Lancelot had slain. He had one son whose name was Meliant, and he had
not forgotten his father's death; rather, thereof did wrath rankle in his heart. He heard
tell that Briant of the Isles had great force and great puissance, and that he warred upon
King Arthur's land, insomuch as that he had already slain many of his knights. Thitherward
goeth he, and is come to where Briant was in a castle of his own. He telleth him how Lancelot
had slain his father in such sort, and prayeth him right courteously that he would make him
knight, for that right fain would he avenge his father, and therefore would he help him in
the war the best he might. Briant made much joy thereof, and made him knight in right costly
sort, and he was the comeliest knight and the most valiant of his age in Briant's court, and greatly
did he desire to meet with Lancelot. They marvelled much in the land and kingdom what had become
of him. The more part thought that he was dead, albeit dead he was
not, but rather sound and hale and whole, had it not been for the
death of Queen Guenievre, whereof the sorrow so lay at his heart that
he might not forget it. He rode one day amidst a forest, and overtook
a knight and a damsel that made great joy together, singing and making
disport.

"By God," saith the damsel, "If this knight that cometh
here will remain, he shall have right good lodging. It is already
nigh eventide, and never will he find hostel so good to-day."  So, Heinz, you caused his hasty act, and therefor, are justly
bound to answer for the consequence; If he brings the accusation, the judges will condemn you
to pay the sum.  I therefore ask whether you have it ready."

Here Herr Ernst attempted to explain that, in the present state of affairs, there could be
no further mention of a payment which was only, intended to punish the disturber of his domestic
peace more severely; but the Emperor stopper him and bade Heinz speak.

The latter gazed in embarrassment at the helmet he held in his hand, and had not yet found;
fitting answer when the Emperor cried: "What am I to think?  Was the Duke of Pomerani; wrong
when he told me of a heap of gold----"

"No, Your Majesty," Heinz here interrupter without raising his eyes. "What was left of the
money would have more than sufficed to cover the sum required----"

"I thought so!" exclaimed the sovereign with out letting him finish; "for a young knight who
like a great lord, bestows a fine estate upon the pious Franciscans, certainly need only command
his treasurer to open the strong box----"

"You are mocking me, Your Majesty," Heinz quietly interposed.  "You are doubtless well aware
whence the golden curse came to me.  I thrust it aside like noxious poison, and if I am reluctant
to use it to buy, as it were, what is dearest and most sacred to me, indeed it does not spring
from parsimony, for I had resolved to offer the two remaining purses to the devout Sisters
of St. Clare and the zealous Minorite Brothers, one of the best of whom laboured earnestly
for the salvation of my soul."

"That is right, my son," fell from the Emperor's lips in a tone of warm approval.  "If the
gold benefits the holy poverty of these pious Brothers and Sisters, the devil's gift may easily
be transformed into a divine blessing.  You both--" he gazed affectionately at Heinz and Eva
as he spoke--"have, as it were, deserted the cloister, and owe it compensation. But your depriving
yourself of your golden treasure, my friend--for two hundred silver marks are no trifle to
a young knight--puts so different a face upon this matter that--that----"  Here he lowered
his voice and continued with affectionate  mirthfulness--"that a  friend must determine to
do what he can for him.  True, my gallant Heinz, I see that your future father-in-law, the
other Nuremberg Honourables, and even your mother, are ready to pay the sum; but he who is
most indebted to you holds fast this privilege, and that man am I, my brave champion!  What
you did for your Emperor and his best work, the peace of the country, deserves a rich reward
and, thanks to the saints, I have something which will discharge my debt.  The Swabian fief
of Reichenbach became vacant. It has a strong citadel, from which we command you to maintain
the peace of the country and overthrow robber knights.  This fief shall be yours. You can enjoy
it with your dear wife.  It must belong to your children and children's children forever; for
that a Schorlin should be born who would be unworthy of such a fief and faithless to his lord
and Emperor seems to me impossible.  Three villages and broad forests, with fields and meadows,
pertain to the estate.  As lord of Reichenbach, it will be easy for you to pay the blood money,
if your father-in-law is not too importunate a creditor."

The latter certainly would not be that, and it cost Ernst Ortlieb no effort to bend the knee
gratefully before the kindly monarch.

The Emperor Rudolph accepted the homage, but he clasped the young lord of Reichenbach to his
heart like a beloved son, and as he placed Eva's hand in his, and she raised her beautiful
face to him, he stooped and kissed her with fatherly kindness.

When Wolff entreated him to bless his alliance in the place of his suffering father, he did
so gladly; and Els also willingly offered him her lips; when he requested the same favour her
sister had granted him, that he might boast of the kisses bestowed on him by the two beautiful
Es, Nuremberg's fairest maidens.

CHAPTER XIX.

Heinz heeded Cordula's warning.  In the royal hall every one would have been justified in believing
him a very cool lover, but during the walk with Eva to the lodgings of his cousin Maier of
Silenen, where the Schurlins, Ortliebs, Wolff, and Herr Pfinzing and his wife were to meet
to celebrate the betrothal, the moon, whose increasing crescent was again in the sky, beheld
many things which gave her pleasure.

The priest soon united Heinz and Eva, but the celestial pilgrim willingly resigned the power
formerly exerted over the maiden to the husband, who clasped her to his heart with tender love.

Luna was satisfied with Wolff and Els also.  She afterwards watched the fate of both couples
in Swabia and Nuremberg, and when the showy escutcheon was removed from the Eysvogel mansion,
and a more modest one put in its place, she was gratified.

She soon saw that a change had also been made in the one above the door of the Ortlieb house,
for the Ortlieb coat of arms, in accordance with the family name, had borne the figure of a
cat, the animal which loves the place,--[Ort, place.]--the house to which it belongs, but on
the wedding day of the two beautiful Es the Emperor Rudolph had commanded that, in perpetual
remembrance of its two loveliest daughters, the Ortliebs should henceforward bear on their
escutcheon two linden leaves under tendrils, the symbol of loyal steadfastness.

When, a few months after Wolff's union with his heart's beloved, the coffin of old Countess
Rotterbach, adorned with a handsome coronet upon the costly pall, was borne out of the house
at the quiet evening hour, she thought there was no cause to mourn.

On the other hand, she grieved when, for a long time, she did not see old Casper Eysvogel,
whose tall figure she had formerly watched with pleasure when, at a late hour, he returned
from some banquet, his bearing erect, and his step as firm as if wine could not get the better
of him.  But suddenly one warm September noon, when her pale, waxing crescent was plainly visible
in the blue sky by daylight, she beheld him again.  He was less erect than before, but he seemed
content with his fate; for, as a cooler breeze waved the light cobwebs in the little garden,
into which he had been led, his daughter-in-law Els with loving care wrapped his feet in the
rug which she had embroidered for him with the Eysvogel coat of arms, and he gratefully kissed
her brow.

It was fully ten years later that Luna saw him also borne to the grave. Frau Rosalinde, his
son, and his beautiful wife followed his coffin with sincere sorrow.  The three gifted children
whom Els had given to her Wolff remained standing in front of the house with Frau Rickel, their
nurse.  The carrier's widow, who had long since regained her health in the Beguine House at
Schweinau, had been taken into Frau Eysvogel's service.  Her little adopted daughter Walpurga,
scarcely seventeen years old, had just been married to the Ortlieb teamster Ortel.  The moon
heard the nurse tell what a pleasant, quiet man Herr Casper had been, and how, away from his
own business affairs and those of the Council, his sole effort had seemed to be to interfere
with no one.

The moon had forgotten to look at Frau Rosalinde.  Besides, after her mother's death she was
rarely seen even by the members of her own household, but when Els desired to seek her she
was sure of finding her with the children.  The parents willingly afforded her the pleasure
she derived from the companionship of the little ones, but they were often obliged to oppose
her wish to dress her grandchildren magnificently.

Frau Rosalinde rarely saw the twin sons of her daughter Isabella, who took the veil after her
husband's death to pray for his sorely imperilled soul.

The Knight Heideck, the uncle and faithful teacher of the boys, was unwilling to let them go
to the city.  He ruled them strictly until they had proved that Countess Cordula's wish had
been fulfilled and, resembling their unfortunate father only in figure and beauty, strength
and courage, they had grown into valiant, honourable knights.

Wolff justified the expectations of Berthold Vorchtel and the Honourable Council concerning
his excellent ability.  When, eight years after he undertook the sole guidance of the business,
the Reichstag again met in Nuremberg, it was the house of Eysvogel which could make the largest
loan to the Emperor Rudolph, who often lacked necessary funds.

At the Reichstag of the year 1289, whose memory is shadowed by many a sorrowful incident, most
of the persons mentioned in our story met once more.

Countess Cordula, now the happy wife of Sir Boemund Altrosen, had also come and again lodged
in the Ortlieb house.  But this time the only person whose homage pleased her was the grey-haired,
but still vigorous and somewhat irascible Herr Ernst Ortlieb.

The Abbess Kunigunde alone was absent.  When, after many an arduous conflict, especially with
the Dominicans, who did not cease to accuse her of lukewarmness, she felt death approaching,
she had summoned her darling Eva from Swabia, and the young wife's husband, who never left
her save when he was wielding his sword for the Emperor, willingly accompanied her to Nuremberg.

With Eva's hand clasped in hers, and supported by Els, the abbess died peacefully, rich in
beautiful hopes.  How often she had described such an end to her pupil as the fairest reward
for the sacrifices in which convent life was so rich!  But the memory of her mother's decease
had brought to Eva, while in Schweinau, the firm conviction that dwellers in the world were
also permitted to find a similar end.  The Saviour Himself had promised the crown of eternal
life to those who were faithful unto death, and she and her husband maintained inviolable fidelity
to the Saviour, to each other, and to every duty which religion, law, and love commanded them
to fulfil.  Therefore, why should they not be permitted to die as happily and confidently as
her aunt, the abbess?

Her life was rich in happiness, and though Heinz Schorlin as a husband and father, as the brave
and loyal liegeman of his Emperor, and the prudent manager of his estate, regained his former
light-heartedness, and taught his wife to share it, both never forgot the painful conflict
by which they had won each other.

When Eva passed the village forge and saw the smith draw the glowing iron from the fire and,
with heavy hammer strokes, fashion it upon the anvil as he desired, she often remembered the
grievous days after her mother's death, which had made the "little saint"--she did not admit
it herself, but the whole Swabian nobility agreed in the opinion--the most faithful of wives
and mothers, the Providence of the poor, the zealous promoter of goodness, the most simply
attired of noblewomen far and near, yet the most aristocratic and distinguished in her appearance
of them all. 

King Arthur was at Cardoil, and so were his knights together with him. He thought to be assured
in his kingdom and to live peaceably; but what time he sate at meat one day in Cardoil, behold
you thereupon a knight that cometh before the Table Round without saluting him.
  He and Katterle knew what she meant, for the ex-schoolmaster
had explained it in the best possible way to his docile wife.

