Willy did as Peppo suggested and his thirst became easier to bear. Captain Brown who happened
to be standing by and overheard this conversation most heartily approved of the plan.  Since
the rescue from the shipwreck he had been a different man.  Redfox no longer held him in his
power; drinking and gambling had no attractions for him and he turned away from "his bad angel"
in disgust. However, when out about eight hundred feet the machine began pitching again, and,
in one of its starts downward, struck the ground. The distance over the ground was measured and
found to be 852 feet; the time of the flight 59 seconds.

Next day Lihoa's prophecy came true.  The heavens clouded over and there came a frightful thunderstorm.
The rain poured down.  The thirsty men caught it by spreading out the sails and soon the empty
casks were filled.  Its coming gave relief to dire distress but brought with it a new misery.
The water soaked and rotted the sun-dried wood of the wreck, which the Chinese had made into
small huts, until fever broke out to add to the suffering caused by scurvy.  The coming of
the fever more than anything else caused the Chinese to lose their faith in the God of the
Golden Fish.

"Neither by discord, the sea, nor thirst, concerning which our lying priest warned us, have
we lost a single one of our number, but now disease rages until our men die like flies," said
Lihoa.

From this time on all of the sick were willing to be baptized--not by the Captain but by the
two boys, Willy and Peppo.  The Captain became very ill and Willy nursed him.  Redfox was taken
with fever, and in his delirium would trust no one to wait upon him.  Constantly he cried "Water!
water!" then would not take it when offered him.  Willy gave him a glass and he threw it at
his head screaming, "Poison! poison! The boy wants to poison me!"  One morning he was gone.
His companions searched for him in vain, and finally recognized his agonizing cries from the
opposite shore where the cannibals were torturing him. Owing to the impossibility of obtaining
suitable material for a 200-square-foot machine, we were compelled to make it only 165 square
feet in area, which, according to the Lilienthal tables, would be supported at an angle of three
degrees in a wind of about 21 miles per hour.

      On the very day that the machine was completed the wind blew from
25 to 30 miles per hour, and we took it out for a trial as a kite.

We found that while it was supported with a man on it in a wind of about 25 miles, its angle
was much nearer 20 degrees than three degrees.  Of the crew
barely a dozen were left; and of the Chinamen not more than fifty, and all of them were suffering
from scurvy.  They wandered about looking more like ghosts than human beings, and now still
another danger threatened.  For a long time they had noticed that the cannibals were preparing
to attack them.

"How shall we protect ourselves?" asked the Captain; "if they really do fall upon us, we are
lost.  Willy go have Peppo tell his people who have not been baptized that it is high time
that they attend to the matter, and then climb the mast to see if you can make out what the
cannibals are doing.  We will sell our hides as dearly as possible."

