As during the last year of his life the King became more and more costive, Fagon made him eat
at the commencement of his repasts many iced fruits, that is to say, mulberries, melons, and
figs rotten from ripeness; and at his dessert many other fruits, finishing with a surprising
quantity of sweetmeats.  All the year round he ate at supper a prodigious quantity of salad.
His soups, several of which he partook of morning and evening, were full of gravy, and were
of exceeding strength, and everything that was served to him was full of spice, to double the
usual extent, and very strong also.  This regimen and the sweetmeats together Fagon did not
like, and sometimes while seeing the King eat, he would make most amusing grimaces, without
daring however to say anything except now and then to Livry and Benoist, who replied that it
was their business to feed the King, and his to doctor him.  The King never ate any kind of
venison or water-fowl, but otherwise partook of everything, fete days and fast days alike,
except that during the last twenty years of his life he observed some few days of Lent.

This summer he redoubled his regime of fruits and drinks.  At last the former clogged his stomach,
taken after soup, weakened the digestive organs and took away his appetite, which until then
had never failed him all his life, though however late dinner might be delayed he never was
hungry or wanted to eat.  But after the first spoonfuls of soup, his appetite came, as I have
several times heard him say, and he ate so prodigiously and so solidly morning and evening
that no one could get accustomed to see it.  So much water and so much fruit unconnected by
anything spirituous, turned his blood into gangrene; while those forced night sweats diminished
its strength and impoverished it; and thus his death was caused, as was seen by the opening
of his body.  The organs were found in such good and healthy condition that there is reason
to believe he would have lived beyond his hundredth year.  His stomach above all astonished,
and also his bowels by their volume and extent, double that of the ordinary, whence it came
that he was such a great yet uniform eater.  Remedies were not thought of until it was no longer
time, because Fagon would never believe him ill, or Madame de Maintenon either; though at the
same time she had taken good care to provide for her own retreat in the case of his death.
Amidst all this, the King felt his state before they felt it, and said so sometimes to his
valets: Fagon always reassured him, but did nothing.  The King was contented with what was
said to him without being persuaded: but his friendship for Fagon restrained him, and Madame
de Maintenon still more.

On Wednesday, the 14th of August, the King was carried to hear mass for the last time; held
the Council of State, ate a meat dinner, and had music in Madame de Maintenon's rooms.  He
supped in his chamber, where the Court saw him as at his dinner; was with his family a short
time in his cabinet, and went to bed a little after ten.

On Thursday, the Festival of the Assumption, he heard mass in his bed. The night had been disturbed
and bad.  He dined in his bed, the courtiers being present, rose at five and was carried to
Madame de Maintenon's, where music was played.  He supped and went to bed as on the previous
evening.  As long as he could sit up he did the same.

On Friday, the 16th of August, the night had been no better; much thirst and drink.  The King
ordered no one to enter until ten.  Mass and dinner in his bed as before; then he was carried
to Madame de Maintenon's; he played with the ladies there, and afterwards there was a grand
concert.

