You have robbed me of the thought that gave me peace. You have taught me to despise where I
prayed before. A thousand things were venerable in my sight till your dismal wisdom stripped
off the veil from them. I saw a crowd of people streaming to church, I heard their enthusiastic
devotion poured forth in a common act of prayer and praise; twice did I stand beside a deathbed,
and saw--wonderful power of religion!--the hope of heaven triumphant over the terror of annihilation,
and the serene light of joy beaming from the eyes of those departing.

"Surely that doctrine must be divine," I exclaimed, "which is acknowledged by the best among
men, which triumphs and comforts so wondrously!" Your cold-blooded wisdom extinguished my enthusiasm.
You affirmed that an equal number of devotees streamed formerly round the Irmensaeule and to
Jupiter's temple; an equal number of votaries, with like exultation, ascended the stake kindled
in honor of Brahma. "Can the very feeling," you added, "which you found so detestable in heathenism
prove the truth of your doctrine?"

You proceeded to say: "Trust nothing but your own reason. There is nothing holy, save truth."
I have obeyed you: I have sacrificed all my opinions, I have set fire to all my ships when
I landed on this island, and I have destroyed all my hopes of return. Never can I become reconciled
to a doctrine which I joyfully welcomed once. My reason is now all to me--my only warrant for
God, virtue, and immortality. Woe to me if I catch this, my only witness, in a contradiction!
if my esteem for its conclusions diminishes! if a broken vessel in my brain diverts its action!
My happiness is henceforth intrusted to the harmonious action of my sensorium: woe to me if
the strings of this instrument give a false note in the critical moments of my life--if my
convictions vary with my pulsations!

LETTER II.

Julius to Raphael.

Your doctrine has flattered my pride. I was a prisoner: you have led me out into the daylight;
the golden shimmer and the measureless vault have enraptured my eye. Formerly, I was satisfied
with the modest reputation of being a good son of my father's house, a friend of my friends,
a useful member of society. You have changed me into a citizen of the universe. At that time
my wishes had not aspired to infringe on the rights of the great: I tolerated these fortunate
people because beggars tolerated me. I did not blush to envy a part of the human race, because
there was a still larger part of humanity that I was obliged to pity. Meeting you, I learned
for the first time that my claims on enjoyment were as well founded as those of my brethren.
Now, for the first time, I learned that, raised one stratum above this atmosphere, I weighed
just as much and as little as the rulers of this world. Raphael severed all bonds of agreement
and of opinion. I felt myself quite free; for reason, as Raphael declared, is the only monarchy
in the world of spirits, and I carried my imperial throne in my brain. All things in heaven
and earth have no value, no estimation, except that which my reason grants them. The whole
creation is mine, for I possess an irresistible omnipotence, and am empowered to enjoy it fully.
All spirits--one degree below the most perfect Spirit--are my brethren, because we all obey
one rule, and do homage to one supremacy.

How magnificent and sublime this announcement sounds! What a field for my thirst of knowledge!
But--unlucky contradiction of nature--this free and soaring spirit is woven together with the
rigid, immovable clockwork of a mortal body, mixed up with its little necessities, and yoked
to its fate--this god is banished into a world of worms. The immense space of nature is opened
to his research, but he cannot think two ideas at the same time. With his eyes he reaches up
to the sunny focus of the Godhead, but he himself is obliged to creep after Him slowly and
wearily through the elements of time. To absorb one enjoyment he must give up all others: two
unlimited desires are too great for his little heart. Every fresh joy costs him the sum of
all previous joys. The present moment is the sepulchre of all that went before it. An idyllic
hour of love is an intermittent pulsation of friendship.

Wherever I look, Raphael, how limited man appears! How great the distance between his aims
and their fulfilment!--yet do not begrudge him his soothing slumber. Wake him not! He was so
happy before he began to inquire whither he was to go and whence he came! Reason is a torch
in a prison. The prisoner knew nothing of the light, but a dream of freedom appeared over him
like a flash in the night which leaves the darkness deeper than before. Our philosophy is the
unhappy curiosity of Oedipus, who did not cease to inquire till the dreadful oracle was unravelled.
Mayest thou never learn who thou art!

Does your wisdom replace what it has set aside? If you had no key to open heaven, why did you
lead me away from earth? If you knew beforehand that the way to wisdom leads through the frightful
abyss of doubt, why did you venture the innocence of your friend Julius on this desperate throw?--

   If to the good, which I propose to do,
   Something very bad borders far too near,
   I prefer not to do this good.

You have pulled down a shelter that was inhabited, and founded a splendid but lifeless palace
on the spot.

Raphael, I claim my soul from you! I am unhappy. My courage is gone. I despair of my own strength.
Write to me soon!--your healing hand alone can pour balm on my burning wounds.

LETTER III.

Raphael to Julius.

Julius, happiness such as ours, if unbroken, would be too much for human lot. This thought
often haunted me even in the full enjoyment of our friendship. This thought, then darkening
our happiness, was a salutary foretaste, intended to mitigate the pain of my present position.
Hardened in the stern school of resignation, I am still more susceptible of the comfort of
seeing in our separation a slight sacrifice whose merit may win from fate the reward of our
future reunion. You did not yet know what privation was. You suffer for the first time.

And yet it is perhaps an advantage for you that I have been torn from you exactly at this time.
You have to endure a malady, from which you can only perfectly recover by your own energy,
so as not to suffer a relapse. The more deserted you feel, the more you will stir up all healing
power in yourself, and in proportion as you derive little or no benefit from temporary and
deceptive palliatives, the more certainly will you succeed in eradicating the evil fundamentally.

I do not repent that I roused you from your dream, though your present position is painful.
I have done nothing more than hasten a crisis, which every soul like yours has sooner or later
to pass through, and where the essential thing is, at what time of life it is endured. There
are times and seasons when it is terrible to doubt truth and virtue. Woe to the man who has
to fight through the quibbles of a self-sufficient reason while he is immersed in the storms
of the passions. I have felt in its fulness all that is expressed by this, and, to preserve
you from similar troubles I could devise no means but to ward off the pestilence by timely
inoculation.

Nor could I, my dear Julius, choose a more propitious time? I met you in the full and glorious
bloom of youthful intelligence and bodily vigor, before you had been oppressed by care or enchained
by passion; fully prepared, in your freedom and strength, to stand the great fight, of which
a sublime tranquillity, produced by conviction, is the prize. Truth and error had not yet been
interwoven with your interests. Your enjoyments and virtues were independent of both. You required
no images of terror to tear you from low dissipation. The feeling for nobler joys had made
these odious to you. You were good from instinct and from unconsecrated moral grace. I had
nothing to fear for your morality, if a building crumbled down on which it was not founded.
Nor do your anxieties alarm me, though you may conjure up many dark anticipations in your melancholy
mood. I know you better, Julius!

You are ungrateful, too! You despise the reason, and forget what joys it has procured you.
Though you might have escaped the dangers of doubt all your life, still it was my duty not
to deprive you of the pleasures which you were capable of enjoying. The height at which you
were was not worthy of you. The way up which you climbed gave you compensation for all of which
I deprived you. I still recall the delight--with what delight you blessed the moment when the
bandage dropped from your eyes! The warmth with which you grasped the truth possibly may have
led your all-devouring imagination to an abyss at sight of which you draw back shuddering.

I must follow the course of your inquiries to discover the sources of your complaints. You
have written down the results of your thoughts: send me these papers and then I will answer you.

LETTER IV.

Julius to Raphael.

I have been looking over my papers this morning. Among them I have found a lost memorandum
written down in those happy hours when I was inspired with a proud enthusiasm. But on looking
over it how different seem all the things treated of! My former views look like the gloomy
boarding of a playhouse when the lights have been removed. My heart sought a philosophy, and
imagination substituted her dreams. I took the warmest for the truest coloring.

I seek for the laws of spirits--I soar up to the infinite, but I forget to prove that they
really exist. A bold attack of materialism overthrows my creation.

You will read through this fragment, my dear Raphael. Would that you could succeed in kindling
once again the extinct flames of my enthusiasm, to reconcile me again to my genius! but my
pride has sunk so low that even Raphael's friendly hand can hardly raise me up again.

THEOSOPHY OF JULILTS.

THE WORLD AND THE THINKING BEING.

The universe is a thought of God. After this ideal thought-fabric passed out into reality,
and the new-born world fulfilled the plan of its Creator--permit me to use this human simile--the
first duty of all thinking beings has been to retrace the original design in this great reality;
to find the principle in the mechanism, the unity in the compound, the law in the phenomenon,
and to pass back from the structure to its primitive foundation. Accordingly to me there is
only one appearance in nature--the thinking being. The great compound called the world is only
remarkable to me because it is present to shadow forth symbolically the manifold expressions
of that being. All in me and out of me is only the hieroglyph of a power which is like to me.
The laws of nature are the cyphers which the thinking mind adds on to make itself understandable
to intelligence--the alphabet by means of which all spirits communicate with the most perfect
Spirit and with one another. Harmony, truth, order, beauty, excellence, give me joy, because
they transport me into the active state of their author, of their possessor, because they betray
the presence of a rational and feeling Being, and let me perceive my relationship with that
Being. A new experience in this kingdom of truth: gravitation, the circulation of the blood,
the natural system of Linnaeus, correspond essentially in my mind to the discovery of an antique
dug up at Herculaneum--they are both only the reflections of one spirit, a renewed acquaintance
with a being like myself. I speak with the Eternal through the instrument of nature,--through
the world's history: I read the soul of the artist in his Apollo.

If you wish to be convinced, my clear Raphael, look back. Each state of the human mind has
some parable in the physical creation by which it is shadowed forth; nor is it only artists
and poets, but even the most abstract thinkers that have drawn from this source. Lively activity
we name fire; time is a stream that rolls on, sweeping all before it; eternity is a circle;
a mystery is hid in midnight gloom, and truth dwells in the sun. Nay, I begin to believe that
even the future destiny of the human race is prefigured in the dark oracular utterances of
bodily creation. Each coming spring, forcing the sprouts of plants out of the earth, gives
me explanations of the awful riddle of death, and contradicts my anxious fears about an everlasting
sleep. The swallow that we find stiffened in winter, and see waking up to life after; the dead
grub coming to life again as the butterfly and rising into the air,--all these give excellent
pictures of our immortality.

How strange all seems to me now, Raphael! Now all seems peopled round about me. To me there
is no solitude in nature. Wherever I see a body I anticipate a spirit. Wherever I trace movement
I infer thought.

Where no dead lie buried, where no resurrection will be, Omnipotence speaks to me this through
His works, and thus I understand the doctrine of the omnipresence of God.

IDEA.

All spirits are attracted by perfection. There may be deviations, but there is no exception
to this, for all strive after the condition of the highest and freest exercise of their powers;
all possess the common instinct of extending their sphere of action; of drawing all, and centring
all in themselves; of appropriating all that is good, all that is acknowledged as charming
and excellent. When the beautiful, the true, and the excellent are once seen, they are immediately
grasped at. A condition once perceived by us, we enter into it immediately. At the moment when
we think of them, we become possessors of a virtue, authors of an action, discoverers of a
truth, possessors of a happiness. We ourselves become the object perceived. Let no ambiguous
smile from you, dear Raphael, disconcert me here,--this assumption is the basis on which I
found all that follows, and we must be agreed before I take courage to complete the structure.

His inner feeling or innate consciousness tells every man almost the same thing. For example,
when we admire an act of magnanimity, of bravery and wisdom, does not a secret feeling spring
up in our heart that we are capable of doing the same? Does not the rush of blood coloring
our cheeks on hearing narratives of this kind proclaim that our modesty trembles at the admiration
called forth by such acts? that we are confused at the praise which this ennobling of our nature
must call down upon us? Even our body at such moments agrees with the attitude of the man,
and shows clearly that our soul has passed into the state we admire. If you were ever present,
Raphael, when a great event was related to a large assembly, did you not see how the relater
waited for the incense of praise, how he devoured it, though it was given to the hero of his
story,--and if you were ever a relater did you not trace how your heart was subject to this
pleasing deception? You have had examples, my dear Raphael, of how easily I can wrangle with
my best friend respecting the reading aloud of a pleasing anecdote or of a beautiful poem,
and my heart told me truly on these occasions that I was only displeased at your carrying off
the laurels because these passed from the head of author to that of the reader. A quick and
deep artistic appreciation of virtue is justly held to be a great aptitude for virtue, in the
same way as it is usual to have no scruple in distrusting the heart of a man whose intelligence
is slow to take in moral beauty.

You need not advance as an objection that, frequently, coupled with a lively perception of
a perfection, the opposite failing is found to coexist, that evil-doers are often possessed
with strong enthusiasm for what is excellent, and that even the weak flame up into enthusiasm
of herculean growth. I know, for example, that our admired Haller, who unmasked in so manly
a spirit the sickly nothingness of vain honors; a man whose philosophical greatness I so highly
appreciated, that he was not great enough to despise the still greater vanity of an order of
knighthood, which conferred an injury on his greatness. I am convinced that in the happy moment
of their ideal conceptions, the artist, the philosopher, and the poet are really the great
and good man whose image they throw out; but with many this ennobling of the mind is only an
unnatural condition occasioned by a more active stirring of the blood, or a more rapid vibration
of the fancy: it is accordingly very transient, like every other enchantment, disappearing
rapidly and leaving the heart more exhausted than before, and delivered over to the despotic
caprice of low passions. I expressly said more exhausted than before, for universal experience
teaches that a relapsing criminal is always the most furious, and that the renegades of virtue
seek additional sweets in the arms of crime to compensate for the heavy pressure of repentance.

I wished to establish, my Raphael, that it is our own condition, when we feel that of another,
that perfection becomes ours for the moment during which we raise in ourselves the representation
of it; that the delight we take in truth, beauty, and virtue shows itself when closely analyzed
to be the consciousness of our individual ennobling and enriching; and I think I have proved this.

We have ideas of the wisdom of the highest Being, of His goodness, of His justice, but none
of His omnipotence. To describe His omnipotence, we help ourselves by the graduated representation
of three successions: Nothing, His Will, and Something. It is waste and empty; God calls on
light; and there is light. If we had a real idea of His operative omnipotence we should be
creators, as He.

Accordingly, every perfection which I perceive becomes my own; it gives me joy, because it
is my own; I desire it, because I love myself. Perfection in nature is no property of matter,
but of spirits. All spirits are happy through their perfection. I desire the happiness of all
souls, because I love myself. The happiness which I represent to myself becomes my happiness;
accordingly I am interested in awakening these representations, to realize them, to exalt them;
I am interested in diffusing happiness around me. Whenever I produce beauty, excellence, or
enjoyment beyond myself, I produce myself; when I neglect or destroy anything, I neglect, I
destroy myself. I desire the happiness of others, because I desire my own; and the desire of
the happiness of others we call benevolence and love.

LOVE.

Now, my most worthy Raphael, let me look round. The height has been ascended, the mist is dissipated;
I stand in the midst of immensity, as in the middle of a glowing landscape. A purer ray of
sunlight has clarified all my thoughts. Love is the noblest phenomenon in the world of souls,
the all-powerful magnet in the spiritual sphere, the source of devotion and of the sublimest
virtue. Yet love is only the reflection of this single original power, an attraction of the
excellent, based upon an instantaneous permutation of individuality, an interchange of being.

When I hate, I take something from myself; when I love, I become richer by what I love. To
pardon is to recover a property that has been lost. Misanthropy is a protracted suicide: egotism
is the supremest poverty of a created being.

When Raphael tore himself from my embrace my soul was rent in twain, and I weep over the loss
of my nobler half. On that holy evening--you must remember it--when our souls first communed
together in ardent sympathy, all your great emotions became my own, and I only entered into
my unvarying right of property over your excellence; I was prouder to love you than to be loved
by you, for my own affection had changed me into Raphael.

   Was it not this almighty instinct
   That forced our hearts to meet
   In the eternal bond of love?
   Raphael! enraptured, resting on your arm,
   I venture, joyful, the march towards perfection,
   That leadeth to the spiritual sun.

   Happy! happy! I have found thee,
   Have secured thee 'midst millions,
   And of all this multitude thou art mine!
   Let the wild chaos return;
   Let it cast adrift the atoms!
   Forever our hearts fly to meet each other.

   Must I not draw reflections of my ecstasy
   From thy radiant, ardent eyes?
   In thee alone do I wonder at myself.
   The earth in brighter tints appears,
   Heaven itself shines in more glowing light,
   Seen through the soul and action of my friend.

   Sorrow drops the load of tears;
   Soothed, it rests from passion's storms,
   Nursed upon the breast of love.
   Nay, delight grows torment, and seeks
   My Raphael, basking in thy soul,
   Sweetest sepulchre! impatiently.

   If I alone stood in the great All of things,
   Dreamed I of souls in the very rocks,
   And, embracing, I would have kissed them.
   I would have sighed my complaints into the air;
   The chasms would have answered me.
   O fool! sweet sympathy was every joy to me.

Love does not exist between monotonous souls, giving out the same tone; it is found between
harmonious souls. With pleasure I find again my feelings in the mirror of yours, but with more
ardent longing I devour the higher emotions that are wanting in me. Friendship and love are
led by one common rule. The gentle Desdemona loves Othello for the dangers through which he
has passed; the manly Othello loves her for the tears that she shed hearing of his troubles.

There are moments in life when we are impelled to press to our heart every flower, every remote
star, each worm, and the sublimest spirit we can think of. We are impelled to embrace them,
and all nature, in the arms of our affection, as things most loved. You understand me, Raphael.
A man who has advanced so far as to read off all the beauty, greatness, and excellence in the
great and small of nature, and to find the great unity for this manifold variety, has advanced
much nearer to the Divinity. The great creation flows into his personality. If each man loved
all men, each individual would possess the whole world.

I fear that the philosophy of our time contradicts this doctrine. Many of our thinking brains
have undertaken to drive out by mockery this heavenly instinct from the human soul, to efface
the effigy of Deity in the soul, and to dissolve this energy, this noble enthusiasm, in the
cold, killing breath of a pusillanimous indifference. Under the slavish influence of their
own unworthiness they have entered into terms with self-interest, the dangerous foe of benevolence;
they have done this to explain a phenomenon which was too godlike for their narrow hearts.
They have spun their comfortless doctrine out of a miserable egotism, and they have made their
own limits the measure of the Creator; degenerate slaves decrying freedom amidst the rattle
of their own chains. Swift, who exaggerated the follies of men till he covered the whole race
with infamy, and wrote at length his own name on the gallows which he had erected for it--even
Swift could not inflict such deadly wounds on human nature as these dangerous thinkers, who,
laying great claim to penetration, adorn their system with all the specious appearance of art,
and strengthen it with all the arguments of self-interest.

Why should the whole species suffer for the shortcomings of a few members?

I admit freely that I believe in the existence of a disinterested love. I am lost if I do not
exist; I give up the Deity, immortality, and virtue. I have no remaining proof of these hopes
if I cease to believe in love. A spirit that loves itself alone is an atom giving out a spark
in the immeasurable waste of space.

SACRIFICE.

But love has produced effects that seem to contradict its nature.

It can be conceived that I increase my own happiness by a sacrifice which I offer for the happiness
of others; but suppose this sacrifice is my life? History has examples of this kind of sacrifice,
and I feel most vividly that it would cost me nothing to die in order to save Raphael. How
is it possible that we can hold death to be a means of increasing the sum of our enjoyments?
How can the cessation of my being be reconciled with the enriching of my being?

The assumption of immortality removes this contradiction; but it also displaces the supreme
gracefulness of this act of sacrifice. The consideration of a future reward excludes love.
There must be a virtue which even without the belief in immortality, even at the peril of annihilation,
suffices to carry out this sacrifice.

I grant it is ennobling to the human soul to sacrifice present enjoyment for a future eternal
good; it is the noblest degree of egotism; but egotism and love separate humanity into two
very unlike races, whose limits are never confounded.

Egotism erects its centre in itself; love places it out of itself in the axis of the universal
whole. Love aims at unity, egotism at solitude. Love is the citizen ruler of a flourishing
republic, egotism is a despot in a devastated creation. Egotism sows for gratitude, love for
the ungrateful. Love gives, egotism lends; and love does this before the throne of judicial
truth, indifferent if for the enjoyment of the following moment, or with the view to a martyr's
crown--indifferent whether the reward is in this life or in the next.

Think, O Raphael, of a truth that benefits the whole human race to remote ages; add that this
truth condemns its confessor to death; that this truth can only be proved and believed if he
dies. Conceive this man gifted with the clear all-embracing and illumining eye of genius, with
the flaming torch of enthusiasm, with all the sublime adaptations for love; let the grand ideal
of this great effect be presented to his soul; let him have only an obscure anticipation of
all the happy beings he will make; let the present and future crowd at the same time into his
soul; and then answer me,--does this man require to be referred to a future life?

The sum of all these emotions will become confounded with his personality; will flow together
in his personal identity, his I or Ego. The human race he is thinking of is himself. It is
a body, in which his life swims forgotten like a blood-drop, forgotten, but essential to the
welfare of the economy; and how quickly and readily he will shed it to secure his health.

GOD.

All perfections in the universe are united in God. God and nature are two magnitudes which
are quite alike. The whole sum of harmonic activity which exists together in the divine substance,
is in nature the antitype of this substance, united to incalculable degrees, and measures,
and steps. If I may be allowed this expressive imagery, nature is an infinitely divided God.

Just as in the prism a white ray of light is split up into seven darker shades of color, so
the divine personality or Ego has been broken into countless susceptible substances. As seven
darker shades melt together in one clear pencil of light, out of the union of all these substances
a divine being would issue. The existing form of nature's fabric is the optical glass, and
all the activities of spirits are only an endless play of colors of that simple divine ray.
If it pleased Omnipotence some day to break up this prism, the barrier between it and the world
would fall down, all spirits would be absorbed in one infinite spirit, all accords would flow
together in one common harmony, all streams would find their end in the ocean.

The bodily form of nature came to pass through the attractive force of the elements. The attraction
of spirits, varied and developed infinitely, would at length lead to the cessation of that
separation (or may I venture the expression) would produce God. An attraction of this kind is love.

Accordingly, my dear Raphael, love is the ladder by which we climb up to likeness to God. Unconsciously
to ourselves, without laying claim to it, we aim at this.

   Lifeless masses are we, when we hate;
   Gods, when we cling; in love to one another,
   Rejoicing in the gentle bond of love.
   Upwards this divinest impulse holdeth sway
   Through the thousandfold degrees of creation
   Of countless spirits who did not create.

   Arm-in-arm, higher and still higher,
   From the savage to the Grecian seer,
   Who is linked to the last seraph of the ring,
   We turn, of one mind, in the same magic dance,
   Till measure, and e'en time itself,
   Sink at death in the boundless, glowing sea.

   Friendless was the great world's blaster;
   And feeling this, he made the spirit world
   Blessed mirrors of his own blessedness!
   And though the Highest found no equal,
   Yet infinitude foams upward unto Him
   From the vast basin of creation's realm.

Love is, Raphael, the great secret that can restore the dishonored king of gold from the flat,
unprofitable chalk; that can save the eternal from the temporal and transient, and the great
oracle of duration from the consuming conflagration of time.

What does all that has been said amount to?

If we perceive excellence, it is ours. Let us become intimate with the high ideal unit, and
we shall be drawn to one another in brotherly love. If we plant beauty and joy we shall reap
beauty and joy. If we think clearly we shall love ardently. "Be ye perfect, as your Father
in heaven is perfect," says the Founder of our Faith. Weak human nature turned pale at this
command, therefore He explained himself in clearer terms: "Love one another!"

   Wisdom, with thy sunlike look,
   Awful goddess! turn thee back,
    And give way to Love;
   Who before thee went, with hero heart,
   Up the steep and stormy path
   To the Godhead's very throne;
   Who, unveiling the Holiest,
   Showed to thee Elysium
   Through the vaulted sepulchre.
    Did it not invite us in?
   Could we reach immortality--
   Or could we seek the spirit
   Without Love, the spirit's master?
   Love, Love leadeth only to Nature's Father,
    Only love the spirits.

I have now given you, Raphael, my spirit's confession of faith--a flying outline of the creation
I have undertaken. As you may perceive, the seed which you scattered in my soul took root.
Mock, or rejoice, or blush at your scholar, as you please. Certain it is this philosophy has
ennobled my heart, and extended and beautified the perspective of my life. It is possible,
my excellent friend, that the entire structure of my conclusions may have been a baseless and
visionary edifice. Perhaps the world, as I depicted it, nowhere exists, save in the brain of
your Julius. Perhaps, after the lapse of thousands on thousands of years, when the wiser Judge
promised in the future, sits on the judgment-seat, at the sight of the true original, filled
with confusion, I should tear in pieces my schoolboy's design. All this may happen--I expect
it; and even if not a vestige of reality is found in my dream, the reality will fill me with
proportionately greater delight and wonder. Ought my ideas to be more beautiful than those
of the Creator? How so? Could we tolerate that His exalted artistic structure should fall beneath
the expectations of a mortal connoisseur? This is exactly the fiery probation of His great
perfection, and the sweetest triumph for the Exalted Spirit, that false conclusions and deception
do not injure His acknowledgment; that all tortuous deviations of the wandering reason at length
strike into the straight road of everlasting truth; that all diverging arms and currents ultimately
meet in the main stream. What an idea, Raphael, I form of the Great Artist, who, differently
travestied in a thousand copies, still retains identical features in all this diversity, from
which even the depreciating hand of a blunderer cannot remove admiration.

Moreover, my representation may certainly be fallacious, wholly an invention,--nay, I am persuaded
that it must necessarily be so; and yet it is possible that all results of this may come to
pass. All great sages are agreed that our whole knowledge moves on ultimately to a conventional
deception, with which, however, the strictest truth can co-exist. Our purest ideas are by no
means images of things, but only their signs or symbols determined by necessity, and co-existing
with them.

