Uneducated as was Lewis, his quick perception, his ungoverned passions, and his native independence,
not only made him a dangerous slave, but an unfaithful and overbearing companion. He, however,
took a wife--a slave like himself,--whose devotedness and good sense, cannot be made manifest,
more than in her willingness to leave all that was dear to her on earth, and flee from their
birth-place, she knew not whither; but confiding in the professed love and protection of her
husband, she cheerfully followed him to the dense forest, in search of that freedom, denied
them in their native country,--submitting herself gladly to all the hardships and fearful anxieties
of a fugitive slave. What to her were horsemen, armed with dirk and rifle! What though the
trained and inhuman blood-hound bayed upon their track! Was not he who had sworn a life-long
allegiance to her by her side! Should he be killed or retaken, what could she desire, but to
be his companion still! Slavery even, bitter as was the cup, might contain for her one sweet
drop, while connubial love lighted up their rude cabin, and sweetened their daily toil; but
the additional anticipation of LIBERTY, to their domestic happiness--oh blessed hope! How it
quickened their weary footsteps, and, with fixed eyes upon the star of the North, they pressed
forward through every difficulty, until they finally reached Cincinnati, O. There they lived
quietly, and with others, suffered the terrors of the mob, where also he was chosen agent,
to seek a more safe and quiet home for his afflicted and outcast countrymen. The office was
accepted, and Lewis became the founder of the Wilberforce colony.

The personal appearance of Israel Lewis was prepossessing; his manner and address easy and
commanding. To those unacquainted with his private life, his ungoverned passions, and his unprincipled,
revengeful disposition, he could appear the gentleman, the philanthropist, and the Christian.

His education was limited; yet he had managed to gather a sufficient knowledge of the sciences
to enable him to read and write, together with quite a fund of general information; and then
his shrewdness and tact accomplished all the rest. To strangers he could appear a ripe scholar,
if left unquestioned. He was a good speaker, and once spake with eloquence and marked effect
before the Legislature, assembled in the Senate Chamber, at Albany, N.Y.

Had the childhood of Mr. Lewis been passed under more favorable auspices; had his intellectual
faculties been so cultivated as to predominate over his animal propensities, and his towering
aspirations directed toward the accomplishment of acts, lofty in their benevolence, noble in
their sacrifice, high in their honorable purpose, and great in their purity; I can but believe
that his powerful intellect would have achieved the fame of a Lundy, or would have bequeathed
to his brethren a memory like that of a Clarkson. Instead, we have found him devoting his energies
to the gratification of his avarice, pride, and ambition--characteristics directly opposed
to the deportment of the humble Christian, and such as our Heavenly Father has never promised
to prosper. How truly has "the wise man" said, "He that is greedy of gain troubleth his own
house; but he that hateth gifts shall live." How strikingly has this passage been verified
in the course of Lewis! For a few paltry sums of gain, could he consent, not alone to rob the
poor, for whom it was kindly given as unto the Lord, but to turn scornfully away from that
poor, illiterate, and humble slave wife, whom he had, in their mutual adversity, vowed to cherish
in prosperity as well as in all other circumstances through life. That wife, who had borne
with him the sorrows of Slavery--the humble choice of a bondman! She, who fled with him anticipating
additional happiness in a life of freedom! Poor woman!

In the hands of a righteous Judge we leave him, who, for the wealth that perisheth,--who, for
worldly honor and selfish gratification, could barter his honesty and integrity, as "Esau,
who sold his birth-right for a mess of pottage."

To me the lesson is an impressive one, and I am thinking it would be well for us all to examine
the foundation on which we stand. If based upon the solid and broad foundation of christianity,
doing to others in all things as we would they should do to us, sacrificing on all occasions
our own ease, and worldly honor, for the benefit of our fellow-men, and the good of our country,
then indeed, we need fear no evil; if the winds of adversity howl about our dwelling, we shall
find it will stand, being founded on a ROCK. But if we build upon "the sands" of fame or self-aggrandizement,
and, like the towering oak, lift our insignificant heads in proud defiance of the coming storm,
we may expect that our superstruction will fall! "And great will be the fall of it!"

CHAPTER XXXIV.

MY RETURN TO ROCHESTER.

Having closed my business in Wilberforce, I prepared to leave on the expiration of my term
of office as township clerk, which was now near at hand. Notwithstanding, I ever felt a sensation
of relief and pleasure, when I thought of returning to my old home and friends in the States,
yet as often as I look abroad over the settlement and remember all my glowing hopes,--all my
delightful anticipations of a prosperous future for those poor, struggling colonists; when
I recollected with what zeal and honest purpose, with what sincerity and sacrifice I had prosecuted
my labor among them,--a dark shadow of disappointment would flit across my mind, however welcome
it might be. That I had firm and tried friends in the colony, I had never the least reason
to doubt, not to suppose their number less after a five years residence with them; but our
expectations had not been realized. Our hope of settling a township, to be represented in Parliament
by one of our own people, was now forever blasted. I remembered too, that many of the colonists
had been unjustly incited against my course; but in the retrospect my heart did not condemn
me. Errors many, no doubt I had committed; but I was grateful, when reviewing the whole ground,
for a conscience void of offence toward God and man; and I finally took my leave of all, craving
the choicest blessings of Heaven to rest upon that infant colony and its interests.

On the nineteenth day of January, 1837, I left Wilberforce, passing through Brantford, Hamilton,
Queenston, Lewiston, and from thence to Rochester. During my journey, I could not avoid feeling
sad and despondent, as my mind incessantly returned to the review of my mission, upon which
I could look with no other decision than that of an entire failure. I had spent my time, wasted
my substance for naught, and was now returning to my dependant family,--that, with myself,
had been stripped of nearly every means of comfort and support.

What would my Rochester friends think of my conduct? Notwithstanding all my despondency and
evil foreboding at that time, I am now well satisfied that my labor was not all in vain, but
that some good did result from it.

As I drew near the city, a gloom like thick darkness overshadowed me: I thought of the unfavorable
transactions which had occurred between the directors of the colony and my friends in Rochester,
and fell to wondering how they would receive me.

On the twenty-third of January, 1837, I finally re-entered the city penniless; but as I soon
found, not so friendless as my fears would have it. Among, the first to welcome me back to
my old home, was that friend of "blessed memory," Everard Peck, who had been apprised of some
of the losses I had met and the trials I had passed through. This gentleman was also one of
the first to propose to be one of five men, who should loan me one hundred dollars each, for
five years. Through the disinterested kindness of this worthy gentleman, I was in a few days
after my arrival, well established in a store of provisions and groceries. The five kind gentlemen,
to whom I was so deeply indebted for the loan, were: Everard Peck, George A. Avery, Samuel
D. Porter, Levi W. Sibley, and Griffith, Brother & Co.

This noble act of generosity and kindness, on the part of my friends, to furnish me with the
means to commence business, especially when their prospect was anything but flattering, regarding
my ever being able to refund their well-timed and gracious liberality,--affected me more deeply
than all the censure and persecution I had elsewhere received. Their frown and displeasure,
I was better prepared to meet than this considerate act of Christian sympathy, which I am not
ashamed to say melted me to tears, and I resolved to show my appreciation of their kindness
by an industry and diligence in business hitherto unsurpassed.

E. Bardwell, then a merchant on Exchange Street, next laid me under a lasting obligation by
offering to sell me goods on credit; others proffered assistance by promising their continual
patronage, which was to me the same as cash,--and soon the store I had opened on Main Street,
was doing an extensive business. My profits were small to be sure, and I had a heavy rent to
pay for my store and dwelling, yet I was making a comfortable living for my family, and laying
by something to reimburse the kind friends who had helped me in the time of need, when I found
that the health of my family required more of my time and assistance than ever before. My oldest
daughter, who, I have before mentioned, having taken a violent cold on Lake Erie, was now confined
to her bed. All that could be done to save the life of a darling child--our first born--was
done; and if we sometimes went beyond our means, it was a satisfaction to us to see her enjoy
some of the comforts of life of which my mission to Canada had deprived her. One physician
after another was employed to stay the approach of the destroyer: some said they could cure
her, if paid in advance; to all of which I cheerfully acceded, but only to see our beloved
sink lower, and patiently pine away.

No one but a parent who has watched the rapid decline of a darling child, and marked with a
bursting heart the approaching footsteps of the spoiler, can imagine how powerless we felt
at that time. The wealth of the Indias, had we possessed it, would have been freely given,
although it would have been unavailing, to shield that loved and gentle form from pain, and
we were obliged to look hopelessly on, while our little patient, suffering daughter sank lower
and lower every day. In vain were our parental arms outstretched for her protection; from death
we could not save her. She had long since ceased to glide about the house, and soothe with
her silvery tones all the childish fears of the little ones. Helpless she now lay, burning
with fever, and wasting from our sight, "till soft as the dew on the twilight descending,"
the cold damps of death gathered on her youthful brow. One pleasant morning after passing a
restless night, I observed her to gaze earnestly upward, and a moment after I called her name
but received no answer.

  "Her languishing head was at rest;
    Its thinkings and achings were o'er;
  Her quiet, immoveable breast,
    Was heaved by affliction no more."

On the fifteenth day of April, 1837, she sweetly fell asleep, aged eleven years. Sorrowfully
we followed her remains to Mount Hope, where we laid her down to rest until the resurrection
morning. Death had now made its first inroad in our family circle, and since then we have laid
two other loved ones by her side. We sorrowed, but not without hope.

My business continued to prosper, and I concluded to buy a small variety store, containing
some three or four hundred dollars worth of goods on the corner of Main and North Streets,
formerly owned by Mr. Snow, but, having two stores on my hands, I did not make much by the trade.

The first summer after I returned to Rochester, the friends of temperance made a fine celebration,
and gave me the privilege of providing the dinner.

I considered it not only a privilege, but an honor, and felt very grateful to the committee
who conferred the favor upon me.

The celebration came off on the Fourth of July, and was indeed a splendid affair. The multitude
were addressed on the public square, by some of the best speakers in the country. I laid in
a large quantity of provisions of every available kind, built a bower, hired waiters, and prepared
seats for five hundred to dine; but when the oration was over, and the multitude came to the
table, I found that as many more seats were wanted. We, however, accommodated as many as we
could, at one dollar each, and all passed off well, to the great satisfaction of all concerned.

When all was over, and the friends learned that I had on hand a large amount of cooked provision,
they continued their kindness by purchasing it, thus preventing any loss on my part.

My store on the corner of Main and North Streets, was at the head of the market, and I was
enabled to supply both of my stores with country produce on the best possible terms. I kept
two clerks at each store, and all seemed prosperous for a time, when from some cause, which
I could never understand, my business began to fail. My family had ever lived prudently, and
I knew that was not the cause. I thought to better my circumstances by taking a store in the
Rochester House, but that proved to be a bad stand for my business, and after one year, I removed
to Buffalo Street, opposite the Court House. I ought to say, that as soon as I found that my
income was getting less than my expenses, I went to the gentlemen who had loaned me the five
hundred dollars, and showed them the true state of my affairs, and they kindly agreed to take
fifty per cent., which I paid them.

After locating on Buffalo Street, I took in a partner, named John Lee, a young man, active
and industrious, who paid into the firm three hundred dollars, with which we bought goods.
With what I had on hand, this raised the joint stock to about a thousand dollars, on which
we were making frequent additions, and on which we had an insurance of six hundred dollars.
Our business was now more prosperous than at any previous time, and we began to look up with
hope and confidence in our final success. One night I returned to my home as usual, leaving
Lee in the store. About twelve o'clock, Mr. Morris awoke me with a few loud raps, and the announcement
that my store was on fire and a part of my goods in the street! I hastened to the place, where
I found, as he had said, what was saved from the fire piled up in the street and the fire extinguished.
The building was greatly damaged and the goods they rescued were nearly ruined. Now we were
thrown out of business, and the firm was dissolved. With the assistance of W.S. Bishop, a lawyer,
we made out the amount of damage, which was readily paid by the agent for the insurance company.

When the Fourth of July came round again, the temperance men resolved on having another demonstration,
and as before, I was requested to supply the dinner, which I did, after the same manner as
the year previous.

Having been thrown out of business by the fire, I began to examine my pecuniary matters, and
found that I was some three or four hundred dollars in debt, which I had no means of paying.
True, I had met with a great misfortune, but I felt that to be an honest man I must meet all
obligations, whether legally bound to do so or not; yet it was beyond my power at that time,
and I finally concluded to leave the city, and try to better my condition by some other business,
or at least to clear myself from debt.

CHAPTER XXXV.

BISHOP BROWN--DEATH OF MY DAUGHTER.

I removed with my family to the village of Canandaigua, where I commenced teaching a school
for colored children, assisted by my daughter. The school was sustained partly by the liberality
of the citizens of the village, and partly by donations from abroad. It was continued two years,
and the children made rapid progress while they were under our tuition.

Soon after I left Rochester, I visited New York city, and while there, I joined "The African
Methodist Episcopal Conference." Bishop Brown, of Philadelphia, presided over the deliberations
of that body, and appeared to be a man of deep piety, as well as apt in business, and was a
native of one of the Carolinas. I found a pleasing acquaintance also, with Bishop Walters of
Baltimore, Md. He was small in stature; but a powerful speaker, and discharged every duty with
"an eye single to the glory of God." He has now gone to give an account of his stewardship,
and I pray that "his mantle may fall" upon one as capable of leading our people as he. The
conference consisted of some sixty or seventy ministers of the gospel, with these two Bishops
at their head. The conference continued its session ten days. When it was closed, Bishop Brown,
with several others, started on a visit to the West. They called at Rochester, and then passed
over to Canada, where a conference was to be holden. We arrived, after a pleasant journey,
at Hamilton, where the English government have a regiment of black soldiers stationed. It was
common, in passing through the streets of Hamilton, to meet every few rods, a colored man in
uniform, with a sword at his side, marching about in all the military pomp allowed only to
white men in this free republic.

All being in readiness, Bishop Brown opened the conference under the authority of Her Britannic
Majesty, with great solemnity, which seemed to be felt by the whole assembly. This meeting
appeared to me far more interesting than the one we had attended in New York city. The colored
people were much more numerous in Hamilton, and in far better circumstances than in New York.
It is a hard case to be poor in any large city, but to be both poor and black, as was the condition
of the majority of our friends in New York, was indeed a terrible calamity. Every class, no
matter how worthless they might be, would be allowed to rent a house in preference to a colored
man. The consequence was, our people were crowded back into the most unhealthy alleys, in old
dilapidated tenements unfit for human beings to dwell in, and such as could not be disposed
of to any other class of people. I am happy to say, however, that a favorable change has taken
place in New York, since the time of which I am speaking. Capitalists have noted the good reputation
of the colored people as tenants, and have of late erected good dwellings for their accommodation.
In Hamilton there was none of that wretchedness and squalid poverty, nor any of that drunken
rowdyism so common in Eastern cities, perceivable among the colored people.

Our conference was largely attended by all classes, both black and white, --many of the latter
invited the Bishop with his associates to their dwellings to dine, indeed we seldom took a
meal at our lodgings, so constantly were we solicited by friends to accompany them home.

We also found many fugitive slaves in that city, many of whom were intelligent mechanics. Some
of them took us about the place, showing us the different buildings they were engaged in erecting;
quite a number were employed in building a church which appeared to be done in a workman-like
manner.

In the meantime our meeting was progressing in a very interesting manner, and when the closing
services were commenced, the house was filled to overflowing; still many could not be accommodated.
The preaching was solemn and impressive, and it really seemed to me that the glory of God filled
the house in which we worshipped; saints rejoiced and shouted "glory to God, in the highest,"
while sinners trembled and cried out, "what must we do to be saved from the wrath to come."
There were several hopeful conversions during the session of conference; and after its close
we spent one day in making social calls, and viewing the city and its surroundings.

Burlington Bay makes an excellent harbor for shipping, while Burlington Heights loom up on
the north in all their wild and terrific grandeur. Near the bay resides Mr. McNab, so notorious
in the history of the Canadian revolution. We went in a large company to look at his beautiful
grounds and residence, over which we were politely conducted by his amiable lady.

It was indeed a lordly mansion, with its surroundings laid out in the English style of princely
magnificence.

On our return to the city at evening, we were invited to attend a grand soiree, got up in honor
of the Bishop's first visit to that place. Several families of colored people combined to provide
the splendid entertainment, while one lady presided at the board. She was very beautiful and
very dark; but a complete model of grace and elegance, conversing with perfect ease and intelligence
with all, both black and white ministers, who surrounded the festive board, as well as our
Irish friends, not a few of whom were present. One honest son of the Emerald Isle entered,
and not understanding the matter, inquired of his brother "Pat," in rather a loud whisper,
"What's all them nagurs setting to that table for?" He, however, soon satisfied himself, and
all passed off quietly and in excellent order. At a late hour the company, after a benediction,
withdrew and dispersed.

We left Hamilton the following morning, feeling grateful and pleased with our meeting and visit.

It was a beautiful morning; the lake was still, no sound was heard but the rushing waves, as
our boat moved on through its placid waters, toward our destination, then called Fort George,
now Niagara, where we took stage for the Falls.

At that place of resort, we stopped to view the stupendous work of Almighty God, and listen
to the ceaseless thundering of the cataract. How tame appear the works of art, and how insignificant
the bearing of proud, puny man, compared with the awful grandeur of that natural curiosity.
Yet there, the rich from all parts of the world, do congregate! There you will find the idle,
swaggering slaveholder, blustering about in lordly style; boasting of his wealth; betting and
gambling; ready to fight, if his slightest wish is not granted, and lavishing his cash on all
who have the least claim upon him. Ah, well can he afford to be liberal,--well can he afford
to spend thousands yearly at our Northern watering places; he has plenty of human chattels
at home, toiling year after year for his benefit. The little hoe-cake he gives them, takes
but a mill of the wealth with which they fill his purse; and should his extravagance lighten
it somewhat, he has only to order his brutal overseer to sell--soul and body --some poor creature;
perchance a husband, or a wife, or a child, and forward to him the proceeds of the sale. While
the wretched slave marches South with a gang, under the lash, he lavishes his funds in extravagant
living,--funds gathered from the tears and blood of a helpless human being. Have you, dear
reader, ever watched the slaveholder at such places as I have, gliding through the shady groves,
or riding in his splendid carriage, dressed in the richest attire, and with no wish ungratified
that gold can purchase; and have you ever been guilty of envying him, or of wishing yourself
in his condition? If so, think of the curse which rests on him who grinds the face of the poor.
Think of his doom in the day of final retribution, when he shall receive at the bar of a righteous
Judge, "according to the deeds done in the body," and not according to his wealth and power.
Think you, that the prayers, cries, and pleadings of the down-trodden slave that for years
have been ascending to the throne of a just God, will never be avenged? Yea, verily, the day
of reckoning hastens on apace, and though, "He bear long with them; He will surely avenge them
of their adversaries; and that speedily!"

As we pursued our journey to Buffalo, we passed Grand Island, from whence Mordecai Emanuel
Noah, some years ago issued a proclamation, calling on the Jews to come and build on that island
the "City of Refuge," but which I believe was not responded to, as I saw it remained in its
native wildness. He had also a monument erected there at the time, which might be seen from
the highway and canal, consisting of a white marble slab, six feet in height, with a suitable
inscription upon it, to direct the poor Jew to the City of Refuge.

It was quite conspicuous, but not so magnificent as Gen. Brock's at Queenston Heights.

Arrived at Buffalo, we held several meetings which were very interesting. The colored people
were then numerous in that city, and owned one of the largest churches in Western New York.
We found a large and prosperous society under the superintendence of Elder Weir, who was a
good and talented man, setting a godly example for his flock to imitate. At Buffalo I parted
with my pleasant and instructive traveling companion, Bishop Brown, never to meet again on
the shores of time. Soon after that pleasant journey he died, and passed from his labor to reward.

Buffalo was then, as now a great place for business. Vessels from all parts of the country
crowded the docks, and I then thought that it must in time become one of the largest cities
in the Union. After a pleasant visit with our people there, I returned to my home in Canandaigua,
where I now began to feel quite settled.

I had been requested to act as agent for the "Anti-Slavery Standard," with which I complied,
and leaving my daughter to teach the school, I spent the most of my time in traveling through
the country to advance the interests of that paper.

When I returned from Buffalo, she was complaining of poor health, nor was it long before we
saw that she was rapidly declining.

This beloved daughter, I had spared no pains nor money to educate and qualify for teaching.
I had encountered all the trials and difficulties that every colored man meets, in his exertions
to educate his family. I had experienced enough to make me fear that I should not always be
able to get my children, into good schools, and therefore determined at whatever cost, to educate
this child thoroughly, that she might be able, not only to provide for her own wants, but to
teach her younger brothers and sisters, should they be deprived of the advantages of a good
school. Well had she rewarded my labor; well had she realized all my fondest hopes and expectations,--but
alas! for human foresight and worldly wisdom! The accomplishments and qualifications of a teacher
were attained; and proudly we looked for the achievement of our long-contemplated design. How
hard to believe that the fell destroyer was upon her track! Her education had qualified her
for teaching the sciences; but now I saw, that her faith in the religion of the blessed Christ,
was assisting her to teach her own heart a lesson of patience, and quiet submission to the
will of Him who holds the issues of life,--and Oh, how difficult for us to learn the solemn
lesson, that her wasting form, her gradual sinking away, was hourly setting before us.

Slowly her strength failed; she, however, saw our sorrowful anxiety, and would try to relieve
it with a cheerful appearance. One day perhaps she would be able to walk about, which would
revive our wavering hope; the next she was prostrate and suffering; then hope died and we were
sad! All the spring time she languished; the summer came, the roses bloomed, and the grain
began to ripen, but she was wasting away. The orchard yielded its golden harvest; the birds
sang merrily on the trees, but a dark shadow had fallen on our hearthstone, and a gloom, like
the pall of death, rested on our household. Her place at table was already vacant; no longer
she called the little ones about her to hear them repeat their tasks,--all of which admonished
us, that soon the bed where we could now see her, would be vacated; and we should no longer
witness her patient smile, and know that she was still with us. The pastor of the Baptist church
often called to pray with, and for, the quiet sufferer, which she appreciated very highly,
for she was a Christian in every sense of the word.

On the thirtieth day of August, at about eleven o'clock, A.M., without a struggle or a groan,
her spirit returned to God who gave it. "Sweetly as babes sleep," she sank into the embrace
of death. Happily, triumphantly, had she seen the grim messenger approach; but she knew whom
she had believed, and that He was able to keep that which she had committed to Him, unto the
resurrection of the just.

She had previously made a confession of her faith in Christ, and had been buried with Him in
baptism. A few days after her demise, a long, sad train wound its way to the village church
yard, where we deposited the remains of our beloved,--Patience Jane Steward, in the eighteenth
year of her age; and then returned to our desolate house, to realize that she had left a world
of pain and sorrow, where the fairest rose conceals a thorn, the sweetest cup a bitter drop,
for a home where the flowers would never fade, and where pain, sorrow and death will never come.

As often as I recalled her triumphant, peaceful death, her firm reliance on God, and sweet
submission to His will, I could not forbear contrasting her departure with that of Mrs. Helm,
whose death I have elsewhere described; and could fervently pray, that I might live the life
of the righteous, that my last end might be like hers.

  "Behold the Western evening light,
    It melts in deep'ning gloom;
  So calmly Christians sink away,
    Descending to the tomb.

  The winds breathe low, the withering leaf
    Scarce whispers from the tree,--
  So gently flows the parting breath,
    When good folks cease to be.

  How beautiful on all the hills,
    The crimson light is shed;
  'Tis like the peace the Christian gives,
    To mourners round his bed.

  How mildly on the wandering cloud,
    The sunset beam is cast,--
  'Tis like the mem'ry left behind,
    When loved ones breathe their last.

  And now above the dews of night,
    The yellow star appears;
  So faith springs in the breast of those,
    Whose eyes are bathed in tears.

  But soon the morning's happier light,
    Its glory shall restore;
  And eyelids that are sealed in death,
    Shall wake to close no more."

CHAPTER XXXVI.

CELEBRATION OF THE FIRST OF AUGUST.

The anti-slavery friends in Canandaigua, had resolved to celebrate the anniversary of the West
India emancipation, in suitable manner in that village, for which funds had been unsparingly
collected, to defray the expenses of the coming demonstration. The first of August, 1847, fell
on Sunday, and our people concluded to devote that day to religious meetings, and the second
to their proposed celebration.

Frederick Douglass and Mr. Van Loon, from Poughkeepsie, addressed the people on the Sabbath;
and also, on the same evening, a large concourse at the Court House. The day following, there
were not less than ten thousand people assembled on the beautiful grounds, belonging to the
village Academy-attentive listeners all to the eloquent speeches delivered, and interested
spectators of the imposing exercises.

When the vast multitude had convened, the exercises were commenced by the Rev. S.R. Ward, who
addressed the throne of grace, after which, Mr. Frederick Douglass delivered an oration, in
a style of eloquence which only Mr. Douglass himself can equal, followed by a song from the
Geneva choir, and music by Barring's band. Rev. H.H. Garnet, editor of "The National Watchman,"
next spake, and with marked effect, followed by Messrs. Ward and Douglass; after which, the
assemblage formed a procession, and marching to the Canandaigua Hotel, partook of a sumptuous
dinner, provided by the proprietor of that house. At six P.M., they again assembled on the
square, and were most eloquently addressed by both Ward and Garnet; at the close, they repaired
to the ladies' fair, where they found everything in a condition which spake well for the enterprise
and industry of our colored sisters. Their articles for sale, were of a choice and considerate
selection, and such as sold rapidly and at fair prices. When all was pleasantly over, the ladies
contributed twenty dollars toward paying the speakers present.

A most beautiful ode was composed by a warm and generous friend of the cause, which was sung
in the grove, in a spirit which produced a thrilling interest. Gladly would I give the reader
the whole composition, but its length makes it objectionable for this place, but should they
happen to hear a soul-stirring and sublime ode, commencing with,

  "Hail! to this day returning;
  Let all to Heaven aspire," &c.,

they may know it is the one to which I refer.

It was indeed, a glorious day for the colored population generally; and many were the indications
of a diminution of that prejudice so prevalent everywhere. Some, who had supposed the colored
man so inferior to themselves as to be incapable of making an interesting speech, were convinced
of their error, after hearing Messrs. Douglass, Ward and Garnet. Mr. Van Loon was a white clergyman,
but a brother indeed; his soul illumined by the pure light of the gospel of peace; his heart
full of sympathy for the oppressed; his tongue pleading eloquently for equal rights; and his
hands busily engaged in breaking every yoke, resting on the necks of poor humanity. So vigorously,
so zealously did he unfold the horrors of the slave system; so truthfully and faithfully did
he expose the treachery of northern politicians, and so pathetically did he appeal to the humanity
of every professed Christian to speak out boldly for the dumb; to shield, by the holy principles
of their religion, the poor, bound, illiterate slave, from Southern cruelty and bondage,--that
some of our aristocratic citizens, some of our white savans, repaid his truthful eloquence,
by visiting upon him the bitterest maledictions. From the negro, said they, we will accept
these statements as true,--from him, they are pertinent and forcible; but when such unpalatable
truths are uttered by a white clergyman, we cannot abide, nor will we listen to them!

Let consistency blush, and justice hang down its head! Is not truth the same, whether proclaimed
by black or white,--bond or free? Is a falsehood to be pardoned because uttered by a negro?
If indeed, as was admitted, the sentiments expressed by our eloquent colored speakers, were
true, could they be false, when enforced by our intellectual friend, Van Loon? Certainly not;
nor would the case have been so decided by these Solons, in any other case: or where the prejudice
against color had not warped and blinded their otherwise good judgments. Our speaker, however,
performed his duty faithfully, and with great satisfaction to the colored people and their
true friends present.

The remains of this fearless champion of liberty; this humble disciple of the despised Nazarene,
now sleeps in death, beside the placid waters of the Hudson, while his cherished memory lives
in the affections of thousands, who "are ready to perish," and is honored by the pure in heart,
wherever his name has been known throughout the land. In the day of final reckoning, think
you, he will regret having plead the cause of the bondman? What then are the few light afflictions
endured in this life, when compared with "an eternal weight of glory," awarded to the faithful
in that which is to come?

Pleasant, happy, and beneficial, as had been the reunion of old and tried friends, to celebrate
a glorious event, yet, like all earthly enjoyments, it was brought to a termination, reluctant
as were the friends to separate. Since that day, many have been the demonstrations of grateful
joy and gladness on the glorious anniversary of the emancipation of slaves on the West India
Islands; and yet, in this boasted "land of the free, and home of the brave;" this famous and
declared free Republic,--the American slave still clanks his heavy chain, and wears the galling
yoke of the bondman!

CHAPTER XXXVII.

CONCLUSION.

For several years past, anti-slavery truth has been spreading, and in proportion as light has
shone upon the "peculiar institution," exposing to the world its crimes and blood,--enstamping
upon its frontlet, "THE SUM OF ALL VILLAINIES,"--has the wrath of the impious slaveholder been
kindled, and his arm outstretched to strengthen the chain, and press closer the yoke upon the
helpless slave, proving conclusively that he loves darkness because his deeds are evil. Nor
is this all; he and his apologists will insolently tell you, that you are the guilty ones who
have tightened the bonds of the slave, increased his hardships, and blighted his prospect of
freedom, by your mistaken kindness, in showing the slaveholder the enormity of his sin! Can
this be so? Have we any direct influence over his human chattels? None. Then who is it that
rivets the chain and increases the already heavy burden of the crushed slave, but he who has
the power to do with him as he wills? He it is, who has been thrust, unwillingly perhaps, into
sufficient light to show him his moral corruption, and the character of the sin he is daily
committing; he it is, whose avarice and idleness induces to hold fast that which is to him
a source of wealth,-- and by no means to allow the same light to fall in upon the darkened
intellect of his slave property, lest his riches "take to themselves wings;" or, as may be
more properly said, take to themselves legs and run away.

What stronger proof can we ask in favor of our position, than the intolerant spirit of the
South? If the system and practice of Slavery is a righteous one, instituted by an All-wise
God, certainly no human power-- especially one so impotent and futile as the abolition power
is said to be --can ever overthrow it. Why then are the mails so closely examined, and fines
imposed on prohibited anti-slavery documents? Is it beyond their power to confute the arguments
adduced, or are they fearful that a ray of Northern light may fall on the mind of some listening
slave, and direct him to the depot of an under-ground railroad? Judge ye!

What but this same fearful and intolerant spirit,--this over-bearing, boasting spirit, was
it, that cowardly attacked a Christian Senator, while seated unsuspectingly at his desk, and
felled him to the floor, bleeding and senseless? Was not the villainous blow which fell upon
the honored head of CHARLES SUMNER, dealt by the infamous Brooks of South Carolina, aimed at
the free speech of the entire North? Was it, think you, a personal enmity that the cowardly
scoundrel had toward our worthy Northern Senator, which induced the attack? No, no. Brooks
spake for the South, and boldly has it responded--Amen!

