"

And there she began to sob.  And those brothers of mine, they actually grew compassionate;
they ran after wine; they called us to bring salts, and help her.  Emily shuddered, and put
her hands behind her; but Jaquetta actually ran up to the woman, and coaxed her and comforted
her, when I had rather have coaxed a tigress.

But I had to go to the table and pour out tea and give it to her with all the rest.  I don't
know how we got through that breakfast.  But we did, and then I made the housekeeper put her
into the very best rooms. Anything if she would only stay there out of the way.

When I came back, I found Fulk explaining why he had spoken at once, and he said he felt that
she would have no scruples about taking the initiative, and that everyone would be having surmises.

Poor Bertram was even more cut up than we were.  It came more suddenly, and he felt as if it
was all his doing.  He had no hope, and he took all ours away.  There had been something in
the old woman that impressed him as genuine, and he had no doubt that she had known and loved
our father.  Nay, no one could suspect Hester of not believing in her own story; the only question
was whether the links of evidence could be substantiated.

The next thing that happened--I can't tell which day it was--was Mrs. Deerhurst's coming, professing
to be dreadfully shocked and overcome by my father's death, to take away Emily.  She must be
so much in our way. I, who saw her first, answered only by begging to keep her--our great comfort
and the one thing that cheered and upheld my brother.

Mrs. Deerhurst looked keenly at me; and I began to wonder what she knew, but just then came
Fulk into the room, with his calm, set, determined face.  I knew he would rather speak without
me, so I went away, and only knew what he could bear to tell me afterwards.

Mrs. Deerhurst had been a great deal kinder than he expected.  No doubt she would not break
the thing off while there was a shred of hope that he was an earl; but he could not drive her
to allow, in so many words, that it must depend upon that.

He had quite made up his mind that it was not right to enjoy Emily's presence and the comfort
it gave him, unless he was secure of Mrs. Deerhurst's permitting the engagement under his possible
circumstances.

I believe he nattered himself she would, and let her deceive him with thinking so, instead
of, as we all did, seeing that what she wanted was to secure the credit of being constant and
disinterested in case he retained his position.  So, although she took Emily home, she left
him cheered and hopeful, admiring her, and believing that she so regarded her daughter's happiness
that, if he had enough to support her, she would overlook the loss of rank and title.  He went
on half the evening talking about what a remarkable woman Mrs. Deerhurst was; and, at any rate,
it cheered him up through those worst days.

Our Lupton uncles came, and were frightfully shocked and incredulous; at least, Uncle George
was.  Uncle Lupton himself remembered something of my father having told him of a former affair
in America.

They would not let Jaquetta and me go to the funeral; and they were wise, for Hester thrust
herself in--but it is of no use to think about that.  Indeed, there is not much to tell about
that time, and I need not go into the investigation.  It was all taken out of our hands, as
my brother had said.  Perrault came over from Canada, and brought his witnesses, but not Joel
Lea.  He had nothing to prove, had conscientious scruples about appearing in an English court
of justice, and still hoped it would all come to nothing.

We stayed on at the London house--the lawyers said we ought, and that possession was "nine-tenths,"
&c.  Besides, we wanted advice for Baby, who had been worse of late.

The end of it was that it went against us.  Faith's marriage, her identity, and Hester's, were
proved beyond all doubt, and little Alured was served Earl of Trevorsham.  Poor child, how
ill he was just then! It was declared water on the brain!  I could hardly think about anything
else; but they all said it seemed like a mockery, and that he would not bear the title a week.
And then Lady Hester would have been, not Countess of Trevorsham, but Viscountess Torwood,
and at any rate she halved the personal property: all that had been meant for us.

For we already knew that there was nothing in the will that could do us any good.  All depended
on my mother's marriage settlements, and as the marriage was invalid they were so much waste paper.

My uncles, to whom my poor mother's fortune reverted, would not touch it, and gave every bit
back to us; but it was only 10,000 pounds, and what was that among the four of us?

I was in a sort of maze all the time, thinking of very little beyond dear little Alured's struggle
for life, and living upon his little faint smiles when he was a shade better.

Jaquetta has told me more of what passed than I heeded at the time.

Our brothers decided not to retain the Trevor name, to which we had no right; but they had
both been christened Torwood; after an old family custom, and they thought it best to use this
still as a surname.

Bertram felt the shame, as he would call it, the most; but Fulk held up his head more.  He
said where there was no sin there was no shame; and that to treat ourselves as under a blot
of disgrace was insulting our parents, who had been mistaken, but not guilty.

Bertram was determined against returning to his regiment, and it would have been really too
expensive.  His plan was to keep together, and lay out our capital upon a piece of ground in
New Zealand, which was beginning to be settled.

Jaquetta was always ready to be delighted.  Dear child, her head was full of log huts and Robinson
Crusoe life, and cows to milk herself; and I really think she would have liked to go ashore
in the Swiss family's eight tubs!

The thorough change, after all the sorrow, seemed delicious to her! I heard her and Bertram
laughing down below, and wondered if they got the length of settling what dogs they would take out!

And Fulk!  He really had almost persuaded himself that Emily would go with us; or at the very
worst, would wait till he had achieved prosperity and could come home and fetch her.

Mrs. Deerhurst had declared that waiting for the decision was so bad for her nerves, that she
must take her to Paris; and actually our dear old stupid fellow had not perceived what that
meant, for the woman had let him part tenderly with Emily in London, with promises of writing,
&c., the instant the case was decided.  It passed his powers to suppose she could expose her
daughter's heart to such a wreck.  So he held up, cheerful and hopeful, thinking what a treasure
of constancy he had! And when they had built their castle in New Zealand, they sent up Jaquey
to call me to share it with them.  Baby was asleep, and I went down; but when I heard the plan--it
was cross to be so unsympathizing, but I did feel hurt and angry at their forgetting him; and
I said, "I shall never leave Alured."

"Ursula! you could not stay by yourself," said Jaquey.  And Bertram, who had hardly ever seen
him, and could not care for him said it was nonsense, and even if there were a chance of the
child living, I could not be left behind.

I was wrought up, and broke out that he would and should live, and that I would come as a stranger,
a nursery governess, and watch over him, and never abandon him to Hester.

"Never fear, Ursula," said Fulk, "if he lives, he will be in safe hands."

"Safe hands!  What are safe hands for a child like that!  Hester's, who only wishes him out
of her way?"

