No raw fowls visit my bedside here; food comes as I wish it to come when I am painting, like
manna from heaven. Mrs. Bobby brings me three times a day something to eat, and though it is
always whatever she likes, I always agree in her choice, and send the blue dishes away empty.
She asked me this morning if I enjoyed my 'h'egg,' and remarked that she had only one fowl,
but it laid an egg for me every morning, so I might know it was 'fresh as fresh.' It is certainly
convenient: the fowl lays the egg from seven to seven-thirty, I eat it from eight to eight-thirty;
no haste, no waste. Never before have I seen such heavenly harmony between supply and demand.
Never before have I been in such visible and unbroken connection with the source of my food.
If I should ever desire two eggs, or if the fowl should turn sulky or indolent, I suppose Mrs.
Bobby would have to go half a mile to the nearest shop, but as yet everything has worked to
a charm. The cow is milked into my pitcher in the morning, and the fowl lays her egg almost
literally in my egg-cup. One of the little Bobbies pulls a kidney bean or a tomato or digs
a potato for my dinner, about half an hour before it is served. There is a sheep in the garden,
but I hardly think it supplies the chops; those, at least, are not raised on the premises.

One grievance I did have at first, but Mrs. Bobby removed the thorn from the princess' pillow
as soon as it was mentioned. Our next-door neighbour had a kennel of homesick, discontented,
and sleepless puppies of various breeds, that were in the habit of howling all night until
Mrs. Bobby expostulated with Mrs. Gooch in my behalf. She told me that she found Mrs. Gooch
very snorty, very snorty indeed, because the pups were an 'obby of her 'usbants; whereupon
Mrs. Bobby responded that if Mrs. Gooch's 'usbant 'ad to 'ave an 'obby, it was a shame it 'ad
to be 'owling pups to keep h'innocent people awake o' nights. The puppies were removed, but
I almost felt guilty at finding fault with a dog in this country. It is a matter of constant
surprise to me, and it always give me a warm glow in the region of the heart, to see the supremacy
of the dog in England. He is respected, admired, loved, and considered, as he deserves to be
everywhere, but as he frequently is not. He is admitted on all excursions; he is taken into
the country for his health; he is a factor in all the master' plans; in short, the English
dog is a member of the family, in good and regular standing.

My interior surroundings are all charming. My little sitting-room, out of which I turned Mrs.
Bobby, is bright with potted ferns and flowering plants, and on its walls, besides the photographs
of a large and unusually plain family, I have two works of art which inspire me anew every
time I gaze at them: the first a scriptural subject, treated by an enthusiastic but inexperienced
hand, 'Susanne dans le Bain, surprise par les Deux Vieillards'; the second, 'The White Witch
of Worcester on her Way to the Stake at High Cross.' The unfortunate lady in the latter picture
is attired in a white lawn wrapper with angel sleeves, and is followed by an abbess with prayer-book,
and eight surpliced choir-boys with candles. I have been long enough in England to understand
the significance of the candles. Doubtless the White Witch had paid four shillings a week for
each of them in her prison lodging, and she naturally wished to burn them to the end.

One has no need, though, of pictures on the walls here, for the universe seems unrolled at
one's very feet. As I look out of my window the last thing before I go to sleep, I see the
lights of Great Belvern, the dim shadows of the distant cathedral towers, the quaint priory
seven centuries old, and just the outline of Holly Bush Hill, a sacred seat of magic science
when the Druids investigated the secrets of the stars, and sought, by auspices and sacrifices,
to forecast the future and to penetrate the designs of the gods.

It makes me feel very new, very undeveloped, to look out of that window. If I were an Englishwoman,
say the fifty-fifth duchess of something, I could easily glow with pride to think that I was
part and parcel of such antiquity; the fortunate heiress not only of land and titles, but of
historic associations. But as I am an American with a very recent background, I blow out my
candle with the feeling that it is rather grand to be making history for somebody else to inherit.

Chapter XIX. The heart of the artist.

I am almost too comfortable with Mrs. Bobby. In fact I wished to be just a little miserable
in Belvern, so that I could paint with a frenzy. Sometimes, when I have been in a state of
almost despairing loneliness and gloom, the colours have glowed on my canvas and the lines
have shaped themselves under my hand independent of my own volition. Now, tucked away in a
corner of my consciousness is the knowledge that I need never be lonely again unless I choose.
When I yield myself fully to the sweet enchantment of this thought, I feel myself in the mood
to paint sunshine, flowers, and happy children's faces; yet I am sadly lacking in concentration,
all the same. The fact is, I am no artist in the true sense of the word. My hope flies ever
in front of my best success, and that momentary success does not deceive me in the very least.
I know exactly how much, or rather how little, I am worth; that I lack the imagination, the
industry, the training, the ambition, to achieve any lasting results. I have the artistic temperament
in so far that it is impossible for me to work merely for money or popularity, or indeed for
anything less than the desire to express the best that is in me without fear or favour. It
would never occur to me to trade on present approval and dash off unworthy stuff while I have
command of the market. I am quite above all that, but I am distinctly below that other mental
and spiritual level where art is enough; where pleasure does not signify; where one shuts oneself
up and produces from sheer necessity; where one is compelled by relentless law; where sacrifice
does not count; where ideas throng the brain and plead for release in expression; where effort
is joy, and the prospect of doing something enduring lures the soul on to new and ever new
endeavour: so I shall never be rich or famous.

What shall I paint to-day? Shall it be the bit of garden underneath my window, with the tangle
of pinks and roses, and the cabbages growing appetisingly beside the sweet-williams, the woodbine
climbing over the brown stone wall, the wicket-gate, and the cherry-tree with its fruit hanging
red against the whitewashed cottage? Ah, if I could only paint it so truly that you could hear
the drowsy hum of the bees among the thyme, and smell the scented hay-meadows in the distance,
and feel that it is midsummer in England! That would indeed be truth, and that would be art.
Shall I paint the Bobby baby as he stoops to pick the cowslips and the flax, his head as yellow
and his eyes as blue as the flowers themselves; or that bank opposite the gate, with its gorse
bushes in golden bloom, its mountain-ash hung with scarlet berries, its tufts of harebells
blossoming in the crevices of rock, and the quaint low clock-tower at the foot? Can I not paint
all these in the full glow of summer-time in my secret heart whenever I open the door a bit
and admit its life-giving warmth and beauty? I think I can, if I can only quit dreaming.

I wonder how the great artists worked, and under what circumstances they threw aside the implements
of their craft, impatient of all but the throb of life itself? Could Raphael paint Madonnas
the week of his betrothal? Did Thackeray write a chapter the day his daughter was born? Did
Plato philosophise freely when he was in love? Were there interruptions in the world's great
revolutions, histories, dramas, reforms, poems, and marbles when their creators fell for a
brief moment under the spell of the little blind tyrant who makes slaves of us all? It must
have been so. Your chronometer heart, on whose pulsations you can reckon as on the procession
of the equinoxes, never gave anything to the world unless it were a system of diet, or something
quite uncoloured and unglorified by the imagination.

Chapter XX. A canticle to Jane.

There are many donkeys owned in these nooks among the hills, and some of the thriftier families
keep donkey-chairs (or 'cheers,' as they call them) to let to the casual summer visitor. This
vehicle is a regular Bath chair, into which the donkey is harnessed. Some of them have a tiny
driver's seat, where a small lad sits beating and berating the donkey for the incumbent, generally
a decrepit dowager from London. Other chairs are minus this absurd coachman's perch, and in
this sort I take my daily drives. I hire the miniature chariot from an old woman who dwells
at the top of Gorse Hill, and who charges one and fourpence the hour, It is a little more when
she fetches the donkey to the door, or when the weather is wet or the day is very warm, or
there is an unusual breeze blowing, or I wish to go round the hills; but under ordinary circumstances,
which may at any time occur, but which never do, one and four the hour. It is only a shilling,
if you have the boy to drive you; but, of course, if you drive yourself, you throw the boy
out of employment, and have to pay extra.

It was in this fashion and on these elastic terms that I first met you, Jane, and this chapter
shall be sacred to you! This is partly owing to the greater fertility of the soil under powerful tropical
atmospheric influences, and partly to the fact that vegetation is continuous throughout the
year, so that slow growing plants can do more within the time, from their functions not being arrested
by the chill of winter; and of many rapidly growing plants, two successive crops can be grown
within the year.

Starch is a substance easily manufactured, and being largely used in several of the arts, as
well as an article of diet, there consequently exists a considerable demand for it in England.
It may be obtained from a great variety of plants, and many of the most productive of it are
natives of the tropics.

The high prices commanded by grain and breadstuffs in Europe, renders the present a remarkably
favorable time to ascertain what can be done in this branch of tropical agriculture; for should
the potato disease return, or this root be less extensively planted than hitherto, starch must
maintain a high price, and it will be worth ascertaining whether some of the superior starch-producing
plants of the tropics might not be cultivated to such an extent as to supply the English market,
and thus be at once profitable to the colonies and advantageous to
the mother country.

Before entering on such a cultivation, however, various points require investigation. We ought to
be able to answer such questions as the following:--

1. What differences
exist between the characters of starch produced by different plants?

2.
What are the qualities or properties that lead manufacturers--calico
printers for example--to prefer one variety to another?

3. For culinary
purposes, and as an article of diet, what qualities or characters
obtain a preference?

4. She is further fortified by the possession of legs which have iron rods concealed
in them, these iron rods terminating in stout grip-hooks, with which she takes hold on mother
earth with an expression that seems to say,--

     'This rock shall fly
      From its firm base as soon as I.'

When I start out in the afternoon, Mrs. Bobby frequently asks me where I am going. I always
answer that I have not made up my mind, though what I really mean to say is that Jane has not
made up her mind. She never makes up her mind until after I have made up mine, lest by some
unhappy accident she might choose the very excursion that I desire myself.

Chapter XXI. I remember, I remember.

For example, I wish to visit St. Bridget's Well, concerning which there are some quaint old
verses in a village history:--

     'Out of thy famous hille,
      There daylie springyeth,
      A water passynge stille,
      That alwayes bringyeth
      Grete comfort to all them
      That are diseased men,
      And makes them well again
          To prayse the Lord.

     'Hast thou a wound to heale,
      The wyche doth greve thee;
      Come thenn unto this welle;
      It will relieve thee;
      Nolie me tangeries,
      And other maladies,
      Have there theyr remedies,
          Prays'd be the Lord.'

St. Bridget's Well is a beautiful spot, and my desire to see it is a perfectly laudable one.
In strict justice, it is really no concern of Jane whether my wishes are laudable or not; but
it only makes the case more flagrant when she interferes with the reasonable plans of a reasonable
being. Never since the day we first met have I harboured a thought that I wished to conceal
from Jane (would that she could say as much!); nevertheless she treats me as if I were a monster
of caprice. As I said before, I wish to visit St. Bridget's Well, but Jane absolutely refuses
to take me there. After we pass Belvern churchyard we approach two roads: the one to the right
leads to the Holy Well; the one to the left leads to Shady Dell Farm, where Jane lived when
she was a girl. At the critical moment I pull the right rein with all my force. In vain: Jane
is always overcome by sentiment when she sees that left-hand road. She bears to the left like
a whirlwind, and nothing can stop her mad career until she is again amid the scenes so dear
to her recollection, the beloved pastures where the mother still lives at whose feet she brayed
in early youth!

Now this is all very pretty and touching. Her action has, in truth, its springs in a most commendable
sentiment that I should be the last to underrate. Shady Dell Farm is interesting, too, for
once, if one can swallow one's wrath and dudgeon at being taken there against one's will; and
one feels that Jane's parents and Jane's early surroundings must be worth a single visit, if
they could produce a donkey of such unusual capacity. Still, she must know, if she knows anything,
that a person does not come from America and pay one and fourpence the hour (or thereabouts)
merely in order to visit the home of her girlhood, which is neither mentioned in Baedeker nor
set down in the local guide-books as a feature of interest.

Whether, in addition to her affection for Shady Dell Farm, she has an objection to St. Bridget's
Well, and thus is strengthened by a double motive, I do not know. She may consider it a relic
of popish superstition; she may be a Protestant donkey; she is a Dissenter,--there's no doubt
about that.

But, you ask, have you tried various methods of bringing her to terms and gaining your own
desires? Certainly. I have coaxed, beaten, prodded, prayed. I have tried leading her past the
Shady Dell turn; she walks all over my feet, and then starts for home, I running behind until
I can catch up with her. I have offered her one and tenpence the hour; she remained firm. One
morning I had a happy inspiration; I determined on conquering Jane by a subterfuge. I said
to myself: "I am going to start for St. Bridget's Well, as usual; several yards before we reach
the two roads, I shall begin pulling, not the right, but the left rein. Jane will lift her
ears suddenly, and say to herself: 'What! has this girl fallen in love with my birthplace at
last, and does she now prefer it to St. Bridget's Well? Then she shall not have it!' Whereupon
Jane will race madly down the right-hand road for the first time, I pulling steadily at the
left rein to keep up appearances, and I shall at last realise my wishes."

This was my inspiration. Would you believe that it failed utterly? It should have succeeded,
and would with an ordinary donkey, but Jane saw through it. She obeyed my pull on the left
rein, and went to Shady Dell Farm as usual.

Another of Jane's eccentricities is a violent aversion to perambulators. As Belvern is a fine,
healthy, growing country, with steadily increasing population, the roads are naturally alive
with perambulators; or at least alive with the babies inside the perambulators. These are the
more alarming to the timid eye in that many of them are double-barrelled, so to speak, and
are loaded to the muzzle with babies; for not only do Belvern babies frequently appear as twins,
but there are often two youngsters of a perambulator age in the same family at the same time.
To weave that donkey and that Bath 'cheer' through the narrow streets of the various Belverns
without putting to death any babies, and without engendering the outspoken condemnation of
the screaming mothers and nurserymaids, is a task for a Jehu. Of course Jane makes it more
difficult by lunging into one perambulator in avoiding another, but she prefers even that risk
to the degradation of treading the path I wish her to tread.

I often wish that for one brief moment I might remove the lid of Jane's brain and examine her
mental processes. She would not exasperate me so deeply if I could be certain of her springs
of action. Is she old, is she rheumatic, is she lazy, is she hungry? Sometimes I think she
means well, and is only ignorant and dull; but this hypothesis grows less and less tenable
as I know her better. Sometimes I conclude that she does not understand me; that the difference
in nationality may trouble her. If an Englishman cannot understand an American woman all at
once, why should an English donkey? Perhaps it takes an American donkey to comprehend an American
woman. Yet I cannot bring myself to drive any other donkey; I am always hoping to impress myself
on her imagination, and conquer her will through her fancy. Meanwhile, I like to feel myself
in the grasp of a nature stronger than my own, and so I hold to Jane, and buy a photograph
of St. Bridget's Well!

Chapter XXII. Comfort Cottage.

It was about two o'clock in the afternoon, and I suddenly heard a strange sound, that of our
fowl cackling. Yesterday I heard her tell-tale note about noon, and the day before just as
I was eating my breakfast. I knew that it would be so! The serpent has entered Eden. That fowl
has laid before eight in the morning for three weeks without interruption, and she has now
entered upon a career of wild and reckless uncertainty which compels me to eat eggs from twelve
to twenty-four hours old, just as if I were in London.

     Alas for the rarity
     Of regularity
     Under the sun!

A hen, being of the feminine gender, underestimates the majesty of order and system; she resents
any approach to the unimaginative monotony of the machine. Probably the Confederated Fowl Union
has been meddling with our little paradise where Labour and Capital have dwelt in heavenly
unity until now. Nothing can be done about it, of course; even if it were possible to communicate
with the fowl, she would say, I suppose, that she would lay when she was ready, and not before;
at least, that is what an American hen would say.

Just as I was brooding over these mysteries and trying to hatch out some conclusions, Mrs.
Bobby knocked at the door, and, coming in, curtsied very low before saying, "It's about namin'
the 'ouse, miss."

"Oh yes. Pray don't stand, Mrs. Bobby; take a chair. I am not very busy; I am only painting
prickles on my gorse bushes, so we will talk it over."

