A rustic cottage, approached between solid hedges of yew, was the bespoken lodging, and M.
and S. were quickly out of the cart, and roaming the garden among fruit trees, autumn flowers,
and beehives. Thence they were summoned to the little front room, the oaken window-sill bright
with fuchsias and geraniums, the walls adorned with an old eight-day clock, a copper warming-pan
and antique trays, while over the mantel-piece was a small fowling piece, years ago reduced
from flint to percussion.  Upon the rafters there were half a side of bacon, bunches of dried
sweet herbs, and the traditional strings of onions. The pictures consisted of four highly coloured
prints of celebrated race-horses, long ago buried and forgotten.  It was in this cottage that
the young men remained, and very comfortable they were, for the bedrooms were fitted up with
the queerest of four-posters, made in the last century, while the walls were covered with prints
from sundry illustrated papers, and illuminated texts.  Serton had sojourned in this humble
dwelling-place before, and expatiated upon its manifold merits to his friend, who prided himself
upon being practical, and said 'twould do, but a five-pound note, he supposed, would buy the
lot.  "No doubt," replied S., "but to me 'tis a cosy nest for anglers."

The fishing, however, was the first consideration, and with a sense of satisfaction induced
by good quarters out went the anglers, across meadows, by the banks of a river.  It was fine
fun to help the lock-keeper with his cast-net and store the bait-can with gudgeons and minnows,
and to crack jokes before the tumbling and rumbling weir, with its deep, wide pool, high banks
around, and overhanging bushes. Serton, electing for a little Waltonian luxury, sat him down
in comfort, plumbed a hard bottom in six feet of water, caught a dace at the first swim, and,
with his cockney-bred maggots, took five others in succession--three roach, and a bleak which
he reported in town, at the Bottle's Head, as the largest ever seen.

Meanwhile M., who was paternostering with worm and minnow, came down to inform S. that he had
already landed four perch, and that the shoal was still unfrightened.  With a recommendation
to his friend to do likewise, he returned to his station, and his basketed perch might soon
have recited, "Master, we are seven."  Thereabouts a shout from S. made the welkin ring; he
cried aloud for help, and M. sprinted along in time to save the fine tackle by netting a big
chub.  From the merry style of the beginning, the captor had felt assured of more roach, and
now confessed that they and dace had ceased biting, though he had used paste and maggot alternately.
Then he took to small red worm and angled forth a dish of fat gudgeon, that would have put
a Seine fisher in raptures.  Next he lost a fish by breakage, and while repairing damages was
arrested by a distant summons from his companion, whom he discovered wrestling with something--no
perch, however--that had gained the further side of the pool, and was now heading remorselessly
for the apron of the weir, under which it fouled and freed.  The witnesses of the defeat were
probably right in their conclusion that this was the aged black trout that had become a legend,
and was believed to be the only trout left in those parts.

During the afternoon M. and S., in peaceful brotherhood, sat over the pool, plied paternoster
and roach pole, and fished till the float could be no more identified in the dusk.  They carried
to the cottage each ten or twelve pounds' weight extra in fish caught, but in his memories
of the homeward walk S. must have been mistaken in his eloquent reference to the crake of the
landrail, though he might have been correct as to the weak, piping cry of the circling bats,
and the ghostly passage of flitting owl mousing low over the meadow.  These alone, he said,
broke the silence; in this M. took him to task, having himself heard the tinkling of sheep
bells and the barking of the shepherd's dog.

Next morning the anglers were somewhat put out at first at the necessity of fulfilling an engagement
with the keeper, being reminded of the promise by the appearance of a shock-headed youth in
the cottage garden, staggering under two sacks.  M. was better versed in these things than
the other, and able to inform him that this meant rabbiting; here were the nets and the ferrets,
and he had undertaken to stand by with the single-barrel and see fair play.  Ferreting is a
business generally transacted without hustle, and the keeper was a noted slowcoach.  With this
knowledge, and the presence under his eye of a basket containing ground-bait kneaded in the
woodhouse while the breakfast rashers were frying, S. opined that he might snatch an hour or
so of honest reaching in the backwater while the rabbit people were getting ready.

The roach master eventually came to the rendezvous, indeed, with a dozen and five of those
beautifully graded roach which are between three-quarters and half pound, and which, when they
are "on the feed," run marvellously even in size and quality.  M. did not now concern himself
about the roach.  He was no longer a Waltonian; his mind had taken the tone of the keeper's.
Yesterday his soul was of the fish, fishy; to-day it was full of muzzle-loaders, nets, and
ferrets.  But he, too, had his reward, and S. noticed that as they plodded athwart a fallow
he looked out keenly and knowingly for feathered or four-footed game as if he were Colonel
Hawker in person, and not the patient paternosterer with downcast eye.  After S. had witnessed
his bright eye and upstanding boldness when he brought the single-barrel to shoulder and dropped
a gloriously burnished woodpigeon at long shot, he conceived an enhanced respect for him evermore,
and was endued with a spirit of toleration to watch the coming operations, in which he took
no part.

Nets were pegged down; there was much talk of bolt holes between the keeper and the rustic
shockhead working on different sides of the bank, and M. and the dog Spider had vision and
thought for nothing but the open holes they guarded.  It transpired that the keeper wanted
rabbits for commerce.  The couples that speedily met fate in the nets were insufficient.  He
required fifteen couple.  M. rolled over a white scut with obvious neatness and dispatch, and
in shifting over to another hedgerow he shot a jay and gloried in its splendour.  The keeper,
however, moderated any secret intentions there might have been as to the plumage by one sentence:
"That's another for the vermin book.  I gets a bob for that."

The keeper's cottage gave lunch and rest to the party, and the talk was either of ferrets,
hares, and rabbits, or of the two rudely carpentered cases which contained well-set-up specimens
of teal, cuckoo, wryneck, abnormally marked swallow, pied rat, landrail, and polecat, each
being a chapter in the life history of the keeper.

The tale of rabbits being incomplete, M. returned to his former occupation, but S. fished again,
continually finding sport of the miscellaneous kind, such as a chub with cheese paste, perch
with dew worm out of the milk-prepared moss, roach rod with running tackle, and leger tackle
on a spinning rod.  With this and a great worm on strong hook he had the surprise of a fight
that gave him not a little concern. The fish at first appeared to be going to ground, even
boring bodily into it.  Then it gave way to panic, and shot about the pool as if pursued by
a water fiend.  Winched in slowly, it plunged into the bank, thought better of it, and ran
up stream.  At this crisis M. arrived, commandeered the net, and stood around offering advice.
It was a monster eel, he said.  Give him more butt; be careful; be more energetic; certainly,
all right.  The last remark was simply a receipt in form of a little speech from S., who had
briefly bidden him to mind his own business.  The unseen fish abruptly had given in.  Was it
collapse?  Slowly, slowly it followed the revolution of the reel, both men peering intent for
first sight and grounds for identification of species.  The first sight, however, must have
been on the part of the fish, which went off in a fright deep down with renewed strength, and
then it did surrender, a barbel of 6 lb., a somewhat rare fish for the river, and only taken
when, as in this case, it had wandered up into the weir pool.

Having told M. to mind his own business with a minimum of ceremony, it was not surprising that
S. was left alone, not exactly to his sport, since, as it happened, the barbel closed his account,
unless one or two losses may be included in that definition, and, to give him his due, he was
so thorough a fisherman that he did regard losses, shortcomings, and mishaps as legitimate
assets in the general game.  He had forgotten in his barbeline absorption to inquire, according
to usage, how his comrade had been faring, and did not meet him again till they were in the
throat of the lane cottage-wards bound.  "Well, old 'un; what luck with the paternoster?" he
asked, cheerily.  M., with a sly twinkle in the eye, said, yes, he had done somewhat; three
pike.  It may be premised that the young men had both been trying at intervals for a certain
marauding pike reported to them as a ferocious duck destroyer by a gentleman farmer who came
down to gossip.  He indicated the field and a gravel pit as a guide to the place where his
cowman had seen a duckling seized by a pike, and the man embellished his account by swearing
that the fish had ploughed his way down the river half out of water, with the ball of feathers
bewhiskering his jaws.  Manford, it seems, had revenged the raided ducks.  A large pike lay
at the bottom of his rush basket underneath three jack and a covering of rushes, and it was
produced as a crowning show, a golden fish of 17 lb. lured to execution by a live bait.  There
was talk of nothing else that night but this prize at keeper's cottage, village tap-room, at
the lockheads, and by five-barred gates; and the exultant keeper, who took credit for all,
was heard to say that it was the best bloomin' jack he had seen "for seven year come last plum
blight," whenever and whatever that might be.

CHAPTER III

MAYFLY DAYS AND DIALOGUES

[SCENE: straw-roofed fishing-hut, door and windows wide open.  Table covered with remnants
of luncheon, floor ditto with mineral water and other bottles, very empty.  In the shade outside,
fishermen lying on the grass gazing at the river, upon which the sun strikes fiercely. Keeper
and keeper's boys standing sentinel up and down the meadow, under orders to report the first
appearance of mayfly.  Heat intense. Swallows hawking over the water.  Fields a sheet of yellow
buttercups, with faint lilac lines formed by cuckoo-flowers on the margins of carriers and
ditches.  Much yawning and silence amongst the lazy sportsmen sprawling in a variety of attitudes;
caps thrown off their sun-scorched faces, waders peeled down to the ankles.]

R. O. (the Riparian Owner, and host of the party): Well, it's about time, I fancy, something
stirred.  The fly was up an hour before this yesterday, and it would be naturally a little
later to-day.

SUFFIELD (a barrister of repute, tall and thin, sarcastic, and a first-rate angler): I don't
believe we shall see a fly till three o'clock, and then we shall have the old game over again--short
rises and bad language all along the line.  Terlan's rod is enough to drive flies and fish
out of the county.

TERLAN (a merry little squire, who takes business and pleasure alike with imperturbable placidity
of temper, and who always uses a double-handed rod for mayfly fishing): The same to you, old
blue-bag. I'll back my 14-footer against your miserable little split cane.

The GENERAL (a retired Indian officer, given to ancient recollections and gloomy views of life):
Yes, and very little to brag about either. A brace and half of trout on this river in the mayfly
week is a very pitiable sight.  When I was a boy nobody had a basket of less than eight brace.
Even the trout seem under the curse of this so-called new age.

SUFFIELD: Ay, you not only could, but did, get them easily in the good old times.  Why, I have
seen the old fogies up at Lord Tummer's water fish from chairs and camp-stools.  (Laughter.)
Fact, 'pon my word. Each man took his place with his footman behind him, and every man jack
of 'em fished in kid gloves.

The GENERAL: But they got their trout, and plenty of 'em, and if they did take it easy, they
filled their baskets.

The PARSON (the least parson-like member of the party, and beloved, as the right sort of parson
always is, by everybody): This is stale matter.  We went over all that ground yesterday, and
agreed to take the modern trout as he is, and make the best of him.  Call it education or what
you like, trout-fishing is not what it was.

The GENERAL (grunting): And never will be.  I say it all comes from your overstocking and returning
hooked fish to the water.  You are all too particular by half, and are eaten up with new-fangled
notions.

R. O.: If we fail, it is not, at any rate, for want of preparations, precautions, and theories.
Here, Georgy, get up, and arm yourself in regular order.

GEORGY (a stout, elderly stockbroker, supposed to be like the lamented George IV, rising with
a laugh, and leisurely filling his pipe): Begad! what am I the worse for my paraphernalia?
The General there and all of you, i' faith, are very glad to make use of my little odds and ends.

The GENERAL (contemptuously): When I was a young man we never bothered ourselves very often
with so much as a landing-net.  Now you are laden with stuff like a pack mule.  Look at Georgy's
priest dangling from one button, his oil-bottle from another, his weighing machine from another.

R. O.: Ay, and there's the damping box for the gut points, and the pin to clear the eyeholes
of the hooks, and the linen cloth to wrap the trout in, and the clearing-ring, and the knee-pads,
and whole magazines of flies.

The PARSON: Good!  I know Georgy has at least twenty patterns, and by the time he has found
out which is the killer the rise is over.

SUFFIELD: Hello!  See that?

ALL: What?  Where?

SUFFIELD: I beg your pardon: it was only a swallow, or a rat.

R. O.: No; Harvey is signalling up at the bridge.  Let us be moving. The fly is coming.  Tight
lines to you all.  [Piscatorum Personae collect their rods, pull up their waders, and stroll
away in various directions.]

GEORGY (an hour later, seated amongst the sedges by a broad part of the river, mopping his
forehead, rod laid aside on the grass behind: to him approaches the Parson from the shallow
above): That was a warm bout while it lasted, parson.  How did you get on?

PARSON: Get on?  Not at all.  For a time the fish rose in all directions, but they did not
seem to take the natural even.  Flopped at 'em and let 'em pass on.

GEORGY: I didn't like to say it before the R. O., but I'm sure we begin this mayfly fishing
too soon.  There ought not to be a rod out till the fly has been on at least a couple of days,
and not a line should be cast till the fish are taking them freely.

PARSON: What have you done?

GEORGY (motioning to his creel, and creeping softly up the bank, with rod lowered): Only a
couple, and handsome fellows, too.  Why one of them is full to the muzzle with drakes; there's
one crawling from between its jaws at this moment.

PARSON: Heigho! he's into another.

GEORGY (having stalked his fish and hooked him, retires from the bank and brings a two-pounder
down to the net, which the parson handles): Well, I've got my brace and half, anyhow.

PARSON (laughing): To tell you the truth, I came down to beg a touch of the paraffin this time.

GEORGY: I thought so.  Here you are.  (Parson returns to his wooden bridge.)  They laugh at
my fads, but somehow take toll of 'em. (General approaches from below.)  Any luck, General?

GENERAL (disgusted): Yes, infernal bad luck!  Two fish broke away one after another.  They
won't fasten a bit.  Never saw anything like it. But I want you to give me one of those gut
points out of your damping box.  I must get one of those boxes for myself.

GEORGY (supplying the requisitioned goods): You'll find it a very useful thing.  Your gut will
always be ready to use.  Ha! my friend (to trout rising madly twenty yards out), I rather think
you'll make number four.  (Done accordingly.  Spring balance produced; trout weighed at 2 lb.
1 oz. in sight of General.)

GENERAL (moving off to the next meadow, and commanding a deep bend, the haunt of heavy trout);
I suppose I have lost the trick; but catch them I can't.  I have risen six fish, and lost the
only ones that took me. Here's the keeper.  What are they doing at the ford, Harvey?

HARVEY: The master's got four, General, and he wants you to come down. The shallow's all alive,
and they are taking well.  There's a trout, sir, at the tail of that weed.

GENERAL (casting a loose line): Missed it again, by Jove!  Why was that, Harvey?

HARVEY (coughing slightly): Well, General, if you ask me, I fancy you had too much slack on
the water.  You'll have a better chance on the sharp stream below.  Let me carry your rod,
sir.  (Hitches fly in small ring.)  No wonder, General, the fish got off: the barb's gone from
the hook.

GENERAL (pacing downwards): That's it, is it?  Nobody knows better than I that after a fish
balks at the hook, one should examine the point. Yet I preach without practice.  Ah, me!  I'm
not in it.

R. O. (genially greeting, and wading out of the shallow): Come along, General; they are rising
well, fly and fish both; and this is a bit of water where they generally mean business.  Good
luck to you!  There's a grand trout a little higher up, look.  He takes every fly that sails
over to him.  Pitch your Champion just four inches before his nose, and he's a gone coon.

GENERAL (encouraged and inspired, casting with confidence; and, believing that he is going
to be successful, succeeding): You are all right, my spotted enemy (playing the fish down stream
firmly).  Come along, Harvey, no quarter; get below those flags, and I'll run him in before
he knows where he is.  That's it: two pounds and a half for a ducat!

R. O.: Capital!  We can't send for Georgy's scales, but I bet you he is two and three-quarters
(as the General bangs the head of fish on the edge of his brogue sole).  Georgy's priest would
come in convenient here, too.

SUFFIELD (at upper end of water, kneeling patiently at the edge of an older coppice, smoking
the pipe of perfect peace, and soliloquising): They don't rise yet.  But a time will come.
Hang it! but this is sweet.  Yea, it is good to be here.  Now, if that little Waterside Sketches
chap was here, let me see, how would he tick it off? Forget-me-nots--and deuced pretty they
are; sedge warblers, three; kingfishers, one; rooks melodious; picturesque cottages on the
downs nestling--they always put it that way--nestling under the beech wood; balmy air--'tis
a trifle nice; cuckoo mentioning his name to all the hills--Tennyson, I know, said so; drowsy
bees and gaudy dragon flies--yes, they are actually in the bond; and all the rest of it, here
it is.  And I've chaffed my friend at the club time out of mind for his gush, and swore by
the gods that all the angler cares about is gross weight of fish killed.  Yet, somehow, I must
have taken all this in many a time, without, I suppose, knowing it.  Softly now.  (Casts deftly
with a short line, lightly and straightly delivered, to a corner up-stream where the current
swerves round a chestnut tree leaning into the river.  Leaps to feet with a split-cane rod
arched like a bow. Retires down stream, smiling.)  No you don't!  I know you.  If you get back
to that first floor front of yours, I'm done.  Out of your familiar ground you're done.  Steady,
steady!  Keep your head up, and on you come.  What?  More line?  Well, well; one more run for
the last. Thanks; here you are.  (Turns a short, thick two-pounder out of the net into a bed
of wild hyacinths in the copse.)

TERLAN (in possession of a side stream which he had won at the friendly toss after breakfast):
Fortune has smiled upon me to-day.  They laugh at my big rod, but I make it work for me.  A
fish has no chance with it.  I saw the Parson weeded four times yesterday with his little ten-foot
greenheart.  My fish don't weed me; they can't.  Ha, ha!  Now look at that trout close under
the farther bank, sucking in the fat Mayflies with a gusto worthy of an alderman.  Here I am
yards away in the meadow; I am out of sight.  The rod seems to know that I rely upon it.  I
don't cast, so to speak; simply give the rod its head, as it were, and there you are.  (Fly
alights on opposite bank, drops gently, with upstanding wings; is seized with a flourish; trout
is brought firmly and rapidly over a bed of weeds, never permitted to twist or turn, and attendant
boy nets him out with a grin on his chubby face.) Dip the net a little more, Tommy; you don't
want to assault a fish, only to lift him out.  How many is that?  Eight do you say?  Then I
want no more.

[SCENE: Straw-roofed fishing hut, as before.  Fishing men returning in straggling order.  Bottles
opened without loss of time.  Black drakes dancing in the air.  Surface of river marked by
never a sign of fish. Flotsam and jetsam of shucks drifting down, and forming in mass at the
eddies.  Swifts and swallows exceedingly busy everywhere.  Sun hastening to western hill-tops.
Beautiful evening effects on field and wood, especially on hawthorn grove, in the light of
the hour, snow-white, touched with golden gleam.]

R. O. (handing rod to keeper, and taking creel from boy): It's all over now.  Short rise to-day.
We shall be having a morning and evening rise to-morrow very likely.  Now for the spoil.  Where's
Georgy?  We want his steelyard.

GEORGY: Here I am.

R. O.: Oh, a grayling on the 3rd June!

GEORGY: Couldn't help it; fly right down his gullet.  Besides, you said you wanted them all
out of the water.

The PARSON (weighing his fish): Mine is a back seat.  I had twenty misses to one hit.  Still,
I'm content--3 lb., 2 1/4 lb., and a pound roach.

The GENERAL (smoking a cheroot on a chair brought out of the hut): My muster roll is soon read--three
fish, total 4 lb.

R. O.: Harvey has reckoned me up.  There are five fish, weighing 10 lb.

SUFFIELD (sauntering up and humming "Now the labourer's task is o'er," and surveying the groups
of trout, disposed on the grass in their tribes and households apart): What a sight for the
tired angler.  Ah! after you with the shandy-gaff.  How many?  I really haven't counted; but
I've had a lovely time at the wood.  (Harvey turns out basket, and weighs fish.) Only seven--well,
I must do better next time.  13 lb., too; that's not high average; but I report myself satisfied.
Here comes Terlan with the mainmast of his brother's yacht.

TERLAN (smiling): Yes, the spar is all right.  Sport?  Pretty fair, but I haven't been working
like galley slaves as some of you have.  Lay the lot out decently, Tommy, and don't smother
them in grass next time.

R. O.: This is the bag of bags, gentlemen.  Four brace of trout, and at the head of the row
a fish of 3 3/4 lb.  Have him set up, Terlan; it's the most shapely fellow I ever saw taken
out of the river.  But I see the wagonette coming down to the mill.  Where's the doctor?

SUFFIELD: Oh! we shall find him presently.  He has been away at the mill-heads and carriers;
what the General would call outpost duty.

[SCENE: Road in front of mill.  Music of droning and dripping wheel. Bats wheeling overhead.
Mother in cottage singing child to sleep. Dogs barking in distance.  Sack-laden wagon rumbling
over bridge. Doctor seated on a cask smoking, and pulling the ears of a setter. Gleam of fading
light on quiet, mirror-like water.  Corncrake heard near.  Nightingales in concert in adjacent
park.  Scent of May-bloom heavy in the air.]

R. O. (on box of wagonette with tired fishermen behind): Well, Doctor, what have you done?

DOCTOR (youthful and of goodly countenance): Six brace.

PARSON: You mean fish--not brace.

DOCTOR (shrugging his shoulders): What time did the Mayfly come up? Three or thereabouts, did
it?  That is just about the time I came in to have a nap, and I have not fished since.  I told
you not to idle about waiting for Mayfly.  Here are my trout, and I got every one of them with
the small fly--Welshman's button--before one o'clock.

The GENERAL: They run small.

DOCTOR: H'm, perhaps they do.  Two of them seem to have rather bad teeth, too.  Still, I don't
grumble.  Ah, well; good-night.  (Wagonette rumbles off down the dusty road.)

R. O.: Good chap, that.  He always sleeps at the mill; says the wheel grinds him to sleep.
(Later, at the porch of the Black Bull.)  We shall have the great rise very likely to-morrow;
but I really do think there's something in that small-fly business.

TERLAN: Not forgetting my mainmast.

GEORGY: And, while you are about it, my fads and fanglements.

CHAPTER IV

MY FIRST TWEED SALMON

It may, I trust, be forgiven me if, when thinking of all the salmon I have taken in half a
century of attempts and hopes for that 70-pounder which is ever lying expectant in the angler's
imagination, I catch my first Tweed salmon over again.  A good deal of water must have run
through Kelso Bridge since, for I had better confess it was in the month of October, 1889.
In that year the autumn fishing in all Scotland on the rivers that remained open during the
month was decidedly capricious.  This was one of those expeditions when it is wise to make
the most of the tiniest opportunities of amusement, and I began very fairly with a fellow-passenger
in the train, one of the class which, seeing your fishing things amongst the baggage, arrogates
to itself the right to open a volley of questions and remarks upon you about fishing.  This
example at once showed the extent of his knowledge upon the subject by the declaration: "I
never have the patience to fish; it's so long waiting for a bite."  He also hinted agreement
with the saying attributed to Johnson.  There is not so much ignorance in these days on the
subject, and the majority of people I fancy now know the difference between sitting down before
a painted float and the downright hard work and incessant activity of a day with salmon or
trout rod.

Next morning, in clean, quiet Kelso, I mused over the intruded opinions of the gentleman in
the train (whom I had ticked off as a good-natured bagman), and having been warned beforehand
by a laconic postscript, "Prospects not rosy," remembered that in angling there is something
needed besides endurance and energy, and that when you are waiting day by day for the water
to fall into condition there is a substantial demand upon patience.  However, the thought must
not spoil breakfast, nor did it.  Then I read my letters, glanced down the columns of the Scotsman,
lighted the first tobacco (the best of the day verily!), and issued forth from the yard of
the Cross Keys, hallowed by the periodical residence of eminent salmon fishers, such as Alfred
Denison, who, with so many of the familiar sportsmen of his day, has gone hence, leaving pleasant
memories behind.

The stony square of the town is in front of you; Forrest's shop is next door as you stand in
the gateway of the old inn, and after a glance at the sky and at the weathercock on the top
of the market house you look in there.  A local fisherman was coming out, and in reply to the
inevitable question as to the state of the river, he said, "Weel, she's awa' again."  Pithy
and characteristic, and full of information was this.  It was a verdict--You may fish, but
shall fish in vain this day. The Tweed is away again.

Gloomily now you walk ahead, leaving your call at the tackle shop for a more convenient season;
at present, at any rate, time is of no account. Past the interesting ruins of Kelso Abbey you
proceed, and soon, leaning over the parapet of Rennie's Bridge, on the right-hand side, your
eye straightaway seeks the Tweedometer fixed against the wall of Mr. Drummond's Ednam House
garden.  The bold black figures on the whitened post mark 2 1/2 ft. above orthodox level. 
Two days ago the 3 ft. point had been reached; then Tweed sank to 2 ft.; now "she" is up again
6 in.

One does not care how high a river may rise, provided it gets over the business once for all,
and recedes steadily, to have done with change for a reasonable time.  The worst phase of all
is that which is represented by intermittent ups and downs on a small scale; for the fish follow
the example of the river most religiously in one respect--when it is unsettled they are unsettled
too.  Such experience as this, morning after morning, for many days, may be handsome exercise
in the finishing-off touches of your lessons in patience, and are probably entertaining enough
to your friends who are not anglers. There is no amusement for you; only resignation.  Make
up your mind to that, my brother.

There must have been a quantity of downpour away to the west up amongst the hills; the skies
are leaden with rain clouds even now; the air is saturated with moisture.  Up beyond the picturesque
little island at the junction of the two rivers the water thunders over the rocky ledge which
forms the dub at the bottom of Floors Castle lower water, and if you observe closely you will
soon conclude that Teviot is bringing down an undue amount of Scottish soil.  Cross the bridge
and look over to the heavy pool under the wooded slope, and note, where the light strikes the
eddy, the yellow hue; 18 in. above ordinary level is the outside limit which the initiated
on Tweed give you as a bare chance for a fish, and it is evident that, even if those dark clouds
do not fulfil their threats, this chance will scarcely come to-morrow, or perchance next day.
Wherefore, once more, let patience have her perfect work.

The bait fishers are busy, to be sure.  Your extremity is their opportunity.  With the worm
they make fair baskets of trout in this dirty water.  The public on Tweedside are indeed a
privileged race. Nearly the whole of the river is free to trout anglers, and there is an abundance
of trout in it.  The inhabitants of Kelso ought to be full of gratitude to the Duke of Roxburghe,
for he gave them, as a generous supplement to their free trouting, miles of the Teviot for
salmon fishing.  They had only to enrol themselves members of a local association and pay a
nominal fee to obtain salmon fishing on the Teviot for a certain number of days in every week.
Mr. James Tait, the clerk to the Tweed Commissioners (whom hundreds of anglers had to thank
for much kindness to strangers), informed me that when the water was right plenty of salmon
were taken in Teviot, especially at the back end.  I think, though some people of course are
never satisfied, that this great boon was duly appreciated by the inhabitants.  You talk to
people by the riverside about the Duke, whose fine mansion crowns the high ground ending the
pretty landscape above bridge, and they curiously harp upon one string.  They say nothing about
his Grace's rank, or wealth, or good looks, or the historical associations of his ancient house.
They simply remark, "Eh! but the Duke's a kind mon."

The Duke walked down to the opposite side once and hailed me in my boat, said he was glad to
give "Red Spinner" a day on his beat, and chatted for a quarter of an hour, the embodiment
of man and sportsman. The late Duke of Abercorn was just such another nature's nobleman, and
while upon the subject of dukes I may include the Duke of Teck as one with whom I had many
a friendly chat about fishing.

That, with the terrible worming the Tweed gets in these autumnal floods, the trout fishing
should be so good is marvellous.  The plentiful supply of suitable food is one reason why the
Tweed has not long been ruined for this summer sport.  The hatch of March Browns in the early
portion of the season is a sight not to be imagined unless seen.  All the summer through insect
life abounds, and I have seen in the middle of October hatches of olive duns that would satisfy
even a Hampshire chalk streamer, while the trout were rising at them beautifully on every hand.
On one of the flood days I strolled up and down Tweedside, and of the dozen or so of anglers
I encountered pottering about with the worm, the majority had something like a dozen trout
in their baskets.  On a day when Teviot was cleared down to porter colour I met a young gentleman
who had been fishing down with flies (the blue dun and Greenwell were on the cast), and had
filled his basket.  There were some fish of three-quarters and half a pound, but the bulk were
smaller.  These trout were not in good condition, for they spawn early in these parts, but
they were not so bad as one might have supposed.

But let us return to our salmon.  While you are trying to play your game of patience like a
philosopher, you will naturally make a superficial acquaintance with such portions of the river
as are accessible to a wayfarer, and if you have not seen it before you will speedily understand
why "she" (on Tweedside you always hear the river referred to in the feminine gender) has so
many admirers, who pledge her in a life-long devotion.  It is indeed a winsome river, and the
scenery, never tame, is in many parts lovely.  Where can there be a more beautiful place than
Sir Richard Waldie-Griffith's park at Hendersyde, as it shows from the other bank of the river?
The autumnal tints are in advance of those farther south, and the beeches glow ruddy from afar.
This borderland is admirably wooded, and the Tweed valley is pre-eminent in that respect. 
The historical associations are so numerous and so interesting that the mind, if you allow
it to run riot, will become overburdened with them.  For myself, to assist in the development
of the ripe fruit of patience, I kept mostly to musings that had Abbotsford for its centre,
and re-read Lockhart on the spot with which that ponderous volume is so closely concerned.
Thanks to Mr. David Tait, I secured one of the early editions, where are to be found all the
references to fishing and other sports which are not included in other editions.

The Wizard of the North lived awhile at Rosebank, a short distance below Kelso, and the old
tree, I believe, was still flourishing in which he used to sit and take pot shots at herons
as they flew over the Tweed, which rolled beneath his leafy perch.  Driving down to Carham,
"Tweedside," who was my companion, showed me Rosebank across the broad stream, and, while I
was reminding him of Walter Scott's gunnery, we saw in an adjacent ploughed field three herons
standing close together, apparently in doleful contemplation.  On this drive also we crossed
a burn which divides English from Scottish soil, and it was tumbling down in angry mood.

The morning, however, comes at last when John, who has been to the station with the early train,
meets you as you descend to the coffee-room with "She'll fush the day."  But you will not forget
that Tweed has been out of order for twelve days, rising and falling, never settled.  Still,
though the chance is very much an off one, it has to be taken.  A day on any water, from Galashiels
down to the last pool below Coldstream, is exceeding precious at this time of the year. Every
boat is apportioned for the riparian owners and their friends to the very end of the season.
If, therefore, you have had kindly leave to fish any of these celebrated waters, and have been
unable through bad weather to live up to the opportunities, I could almost weep with or for
you; or, if you think strong language more manly, I would make an effort for once to meet you
on that ground.  I speak, alas, from the book.  The wounds inflicted by jade Fortune in these
regards are yet unhealed.  Take, then, your very off-chance and be thankful.

The truth is that you never quite know what will happen in salmon fishing.  On that drenching
Saturday, when you were working like a galley slave without raising or seeing a fish on the
Lower Floors water (where Lord Randolph Churchill subsequently slew his four fish), did not
Mr. Gilbey take five at Carham and Mr. Arkwright four at Birgham? On the Monday, when the water
was a little better, did you not find that the salmon had moved right away from the beat for
which you were that day booked?  It was surely so; and the only sport obtained was by a young
gentleman who had handled a rod for the first time on the previous Friday, and who now happened
upon a 25-lb.  fish, the only one killed that day, with the exception of a pound yellow trout,
which took your own fly--a Silver Doctor 1 1/2 in. long.  This, and a couple of false rises
from salmon, constituted your only luck.  Yet there were salmon and grilse in all the streams,
splashing in the slow oily sweep that crept under the wood yonder.

It was consolation that night to discover that not much had been done anywhere.  A gossip in
Mr. Forrest's shop had heard that the Duke of Roxburghe had killed a couple, and the Duchess,
who fishes fair with a good salmon rod and casts the fly in a masterly style, also a brace.
Mr. Drummond, up at the meeting point of Teviot and Tweed, had done something also.  That night,
too, the gallant General arrived from Tayside, to make your mouth water as he, being cross-examined
as to sport, elaborated the record which had appeared in Saturday's Field. If there is any
wrinkle in salmon fishing that the General does not know, you would like to hear of it, would
you not?  Mark his artful little plan of using the common safety-pin of commerce for stringing
his flies upon, threading them upon the pin by the loop before the affair is closed up.

