THE WRITING OF THE
    SHORT STORY

    BY

    LEWIS WORTHINGTON SMITH, A.M.

    DRAKE UNIVERSITY, DES MOINES, IOWA

    D. C. HEATH & CO., PUBLISHERS
    BOSTON  NEW YORK  CHICAGO

    COPYRIGHT, 1902,
    BY D. C. HEATH & CO.

    IT IS A PLEASURE TO BE PERMITTED TO ASSOCIATE
     WITH THIS LITTLE BOOK THE NAME OF MY FRIEND
               PROFESSOR L. A. SHERMAN
            OF THE UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA.

SUGGESTIONS FOR TEACHERS

In the author's classes the three stories in the volume entitled "Three Hundred Dollars" are
first studied because of their simplicity, and these are followed by parts of "The Bonnie Brier
Bush," and then by the stories from Bret Harte. Mrs. Phelps Ward's "Loveliness" is especially
valuable for illustrating methods and devices for making a simple theme dramatically interesting.
Students are required to mark stories with the symbols and discuss them with reference to the
principles of which this little book is an exposition, but no recitation on the book itself
is required. Perhaps one-third of the time in the class-room is spent in discussion of the
short themes written by the class, and when convenient these are placed on the board before
the class for that purpose. In the theme work following the suggested subjects the effort is
made to confine instruction and practice to one thing at a time, but at the conclusion of the
work of the term each member of the class is required to hand in a complete original story.

THE WRITING OF THE SHORT STORY

NARRATIVE FORMS

=1. Elements of the Story.=--This little volume is meant to be a discussion of but one of the
various forms that literature takes, and it will be first in order to see what are the elements
that go to the making of a narrative having literary quality. A story may be true or false,
but we shall here be concerned primarily with fiction, and with fiction of no great length.
In writing of this sort the first essential is that something shall happen; a story without
a succession of incidents of some kind is inconceivable. We may then settle upon incident as
a first element. As a mere matter of possibility a story may be written without any interest
other than that of incident, but a story dealing with men will not have much interest for thoughtful
readers unless it also includes some showing of character. Further, as the lives of all men
and women are more or less conditioned by their surroundings and circumstance, any story will
require more or less description. Incidents are of but little moment, character showing may
have but slight interest, description is purposeless, unless the happenings of the story develop
in the characters feelings toward which we assume some attitude of sympathy or opposition.
Including this fourth element of the story, we shall then have incident, description, character,
mood, as the first elements of the narrative form.

=2. A Succession of Incidents Required.=--A series of unconnected happenings may be interesting
merely from the unexpectedness--or the hurry and movement of the events, but ordinarily a story
gains greatly in its appeal to the reader through having its separate incidents developed in
some sort of organic unity. The handling of incidents for a definite effect gives what we call
plot. A plot should work steadily forward to the end or dénouement, and should yet conceal
that end in order that interest may be maintained to the close. Evidently a writer who from
the first has in mind the outcome of his story will subordinate the separate incidents to that
main purpose and so in that controlling motive give unity to the whole plot. Further, the interest
in the plot will be put on a higher plane, if in the transition from incident to incident there
is seen, not chance simply, but some relation of cause and effect.