And by her side there was an odd bubbling that put her in mind of blowing the soap-suds into
a froth when preparing them for bubble blowing; but when she looked round she saw something
very unlike the long pipes her big brother used, or the basin of soap-suds. There was a beautifully
shaped glass bottle, and into it went a very long twisting tube, like a snake coiled on the
floor, and the other end of the serpent, instead of a head, had an amber mouth-piece which
went between a pair of lips.  Lucy knew it for a hubble-bubble or Turkish pipe, and saw that
the lips were in a brown face, with big black eyes, round which dark bluish circles were drawn.
The jet-black hair was carefully braided with jewels, and over it was thrown a purple satin
sort of pelisse over a white silk embroidered vest, tied in with a sash, striped with all manner
of colors; also immense wide white trousers, out of which peeped a pair of brown bare feet,
on which, however, were a splendid pair of slippers curled up at the toes.

The owner seemed to be very little older than Lucy, and sat gravely looking at her for a little
while, then clapped her hands.  A black woman came, and the young Turkish maiden said, "Bring
coffee for the little Frank lady."

So a tiny table of mother-of-pearl was brought, and on it some exquisite little striped porcelain
cups, standing not in saucers, but in silver filigree cups into which they exactly fitted.
Lucy remembered her Chinese experience, and did not venture to ask for milk or sugar, but she
found that the real Turkish coffee was so pure and delicate that she could drink it without.

"Where are your jewels?" then asked the little hostess.

"I'm not old enough to have any."

"How old are you?"

"Nine."

"Nine!  I'm only ten, and I shall be married next week---"

"Married!  Oh, no, you are joking."

"Yes, I shall.  Selim Bey has paid my father the dowry for me, and I shall be taken to his
house next week."

"And I suppose you like him very much."

"He looks big and tall," said the child with exultation.  "I saw him riding when I went with
my mother to the Sweet Waters.  'Amina,' she said, 'there is your lord, in the Frankish coat--with
the white horse.'"

"Have you not talked to him?" asked Lucy.

"What should I do that for?" said Amina.

"Aunt Bessie used to like to talk to nobody but Uncle Frank before they were married," replied
Lucy.

"I shall talk enough when I am married," replied the little Turk. "I shall make him give me
plenty of sweetmeats, and a carriage with two handsome bullocks, and the biggest Nubian black
slave in the market to drive me to Sweet Waters, in a thin blue veil, with all my jewels on.
Father says that Selim Bey will give me everything, and a Frank governess.  What is a governess?
Is it anything like the little gold case you have round your neck?"

"My locket with Mamma's hair?  Oh, no, no," said Lucy, laughing; "a governess is a lady to
teach you."

"I don't want to learn any more," said Amina, much disgusted; "I shall tell him I can make
sweetmeats, and roll rose-leaves.  What should I learn for?"

"Should you not like to read and write?"

"Teaching is only meant for men," replied Amina.  "They have got to read the Koran, but it
is all ugly letters; I won't learn to read."

"You don't know how nice it is to read stories all about different countries," said Lucy. 
"Ah! I wish I was in the schoolroom, at home, and I would show you how pleasant it is."

