The neighbours about Ashpound were slow to discover, as erring men and women are always slow
to discover, that God is more merciful than they, and that he can bring good out of evil, light
out of darkness; but they discovered it at last, and, after a probation, took Mr. and Mrs.
Gervase Norgate back into society and its esteem and regard, and the family at Ashpound became
eventually as well considered, and as much sought after in friendship and marriage, as any
family among the southern moors, long after John Fitzwilliam Baring had dressed for dinner,
and taken a fit with a cue in his hand.

As for Aunt Tabby and old Miles, they said, "All's well that ends well." But old Miles stood
out stubbornly, "That it is not a many carts afore the horses as comes in at the journey's
end, and it ain't dootiful-like in them when they does do it, though I'm content." And Aunt
Tabby argued, "It is shockingly against morality to conclude that her fall--and who'd have
thought a strong woman like her would fall?--has been for his rising again."

MISS WEST'S CHRISTMAS ADVENTURE.

I.

"Miss West, I will thank you to see that the school-books and the school-work are in their
proper places, and the school-room locked for the holidays."

The speaker, Miss Sandys, was the proprietor of Carter Hill School, and Miss West was the governess.
The season was Christmas, and the children, without an exception, had departed rejoicing.

With a sense of liberty as keen as the children's, but with a glee of a decidedly soberer kind,
Miss West executed the commission, and then took her place beside her superior at the parlour-fire.

Miss Sandys was quite an elderly woman. She was over fifty, and had grown grey in the service.
Her features, even in her prime, had been gaunt, like the rest of her person. But she had mellowed
with age, and had become what the Germans call charakteristisch, and what we may term original
and sagacious. She dressed well--that is, soberly and substantially--in soft wools or strong
silks, as she possibly did not find it easy to do in her youth. She was stately, if somewhat
stiff, in her deportment. At present she felt intoxicated at the prospect of enjoying for ten
days the irresponsibility of private life.

Miss West had not by any means attained the Indian summer of Miss Sandys; she was still in
the more trying transition stage. In spite of the shady hollows in the cheeks, and the haggard
lines about the mouth, she was a young woman yet. Indeed, had it not been for those hollows
and lines, she would have been pretty--as she was when the clear cheeks had no wanness in their
paleness, but were round and soft; when the straight mouth pouted ever so little, and the sharp
eyes were bright, and the fine dark hair was profuse instead of scanty. But she laid no claim
to prettiness now, and dressed as plainly as feminine propriety would allow.

As she sat in the linen and drugget-covered parlour, which was a drawing-room when in full-dress,
she could not help a half-conscious restraint creeping over her. But this was not because Miss
Sandys was an ogress, rather because she herself had grown semi-professional even in holiday
trim. She looked into the compressed fire in the high, old-fashioned grate, and wondered how
she would pass the coming idle week. She had spent a good many idle weeks at Carter Hill before;
but they always came upon her afresh with a sense of strangeness, bringing at the same time
a tide of old associations.

Miss Sandys was a blunt woman by nature, and it was only by great effort that she had become
fine-edged. So she said to Miss West, with a sort of naïve abruptness, "I'll tell you what,
Miss West, we'll have cake to tea, because there are only you and I, and it is the first night
of the holidays; and we'll have a strong cup, since we have all the teapot to ourselves. I
think I shall try my hand this week at some of my old tea-cakes and pies and things which my
mother taught me to bake. I am going to have my cousin Jamie and his wife here. He is a rough
sailor, and his conversation does not suit before the girls. She was only a small farmer's
daughter, and cannot behave prettily at all. But they are worthy people, and are the nearest
relations I have left in the world. Perhaps I'll take you to see them in the summer, Miss West.
Ah, dear! it is liberty-hall at my cousin Jamie's little place. Peggy's Haven, he calls it,
after his old ship and his old wife. But it is a fine change for me, though it would not do
for the young people to hear about it--you understand, Miss West."

Miss West understood, and she readily acquiesced in the prospect of meeting Captain and Mrs.
Berwick. She was even flattered by it. The right chord of genuine nobility was in her, though
she was reported to be satirical. It was true that she was slightly disposed to make abrupt,
ironical speeches, the practice being one of her few small privileges. But she felt that Miss
Sandys' confidence was honourable alike to giver and receiver, and that the terms on which
she lived with her employer did no discredit to either. The fact was that Miss West returned
thanks for these same terms in the middle of her confession of errors every day of her life.

Accordingly Miss West drank the strong tea, and did her best to relish the little blocks of
cake, though they were slightly stale; and not the less did she enjoy them that she settled
in her private mind to propose buttered toast next time, and to prepare it herself. She listened
and replied to Miss Sandys' conversation, which did not now run so much on school incidents
as on affairs in general. Miss Sandys' talk was shrewd and sensible at all times, and not without
interest and amusement, especially when it diverged, at this point and that, to her own experience,
and to the customs and opinions of her youth, when faded Miss West was a baby.

Christmas brought holidays to Miss Sandys' school, but Christmas Eve was, in other respects,
very unmarked. It would have been dull, almost grim, to English notions. There was no Christmas
tree, no waits, no decorating of the church for the morrow. Still, it was the end of the year--the
period, by universal consent, dedicated to goodwill and rejoicing all over the world--the old
"daft days" even of sober, austere Scotland. Jenny and Menie, in the kitchen, were looking
forward to that Handsel Monday which is the Whit Monday of country servants, and the family
gathering of the peasantry in Scotland. First footing and New Year's gifts were lighting up
the servant girls' imaginations. The former may be safely looked upon as over with Miss Sandys
and Miss West, but they were not without visions of New Year's gifts--the useful, considerate
New Year's gifts of mature years. Miss West was at this moment knitting an exquisitely fine,
yet warm, veil which she had begun two months ago, and which she had good hopes of completing
within the next few days. Miss Sandys had a guess that this veil was for her velvet bonnet,
and looked at it admiringly as a grand panacea for her spring face-ache.

In the course of the evening Miss Sandys, after a fit of absence of mind, suddenly asked Miss
West's name.

On the spur of the moment, she answered, with surprise, "Why, Miss West, to be sure. What do
you mean, Miss Sandys?" Then she reflected, laughed, and owned that she had almost forgotten
that she had a Christian name. But she had certainly got one, and it was Magdalene, or Madge,
or Maddie; once it was Mad; and as she said Mad she laughed a second time, to conceal a break
in her voice.

Miss Sandys smiled awkwardly and guiltily, and observed quickly, "My Christian name is Christian.
Did you know that, Miss West? Oh, I forgot; you must have seen it marked on the table and bed
linen."

"Mine is to be read on my pocket-handkerchiefs. Our Christian names preserved on table-cloths
and pocket-handkerchiefs!--droll, isn't it, Miss Sandys?"

"Of course they are in our books and letters," corrected matter-of-fact Miss Sandys. "I dare
say they are in a couple of family Bibles, too (at least, I can speak for one), and in the
records of births and baptisms in session books, if these are not destroyed by damp and rats;
and since names are recorded in heaven," Miss Sandys was drawn on to ramble, "surely our Christian
names are there, my dear."

Miss West knew as well as if she had been told it, that Miss Sandys was about to bestow on
her a present with which her Christian name was to be connected. Miss Sandys' eyes had failed
through long looking over lessons, and she no longer did any handiwork, save coarse knitting,
hemming, and darning. But she had a fuller purse than her companion, and shops, even metropolitan
shops, were to be reached by letter from Carter Hill.

In addition to the strong tea and the cake, Miss Sandys further treated Miss West to a supper
of such dainties as toasted cheese and Edinburgh ale. There were prayers--they seemed quite
family prayers--with only the four worshippers to join in them. Then there was a shake of the
hands, and Miss West lit her candle, retired, and shut herself up in her own little room. Its
daily aspect was so unchanged, that it appeared when she entered it as though the holidays
had not come, and that it must still be the ordinary bustling school life.

She sat down, though there was no fire, and thought a little, till she fell on her knees and
prayed in low murmurs that God would enable her to bear this season, which made her heavy,
sick, and faint with associations, and that He would render her contented with many undeserved
blessings, and resigned to many natural penalties which He ordained. Next, with strange inconsistency
to all but the Hearer of prayer and the Framer of the wayward human heart, she besought to
be forgiven and delivered from levity and folly--to be kept humble and mindful of death. "It
is ill tearing up weeds by the roots," she said to herself plainly, when she had risen from
her knees, "and I am vain and volatile, and I like to mystify and tease my neighbour to this day."

II.

Christmas Day rose with a clear, frosty blue sky. Miss Sandys and Miss West both felt the unwonted
stillness of the house; and they could not help a lurking suspicion that time without public
occupation might hang a dead weight on their hands. The two ladies went through the ceremony
of wishing each other a merry Christmas, Scotland though it was. Miss Sandys went off to put
into execution her holiday cooking practice--for it was refreshing to her to have a bowl instead
of a book in her grasp--and to make her preparations for welcoming her primitive cousins. Miss
West sat down to write her letters and to work at her veil and at her other New Year's gifts.

She wished she could work with her mind as well as her fingers, so that it might not run on
picturing what this day was in tens of thousands of homes throughout Christendom. It had always
been an unruly member this fancy of hers, and it was particularly busy at this season. Yesterday
the roads had resounded with the blithe tramp of eager feet hieing homewards. To-day the air
was ringing with the pleasant echo of voices round hearths, the fires of which flashed like
the sun, and where age and youth met in the perfect confidence and sweet fearlessness of family
affection. In her mind's eye, she had yesterday seen railways and coaches disgorging their
cheerful loads; she had witnessed the meetings at lodge gates, in halls, and on the thresholds
of parlour and cottage kitchens; she had looked on the bountiful boards, where cherished guests
crowned the festival, of which Miss Sandys' rasping tea and stale cake was a half-pathetic,
half-comic version. To-day she was in spirit with the multitude walking in close groups to
holly-wreathed churches, sharing in the light-hearted thoughtlessness of many an acknowledgment,
and in the deep gratitude of many a thanksgiving. She strove to put herself aside altogether
in her meditations, and simply to rejoice with those who rejoiced; but she had not attained
this degree of unselfishness; she could not help believing sometimes that she had plucked all
the thorns and none of the roses of life. But if you suppose that she betrayed this yearning
and pining to the world at large, you are very much mistaken. As has been told, she had the
right chord of genuine nobility and generosity in her, and she laboured to fit her cross to
her own back, so that it might not overshadow and crush others. Her fingers went nimbly about
her gifts--trifling things, only enough to gladden simple hearts. She gratified Miss Sandys
by praising her rusty accomplishments in cookery; she uttered a jest or two for the benefit
of Jenny and Menie, who had a liking for her, though they called her "scornful;" and she brought
in holly and box from the garden to decorate the sitting-rooms. The last move, however, proved
nearly a failure, for there was one little pink and white blossom of laurustinus, which had
ventured out in a sheltered nook, though half of its leaves were blanched ashen grey. It somehow
or other raised such a tide of sentiment in her as all but overcame her.

Miss West desired work for this season, and she got work, and tolerably hard work too, for
besides completing her New Year's gifts, she had to help to entertain Captain and Mrs. Berwick.

The visitors were so vulgar, according to fine people, that they were not even sensible of
their own vulgarity. And so good-natured were they, that they were not offended because cousin
Sandys did not invite them with any of the genteel parents of her pupils. They took this reserved
hospitality as a complimentary admission of their kinsmanship. But they were not intrinsically
more coarse-minded than many dukes and duchesses. Captain Berwick, it is true, was nautical
in his tone, and talked shop, but that is permitted to sea captains in novels, nay, enjoined
upon them. He was apt to be broad in his jokes, and to use unwarrantable expressions, for which
he bent his shock head in penitent apology the moment after he had used them. "It is the effect
of bad habits, Kirsten and Peggy," he would cry: "you women know nothing of bad habits any
more than of bad words."

Mrs. Berwick was a particularly round-eyed woman, and was plump and ruddy where the Captain
was battered and weather-beaten. She placed the scene of most of her narratives in the kitchens
of her acquaintances, and scrambled with her dramatis personæ through the strong situations
of a servant's history.

Nevertheless the manner of the Berwicks was not without the refreshing influence of common,
rude fresh air. They were not exceptionally coarse-minded, but unluckily they were neither
strong nor fine minded. They were ponderous, clumsy beings, and although genuine and warm-hearted,
were destitute of internal resources. They expected to be constantly eating and drinking, or
to be constantly entertained. If they were not entertained, they showed their weariness without
restraint, by yawning outrageously. The entertaining of Captain and Mrs. Berwick was therefore
no sinecure. But Miss West was loyal. She walked with the Captain, so that he might have more
than his one smoke a day, and perseveringly copied and sang Braham's songs for him. She designed
and cut out patterns for Mrs. Berwick, who, as the Captain had saved money, did not make her
own dresses, but nevertheless loved to accumulate patterns of sleeves, capes, and flounces.
She listened to her tales, and helped her to as much more kitchiana as she could produce on
short notice. She told how Betsy had worn feathers and been taken to prison on suspicion of
theft; and how Marianne her sister had hoarded her wages in order to secure legal advice for
Betsy, and had captivated and married an officer of the court in which Betsy had been tried,
and how it had all happened in a family where Miss West had lived.

III.

Captain and Mrs. Berwick were gone. The holidays at Carter Hill were all but ended--"all but
ended," Miss Sandys repeated with a little sigh of relief, and an inclination to moralize on
that weariness which is the result of pleasure. When Miss West came down in the morning the
kettle was steaming on the hob, the teapot under its cosie, and the couple of rolls and the
dish of sausages were set in their places. Miss Sandys--her working apron lying ready to take
up on the side-table behind her--was bent to the last on buns and pork pies, though she frankly
admitted they were vanity. But the girls must be broken from their home dainties by degrees,
and Jenny and Menie must have "cakes" to carry to their homes on their Handsel Monday.

Miss West found a letter on her plate. It caused her complexion to change, and her sharp eyes
to fasten on it fixedly. No wonder her head swam and her ears rang. She was going through the
uncomfortable process of turning back some ten or twelve years in her life. It was a strange
letter to come to her--a large letter, which had been charged double postage; a letter with
the elements of mortification in it, as well as other elements, both to sender and receiver.
It was written in a big, scampering hand.

    "Dear Mad," it began, "it is so queer to be addressing you again. I
    remember when I used to say 'Mad' to a white-faced, dark-eyed girl.
    Was she pretty, I wonder? Some people said so, but I don't know,
    only I have never seen a face quite equal to hers since--never. Mad
    and I were great friends when I used to visit her elder brother;
    great friends, indeed, in a bantering, biting way. But it was Mad
    who bantered and bit; certainly I did not banter and bite again,
    rarely even so much as gave a gentle pinch, for I would not have
    hurt Mad for the world, and Mad did not hurt me. At least she never
    meant it seriously, and she was always so piteously penitent when
    she thought she had wounded my feelings. Oh, dear, quizzing Mad! she
    had such a soft heart in its bristling shell, and I hurt it. I hurt
    Mad--yes, I know; I know to my sorrow and shame.

    "Mad, do you remember how you went every day to meet a timid little
    brother coming from school along a lonely moorland road, where there
    were broomy braes in June and heathery braes in September? What a
    convenient custom it was for me, since the little brother, unlike
    little monsters of the same kind, had neither eyes nor ears but for
    his own avocations, and trotted on obediently in front of us. The
    sight of my own little Bill's satchel gives me a turn, and makes me
    feel spoony to this day. Do you remember your great dog, Mad? (what
    a child you were for pets!)--and who it was used to go to the kennel
    to feed it with you? If that dog had been a true Bevis, it would
    have torn that hulking fellow where he stood, yet he meant no harm;
    nay, he had a strong persuasion that he was doing something
    meritorious (how he hit it I can't tell) in not committing himself
    and binding you when he had no more than a clerk's paltry income.
    But I have heard that trees, stripped of leaves in flowery May,
    revenge themselves by bursting out green, if the frosts will let
    them, in foggy November. So the prudence of twenty-five may be the
    folly of thirty-five. It was rank mean-spiritedness in me not to go
    through thick and thin, through flood and fire, for Mad. What in the
    world was worth striving for if she was not worth it? Ah, I lost my
    chance when I might have taken it, and trusted the rest to
    Providence! But I did not know, though I fancied I did, the value of
    the jewel, the price of which, in stern self-restraint, I refused to
    pay. I might have been another man if I had not been so prudent,
    for, as I have said, not another face has been to me quite (no, not
    by a long chalk) what Mad's once was. It was only yesterday that I
    heard by chance--and the story has haunted me since--that Mad is
    still a single woman, her family all dispersed, and she a teacher in
    a school--my quizzing, affectionate Mad a drudging, lonely teacher!

    "After being so prudent, it is not wonderful to record that I was
    fickle, though circumstances, and not my will, separated Mad and me
    at first. I could not get down to the old place so regularly as I
    was wont to do, which annoyed me, and I did my best to get rid of
    the obstacles. When I did get down, Mad was not at home, and I had
    no right to follow her. We met seldomer; we grew stiffer and
    stranger to each other. You are acquainted with the process, Miss
    West, though perhaps not fully with my share in it. The impression
    which Mad had made on me, unique as it was, faded and was overlaid
    by others. I met another girl, whom I liked too, and whom it
    appeared so much simpler--more expedient and advantageous--for me to
    love and to marry. I married her, breaking no vows, not writing
    myself faithless, far less treacherous, but only fickle. Yet I had
    once known, if ever man knew, that I had made Mad's strong heart--I
    think it was strong, although it was soft to me--beat in tune with
    mine. I had done all I could, short of saying the words, to impress
    Mad with what were my wishes and intentions, I had preferred her in
    every company, followed her when I was down at the old place, like
    her shadow (her shadow, indeed!). I had elected her my confidante
    and adviser, and poured all my precious opinions and plans--my very
    scrapes--into her curious, patient ears. Mad, have you forgotten
    how once, like an old-fashioned, grandiloquent muff, I showed you
    the picture of a perfect woman in a book of poetry--'Paradise Lost'
    it might have been, and 'Eve' for any special appropriateness in the
    picture--and broadly hinted my private idea that the perfect woman
    was fulfilled in Mad!--lively, faulty Mad! Your sisters were very
    anxious to read the passage which I had selected for your study, and
    from which I was evidently pointing a moral; but you closed the book
    abruptly in the old seat behind the round tea-table with the brass
    rim. I suppose the sisters don't know the passage to this day?

    "Having been fickle, I was a great deal better off in my wife than I
    deserved. Remember, Mad, my wife and the mother of my children was a
    good woman; I was reasonably happy with her, and I trust I bore her
    tender reverence. She died and left me with our children two winters
    ago. When we meet again, it will be where there is neither marrying
    nor giving in marriage. Now, when I can do her no wrong, I think of
    another to whom I did wrong; than whom there was never another to me
    the same--no, nothing like it. Learning that Mad has been true--oh!
    Mad, you could never have been anything else but true--I have
    wondered whether I might not be allowed to do something to atone,
    whether I was not worth having still, and whether I could not--a
    bold phrase, but it will out--make it up to Mad, a solitary single
    woman, a teacher in a school. Oh! Mad, I say again, what a hard fate
    for you!

    "I cannot offer an immense inducement. I am not a merchant prince,
    though I am richer than I was in the old days; yet somehow I do not
    care to boast of my riches to Mad, and I am a widower with two small
    children--not models. I dare not send you my carte, and I don't
    want yours. You are always the same Mad to me that you have been
    through all those years, and will be to the end of the chapter,
    whether you answer me yes or no. You will answer yes. You were
    always great for magnanimity, and flamed up on it, dark eyes, white
    cheeks, and all, when you were a wild lassie. Don't tell me you are
    less magnanimous as a brave, hard-working woman, or you will sap my
    faith in womankind.

    "Mad, how this Christmas season stirs me with the far-off murmurs of
    another Christmas, when you and I pulled the holly and the other
    thing--the thing with the tiny, fair, frost-bitten clusters of
    blossom--some sort of laurel wasn't it? That old Christmas, who can
    describe? What glamour over the prosaic family dinner and carpet
    dance to see the old year out and the new year in? Say the word,
    Mad, and before the first full moon of this new year has waned to
    half a cheese she will shine down upon us, anew, with the old
    shining. I swear it on the part of your old friend,

    BILL NAIRNE."

What Miss West said when she read the letter was, "Make it up, indeed! Redeem me from such
degradation! Crown me with such honour! Intolerable arrogance! How could he take it upon him?
But it is like Bill; conceited fellow!"

Miss West was properly indignant. The letter was so unsuitable in every respect. All her life
she had been famous as a woman of spirit--the spirit which will cause a woman to decline an
obligation as long as independence is possible, and which will not have for pity what it cannot
have for love. She would prove to Bill Nairne that it was no such hard fate as he supposed
to teach a school under Miss Sandys, no such promotion, as he fondly imagined, to be placed
at the head of the household of a pompous widower with a pair of spoilt children. She would
convince him that a woman of her age is more difficult to please than a girl, and is not to
be led off her feet by a few impertinently recalled reminiscences, nor to be won by the tardy
wag of a finger. She would teach Bill Nairne a lesson undreamt of in his philosophy--that all
the nonsense about old maids, their humiliations, their forlorn condition, and their desperate
welcoming of late offers was wholly false.

She selected the smallest sheet of note-paper from the packet lying beside the exercises in
her desk, and wrote:--

    "Dear Sir,--I am glad to be able to tell you that, on the whole,
    teaching in a school is not so hard a fate as you think. Miss
    Sandys is an excellent woman, a reliable friend, and an agreeable
    companion. The girls and their antecedents exhibit life to me
    under considerable variety of characters and circumstances, and as
    pupils they are mostly affectionate as well as interesting. I must
    remain indebted for your good opinion, and you have my best wishes
    for your future welfare, but I beg to decline your--gratuitous"
    (Miss West had written the word, but she changed it into--not
    gracious, but) "generous offer. Without offence to you, old times
    do not come again.

    "Believe me, yours very sincerely, M. WEST."

Miss West read her letter, and considered it was, perhaps, too brief. She did not want to part
with him in an unfriendly fashion. Her last words to Bill Nairne must be such as she herself
could think of without pain. So she rummaged among her Christmas gifts, and found a dancing
Dervish and a brightly-embroidered ball. These she wrapped up with the letter, and made a small
parcel of the whole, after she had added this postscript: "Please give the enclosed toys as
cheap New Year's playthings to the children. Tell them, if you choose, that they come from
an old friend of papa's, whose name was--Mad."

IV.

Miss West took the letter to the post-office herself after dinner, as she was going to inquire
for a pupil who lived near Carter Hill, and who was sick--unhappy child!--from holiday junketing.
Miss West could not recover her equanimity till that letter was out of the house. It had shaken
her, satirical and discreet though she was. It had also given her a guilty sensation towards
Miss Sandys. She could not endure that even the servants should read the address:--"W. Nairne,
Esq., Waterloo Lodge, Bridgeton, Strokeshire," though W. Nairne, Esq., might have stood for
her brother-in-law, her uncle by marriage, or her maternal grandfather for aught they could
tell. She held her hand over the superscription as if to hide it from herself as she walked
along under the newly-risen moon, as it cast its light on a crisp sprinkling of snow. It was
true Christmas weather at last, and this was something like a Christmas adventure for her.
But not the less did she wish the Christmas ended, and the moon replaced by gas jets of the
smallest size. "A pretty story for the girls if they should get hold of it," she thought, and
shuddered. She did not recover altogether till she had posted her packet, and walked half a
mile further on. At length she passed through a creaking gate and a shrubbery, and was shown
up to a smart drawing-room. She was there to ask for the health of Miss Victoria Middlemass,
the daughter of a gentleman who led a country gentleman's life on the proceeds of a sleeping
partnership in a mercantile house in a large town at some distance.

Mrs. Middlemass came in hurriedly. She had only time to wish Miss West a merry Christmas and
a good New Year, and to announce that Vicky was quite herself again, except that the bun fever
had left her rather pale, and she had not got back all her appetite. She could not, however,
make the same complaint of Mr. Middlemass, who had just come in ravenously hungry from the
train. He had been accompanied by another gentleman, who had been introduced to him before
he left the north, and whom Mr. Middlemass would not allow to go over to the inn at Stoneham,
where he was to spend a few days with a friend. Mr. Middlemass and his new acquaintance were
still at dinner.

Miss West was hurrying away after having discharged her commission, in order not to detain
Mrs. Middlemass from her husband and his guest, and not to impose on master or servant the
trouble of seeing her home.

But as they were exchanging smothered good-byes near the open dining-room door, Mr. Middlemass,
who was frank and hospitable, broke through the clatter of knives and forks, and called out
unceremoniously, "My dear, who is that you are taking leave of?"

"It is only Miss West, my dear," his wife replied softly to quiet him.

"Miss West!" and he banged from his seat and bounced to the door. "Miss West! the very woman
in the nick of time. Stay, Miss West, and thank your stars; here's an old friend come a long
way to see you."

Miss West turned, and there, behind the cordial face of the master of the house, who suspected
nothing, and was only happy to be helpful to a brother merchant, were the perfectly recognizable
lineaments of that old personable fellow, Bill Nairne.

Miss West for a second fancied that the letter she had posted to him ten minutes before had
sped like a telegram to its destination, and that he had sped back on the telegraphic wires
to remonstrate with her and expose her. The next instant she was sensible that the accident
of his being there in person must be a result of a previous change of mind on his part.

