But, on the other hand, an opposite change took place. The disappearance of the Jacobin movement
allowed the Radicalism of home growth to display itself more fully. English Whigs of all shades
had opposed the war with certain misgivings. They had been nervously anxious not to identify
themselves with the sentiments of the Jacobins. They desired peace with the French, but had
to protest that it was not for love of French principles. That difficulty was removed. There
was no longer a vision--such as Gillray had embodied in his caricatures--of a guillotine in
St. James's Street: or of a Committee of Public Safety formed by Fox, Paine, and Horne Tooke.
Meanwhile Whig prophecies of the failure of the war were not disproved by its results. Though
the English navy had been victorious, English interference on the Continent had been futile.
Millions of money had been wasted: and millions were flowing freely. Even now we stand astonished
at the reckless profusion of the financiers of the time. And what was there to show for it?
The French empire, so far from being destroyed, had been consolidated. If we escaped for the
time, could we permanently resist the whole power of Europe? When the Peninsular War began
we had been fighting, except for the short truce of Amiens, for sixteen years; and there seemed
no reason to believe that the expedition to Portugal in 1808 would succeed better than previous
efforts. The Walcheren expedition of 1809 was a fresh proof of our capacity for blundering.
Pauperism was still increasing rapidly, and forebodings of a war with America beginning to
trouble men interested in commerce. The English Opposition had ample texts for discourses;
and a demand for change began to spring up which was no longer a reflection of foreign sympathies.
An article in the Edinburgh of January 1808, which professed to demonstrate the hopelessness
of the Peninsular War, roused the wrath of the Tories. The Quarterly Review was started by
Canning and Scott, and the Edinburgh, in return, took a more decidedly Whig colour. The Radicals
now showed themselves behind the Whigs. Cobbett, who had been the most vigorous of John Bull
Anti-Jacobins, was driven by his hatred of the tax-gatherer and the misery of the agricultural
labourers into the opposite camp, and his Register became the most effective organ of Radicalism.
Demands for reform began again to make themselves heard in parliament. Sir Francis Burdett,
who had sat at the feet of Horne Tooke, and whose return with Cochrane for Westminster in 1807
was the first parliamentary triumph of the reformers, proposed a motion on 15th June 1809,
which was, of course, rejected, but which was the first of a series, and marked the revival
of a serious agitation not to cease till the triumph of 1832.

Meanwhile Bentham, meditating profoundly upon the Panopticon, had at last found out that he
had begun at the wrong end. His reasoning had been thrown away upon the huge dead weight of
official indifference, or worse than indifference. Why did they not accept the means for producing
the greatest happiness of the greatest number? Because statesmen did not desire the end. And
why not? To answer that question, and to show how a government could be constructed which should
desire it, became a main occupation of Bentham's life. He seldom left Queen's Square Place
except for certain summer outings. In 1807 he took a house at Barrow Green, near Oxted, in
Surrey, lying in a picturesque hollow at the foot of the chalk hills.[301] It was an old-fashioned
house, standing in what had been a park, with a lake and a comfortable kitchen garden. Bentham
pottered about in the grounds and under the old chestnut-trees, codifying, gardening, and talking
to occasional disciples. He returned thither in following years; but in 1814, probably in consequence
of his compensation for the Panopticon, took a larger place, Ford Abbey, near Chard in Somersetshire.
It was a superb residence,[302] with chapel, cloisters, and corridors, a hall eighty feet long
by thirty high, and a great dining parlour. Parts of the building dated from the twelfth century
or the time of the Commonwealth, or had undergone alterations attributed to Inigo Jones. No
Squire Western could have cared less for antiquarian associations, but Bentham made a very
fair monk. The place, for which he paid £315 a year, was congenial. He rode his favourite hobby
of gardening, and took his regular 'ante-jentacular' and 'post-prandial' walks, and played
battledore and shuttlecock in the intervals of codification. He liked it so well that he would
have taken it for life, but for the loss of £8000 or £10,000 in a Devonshire marble-quarry.[303]
In 1818 he gave it up, and thenceforward rarely quitted Queen's Square Place. His life was
varied by few incidents, although his influence upon public affairs was for the first time
becoming important. The busier journalists and platform orators did not trouble themselves
much about philosophy. But they were in communication with men of a higher stamp, Romilly,
James Mill, and others, who formed Bentham's innermost council. Thus the movements in the outside
world set up an agitation in Bentham's study; and the recluse was prompted to set himself to
work upon elaborating his own theories in various directions, in order to supply the necessary
substratum of philosophical doctrine. If he had not the power of gaining the public ear, his
oracles were transmitted through the disciples who also converted some of his raw materials
into coherent books.

The most important of Bentham's disciples for many years was James Mill, and I shall have to
say what more is necessary in regard to the active agitation when I speak of Mill himself.
For the present, it is enough to say that Mill first became Bentham's proselyte about 1808.
Mill stayed with Bentham at Barrow Green and at Ford Abbey. Though some differences caused
superficial disturbances of their harmony, no prophet could have had a more zealous, uncompromising,
and vigorous disciple. Mill's force of character qualified him to become the leader of the
school; but his doctrine was always essentially the doctrine of Bentham, and for the present
he was content to be the transmitter of his master's message to mankind. He was at this period
a contributor to the Edinburgh Review; and in October 1809 he inserted some praises of Bentham
in a review of a book upon legislation by S. Scipion Bexon. The article was cruelly mangled
by Jeffrey, according to his custom, and Jeffrey's most powerful vassal, Brougham, thought
that the praises which remained were excessive.[304]

Obviously the orthodox Whigs were not prepared to swear allegiance to Bentham. He was drawing
into closer connection with the Radicals. In 1809 Cobbett was denouncing the duke of York in
consequence of the Mrs. Clarke scandal. Bentham wrote to him, but anonymously and cautiously,
to obtain documents in regard to a previous libel case,[305] and proceeded to write a pamphlet
on the Elements of the Art of Packing (as applied to Special Juries), so sharp that his faithful
adviser, Romilly, procured its suppression for the time.[306] Copies, however, were printed
and privately given to a few who could be trusted. Bentham next wrote (1809) a 'Catechism of
Parliamentary Reform,' which he communicated to Cobbett (16th November 1810), with a request
for its publication in the Register.[307] Cobbett was at this time in prison for his attack
upon flogging militia men; and, though still more hostile to government, was bound to be more
cautious in his line of assault. The plan was not published, whether because too daring or
too dull; but it was apparently printed. Bentham's opinion of Cobbett was anything but flattering.
Cobbett, he thought in 1812, was a 'vile rascal,' and was afterwards pronounced to be 'filled
with the odium humani generis--his malevolence and lying beyond everything.'[308] Cobbett's
radicalism, in fact, was of the type most hostile to the Utilitarians. John Hunt, in the Examiner,
was 'trumpeting' Bentham and Romilly in 1812, and was praised accordingly.[309] Bentham formed
an alliance with another leading Radical. He had made acquaintance by 1811 with Sir F. Burdett,
to whom he then appealed for help in an attack upon the delays of Chancery.[310] Burdett, indeed,
appeared to him to be far inferior to Romilly and Brougham, but he thought that so powerful
a 'hero of the mob' ought to be turned to account in the good cause.[311] Burdett seems to
have courted the old philosopher; and a few years later a closer alliance was brought about.
The peace of 1815 was succeeded by a period of distress, the more acutely felt from the disappointment
of natural hopes of prosperity; and a period of agitation, met by harsh repression, followed.
Applications were made, to Bentham for permission to use his 'Catechism,' which was ultimately
published (1818) in a cheap form by Wooler, well known as the editor of the democratic Black
Dwarf.[312] Burdett applied for a plan of parliamentary reform. The result was a series of
resolutions moved by Burdett in the House of Commons on 2nd June 1818,[313] demanding universal
suffrage, annual parliaments, and vote by ballot. Bentham had thus accepted the conclusions
reached in a different way by the believers in that 'hodge-podge' of absurdities, the declaration
of the rights of man. Curiously enough, his assault upon that document appeared in Dumont's
French version in the year 1816, at the very time when he was accepting its practical conclusions.

The schemes in which Mill was interested at this time drew Bentham's attention in other directions.
In 1813 the Quaker, William Allen, who had been a close ally of Mill, induced Bentham to invest
money in the New Lanark establishment. Owen, whose benevolent schemes had been hampered by
his partners, bought them out, the new capital being partly provided by Allen, Bentham, and
others. Bentham afterwards spoke contemptuously of Owen, who, as he said, 'began in vapour
and ended in smoke,'[314] and whose disciples came in after years into sharp conflict with
the Utilitarians. Bentham, however, took pleasure, it seems, in Owen's benevolent schemes for
infant education, and made money by his investment, for once combining business with philanthropy
successfully.[315] Probably he regarded New Lanark as a kind of Panopticon. Owen had not as
yet become a prophet of Socialism.

Another set of controversies in which Mill and his friends took an active part, started Bentham
in a whole series of speculations. A plan (which I shall have to mention in connection with
Mill), was devised in 1815 for a 'Chrestomathic school,' which was to give a sound education
of proper Utilitarian tendencies to the upper and middle classes. Brougham, Mackintosh, Ricardo,
William Allen, and Place were all interested in this undertaking.[316] Bentham offered a site
at Queen's Square Place, and though the scheme never came to the birth, it set him actively
at work. He wrote a series of papers during his first year at Ford Abbey[317] upon the theory
of education, published in 1816 as Chrestomathia; and to this was apparently due a further
excursion beyond the limits of jurisprudence. Educational controversy in that ignorant day
was complicated by religious animosity; the National Society and the 'British and Foreign'
Society were fighting under the banners of Bell and Lancaster, and the war roused excessive
bitterness. Bentham finding the church in his way, had little difficulty in discovering that
the whole ecclesiastical system was part of the general complex of abuse against which he was
warring. He fell foul of the Catechism; he exposed the abuses of non-residence and episcopal
wealth; he discovered that the Thirty-nine Articles contained gross fallacies; he went on to
make an onslaught upon the Apostle St Paul, whose evidence as to his conversion was exposed
to a severe cross-examination; and, finally, he wrote, or supplied the materials for, a remarkable
Analysis of Natural Religion, which was ultimately published by Grote under the pseudonym 'Philip
Beauchamp,' in 1822. This procedure from the particular case of the Catechism in schools up
to the general problem of the utility of religion in general, is curiously characteristic of
Bentham.

Bentham's mind was attracted to various other schemes by the disciples who came to sit at his
feet, and professed, with more or less sincerity, to regard him as a Solon. Foreigners had
been resorting to him from all parts of the world, and gave him hopes of new fields for codifying.
As early as 1808 he had been visited at Barrow Green by the strange adventurer, politician,
lawyer, and filibuster, Aaron Burr, famous for the duel in which he killed Alexander Hamilton,
and now framing wild schemes for an empire in Mexico. Unscrupulous, restlessly active and cynical,
he was a singular contrast to the placid philosopher, upon whom his confidences seem to have
made an impression of not unpleasing horror. Burr's conversation suggested to Bentham a singular
scheme for emigrating to Mexico. He applied seriously for introductions to Lord Holland, who
had passed some time in Spain, and to Holland's friend, Jovellanos (1749-1812), a member of
the Spanish Junta, who had written treatises upon legislation (1785), of which Bentham approved.[318]
The dream of Mexico was succeeded by a dream of Venezuela. General Miranda spent some years
in England, and had become well known to James Mill. He was now about to start upon an unfortunate
expedition to Venezuela, his native country. He took with him a draft of a law for the freedom
of the press, which Bentham drew up, and he proposed that when his new state was founded, Bentham
should be its legislator.[319] Miranda was betrayed to the Spanish government in 1812, and
died (1816) in the hands of the Inquisition. Bolivar, who was also in London in 1810 and took
some notice of Joseph Lancaster, applied in flattering terms to Bentham. Long afterwards, when
dictator of Columbia, he forbade the use of Bentham's works in the schools, to which, however,
the privilege of reading him was restored, and, let us hope, duly valued, in 1835.[320] Santander,
another South American hero, was also a disciple, and encouraged the study of Bentham. Bentham
says in 1830 that forty thousand copies of Dumont's Traités had been sold in Paris for the
South American trade.[321] What share Bentham may have had in modifying South American ideas
is unknown to me. In the United States he had many disciples of a more creditable kind than
Burr. He appealed in 1811 to Madison, then President, for permission to construct a 'Pannomion'
or complete body of law, for the use of the United States; and urged his claims both upon Madison
and the Governor of Pennsylvania in 1817, when peace had been restored. He had many conversations
upon this project with John Quincy Adams, who was then American minister in England.[322] This,
of course, came to nothing, but an eminent American disciple, Edward Livingston (1764-1836),
between 1820 and 1830 prepared codes for the State of Louisiana, and warmly acknowledged his
obligations to Bentham.[323] In 1830 Bentham also acknowledges a notice of his labours, probably
resulting from this, which had been made in one of General Jackson's presidential messages.[324]
In his later years the United States became his ideal, and he never tired of comparing its
cheap and honest enactment with the corruption and extravagance at home.

NOTES:

[291] Works, x. 403.

[292] Ibid. x. 62.

[293] Bentham had himself written some of his papers in French.

[294] Works, x. 407, 410, 413, 419.

[295] Ibid. x. 415.

[296] Lord E. Fitzmaurice's Life of Shelburne.

[297] Works, x. 413.

[298] This statement, I believe, refers to a complimentary reference to Bentham in the preface
to the French Code.

[299] Works, x. 458.

[300] Bentham says that he reached these conclusions some time before 1809: Works, iii. 435.
Cf. Ibid. v. 278.

[301] Works, x. 425.

[302] See description in Bain's James Mill, 129-36.

[303] Works, x. 479, 573.

[304] Works, x. 452-54.; Bain's James Mill, 104.

[305] The case of the 'King v. Cobbett,' (1804), which led to the proceedings against Mr. Justice
Johnson in 1805.--Cobbett's State Trials, xxix.

[306] Works, x. 448-49.

[307] Ibid. x. 458.

[308] Works, x. 471, 570.

[309] Ibid. x. 471.

[310] Ibid. x. 461.

[311] Ibid. x. 471.

[312] Ibid. x. 490.

[313] Printed in Works, x. 495-97.

[314] Ibid. x. 570.

[315] Ibid. x. 476.

[316] Works, x. 485.

[317] Bain's James Mill, 136. Church of Englandism and Not Paul but Jesus were also written
at Ford Abbey.

[318] Works, x. 433, 448.

[319] Ibid. x. 457-58; Bain's James Mill, 79.

[320] Works, 553-54, 565.

[321] Ibid. xi. 53.

[322] See Memoirs of J. Q. Adams (1874), iii. 511, 520, 532, 535-39, 540, 544, 560, 562-63.
and Bentham's letter to Adams in Works, x. 554.

[323] Works, xi. 23.

[324] Ibid. xi. 40.

V. CODIFICATION

The unsettled conditions which followed the peace in various European countries found Bentham
other employment. In 1809 Dumont did some codifying for the Emperor of Russia, and in 1817
was engaged to do the same service for Geneva. He was employed for some years, and is said
to have introduced a Benthamite Penal Code and Panopticon, and an application of the Tactics.[325]
In 1820 and 1821 Bentham was consulted by the Constitutional party in Spain and Portugal, and
wrote elaborate tracts for their enlightenment. He made an impression upon at least one Spaniard.
Borrow, when travelling in Spain some ten years after Bentham's death, was welcomed by an Alcalde
on Cape Finisterre, who had upon his shelves all the works of the 'grand Baintham,' and compared
him to Solon, Plato, and even Lope de Vega.[326] The last comparison appeared to Borrow to
be overstrained. Bentham even endeavoured in 1822-23 to administer some sound advice to the
government of Tripoli, but his suggestions for 'remedies against misrule' seem never to have
been communicated.[327] In 1823 and 1824 he was a member of the Greek Committee; he corresponded
with Mavrocordato and other leaders; and he begged Parr to turn some of his admonitions into
'Parrian' Greek for the benefit of the moderns.[328] Blaquière and Stanhope, two ardent members
of the committee, were disciples; and Stanhope carried with him to Greece Bentham's Table of
the Springs of Action, with which he tried to indoctrinate Byron. The poet, however, thought
with some plausibility that he was a better judge of human passions than the philosopher. Parry,
the engineer, who joined Byron at the same time, gives a queer account of the old philosopher
trotting about London in the service of the Greeks.[329] The coarse and thoughtless might laugh,
and perhaps some neither coarse nor thoughtless might smile. But Bowring tells us that these
were days of boundless happiness for Bentham.[330] Tributes of admiration were pouring in from
all sides, and the true Gospel was spreading across the Atlantic and along the shores of the
Mediterranean.

At home the Utilitarian party was consolidating itself; and the struggle which resulted in
the Reform Bill was slowly beginning. The veteran Cartwright, Bentham's senior by eight years,
tried in 1821 to persuade him to come out as one of a committee of 'Guardians of Constitutional
Reform,' elected at a public meeting.[331] Bentham wisely refused to be drawn from his privacy.
He left it to his friends to agitate, while he returned to labour in his study. The demand
for legislation which had sprung up in so many parts of the world encouraged Bentham to undertake
the last of his great labours. The Portuguese Cortes voted in December 1821 that he should
be invited to prepare an 'all-comprehensive code'; and in 1822 he put out a curious 'Codification
proposal,' offering to do the work for any nation in need of a legislator, and appending testimonials
to his competence for the work. He set to work upon a 'Constitutional Code,' which occupied
him at intervals during the remainder of his life, and embodied the final outcome of his speculations.
He diverged from this main purpose to write various pamphlets upon topics of immediate interest;
and was keenly interested in the various activities of his disciples. The Utilitarians now
thought themselves entitled to enter the field of politics as a distinct body. An organ to
defend their cause was desirable, and Bentham supplied the funds for the Westminster Review,
of which the first number appeared in April 1824.

The editorship fell chiefly into the hands of Bowring (1792-1872). Bowring had travelled much
upon the Continent for a commercial house, and his knowledge of Spanish politics had brought
him into connection with Bentham, to whom Blaquière recommended him in 1820.[332] A strong
attachment sprang up between the two. Bentham confided all his thoughts and feelings to the
young man, and Bowring looked up to his teacher with affectionate reverence. In 1828 Bentham
says that Bowring is 'the most intimate friend he has.'[333] Bowring complains of calumnies,
by which he was assailed, though they failed to alienate Bentham. What they may have been matters
little; but it is clear that a certain jealousy arose between this last disciple and his older
rivals. James Mill's stern and rigid character had evidently produced some irritation at intervals;
and to him it would naturally appear that Bowring was the object of a senile favouritism. In
any case it is to be regretted that Bentham thus became partly alienated from his older friends[334].
Mill was too proud to complain; and never wavered in his allegiance to the master's principles.
But one result, and to us the most important, was that the new attachment led to the composition
of one of the worst biographies in the language, out of materials which might have served for
a masterpiece. Bowring was a great linguist, and an energetic man of business. He wrote hymns,
and one of them, 'In the cross of Christ I glory,' is said to have 'universal fame.' A Benthamite
capable of so singular an eccentricity judiciously agreed to avoid discussions upon religious
topics with his master. To Bowring we also owe the Deontology, which professes to represent
Bentham's dictation. The Mills repudiated this version, certainly a very poor one, of their
teacher's morality, and held that it represented less Bentham than such an impression of Bentham
as could be stamped upon a muddle-headed disciple.[335]

The last years of his life brought Bentham into closer connection with more remarkable men.
The Radicals had despised the Whigs as trimmers and half-hearted reformers, and James Mill
expressed this feeling very frankly in the first numbers of the Westminster Review. Reform,
however, was now becoming respectable, and the Whigs were gaining the courage to take it up
seriously. Foremost among the Edinburgh Reviewers was the great Henry Brougham, whose fame
was at this time almost as great as his ambition could desire, and who considered himself to
be the natural leader of all reform. He had shown eagerness to distinguish himself in lines
fully approved by Bentham. His admirers regarded him as a giant; and his opponents, if they
saw in him a dash of the charlatan, could not deny his amazing energy and his capacity as an
orator. The insatiable vanity which afterwards ruined his career already made it doubtful whether
he fought for the cause or the glory. But he was at least an instrument worth having. He was
a kind of half-disciple. If in 1809 he had checked Mill's praise of Bentham, he was soon afterwards
in frequent communication with the master. In July 1812 Bentham announces that Brougham is
at last to be admitted to a dinner, for which he had been 'intriguing any time this six months,'
and expects that his proselyte will soon be the first man in the House of Commons, and eclipse
even Romilly.[336] In later years they had frequent communications; and when in 1827 Brougham
was known to be preparing an utterance upon law reform, Bentham's hopes rose high. He offered
to his disciple 'some nice little sweet pap of my own making,' sound teaching that is, upon
evidence, judicial establishments and codification. Brougham thanks his 'dear grandpapa,' and
Bentham offers further supplies to his 'dear, sweet little poppet.'[337] But when the orator
had spoken Bentham declares (9th February 1828) that the mountain has been delivered of a mouse.
Brougham was 'not the man to set up' simple and rational principles. He was the sham adversary
but the real accomplice of Peel, pulling up lies by the root to plant others equally noxious.[338]
In 1830 Bentham had even to hold up 'Master Peel' as a 'model good boy' to the self-styled
reformer. Brougham needs a dose of jalap instead of pap, for he cannot even spell the 'greatest
happiness principle' properly.[339] Bentham went so far as to write what he fondly took to
be an epigram upon Brougham:

    'So foolish and so wise, so great, so small,
     Everything now, to-morrow nought at all.'[340]

In September 1831 Brougham as Chancellor announced a scheme for certain changes in the constitution
of the courts. The proposal called forth Bentham's last pamphlet, Lord Brougham displayed.[341]
Bentham laments that his disciple has 'stretched out the right hand of fellowship to jobbers
of all sorts.'[342] In vain had Brougham in his speech called Bentham 'one of the great sages
of the law.' Bentham acknowledges his amiability and his genius; but laments over the untrustworthy
character of a man who could only adopt principles so far as they were subservient to his own
vanity.

Another light of the Edinburgh Review, who at this time took Brougham at his own valuation,
did an incidental service to Bentham. Upon the publication of the Book of Fallacies in 1825,
Sydney Smith reviewed or rather condensed it in the Edinburgh Review, and gave the pith of
the whole in his famous Noodle's Oration. The noodle utters all the commonplaces by which the
stupid conservatives, with Eldon at their head, met the demands of reformers. Nothing could
be wittier than Smith's brilliant summary. Whigs and Radicals for the time agreed in ridiculing
blind prejudice. The day was to come when the Whigs at least would see that some principles
might be worse than prejudice. All the fools, said Lord Melbourne, 'were against Catholic Emancipation,
and the worst of it is, the fools were in the right.' Sydney Smith was glad to be Bentham's
mouthpiece for the moment: though, when Benthamism was applied to church reform, Smith began
to perceive that Noodle was not so silly as he seemed.

One other ally of Bentham deserves notice. O'Connell had in 1828, in speaking of legal abuses,
called himself 'an humble disciple of the immortal Bentham.'[343] Bentham wrote to acknowledge
the compliment. He invited O'Connell to become an inmate of his hermitage at Queen's Square
Place, and O'Connell responded warmly to the letters of his 'revered master.' Bentham's aversion
to Catholicism was as strong as his objection to Catholic disqualifications, and he took some
trouble to smooth down the difficulties which threatened an alliance between ardent believers
and thoroughgoing sceptics. O'Connell had attacked some who were politically upon his side.
'Dan, dear child,' says Bentham, 'whom in imagination I am at this moment pressing to my fond
bosom, put off, if it be possible, your intolerance.'[344] Their friendship, however, did not
suffer from this discord, and their correspondence is in the same tone till the end. In one
of Bentham's letters he speaks of a contemporary correspondence with another great man, whom
he does not appear to have met personally. He was writing long letters, entreating the duke
of Wellington to eclipse Cromwell by successfully attacking the lawyers. The duke wrote 'immediate
answers in his own hand,' and took good-humouredly a remonstrance from Bentham upon the duel
with Lord Winchilsea in 1829.[345] Bentham was ready to the end to seek allies in any quarter.
When Lord Sidmouth took office in 1812, Bentham had an interview with him, and had some hopes
of being employed to prepare a penal code.[346] Although experience had convinced him of the
futility of expectations from the Sidmouths and Eldons, he was always on the look out for sympathy;
and the venerable old man was naturally treated with respect by people who had little enough
of real interest in his doctrines.

During the last ten years of his life, Bentham was cheered by symptoms of the triumph of his
creed. The approach of the millennium seemed to be indicated by the gathering of the various
forces which carried Roman Catholic Emancipation and the Reform Bill. Bentham still received
testimonies of his fame abroad. In 1825 he visited Paris to consult some physicians. He was
received with the respect which the French can always pay to intellectual eminence.[347] All
the lawyers in a court of justice rose to receive him, and he was placed at the president's
right hand. On the revolution of 1830, he addressed some good advice to the country of which
he had been made a citizen nearly forty years before. In 1832, Talleyrand, to whom he had talked
about the Panopticon in 1792, dined with him alone in his hermitage.[348] When Bowring observed
to the prince that Bentham's works had been plundered, the polite diplomatist replied, et pillé
de tout le monde, il est toujours riche. Bentham was by this time failing. At eighty-two he
was still, as he put it, 'codifying like any dragon.'[349] On 18th May 1832 he did his last
bit of his lifelong labour, upon the 'Constitutional Code.' The great reform agitation was
reaching the land of promise, but Bentham was to die in the wilderness. He sank without a struggle
on 6th June 1832, his head resting on Bowring's bosom. He left the characteristic direction
that his body should be dissected for the benefit of science. An incision was formally made;
and the old gentleman, in his clothes as he lived, his face covered by a wax mask, is still
to be seen at University College in Gower Street.

Bentham, as we are told, had a strong personal resemblance to Benjamin Franklin. Sagacity,
benevolence, and playfulness were expressed in both physiognomies. Bentham, however, differed
from the man whose intellect presents many points of likeness, in that he was not a man of
the market-place or the office. Bentham was in many respects a child through life:[350] a child
in simplicity, good humour, and vivacity; his health was unbroken; he knew no great sorrow;
and after emerging from the discouragement of his youth, he was placidly contemplating a continuous
growth of fame and influence. He is said to have expressed the wish that he could awake once
in a century to contemplate the prospect of a world gradually adopting his principles and so
making steady progress in happiness and wisdom.

No man could lead a simpler life. His chief luxuries at table were fruit, bread, and tea. He
had a 'sacred teapot' called Dick, with associations of its own, and carefully regulated its
functions. He refrained from wine during the greatest part of his life, and was never guilty
of a single act of intemperance. In later life he took a daily half-glass of Madeira. He was
scrupulously neat in person, and wore a Quaker-like brown coat, brown cassimere breeches, white
worsted stockings and a straw hat. He walked or 'rather trotted' with his stick Dapple, and
took his 'ante-prandial' and other 'circumgyrations' with absolute punctuality. He loved pets;
he had a series of attached cats; and cherished the memory of a 'beautiful pig' at Hendon,
and of a donkey at Ford Abbey. He encouraged mice to play in his study--a taste which involved
some trouble with his cats, and suggests problems as to the greatest happiness of the greatest
number. Kindness to animals was an essential point of his moral creed. 'I love everything,'
he said, 'that has four legs.' He had a passion for flowers, and tried to introduce useful
plants. He loved music--especially Handel--and had an organ in his house. He cared nothing
for poetry: 'Prose,' he said,[351] 'is when all the lines except the last go on to the margin.
Poetry is when some of them fall short of it.' He was courteous and attentive to his guests,
though occasionally irritable when his favourite crotchets were transgressed, or especially
if his fixed hours of work were deranged.

His regularity in literary work was absolute. He lived by a time-table, working in the morning
and turning out from ten to fifteen folio pages daily. He read the newspapers regularly, but
few books, and cared nothing for criticisms on his own writings. His only substantial meal
was a dinner at six or half-past, to which he occasionally admitted a few friends as a high
privilege. He liked to discuss the topics of which his mind was full, and made notes beforehand
of particular points to be introduced in conversation. He was invariably inaccessible to visitors,
even famous ones, likely to distract his thoughts. 'Tell Mr. Bentham that Mr. Richard Lovell
Edgeworth desires to see him.' 'Tell Mr. Richard Lovell Edgeworth that Mr. Bentham does not
desire to see him' was the reply. When Mme. de Staël came to England, she said to Dumont: 'Tell
Bentham I shall see nobody till I have seen him.' 'I am sorry for it,' said Bentham, 'for then
she will never see anybody.' And he summed up his opinion of the famous author of Corinne by
calling her 'a trumpery magpie.'[352] There is a simplicity and vivacity about some of the
sayings reported by Bowring, which prove that Bentham could talk well, and increase our regret
for the absence of a more efficient Boswell. At ten Bentham had his tea, at eleven his nightcap,
and by twelve all his guests were ignominiously expelled. He was left to sleep on a hard bed.
His sleep was light, and much disturbed by dreams.

Bentham was certainly amiable. The 'surest way to gain men,' he said, 'is to appear to love
them, and the surest way to appear to love them is to love them in reality.' The least pleasing
part of his character, however, is the apparent levity of his attachments. He was, as we have
seen, partly alienated from Dumont, though some friendly communications are recorded in later
years, and Dumont spoke warmly of Bentham only a few days before his death in 1829.[353] He
not only cooled towards James Mill, but, if Bowring is to be trusted, spoke of him with great
harshness.[354] Bowring was not a judicious reporter, indeed, and capable of taking hasty phrases
too seriously. What Bentham's remarks upon these and other friends suggest is not malice or
resentment, but the flippant utterance of a man whose feelings are wanting in depth rather
than kindliness. It is noticeable that, after his early visit at Bowood, no woman seems to
have counted for anything in Bentham's life. He was not only never in love, but it looks as
if he never even talked to any woman except his cook or housemaid.

The one conclusion that I need draw concerns a question not, I think, hard to be solved. It
would be easy to make a paradox by calling Bentham at once the most practical and most unpractical
of men. This is to point out the one-sided nature of Bentham's development. Bentham's habits
remind us in some ways of Kant; and the thought may be suggested that he would have been more
in his element as a German professor of philosophies. In such a position he might have devoted
himself to the delight of classifying and co-ordinating theories, and have found sufficient
enjoyment in purely intellectual activity. After a fashion that was the actual result. How
far, indeed, Bentham could have achieved much in the sphere of pure philosophy, and what kind
of philosophy he would have turned out, must be left to conjecture. The circumstances of his
time and country, and possibly his own temperament generally, turned his thoughts to problems
of legislation and politics, that is to say, of direct practical interest. He was therefore
always dealing with concrete facts, and a great part of his writings may be considered as raw
material for acts of parliament. Bentham remained, however, unpractical, in the sense that
he had not that knowledge which we ascribe either to the poet or to the man of the world. He
had neither the passion nor the sympathetic imagination. The springs of active conduct which
Byron knew from experience were to Bentham nothing more than names in a careful classification.
Any shrewd attorney or Bow Street runner would have been a better judge of the management of
convicts; and here were dozens of party politicians, such as Rigby and Barré, who could have
explained to him beforehand those mysteries in the working of the political machinery, which
it took him half a lifetime to discover. In this sense Bentham was unpractical in the highest
degree, for at eighty he had not found out of what men are really made. And yet by his extraordinary
intellectual activity and the concentration of all his faculties upon certain problems, he
succeeded in preserving an example, and though not a unique yet an almost unsurpassable example,
of the power which belongs to the man of one idea.

NOTES:

[325] See correspondence upon his codification plans in Russia, America, and Geneva in Works,
iv. 451-594.

[326] Borrow's Bible in Spain, ch. xxx.

[327] Works, viii. 555-600.

[328] Ibid. x. 534. See Blaquière's enthusiastic letter to Bentham.--Works, x. 475.

[329] See, however, Bentham's reference to this story.--Works, xi. 66.

[330] Works, x. 539.

[331] Ibid. x. 522.

[332] Works, x. 516.

[333] Ibid. x. 591.

[334] A letter from Mill in the University College MSS. describes a misunderstanding about
borrowed books, a fertile, but hardly adequate, cause of quarrel.

[335] Bowring's religious principles prevented him from admitting some of Bentham's works to
the collective edition.

[336] Works, x. 471-72.

[337] Ibid. x. 576.

[338] Ibid. x. 588.

[339] Works, xi. 37. Papers preserved at University College show that during Peel's law reforms
at this time Bentham frequently communicated with him.

[340] Ibid. xi. 50.

[341] Ibid. v. 549.

[342] Ibid. v. 609.

[343] Works, x. 594.

[344] Ibid. xi. 26.

[345] Ibid. xi. 13, 28.

[346] Works, x. 468.

[347] Ibid. x. 551.

[348] Ibid. xi. 75.

[349] Ibid. xi. 33.

[350] Mill's Dissertations, i. 354 and 392 n.

[351] Works, x. 442.

[352] Works, x. 467; xi. 79.

[353] Ibid. xi. 23-24.

[354] Ibid. x. 450.

CHAPTER VI

BENTHAM'S DOCTRINE

I. FIRST PRINCIPLES

Bentham's position is in one respect unique. There have been many greater thinkers; but there
has been hardly any one whose abstract theory has become in the same degree the platform of
an active political party. To accept the philosophy was to be also pledged to practical applications
of Utilitarianism. What, then, was the revelation made to the Benthamites, and to what did
it owe its influence? The central doctrine is expressed in Bentham's famous formula: the test
of right and wrong is the 'greatest happiness of the greatest number.' There was nothing new
in this assertion. It only expresses the fact that Bentham accepted one of the two alternatives
which have commended themselves to conflicting schools ever since ethical speculation was erected
into a separate department of thought. Moreover, the side which Bentham took was, we may say,
the winning side. The ordinary morality of the time was Utilitarian in substance. Hutcheson
had invented the sacred phrase: and Hume had based his moral system upon 'utility.'[355] Bentham
had learned much from Helvétius the French freethinker, and had been anticipated by Paley the
English divine. The writings in which Bentham deals explicitly with the general principles
of Ethics would hardly entitle him to a higher position than that of a disciple of Hume without
Hume's subtlety; or of Paley without Paley's singular gift of exposition. Why, then, did Bentham's
message come upon his disciples with the force and freshness of a new revelation? Our answer
must be in general terms that Bentham founded not a doctrine but a method: and that the doctrine
which came to him simply as a general principle was in his hands a potent instrument applied
with most fruitful results to questions of immediate practical interest.

Beyond the general principle of utility, therefore, we have to consider the 'organon' constructed
by him to give effect to a general principle too vague to be applied in detail. The fullest
account of this is contained in the Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation.
This work unfortunately is a fragment, but it gives his doctrine vigorously and decisively,
without losing itself in the minute details which become wearisome in his later writings. Bentham
intended it as an introduction to a penal code; and his investigation sent him back to more
general problems. He found it necessary to settle the relations of the penal code to the whole
body of law; and to settle these he had to consider the principles which underlie legislation
in general. He had thus, he says, to 'create a new science,' and then to elaborate one department
of the science. The 'introduction' would contain prolegomena not only for the penal code but
for the other departments of inquiry which he intended to exhaust.[356] He had to lay down
primary truths which should be to this science what the axioms are to mathematical sciences.[357]
These truths therefore belong to the sphere of conduct in general, and include his ethical theory.

'Nature has placed mankind' (that is his opening phrase) 'under the governance of two sovereign
masters, pain and pleasure. It is for them alone to point out what we ought to do, as well
as to determine what we shall do.' There is the unassailable basis. It had been laid down as
unequivocally by Locke,[358] and had been embodied in the brilliant couplets of Pope's Essay
on Man.[359] At the head of the curious table of universal knowledge, given in the Chrestomathia,
we have Eudæmonics as an all-comprehensive name of which every art is a branch.[360] Eudæmonics,
as an art, corresponds to the science 'ontology.' It covers the whole sphere of human thought.
It means knowledge in general as related to conduct. Its first principle, again, requires no
more proof than the primary axioms of arithmetic or geometry. Once understood, it is by the
same act of the mind seen to be true. Some people, indeed, do not see it. Bentham rather ignores
than answers some of their arguments. But his mode of treating opponents indicates his own
position. 'Happiness,' it is often said, is too vague a word to be the keystone of an ethical
system; it varies from man to man: or it is 'subjective,' and therefore gives no absolute or
independent ground for morality. A morality of 'eudæmonism' must be an 'empirical' morality,
and we can never extort from it that 'categorical imperative,' without which we have instead
of a true morality a simple system of 'expediency.' From Bentham's point of view the criticism
must be retorted. He regards 'happiness' as precisely the least equivocal of words; and 'happiness'
itself as therefore affording the one safe clue to all the intricate problems of human conduct.
The authors of the Federalist, for example, had said that justice was the 'end of government.'
'Why not happiness?' asks Bentham. 'What happiness is every man knows, because what pleasure
is, every man knows, and what pain is, every man knows. But what justice is--this is what on
every occasion is the subject-matter of dispute.'[361] That phrase gives his view in a nutshell.
Justice is the means, not the end. That is just which produces a maximum of happiness. Omit
all reference to Happiness, and Justice becomes a meaningless word prescribing equality, but
not telling us equality of what. Happiness, on the other hand, has a substantial and independent
meaning from which the meaning of justice can be deduced. It has therefore a logical priority:
and to attempt to ignore this is the way to all the labyrinths of hopeless confusion by which
legislation has been made a chaos. Bentham's position is indicated by his early conflict with
Blackstone, not a very powerful representative of the opposite principle. Blackstone, in fact,
had tried to base his defence of that eminently empirical product, the British Constitution,
upon some show of a philosophical groundwork. He had used the vague conception of a 'social
contract,' frequently invoked for the same purpose at the revolution of 1688, and to eke out
his arguments applied the ancient commonplaces about monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy.
He thus tried to invest the constitution with the sanctity derived from this mysterious 'contract,'
while appealing also to tradition or the incarnate 'wisdom of our ancestors,' as shown by their
judicious mixture of the three forms. Bentham had an easy task, though he performed it with
remarkable vigour, in exposing the weakness of this heterogeneous aggregate. Look closely,
and this fictitious contract can impose no new obligation: for the obligation itself rests
upon Utility. Why not appeal to Utility at once? I am bound to obey, not because my great-grandfather
may be regarded as having made a bargain, which he did not really make, with the great-grandfather
of George III.; but simply because rebellion does more harm than good. The forms of government
are abstractions, not names of realities, and their 'mixture' is a pure figment. King, Lords,
and Commons are not really incarnations of power, wisdom, and goodness. Their combination forms
a system the merits of which must in the last resort be judged by its working. 'It is the principle
of utility, accurately apprehended and steadily applied, that affords the only clew to guide
a man through these streights.'[362] So much in fact Bentham might learn from Hume; and to
defend upon any other ground the congeries of traditional arrangements which passed for the
British Constitution was obviously absurd. It was in this warfare against the shifting and
ambiguous doctrines of Blackstone that Bentham first showed the superiority of his own method:
for, as between the two, Bentham's position is at least the most coherent and intelligible.

Blackstone, however, represents little more than a bit of rhetoric embodying fragments of inconsistent
theories. The Morals and Legislation opens by briefly and contemptuously setting aside more
philosophical opponents of Utilitarianism. The 'ascetic' principle, for example, is the formal
contradiction of the principle of Utility, for it professedly declares pleasure to be evil.
Could it be consistently carried out it would turn earth into hell. But in fact it is at bottom
an illegitimate corollary from the very principle which it ostensibly denies. It professes
to condemn pleasure in general; it really means that certain pleasures can only be bought at
an excessive cost of pain. Other theories are contrivances for avoiding the appeal 'to any
external standard'; and in substance, therefore, they make the opinion of the individual theorist
an ultimate and sufficient reason. Adam Smith by his doctrine of 'sympathy' makes the sentiment
of approval itself the ultimate standard. My feeling echoes yours, and reciprocally; each cannot
derive authority from the other. Another man (Hutcheson) invents a thing made on purpose to
tell him what is right and what is wrong and calls it a 'moral sense.' Beattie substitutes
'common' for 'moral' sense, and his doctrine is attractive because every man supposes himself
to possess common sense. Others, like Price, appeal to the Understanding, or, like Clarke,
to the 'Fitness of Things,' or they invent such phrases as 'Law of Nature,' or 'Right Reason'
or 'Natural Justice,' or what you please. Each really means that whatever he says is infallibly
true and self-evident. Wollaston discovers that the only wrong thing is telling a lie; or that
when you kill your father, it is a way of saying that he is not your father, and the same method
is applicable to any conduct which he happens to dislike. The 'fairest and openest of them
all' is the man who says, 'I am of the number of the Elect'; God tells the Elect what is right:
therefore if you want to know what is right, you have only to come to me.[363] Bentham is writing
here in his pithiest style. His criticism is of course of the rough and ready order; but I
think that in a fashion he manages to hit the nail pretty well on the head.

His main point, at any rate, is clear. He argues briefly that the alternative systems are illusory
because they refer to no 'external standard.' His opponents, not he, really make morality arbitrary.
This, whatever the ultimate truth, is in fact the essential core of all the Utilitarian doctrine
descended from or related to Benthamism. Benthamism aims at converting morality into a science.
Science, according to him, must rest upon facts. It must apply to real things, and to things
which have definite relations and a common measure. Now, if anything be real, pains and pleasures
are real. The expectation of pain or pleasure determines conduct; and, if so, it must be the
sole determinant of conduct. The attempt to conceal or evade this truth is the fatal source
of all equivocation and confusion. Try the experiment. Introduce a 'moral sense.' What is its
relation to the desire for happiness? If the dictates of the moral sense be treated as ultimate,
an absolutely arbitrary element is introduced; and we have one of the 'innate ideas' exploded
by Locke, a belief summarily intruded into the system without definite relations to any other
beliefs: a dogmatic assertion which refuses to be tested or to be correlated with other dogmas;
a reduction therefore of the whole system to chaos. It is at best an instinctive belief which
requires to be justified and corrected by reference to some other criterion. Or resolve morality
into 'reason,' that is, into some purely logical truth, and it then remains in the air--a mere
nonentity until experience has supplied some material upon which it can work. Deny the principle
of utility, in short, as he says in a vigorous passage,[364] and you are involved in a hopeless
circle. Sooner or later you appeal to an arbitrary and despotic principle and find that you
have substituted words for thoughts.

The only escape from this circle is the frank admission that happiness is, in fact, the sole
aim of man. There are, of course, different kinds of happiness as there are different kinds
of physical forces. But the motives to action are, like the physical forces, commensurable.
Two courses of conduct can always be compared in respect of the happiness produced, as two
motions of a body can be compared in respect of the energy expended. If, then, we take the
moral judgment to be simply a judgment of amounts of happiness, the whole theory can be systematised,
and its various theorems ranged under a single axiom or consistent set of axioms. Pain and
pleasure give the real value of actions; they are the currency with a definite standard into
which every general rule may be translated. There is always a common measure applicable in
every formula for the estimation of conduct. If you admit your Moral Sense, you profess to
settle values by some standard which has no definite relation to the standard which in fact
governs the normal transactions. But any such double standard, in which the two measures are
absolutely incommensurable, leads straight to chaos. Or, if again you appeal to reason in the
abstract, you are attempting to settle an account by pure arithmetic without reference to the
units upon which your operation is performed. Two pounds and two pounds will make four pounds
whatever a pound may be; but till I know what it is, the result is nugatory. Somewhere I must
come upon a basis of fact, if my whole construction is to stand.

This is the fundamental position implied in Bentham's doctrine. The moral judgment is simply
one case of the judgment of happiness. Bentham is so much convinced of this that to him there
appeared to be in reality no other theory. What passed for theories were mere combinations
of words. Having said this, we know where to lay the foundations of the new science. It deals
with a vast complicity of facts: it requires 'investigations as severe as mathematical ones,
but beyond all comparison more intricate and extensive.'[365] Still it deals with facts, and
with facts which have a common measure, and can, therefore, be presented as a coherent system.
To present this system, or so much of it as is required for purposes of legislation, is therefore
his next task. The partial execution is the chief substance of the Introduction. Right and
wrong conduct, we may now take for granted, mean simply those classes of conduct which are
conducive to or opposed to happiness; or, in the sacred formula, to act rightly means to promote
the greatest happiness of the greatest number. The legislator, like every one else, acts rightly
in so far as he is guided by the principle (to use one of the phrases coined by Bentham) of
'maximising' happiness. He seeks to affect conduct; and conduct can be affected only by annexing
pains or pleasures to given classes of actions. Hence we have a vitally important part of his
doctrine--the theory of 'sanctions.' Pains and pleasures as annexed to action are called 'sanctions.'
There are 'physical or natural,' 'political, 'moral or popular,' and 'religious' sanctions.
The 'physical' sanctions are such pleasures and pains as follow a given course of conduct independently
of the interference of any other human or supernatural being; the 'political' those which are
annexed by the action of the legislator; the 'moral or popular' those which are annexed by
other individuals not acting in a corporate capacity; and the 'religious' those which are annexed
by a 'superior invisible being,' or, as he says elsewhere,[366] 'such as are capable of being
expected at the hands of an invisible Ruler of the Universe.' The three last sanctions, he
remarks, 'operate through the first.' The 'magistrate' or 'men at large' can only operate,
and God is supposed only to operate, 'through the powers of nature,' that is, by applying some
of the pains and pleasures which may also be natural sanctions. A man is burnt: if by his own
imprudence, that is a 'physical' sanction; if by the magistrate, it is a 'political' sanction;
if by some neglect of his neighbours, due to their dislike of his 'moral character,' a 'moral'
sanction; if by the immediate act of God or by distraction caused by dread of God's displeasure,
it is a 'religious' sanction. Of these, as Bentham characteristically observes[367] in a later
writing the political is much stronger than the 'moral' or 'religious.' Many men fear the loss
of character or the 'wrath of Heaven,' but all men fear the scourge and the gallows.[368] He
admits, however, that the religious sanction and the additional sanction of 'benevolence' have
the advantage of not requiring that the offender should be found out.[369] But in any case,
the 'natural' and religious sanctions are beyond the legislator's power. His problem, therefore,
is simply this: what sanctions ought he to annex to conduct, or remembering that 'ought' means
simply 'conducive to happiness,' what political sanctions will increase happiness?

To answer this fully will be to give a complete system of legislation; but in order to answer
it we require a whole logical and psychological apparatus. Bentham shows this apparatus at
work, but does not expound its origin in any separate treatise. Enough information, however,
is given as to his method in the curious collection of the fragments connected with the Chrestomathia.
A logical method upon which he constantly insisted is that of 'bipartition,'[370] called also
the 'dichotomous' or 'bifurcate' method, and exemplified by the so-called 'Porphyrian Tree.'
The principle is, of course, simple. Take any genus: divide it into two classes, one of which
has and the other has not a certain mark. The two classes must be mutually exclusive and together
exhaustive. Repeat the operation upon each of the classes and continue the process as long
as desired.[371] At every step you thus have a complete enumeration of all the species, varieties,
and so on, each of which excludes all the others. No mere logic, indeed, can secure the accuracy
and still less the utility of the procedure. The differences may be in themselves ambiguous
or irrelevant. If I classify plants as 'trees' and 'not trees,' the logical form is satisfied:
but I have still to ask whether 'tree' conveys a determinate meaning, and whether the distinction
corresponds to a difference of any importance. A perfect classification, however, could always
be stated in this form. Each species, that is, can be marked by the presence or absence of
a given difference, whether we are dealing with classes of plants or actions: and Bentham aims
at that consummation though he admits that centuries may be required for the construction of
an accurate classification in ethical speculations.[372] He exaggerates the efficiency of his
method, and overlooks the tendency of tacit assumptions to smuggle themselves into what affects
to be a mere enumeration of classes. But in any case, no one could labour more industriously
to get every object of his thought arranged and labelled and put into the right pigeon-hole
of his mental museum. To codify[373] is to classify, and Bentham might be defined as a codifying
animal.

Things thus present themselves to Bentham's mind as already prepared to fit into pigeon-holes.
This is a characteristic point, and it appears in what we must call his metaphysical system.
'Metaphysics,' indeed, according to him, is simply 'a sprig,' and that a small one, of the
'branch termed Logic.'[374] It is merely the explanation of certain general terms such as 'existence,'
'necessity,' and so forth.[375] Under this would apparently fall the explanation of 'reality'
which leads to a doctrine upon which he often insists, and which is most implicitly given in
the fragment called Ontology. He there distinguishes 'real' from 'fictitious entities,' a distinction
which, as he tells us,[376] he first learned from d'Alembert's phrase Êtres fictifs and which
he applies in his Morals and Legislation. 'Real entities,' according to him,[377] are 'individual
perceptions,' 'impressions,' and 'ideas.' In this, of course, he is following Hume, though
he applies the Johnsonian argument to Berkeley's immaterialism.[378] A 'fictitious entity'
is a name which does note 'raise up in the mind any correspondent images.'[379] Such names
owe their existence to the necessities of language. Without employing such fictions, however,
'the language of man could not have risen above the language of brutes';[380] and he emphatically
distinguishes them from 'unreal' or 'fabulous entities.' A 'fictitious entity' is not a 'nonentity.'[381]
He includes among such entities all Aristotle's 'predicaments' except the first: 'substance.'[382]
Quantity, quality, relation, time, place are all 'physical fictitious entities.' This is apparently
equivalent to saying that the only 'physical entities' are concrete things--sticks, stones,
bodies, and so forth--the 'reality' of which he takes for granted in the ordinary common sense
meaning. It is also perfectly true that things are really related, have quantity and quality,
and are in time and space. But we cannot really conceive the quality or relation apart from
the concrete things so qualified and related. We are forced by language to use substantives
which in their nature have only the sense of adjectives. He does not suppose that a body is
not really square or round; but he thinks it a fiction to speak of squareness or roundness
or space in general as something existing apart from matter and, in some sense, alongside of
matter.

This doctrine, which brings us within sight of metaphysical problems beyond our immediate purpose,
becomes important to his moral speculation. His special example of a 'fictitious entity' in
politics is 'obligation.'[383] Obligations, rights, and similar words are 'fictitious entities.'
Obligation in particular implies a metaphor. The statement that a man is 'obliged' to perform
an act means simply that he will suffer pain if he does not perform it. The use of the word
obligation, as a noun substantive, introduces the 'fictitious entity' which represents nothing
really separable from the pain or pleasure. Here, therefore, we have the ground of the doctrine
already noticed. 'Pains and pleasures' are real.[384] 'Their existence,' he says,[385] 'is
matter of universal and constant experience.' But other various names referring to these: emotion,
inclination, vice, virtue, etc., are only 'psychological entities.' 'Take away pleasures and
pains, not only happiness but justice and duty and obligation and virtue--all of which have
been so elaborately held up to view as independent of them--are so many empty sounds.'[386]
The ultimate facts, then, are pains and pleasures. They are the substantives of which these
other words are properly the adjectives. A pain or a pleasure may exist by itself, that is
without being virtuous or vicious: but virtue and vice can only exist in so far as pain and
pleasure exists.

This analysis of 'obligation' is a characteristic doctrine of the Utilitarian school. We are
under an 'obligation' so far as we are affected by a 'sanction.' It appeared to Bentham so
obvious as to need no demonstration, only an exposition of the emptiness of any verbal contradiction.
Such metaphysical basis as he needed is simply the attempt to express the corresponding conception
of reality which, in his opinion, only requires to be expressed to carry conviction.

NOTES:

[355] See note under Bentham's life, ante, p. 178.

[356] Preface to Morals and Legislation.

[357] Works, i. ('Morals and Legislation'), ii. n.

[358] Essay, bk. ii. ch. xxi. § 39-§ 44. The will, says Locke, is determined by the 'uneasiness
of desire.' What moves desire? Happiness, and that alone. Happiness is pleasure, and misery
pain. What produces pleasure we call good; and what produces pain we call evil. Locke, however,
was not a consistent Utilitarian.

[359] Epistle iv., opening lines.

[360] Works, vii. 82.

[361] Works ('Constitutional Code'), ix. 123.

[362] Works ('Fragment'), i. 287.

[363] Works ('Morals and Legislation'), i. 8-10. Mill quotes this passage in his essay on Bentham
in the first volume of his Dissertations. This essay, excellent in itself must be specially
noticed as an exposition by an authoritative disciple.

[364] Works ('Morals and Legislation'), i. 13.

[365] Works ('Morals and Legislation'), i. v.

[366] Works ('Evidence'), vi. 261.

[367] Works ('Evidence'), vii. 116.

[368] Ibid. ('Morals and Legislation'), i. 14, etc.; Ibid. vi. 260. In Ibid. ('Evidence') vii.
116, 'humanity,' and in 'Logical Arrangements,' Ibid. ii. 290, 'sympathy' appears as a fifth
sanction. Another modification is suggested in Ibid. i. 14 n.

[369] Ibid. ('Morals and Legislation'), i. 67.

[370] Works ('Morals and Legislation'), i. 96 n.

[371] See especially Ibid. viii. 104, etc.; 253, etc.; 289, etc.

[372] Ibid. viii. 106.

[373] 'Codify' was one of Bentham's successful neologisms.

[374] Works ('Logic'), viii. 220.

[375] Here Bentham coincides with Horne Tooke, to whose 'discoveries' he refers in the Chrestomathia
(Works, viii. 120, 185, 188).

[376] Works, iii. 286; viii. 119.

[377] Ibid. ('Ontology') viii. 196 n.

[378] Ibid. viii, 197 n.

[379] Ibid. viii. 263.

[380] Works ('Ontology'), viii. 119.

[381] Ibid. viii. 198.

[382] Ibid. viii. 199.

[383] Ibid. viii. 206, 247.

[384] Helvétius adds to this that the only real pains and pleasures are the physical, but Bentham
does not follow him here. See Helvétius, OEuvres (1781), ii. 121, etc.

[385] Works, i. 211 ('Springs of Action').

[386] Ibid. i. 206.

II. SPRINGS OF ACTION

Our path is now clear. Pains and pleasures give us what mathematicians call the 'independent
variable.' Our units are (in Bentham's phrase) 'lots' of pain or pleasure. We have to interpret
all the facts in terms of pain or pleasure, and we shall have the materials for what has since
been called a 'felicific calculus.' To construct this with a view to legislation is his immediate
purpose. The theory will fall into two parts: the 'pathological,' or an account of all the
pains and pleasures which are the primary data; and the 'dynamical,' or an account of the various
modes of conduct determined by expectations of pain and pleasure. This gives the theory of
'springs of action,' considered in themselves, and of 'motives,' that is, of the springs as
influencing conduct.[387] The 'pathology' contains, in the first place, a discussion of the
measure of pain and pleasure in general; secondly, a discussion of the various species of pain
and pleasure; and thirdly, a discussion of the varying sensibilities of different individuals
to pain and pleasure.[388] Thus under the first head, we are told that the value of a pleasure,
considered by itself, depends upon its intensity, duration, certainty, and propinquity; and,
considered with regard to modes of obtaining it, upon its fecundity (or tendency to produce
other pains and pleasures) and its purity (or freedom from admixture of other pains and pleasures).
The pain or pleasure is thus regarded as an entity which is capable of being in some sense
weighed and measured.[389] The next step is to classify pains and pleasures, which though commensurable
as psychological forces, have obviously very different qualities. Bentham gives the result
of his classification without the analysis upon which it depends. He assures us that he has
obtained an 'exhaustive' list of 'simple pleasures.' It must be confessed that the list does
not commend itself either as exhaustive or as composed of 'simple pleasures.' He does not explain
the principle of his analysis because he says, it was of 'too metaphysical a cast,'[390] but
he thought it so important that he published it, edited with considerable modifications by
James Mill, in 1817, as a Table of the Springs of Action.[391]

J. S. Mill remarks that this table should be studied by any one who would understand Bentham's
philosophy. Such a study would suggest some unfavourable conclusions. Bentham seems to have
made out his table without the slightest reference to any previous psychologist. It is simply
constructed to meet the requirements of his legislative theories. As psychology it would be
clearly absurd, especially if taken as giving the elementary or 'simple' feelings. No one can
suppose, for example, that the pleasures of 'wealth' or 'power' are 'simple' pleasures. The
classes therefore are not really distinct, and they are as far from being exhaustive. All that
can be said for the list is that it gives a sufficiently long enumeration to call attention
from his own point of view to most of the ordinary pleasures and pains; and contains as much
psychology as he could really turn to account for his purpose.

The omissions with which his greatest disciple charges him are certainly significant. We find,
says Mill, no reference to 'Conscience,' 'Principle,' 'Moral Rectitude,' or 'Moral Duty' among
the 'springs of action,' unless among the synonyms of a 'love of reputation,' or in so far
as 'Conscience' and 'Principle' are sometimes synonymous with the 'religious' motive or the
motive of 'sympathy.' So the sense of 'honour,' the love of beauty, and of order, of power
(except in the narrow sense of power over our fellows) and of action in general are all omitted.
We may conjecture what reply Bentham would have made to this criticism. The omission of the
love of beauty and æsthetic pleasures may surprise us when we remember that Bentham loved music,
if he cared nothing for poetry. But he apparently regarded these as 'complex pleasures,'[392]
and therefore not admissible into his table, if it be understood as an analysis into the simple
pleasures alone. The pleasures of action are deliberately omitted, for Bentham pointedly gives
the 'pains' of labour as a class without corresponding pleasure; and this, though indicative,
I think, of a very serious error, is characteristic rather of his method of analysis than of
his real estimate of pleasure. Nobody could have found more pleasure than Bentham in intellectual
labour, but he separated the pleasure from the labour. He therefore thought 'labour,' as such,
a pure evil, and classified the pleasure as a pleasure of 'curiosity.' But the main criticism
is more remarkable. Mill certainly held himself to be a sound Utilitarian; and yet he seems
to be condemning Bentham for consistent Utilitarianism. Bentham, by admitting the 'conscience'
into his simple springs of action, would have fallen into the very circle from which he was
struggling to emerge. If, in fact, the pleasures of conscience are simple pleasures, we have
the objectionable 'moral sense' intruded as an ultimate factor of human nature. To get rid
of that 'fictitious entity' is precisely Bentham's aim. The moral judgment is to be precisely
equivalent to the judgment: 'this or that kind of conduct increases or diminishes the sum of
human pains or pleasures.' Once allow that among the pains and pleasures themselves is an ultimate
conscience--a faculty not constructed out of independent pains and pleasures--and the system
becomes a vicious circle. Conscience on any really Utilitarian scheme must be a derivative,
not an ultimate, faculty. If, as Mill seems to say, the omission is a blunder, Bentham's Utilitarianism
at least must be an erroneous system.

We have now our list both of pains and pleasures and of the general modes of variation by which
their value is to be measured. We must also allow for the varying sensibilities of different
persons. Bentham accordingly gives a list of thirty-two 'circumstances influencing sensibility.'[393]
Human beings differ in constitution, character, education, sex, race, and so forth, and in
their degrees of sensibility to all the various classes of pains and pleasures; the consideration
of these varieties is of the highest utility for the purposes of the judge and the legislator.[394]
The 'sanctions' will operate differently in different cases. A blow will have different effects
upon the sick and upon the healthy; the same fine imposed upon the rich and the poor will cause
very different pains; and a law which is beneficent in Europe may be a scourge in America.

We have thus our 'pathology' or theory of the passive sensibilities of man. We know what are
the 'springs of action,' how they vary in general, and how they vary from one man to another.
We can therefore pass to the dynamics.[395] We have described the machinery in rest, and can
now consider it in motion. We proceed as before by first considering action in general: which
leads to consideration of the 'intention' and the 'motive' implied by any conscious action:
and hence of the relation of these to the 'springs of action' as already described. The discussion
is minute and elaborate; and Bentham improves as he comes nearer to the actual problems of
legislation and further from the ostensible bases of psychology. The analysis of conduct, and
of the sanctions by which conduct is modified, involves a view of morals and of the relations
between the spheres of morality and legislation which is of critical importance for the whole
Utilitarian creed. 'Moral laws' and a 'Positive law' both affect human action. How do they
differ? Bentham's treatment of the problem shows, I think, a clearer appreciation of some difficulties
than might be inferred from his later utterances. In any case, it brings into clear relief
a moral doctrine which deeply affected his successors.

NOTES:

[387] Works, i. 205; and Dumont's Traités (1820), i. xxv, xxvi. The word 'springs of action'
perhaps comes from the marginal note to the above-mentioned passage of Locke (bk. ii. chap.
xxvi, § 41, 42).

[388] Morals and Legislation, chaps. iv., v., vi.

[389] See 'Codification Proposal' (Works, iv. 540), where Bentham takes money as representing
pleasure, and shows how the present value may be calculated like that of a sum put out to interest.
The same assumption is often made by Political Economists in regard to 'utilities.'

[390] Works ('Morals and Legislation'), i. 17 n.

[391] It is not worth while to consider this at length; but I give the following conjectural
account of the list as it appears in the Morals and Legislation above. In classifying pain
or pleasures, Bentham is, I think, following the clue suggested by his 'sanctions.' He is really
classifying according to their causes or the way in which they are 'annexed.' Thus pleasures
may or may not be dependent upon other persons, or if upon other persons, may be indirectly
or directly caused by their pleasures or pains. Pleasures not caused by persons correspond
to the 'physical sanction,' and are those (1) of the 'senses,' (2) of wealth, i.e. caused by
the possession of things, and (3) of 'skill,' i.e. caused by our ability to use things. Pleasures
caused by persons indirectly correspond first to the 'popular or moral sanction,' and are pleasures
(4) of 'amity,' caused by the goodwill of individuals, and (5) of a 'good name,' caused by
the goodwill of people in general; secondly, to 'political sanction,' namely (6) pleasures
of 'power'; and thirdly, to the 'religious sanction,' or (7) pleasures of 'piety.' All these
are 'self-regarding pleasures.' The pleasures caused directly by the pleasure of others are
those (8) of 'benevolence,' and (9) of malevolence. We then have what is really a cross division
by classes of 'derivative' pleasures; these being due to (10) memory, (11) imagination, (12)
expectation, (13) association. To each class of pleasures corresponds a class of pains, except
that there are no pains corresponding to the pleasures of wealth or power. We have, however,
a general class of pains of 'privation,' which might include pains of poverty or weakness:
and to these are opposed (14) pleasures of 'relief,' i.e. of the privation of pains. In the
Table, as separately published, Bentham modified this by dividing pleasures of sense into three
classes, the last of which includes the two first; by substituting pleasures of 'curiosity'
for pleasures of 'skill' by suppressing pleasures of relief and pains of privation; and by
adding, as a class of 'pains' without corresponding pleasures, pains (1) of labour, (2) of
'death, and bodily pains in general.' These changes seem to have been introduced in the course
of writing his Introduction, where they are partly assumed. Another class is added to include
all classes of 'self-regarding pleasures or pains.' He is trying to give a list of all 'synonyms'
for various pains and pleasures, and has therefore to admit classes corresponding to general
names which include other classes.

[392] Works i. 210, where he speaks of pleasures of the 'ball-room,' the 'theatre,' and the
'fine arts' as derivable from the 'simple and elementary' pleasures.

[393] Works ('Morals and Legislation'), i. 22 etc.

[394] Ibid. i. 33.

[395] Morals and Legislation, ch. vii. to xi.

III. THE SANCTIONS

Let us first take his definitions of the fundamental conceptions. All action of reasonable
beings implies the expectation of consequences. The agent's 'intention' is defined by the consequences
actually contemplated. The cause of action is the hope of the consequent pleasures or the dread
of the consequent pains. This anticipated pleasure or pain constitutes the 'internal motive'
(a phrase used by Bentham to exclude the 'external motive' or event which causes the anticipation).[396]
The motive, or 'internal motive,' is the anticipation of pain to be avoided or pleasure to
be gained. Actions are good or bad simply and solely as they are on the whole 'productive of
a balance of pleasure or pain.' The problem of the legislator is how to regulate actions so
as to incline the balance to the right side. His weapons are 'sanctions' which modify 'motives.'
What motives, then, should be strengthened or checked? Here we must be guided by a principle
which is, in fact, the logical result of the doctrines already laid down. We are bound to apply
our 'felicific calculus' with absolute impartiality. We must therefore assign equal value to
all motives. 'No motives,' he says,[397] are 'constantly good or constantly bad.' Pleasure
is itself a good; pain itself an evil: nay, they are 'the only good and the only evil.' This
is true of every sort of pain and pleasure, even of the pains and pleasures of illwill. The
pleasures of 'malevolence' are placed in his 'table' by the side of pleasures of 'benevolence.'
Hence it 'follows immediately and incontestably, that there is no such thing as any sort of
motive that is in itself a bad one.' The doctrine is no doubt a logical deduction from Bentham's
assumptions, and he proceeds to illustrate its meaning. A 'motive' corresponds to one of his
'springs of action.' He shows how every one of the motives included in his table may lead either
to good or to bad consequences. The desire of wealth may lead me to kill a man's enemy or to
plough his field for him; the fear of God may prompt to fanaticism or to charity; illwill may
lead to malicious conduct or may take the form of proper 'resentment,' as, for example, when
I secure the punishment of my father's murderer. Though one act, he says, is approved and the
other condemned, they spring from the same motive, namely, illwill.[398] He admits, however,
that some motives are more likely than others to lead to 'useful' conduct; and thus arranges
them in a certain 'order of pre-eminence.'[399] It is obvious that 'goodwill,' 'love of reputation,'
and the 'desire of amity' are more likely than others to promote general happiness. 'The dictates
of utility,' as he observes, are simply the 'dictates of the most extensive and enlightened
(that is, well advised) benevolence.' It would, therefore, seem more appropriate to call the
'motive' good; though no one doubts that when directed by an erroneous judgment it may incidentally
be mischievous.

The doctrine that morality depends upon 'consequences' and not upon 'motives' became a characteristic
Utilitarian dogma, and I shall have to return to the question. Meanwhile, it was both a natural
and, I think, in some senses, a correct view, when strictly confined to the province of legislation.
For reasons too obvious to expand, the legislator must often be indifferent to the question
of motives. He cannot know with certainty what are a man's motives. He must enforce the law
whatever may be the motives for breaking it; and punish rebellion, for example, even if he
attributes it to misguided philanthropy. He can, in any case, punish only such crimes as are
found out; and must define crimes by palpable 'external' marks. He must punish by such coarse
means as the gallows and the gaol: for his threats must appeal to the good and the bad alike.
He depends, therefore, upon 'external' sanctions, sanctions, that is, which work mainly upon
the fears of physical pain; and even if his punishments affect the wicked alone, they clearly
cannot reach the wicked as wicked, nor in proportion to their wickedness. That is quite enough
to show why in positive law motives are noticed indirectly or not at all. It shows also that
the analogy between the positive and the moral law is treacherous. The exclusion of motive
justifiable in law may take all meaning out of morality. The Utilitarians, as we shall see,
were too much disposed to overlook the difference, and attempt to apply purely legal doctrine
in the totally uncongenial sphere of ethical speculation. To accept the legal classification
of actions by their external characteristics is, in fact, to beg the question in advance. Any
outward criterion must group together actions springing from different 'motives' and therefore,
as other moralists would say, ethically different.

There is, however, another meaning in this doctrine which is more to the purpose here. Bentham
was aiming at a principle which, true or false, is implied in all ethical systems based upon
experience instead of pure logic or a priori 'intuitions.' Such systems must accept human nature
as a fact, and as the basis of a scientific theory. They do not aim at creating angels but
at developing the existing constitution of mankind. So far as an action springs from one of
the primitive or essential instincts of mankind, it simply proves the agent to be human, not
to be vicious or virtuous, and therefore is no ground for any moral judgment. If Bentham's
analysis could be accepted, this would be true of his 'springs of action.' The natural appetites
have not in themselves a moral quality: they are simply necessary and original data in the
problem. The perplexity is introduced by Bentham's assumption that conduct can be analysed
so that the 'motive' is a separate entity which can be regarded as the sole cause of a corresponding
action. That involves an irrelevant abstraction. There is no such thing as a single 'motive.'
One of his cases is a mother who lets her child die for love of 'ease.' We do not condemn her
because she loves ease, which is a motive common to all men and therefore unmoral, not immoral.
But neither do we condemn her merely for the bad consequences of a particular action. We condemn
her because she loves ease better than she loves her child: that is, because her whole character
is 'unnatural' or ill-balanced, not on account of a particular element taken by itself. Morality
is concerned with concrete human beings, and not with 'motives' running about by themselves.
Bentham's meaning, if we make the necessary correction, would thus be expressed by saying that
we don't blame a man because he has the 'natural' passions, but because they are somehow wrongly
proportioned or the man himself wrongly constituted. Passions which may make a man vicious
may also be essential to the highest virtue. That is quite true; but the passion is not a separate
agent, only one constituent of the character.

Bentham admits this in his own fashion. If 'motives' cannot be properly called good or bad,
is there, he asks, nothing good or bad in the man who on a given occasion obeys a certain motive?
'Yes, certainly,' he replies, 'his disposition.'[400] The disposition, he adds, is a 'fictitious
entity, and designed for the convenience of discourse in order to express what there is supposed
to be permanent in a man's frame of mind.' By 'fictitious,' as we have seen, he means not 'unreal'
but simply not tangible, weighable, or measurable--like sticks and stones, or like pains and
pleasures. 'Fictitious' as they may be, therefore, the fiction enables us to express real truths,
and to state facts which are of the highest importance to the moralist and the legislator.
Bentham discusses some cases of casuistry in order to show the relation between the tendency
of an action and the intention and motives of the agent. Ravaillac murders a good king; Ravaillac's
son enables his father to escape punishment, or conveys poison to his father to enable him
to avoid torture by suicide.[401] What is the inference as to the son's disposition in either
case? The solution (as he substantially and, I think, rightly suggests) will have to be reached
by considering whether the facts indicate that the son's disposition was mischievous or otherwise;
whether it indicates political disloyalty or filial affection, and so forth, and in what proportions.
The most interesting case perhaps is that of religious persecution, where the religious motive
is taken to be good, and the action to which it leads is yet admitted to be mischievous. The
problem is often puzzling, but we are virtually making an inference as to the goodness or badness
of the 'disposition' implied by the given action under all the supposed circumstances. This
gives what Bentham calls the 'meritoriousness'[402] of the disposition. The 'intention' is
caused by the 'motive.' The 'disposition' is the 'sum of the intentions'; that is to say, it
expresses the agent's sensibility to various classes of motives; and the merit therefore will
be in proportion to the total goodness or badness of the disposition thus indicated. The question
of merit leads to interesting moral problems. Bentham, however, observes that he is not here
speaking from the point of view of the moralist but of the legislator. Still, as a legislator
he has to consider what is the 'depravity' of disposition indicated by different kinds of conduct.
This consideration is of great importance. The 'disposition' includes sensibility to what he
calls 'tutelary motives'--motives, that is, which deter a man from such conduct as generally
produces mischievous consequences. No motive can be invariably, though some, especially the
motive of goodwill, and in a minor degree those of 'amity' and a 'love of reputation,' are
generally, on the right side. The legislator has to reinforce these 'tutelary motives' by 'artificial
tutelary motives,' and mainly by appealing to the 'love of ease,' that is, by making mischievous
conduct more difficult, and to 'self-preservation,' that is, by making it more dangerous.[403]
He has therefore to measure the force by which these motives will be opposed; or, in other
words, the 'strength of the temptation.' Now the more depraved a man's disposition, the weaker
the temptation which will seduce him to crime. Consequently if an act shows depravity, it will
require a stronger counter-motive or a more severe punishment, as the disposition indicated
is more mischievous. An act, for example, which implies deliberation proves a greater insensibility
to these social motives which, as Bentham remarks,[404] determine the 'general tenor of a man's
life,' however depraved he may be. The legislator is guided solely by 'utility,' or aims at
maximising happiness without reference to its quality. Still, so far as action implies disposition,
he has to consider the depravity as a source of mischief. The legislator who looks solely at
the moral quality implied is wrong; and, if guided solely by his sympathies, has no measure
for the amount of punishment to be inflicted. These considerations will enable us to see what
is the proper measure of resentment.[405]

The doctrine of the neutrality or 'unmorality' of motive is thus sufficiently clear. Bentham's
whole aim is to urge that the criterion of morality is given by the consequences of actions.
To say the conduct is good or bad is to say in other words that it produces a balance of pleasure
or pain. To make the criterion independent, or escape the vicious circle, we must admit the
pleasures and pains to be in themselves neutral; to have, that is, the same value, if equally
strong, whatever their source. In our final balance-sheet we must set down pains of illwill
and of goodwill, of sense and of intellect with absolute impartiality, and compare them simply
in respect of intensity. We must not admit a 'conscience' or 'moral sense' which would be autocratic;
nor, indeed, allow moral to have any meaning as applied to the separate passions. But it is
quite consistent with this to admit that some motives, goodwill in particular, generally tend
to bring out the desirable result, that is, a balance of pleasure for the greatest number.
The pains and pleasures are the ultimate facts, and the 'disposition' is a 'fictitious entity'
or a name for the sum of sensibilities. It represents the fact that some men are more inclined
than others to increase the total of good or bad.

NOTES:

[396] Works ('Morals and Legislation'), i. 46.

[397] Ibid. i. 48.

[398] Works ('Morals and Legislation'), i. 56.

[399] Ibid. i. 56.

[400] Works ('Morals and Legislation'), i. 60.

[401] Ibid. i. 62.

[402] Ibid. i. 65.

[403] These are the two classes of 'springs of action' omitted in the Table.

[404] Works ('Morals and Legislation'), i. 68.

[405] Here Bentham lays down the rule that punishment should rise with the strength of the
temptation, a theory which leads to some curious casuistical problems. He does not fully discuss,
and I cannot here consider, them. I will only note that it may conceivably be necessary to
increase the severity of punishment, instead of removing the temptation or strengthening the
preventive action. If so, the law becomes immoral in the sense of punishing more severely as
the crime has more moral excuse. This was often true of the old criminal law, which punished
offences cruelly because it had no effective system of police. Bentham would of course have
agreed that the principle in this case was a bad one.

IV. CRIMINAL LAW

We have now, after a long analysis, reached the point at which the principles can be applied
to penal law. The legislator has to discourage certain classes of conduct by annexing 'tutelary
motives.' The classes to be suppressed are of course those which diminish happiness. Pursuing
the same method, and applying results already reached, we must in the first place consider
how the 'mischief of an act' is to be measured.[406] Acts are mischievous as their 'consequences'
are mischievous; and the consequences may be 'primary' or 'secondary.' Robbery causes pain
to the loser of the money. That is a primary evil. It alarms the holders of money; it suggests
the facility of robbery to others; and it weakens the 'tutelary motive' of respect for property.
These are secondary evils. The 'secondary' evil may be at times the most important. The non-payment
of a tax may do no appreciable harm in a particular case. But its secondary effects in injuring
the whole political fabric may be disastrous and fruitful beyond calculation. Bentham proceeds
to show carefully how the 'intentions' and 'motives' of the evildoer are of the greatest importance,
especially in determining these secondary consequences, and must therefore be taken into account
by the legislator. A homicide may cause the same primary evil, whether accidental or malignant;
but accidental homicide may cause no alarm, whereas the intentional and malignant homicide
may cause any quantity of alarm and shock to the general sense of security. In this way, therefore,
the legislator has again indirectly to take into account the moral quality which is itself
dependent upon utility. 

McKann was told that this was one of the historic passions of old age. He had looked at her on
that occasion, but she was so befrilled and befeathered that he caught nothing but a graceful
outline and a small, dark head above a white ostrich boa. He had noted with disgust, however, the
stooped shoulders and white imperial of the silk-hatted man beside her, and the senescent line
of his back. McKann described to his wife this unpleasing picture only last night, while he
was undressing, when he was making every possible effort to avert this concert party. But
Bessie only looked superior and said she wished to hear Kitty Ayrshire sing, and that her "private life"
was something in which she had no interest.

Well, here he was; hot and uncomfortable, in a chair much too small for him, with a row of
blinding footlights glaring in his eyes. Suddenly the door at his right elbow opened. Their seats
were at one end of the front row; he had thought they would be less conspicuous there than
in the centre, and he had not foreseen that the singer would walk over him every time she came
upon the stage. Her velvet train brushed against his trousers as she passed him. The applause
which greeted her was neither overwhelming nor prolonged. Her conservative audience did not know
exactly how to accept her toilette. They were accustomed to dignified concert gowns, like those which
Pittsburgh matrons (in those days!) wore at their daughters' coming-out teas.

Kitty's gown that evening was really quite outrageous--the repartée of a conscienceless Parisian
designer who took her hint that she wished something that would be entirely novel in the States.
Today, after we have all of us, even in the uttermost provinces, been educated by Baskt and
the various Ballets Russes, we would accept such a gown without distrust; but then it was a little
disconcerting, even to the well-disposed. It was constructed of a yard or two of green velvet--a
reviling, shrieking green which would have made a fright of any woman who had not inextinguishable
beauty--and it was made without armholes, a device to which we were then so unaccustomed that it
was nothing less than alarming. The velvet skirt split back from a transparent gold-lace petticoat,
gold stockings, gold slippers. The narrow train was, apparently, looped to both ankles, and
it kept curling about her feet like a serpent's tail, turning up its gold lining as if it were
squirming over on its back. It was not, we felt, a costume in which to sing Mozart and Handel
and Beethoven.

Kitty sensed the chill in the air, and it amused her. She liked to be thought a brilliant artist
by other artists, but by the world at large she liked to be thought a daring creature. She had every
reason to believe, from experience and from example, that to shock the great crowd was the
surest way to get its money and to make her name a household word. Nobody ever became a household word
of being an artist, surely; and you were not a thoroughly paying proposition until your name
meant something on the sidewalk and in the barber-shop. Kitty studied her audience with an appraising
eye. She liked the stimulus of this disapprobation. As she faced this hard-shelled public she
felt keen and interested; she knew that she would give such a recital as cannot often be heard
for money.

She nodded gaily to the young man at the piano, fell into an attitude of seriousness, and
began the group of Beethoven and Mozart songs.

Though McKann would not have admitted it, there were really a great many people in the concert-hall
who knew what the prodigal daughter of their country was singing, and how well she was doing
it. They thawed gradually under the beauty of her voice and the subtlety of her interpretation.
She had sung seldom in concert then, and they had supposed her very dependent upon the accessories
of the opera. Clean singing, finished artistry, were not what they expected from her. They began
to feel, even, the wayward charm of her personality.

McKann, who stared coldly up at the balconies during her first song, during the second glanced
cautiously at the green apparition before him. He was vexed with her for having retained a débutante
figure. He comfortably classed all singers--especially operatic singers--as "fat Dutchwomen"
or "shifty Sadies," and Kitty would not fit into his clever generalization. She displayed, under
his nose, the only kind of figure he considered worth looking at--that of a very young girl,
supple and sinuous and quicksilverish; thin, eager shoulders, polished white arms that were nowhere
too fat and nowhere too thin. McKann found it agreeable to look at Kitty, but when he saw that
the authoritative Mrs. Post, red as a turkey-cock with opinions she was bursting to impart,
was studying and appraising the singer through her lorgnette, he gazed indifferently out into
the house again. He felt for his watch, but his wife touched him warningly with her elbow--which,
he noticed, was not at all like Kitty's.

When Miss Ayrshire finished her first group of songs, her audience expressed its approval positively,
but guardedly. She smiled bewitchingly upon the people in front, glanced up at the balconies,
and then turned to the company huddled on the stage behind her.

After her gay and careless bows, she retreated toward the stage door. As she passed McKann, she again
brushed lightly against him, and this time she paused long enough to glance down at him and murmur,
"Pardon!"

In the moment her bright, curious eyes rested upon him, McKann seemed to see himself as if she
were holding a mirror up before him. He beheld himself a heavy, solid figure, unsuitably clad for the
time and place, with a florid, square face, well-visored with good living and sane opinions--an
inexpressive countenance. Not a rock face, exactly, but a kind of pressed-brick-and-cement face, a
"business" face upon which years and feelings had made no mark--in which cocktails might eventually
blast out a few hollows. He had never seen himself so distinctly in his shaving-glass as he
did in that instant when Kitty Ayrshire's liquid eye held him, when her bright, inquiring glance roamed
over his person. After her prehensile train curled over his boot and she was gone, his wife turned
to him and said in the tone of approbation one uses when an infant manifests its groping intelligence,
"Very gracious of her, I'm sure!" Mrs. Post nodded oracularly. McKann grunted.

Kitty began her second number, a group of romantic German songs which were altogether more her
affair than her first number. When she turned once to acknowledge the applause behind her, she
caught McKann in the act of yawning behind his hand--he of course
wore no gloves--and he thought she frowned a little.

This did not embarrass him; it somehow made him feel important. When she retired after the
second part of the program, she again looked him over curiously as she passed, and she took
marked precaution that her dress did not touch him. Mrs. Post and his wife again commented
upon her consideration.

The final number was made up of modern French songs which Kitty sang enchantingly, and at last
her frigid public was thoroughly aroused. While she was coming back again and again to smile
and curtsy, McKann whispered to his wife that if there were to be encores he had better make a dash
for his train.

"Not at all," put in Mrs. Post. "Kitty is going on the same train. She sings in Faust at the
opera tomorrow night, so she'll take no chances."

McKann once more told himself how sorry he felt for Post. At last Miss Ayrshire returned, escorted
by her accompanist, and gave the people what she of course knew they wanted: the most popular
aria from the French opera of which the title-rôle had become synonymous with her name--an opera
written for her and to her and round about her, by the veteran French composer who adored her,--the
last and not the palest flash of his creative fire. This brought her audience all the way. They
clamoured for more of it, but she was not to be coerced. She had been unyielding through storms
to which this was a summer breeze. She came on once more, shrugged her shoulders, blew them a
kiss, and was gone. Her last smile was for that uncomfortable part of her audience seated behind
her, and she looked with recognition at McKann and his ladies as she nodded good night to the
wooden chairs.

McKann hurried his charges into the foyer by the nearest exit and put them into his motor. Then he
went over to the Schenley to have a glass of beer and a rarebit before train-time. He had not, he admitted
to himself, been so much bored as he pretended. The minx herself was well enough, but it was
absurd in his fellow-townsmen to look owlish and uplifted about her. He had no rooted dislike
for pretty women; he even didn't deny that gay girls had their place in the world, but they
ought to be kept in their place. He was born a Presbyterian, just as he was born a McKann. He sat
in his pew in the First Church every Sunday, and he never missed a presbytery meeting when he
was in town. His religion was not very spiritual, certainly, but it was substantial and concrete,
made up of good, hard convictions and opinions. It had something to do with citizenship, with
whom one ought to marry, with the coal business (in which his own name was powerful), with the
Republican party, and with all majorities and established precedents. He was hostile to fads, to
enthusiasms, to individualism, to all changes except in mining machinery and in methods of transportation.

His
equanimity restored by his lunch at the Schenley, McKann lit a big cigar, got into his taxi,
and bowled off through the sleet.

There was not a sound to be heard or a light to be seen. The ice glittered on the pavement and
on the naked trees. No restless feet were abroad. At eleven o'clock the rows of small, comfortable
houses looked as empty of the troublesome bubble of life as the Allegheny cemetery itself. Suddenly
the cab stopped, and McKann thrust his head out of the window. A woman was standing in the
middle of the street addressing his driver in a tone of excitement. Over against the curb a lone
electric stood despondent in the storm. The young woman, her cloak blowing about her, turned from
the driver to McKann himself, speaking rapidly and somewhat incoherently.

"Could you not be so kind as to help us? It is Mees Ayrshire, the singer. The juice is gone out
and we cannot move. We must get to the station. Mademoiselle cannot miss the train; she sings
tomorrow night in New York. It is very important. Could you not take us to the station at
East Liberty?"

McKann opened the door.

"That's all right, but you'll have to hurry.

It's eleven-ten now. You've only got fifteen minutes to make the
train.

Tell her to come along."

The maid drew back and looked up at him in amazement.

"But, the hand-luggage to carry, and Mademoiselle to walk!

The street is like glass!"

McKann threw away his cigar and followed her.

He stood silent by the door of the derelict, while the maid explained that she had found help. The
driver had gone off somewhere to telephone for a car. Miss Ayrshire seemed not at all apprehensive;
she had not doubted that a rescuer would be forthcoming. She moved deliberately; out of a
whirl of skirts she thrust one fur-topped shoe--McKann saw the flash of the gold stocking
above it--and alighted.

"So kind of you! So fortunate for us!" she murmured. One hand she placed upon his sleeve, and in the other
she carried an armful of roses that had been sent up to the concert stage. The petals showered upon
the sooty, sleety pavement as she picked her way along. They would be lying there tomorrow
morning, and the children in those houses would wonder if there had been a funeral. The maid
followed with two leather bags. As soon as he had lifted Kitty into his cab she exclaimed:

"My
jewel-case! I have forgotten it. It is on the back seat, please. I am so careless!"

He dashed back, ran his hand along the cushions, and discovered a small leather bag. When he
returned he found the maid and the luggage bestowed on the front seat, and a place left for
him on the back seat beside Kitty and her flowers.

"Shall we be taking you far out of your way?" she asked sweetly. "I haven't an idea where the station
is. I'm not even sure about the name. Céline thinks it is East Liberty, but I think it is West Liberty.
An odd name, anyway. It is a Bohemian quarter, perhaps?

A district where the law relaxes a trifle?"

McKann replied grimly that he didn't think the name referred to that kind of liberty.

"So much the better," sighed Kitty. "I am a Californian; that's the only part of America I know
very well, and out there, when we called a place Liberty Hill or Liberty Hollow--well, we meant
it. You will excuse me if I'm uncommunicative, won't you? I must not talk in this raw air. My throat
is sensitive after a long program." She lay back in her corner and closed her eyes.

When the cab rolled down the incline at East Liberty station, the New York express was whistling
in. A porter opened the door. McKann sprang out, gave him a claim check and his Pullman ticket, and
told him to get his bag at the check-stand and rush it on that train.

Miss Ayrshire, having gathered up her flowers, put out her hand to take his arm. "Why, it's you!"
she exclaimed, as she saw his face in the light. "What a coincidence!" She made no further
move to alight, but sat smiling as if she had just seated herself in a drawing-room and were ready
for talk and a cup of tea.

McKann caught her arm. "You must hurry, Miss Ayrshire, if you mean to catch that train. It stops
here only a moment. Can you run?"

"Can I run!" she laughed. "Try me!"

As they raced through the tunnel and up the inside stairway, McKann admitted that he had never
before made a dash with feet so quick and sure stepping out beside him. The white-furred boots
chased each other like lambs at play, the gold stockings flashed like the spokes of a bicycle
wheel in the sun. They reached the door of Miss Ayrshire's state-room just as the train began to
pull out. McKann was ashamed of the way he was panting, for Kitty's breathing was as soft and
regular as when she was reclining on the back seat of his taxi. It had somehow run in his head
that all these stage women were a poor lot physically--unsound, overfed creatures, like canaries
that are kept in a cage and stuffed with song-restorer. He retreated to escape her thanks. "Good night!
Pleasant journey! Pleasant dreams!" With a friendly nod in Kitty's direction he closed the
door behind him.

He was somewhat surprised to find his own bag, his Pullman ticket in the strap, on the seat just
outside Kitty's door.

But there was nothing strange about it. He had got the last section left on the train, No. 13,
next the drawing-room. Every other berth in the car was made up. He was just starting to look
for the porter when the door of the state-room opened and Kitty Ayrshire came out. She seated herself
carelessly in the front seat beside his bag.

"Please talk to me a little," she said coaxingly. "I'm always wakeful after I sing, and I have
to hunt some one to talk to. Céline and I get so tired of each other. We can speak very low,
and we shall not disturb any one." She crossed her feet and rested
her elbow on his Gladstone. Though she still wore her gold slippers
and stockings, she did not, he thanked Heaven, have on her concert
gown, but a very demure black velvet with some sort of pearl trimming
about the neck. "Wasn't it funny," she proceeded, "that it happened
to be you who picked me up? I wanted a word with you, anyway."

McKann
smiled in a way that meant he wasn't being taken in. "Did you? We
are not very old acquaintances."

"No, perhaps not. But you disapproved
tonight, and I thought I was singing very well. You are very critical
in such matters?"

He had been standing, but now he sat down. "My
dear young lady, I am not critical at all. I know nothing about 'such
matters.'"

"And care less?" she said for him, "Well, then we know
where we are, in so far as that is concerned. What did displease you?
My gown, perhaps? It may seem a little outré here, but it's the sort
of thing all the imaginative designers abroad are doing. You like
the English sort of concert gown better?"

"About gowns," said McKann,
"I know even less than about music. If I looked uncomfortable, it
was probably because I was uncomfortable. The seats were bad and the
lights were annoying."

Kitty looked up with solicitude. "I was sorry
they sold those seats. I don't like to make people uncomfortable in
any way. Did the lights give you a headache? They are very trying.
They burn one's eyes out in the end, I believe." She paused and waved
the porter away with a smile as he came toward them. Half-clad Pittsburghers
were tramping up and down the aisle, casting sidelong glances at McKann
and his companion. "How much better they look with all their clothes
on," she murmured. Then, turning directly to McKann again: "I saw
you were not well seated, but I felt something quite hostile and personal.
You were displeased with me. Doubtless many people are, but I seldom
get an opportunity to question them. It would be nice if you took
the trouble to tell me why you were displeased."

She spoke frankly,
pleasantly, without a shadow of challenge or hauteur. She did not
seem to be angling for compliments. McKann settled himself in his
seat. He thought he would try her out. She had come for it, and he
would let her have it. He found, however, that it was harder to formulate
the grounds of his disapproval than he would have supposed. Now that
he sat face to face with her, now that she was leaning against his
bag, he had no wish to hurt her.

"I'm a hard-headed business man,"
he said evasively, "and I don't much believe in any of you fluffy-ruffles
people. I have a sort of natural distrust of them all, the men more
than the women."

She looked thoughtful. "Artists, you mean?" drawing
her words slowly. "What is your business?"

"Coal."

"I don't feel
any natural distrust of business men, and I know ever so many. I don't
know any coal-men, but I think I could become very much interested
in coal. Am I larger-minded than you?"

McKann laughed. "I don't think
you know when you are interested or when you are not. I don't believe
you know what it feels like to be really interested. There is so much
fake about your profession. It's an affectation on both sides. I know
a great many of the people who went to hear you tonight, and I know
that most of them neither know nor care anything about music. They
imagine they do, because it's supposed to be the proper thing."

Kitty
sat upright and looked interested. Indeed, it seems to be indisputable
that Bentham's arguments are the really relevant and important arguments. How can we decide
any of the points which come up for discussion? Should a witness be cross-examined? Should
his evidence be recorded? Should a wife be allowed to give evidence against her husband? or
the defendant to give evidence about his own case? These and innumerable other points can only
be decided by reference to what Bentham understood by 'utility.' This or that arrangement is
'useful' because it enables us to get quickly and easily at the evidence, to take effective
securities for its truthfulness, to estimate its relevance and importance, to leave the decision
to the most qualified persons, and so forth. These points, again, can only be decided by a
careful appeal to experience, and by endeavouring to understand the ordinary play of 'motives'
and 'sanctions.' What generally makes a man lie, and how is lying to be made unpleasant? By
rigorously fixing our minds at every point on such issues, we find that many questions admit
of very plain answers, and are surprised to discover what a mass of obscurity has been dispelled.
It is, however, true that although the value of the method can hardly be denied unless we deny
the value of all experience and common sense, we may dispute the degree in which it confirms
the general principle. Every step seems to Bentham to reflect additional light upon his primary
axiom. Yet it is possible to hold that witnesses should be encouraged to speak the truth, and
that experience may help us to discover the best means to that end without, therefore, admitting
the unique validity of the 'greatest happiness' principle. That principle, so far as true,
may be itself a deduction from some higher principle; and no philosopher of any school would
deny that 'utility' should be in some way consulted by the legislator.

The book illustrates the next critical point in Bentham's system--the transition from law to
politics. He was writing the book at the period when the failure of the Panopticon was calling
his attention to the wickedness of George III. and Lord Eldon, and when the English demand
for parliamentary reform was reviving and supplying him with a sympathetic audience. Now, in
examining the theory of evidence upon the plan described, Bentham found himself at every stage
in conflict with the existing system, or rather the existing chaos of unintelligible rules.
English lawyers, he discovered, had worked out a system of rules for excluding evidence. Sometimes
the cause was pure indolence. 'This man, were I to hear him,' says the English judge, 'would
come out with a parcel of lies. It would be a plague to hear him: I have heard enough already;
shut the door in his face.'[420] But, as Bentham shows with elaborate detail, a reason for
suspecting evidence is not a reason for excluding it. A convicted perjurer gives evidence,
and has a pecuniary interest in the result. That is excellent ground for caution; but the fact
that the man makes a certain statement may still be a help to the ascertainment of truth. Why
should that help be rejected? Bentham scarcely admits of any exception to the general rule
of taking any evidence you can get--one exception being the rather curious one of confession
to a Catholic priest; secrecy in such cases is on the whole, he thinks, useful. He exposes
the confusion implied in an exclusion of evidence because it is not fully trustworthy, which
is equivalent to working in the dark because a partial light may deceive. But this is only
a part of a whole system of arbitrary, inconsistent, and technical rules worked out by the
ingenuity of lawyers. Besides the direct injury they gave endless opportunity for skilful manoeuvring
to exclude or admit evidence by adopting different forms of procedure. Rules had been made
by judges as they were wanted and precedents established of contradictory tendency and uncertain
application. Bentham contrasts the simplicity of the rules deducible from 'utility' with the
amazing complexity of the traditional code of technical rules. Under the 'natural' system,
that of utility, you have to deal with a quarrel between your servants or children. You send
at once for the disputants, confront them, take any relevant evidence, and make up your mind
as to the rights of the dispute. In certain cases this 'natural' procedure has been retained,
as, for example, in courts-martial, where rapid decision was necessary. Had the technical system
prevailed, the country would have been ruined in six weeks.[421] But the exposure of the technical
system requires an elaborate display of intricate methods involving at every step vexation,
delay, and injustice. Bentham reckons up nineteen separate devices employed by the courts.
He describes the elaborate processes which had to be gone through before a hearing could be
obtained; the distance of courts from the litigants; the bandying of cases from court to court;
the chicaneries about giving notice; the frequent nullification of all that had been done on
account of some technical flaw; the unintelligible jargon of Latin and Law-French which veiled
the proceedings from the public; the elaborate mysteries of 'special pleading'; the conflict
of jurisdictions, and the manufacture of new 'pleas' and new technical rules; the 'entanglement
of jurisdictions,' and especially the distinction between law and equity, which had made confusion
doubly confounded. English law had become a mere jungle of unintelligible distinctions, contradictions,
and cumbrous methods through which no man could find his way without the guidance of the initiated,
and in which a long purse and unscrupulous trickery gave the advantage over the poor to the
rich, and to the knave over the honest man. One fruitful source of all these evils was the
'judge-made' law, which Bentham henceforth never ceased to denounce. His ideal was a distinct
code which, when change was required, should be changed by an avowed and intelligible process.
The chaos which had grown up was the natural result of the gradual development of a traditional
body of law, in which new cases were met under cover of applying precedents from previous decisions,
with the help of reference to the vague body of unwritten or 'common law,' and of legal fictions
permitting some non-natural interpretation of the old formulæ. It is the judges, he had already
said in 1792,[422] 'that make the common law. Do you know how they make it? Just as a man makes
laws for his dog. When your dog does anything you want to break him of, you wait till he does
it and then beat him. This is the way you make laws for your dog, and this is the way the judges
make laws for you and me.' The 'tyranny of judge-made law' is 'the most all-comprehensive,
most grinding, and most crying of all grievances,'[423] and is scarcely less bad than 'priest-made
religion.'[424] Legal fictions, according to him, are simply lies. The permission to use them
is a 'mendacity licence.' In 'Rome-bred law ... fiction' is a 'wart which here and there disfigures
the face of justice. In English law fiction is a syphilis which runs into every vein and carries
into every part of the system the principle of rottenness.'[425]

The evils denounced by Bentham were monstrous. The completeness of the exposure was his great
merit; and his reputation has suffered, as we are told on competent authority, by the very
efficiency of his attack. The worst evils are so much things of the past, that we forget the
extent of the evil and the merits of its assailant. Bentham's diagnosis of the evil explains
his later attitude. He attributes all the abuses to consciously corrupt motives even where
a sufficient explanation can be found in the human stupidity and honest incapacity to look
outside of traditional ways of thought. He admits, indeed, the personal purity of English judges.
No English judge had ever received a bribe within living memory.[426] But this, he urges, is
only because the judges find it more profitable as well as safer to carry out a radically corrupt
system. A synonym for 'technical' is 'fee-gathering.' Lawyers of all classes had a common interest
in multiplying suits and complicating procedure: and thus a tacit partnership had grown up
which he describes as 'Judge and Co.' He gives statistics showing that in the year 1797 five
hundred and forty-three out of five hundred and fifty 'writs of error' were 'shams,' or simply
vexatious contrivances for delay, and brought a profit to the Chief Justice of over £1400.[427]
Lord Eldon was always before him as the typical representative of obstruction and obscurantism.
In his Indications respecting Lord Eldon (1825) he goes into details which it must have required
some courage to publish. Under Eldon, he says, 'equity has become an instrument of fraud and
extortion.'[428] He details the proceedings by which Eldon obtained the sanction of parliament
for a system of fee-taking, which he had admitted to be illegal, and which had been denounced
by an eminent solicitor as leading to gross corruption. Bentham intimates that the Masters
in Chancery were 'swindlers,'[429] and that Eldon was knowingly the protector and sharer of
their profits. Romilly, who had called the Court of Chancery 'a disgrace to a civilised nation,'
had said that Eldon was the cause of many of the abuses, and could have reformed most of the
others. Erskine had declared that if there was a hell, the Court of Chancery was hell.[430]
Eldon, as Bentham himself thought, was worse than Jeffreys. Eldon's victims had died a lingering
death, and the persecutor had made money out of their sufferings. Jeffreys was openly brutal;
while Eldon covered his tyranny under the 'most accomplished indifference.'[431]

Yet Eldon was but the head of a band. Judges, barristers, and solicitors were alike. The most
hopeless of reforms would be to raise a 'thorough-paced English lawyer' to the moral level
of an average man.[432] To attack legal abuses was to attack a class combined under its chiefs,
capable of hoodwinking parliament and suppressing open criticism. The slave-traders whom Wilberforce
attacked were comparatively a powerless excrescence. The legal profession was in the closest
relations to the monarchy, the aristocracy, and the whole privileged and wealthy class. They
were welded into a solid 'ring.' The king, and his ministers who distributed places and pensions;
the borough-mongers who sold votes for power; the clergy who looked for bishoprics; the monied
men who aspired to rank and power, were all parts of a league. It was easy enough to talk of
law reform. Romilly had proposed and even carried a 'reformatiuncle' or two;[433] but to achieve
a serious success required not victory in a skirmish or two, not the exposure of some abuse
too palpable to be openly defended even by an Eldon, but a prolonged war against an organised
army fortified and entrenched in the very heart of the country.

NOTES:

[415] Works, iii. 267.

[416] Ibid. x. 569

[417] Autobiography, p. 116.

[418] The subject is again treated in Book v. on 'Circumstantial Evidence.'

[419] Works, vi. 204.

[420] Works, vii. 391.

[421] Works, vii. 321-25. Court-martials are hardly a happy example now.

[422] 'Truth v. Ashhurst' (1792), Works, v. 235.

[423] Works ('Codification Petition'), v. 442.

[424] Ibid. vi. 11.

[425] Ibid. v. 92.

[426] Works, vii. 204, 331; ix. 143.

[427] Ibid. vii. 214.

[428] Ibid. v. 349.

[429] Ibid. v. 364.

[430] Works, v. 371.

[431] Ibid. v. 375.

[432] Ibid. vii. 188.

[433] Ibid. v. 370.

VI. RADICALISM

Thus Bentham, as his eyes were opened, became a Radical. The political purpose became dominant,
although we always see that the legal abuses are uppermost in his mind; and that what he really
seeks is a fulcrum for the machinery which is to overthrow Lord Eldon. Some of the pamphlets
deal directly with the special instruments of corruption. The Elements of the Art of Packing
shows how the crown managed to have a permanent body of special 'jurors' at its disposal. The
'grand and paramount use'[434] of this system was to crush the liberty of the press. The obscure
law of libel, worked by judges in the interest of the government, enabled them to punish any
rash Radical for 'hurting the feelings' of the ruling classes, and to evade responsibility
by help of a 'covertly pensioned' and servile jury. The pamphlet, though tiresomely minute
and long-winded, contained too much pointed truth to be published at the time. The Official
Aptitude minimised contains a series of attacks upon the system of patronage and pensions by
which the machinery of government was practically worked. In the Catechism of reformers, written
in 1809, Bentham began the direct application of his theories to the constitution; and the
final and most elaborate exposition of these forms the Constitutional Code, which was the main
work of his later years. This book excited the warmest admiration of Bentham's disciples.[435]
J. S. Mill speaks of its 'extraordinary power ... of at once seizing comprehensive principles
and scheming out minute details,' and of its 'surpassing intellectual vigour.' Nor, indeed,
will any one be disposed to deny that it is a singular proof of intellectual activity, when
we remember that it was begun when the author was over seventy, and that he was still working
at eighty-four.[436] In this book Bentham's peculiarities of style reach their highest development,
and it cannot be recommended as light reading. Had Bentham been a mystical philosopher, he
would, we may conjecture, have achieved a masterpiece of unintelligibility which all his followers
would have extolled as containing the very essence of his teaching. His method condemned him
to be always intelligible, however crabbed and elaborate. Perhaps, however, the point which
strikes one most is the amazing simple-mindedness of the whole proceeding. Bentham's light-hearted
indifference to the distinction between paper constitutions and operative rules of conduct
becomes almost pathetic.

Bentham was clearly the victim of a common delusion. If a system will work, the minutest details
can be exhibited. Therefore, it is inferred, an exhibition of minute detail proves that it
will work. Unfortunately, the philosophers of Laputa would have had no more difficulty in filling
up details than the legislators of England or the United States. When Bentham had settled in
his 'Radical Reform Bill'[437] that the 'voting-box' was to be a double cube of cast-iron,
with a slit in the lid, into which cards two inches by one, white on one side and black on
the other, could be inserted, he must have felt that he had got very near to actual application:
he can picture the whole operation and nobody can say that the scheme is impracticable for
want of working plans of the machinery. There will, doubtless, be no difficulty in settling
the shape of the boxes, when we have once agreed to have the ballot. But a discussion of such
remote details of Utopia is of incomparably less real interest than the discussion in the Rationale
of Evidence of points, which, however minute, were occurring every day, and which were really
in urgent need of the light of common sense.

Bentham's general principles may be very simply stated. They are, in fact, such as were suggested
by his view of legal grievances. Why, when he had demonstrated that certain measures would
contribute to the 'greatest happiness of the greatest number,' were they not at once adopted?
Because the rulers did not desire the greatest happiness of the greatest number. This, in Bentham's
language, is to say that they were governed by a 'sinister interest.' Their interest was that
of their class, not that of the nation; they aimed at the greatest happiness of some, not at
the greatest happiness of all. A generalisation of this remark gives us the first axioms of
all government. There are two primary principles: the 'self-preference' principle, in virtue
of which every man always desires his own greatest happiness'; and the 'greatest happiness'
principle, in virtue of which 'the right and proper end' of government is the 'greatest happiness
of the greatest number.'[438] The 'actual end' of every government, again, is the greatest
happiness of the governors. Hence the whole problem is to produce a coincidence of the two
ends, by securing an identity of interest between governors and governed. To secure that we
have only to identify the two classes or to put the government in the hands of all.[439] In
a monarchy, the ruler aims at the interest of one--himself; in a 'limited monarchy' the aim
is at the happiness of the king and the small privileged class; in a democracy, the end is
the right one--the greatest happiness of the greatest number. This is a short cut to all constitutional
questions. Probably it has occurred in substance to most youthful members of debating societies.
Bentham's confidence in his logic lifts him above any appeal to experience; and he occasionally
reminds us of the proof given in Martin Chuzzlewit that the queen must live in the Tower of
London. The 'monarch,' as he observes,[440] 'is naturally the very worst--the most maleficent
member of the whole community.' Wherever an aristocracy differs from the democracy, their judgment
will be erroneous.[441] The people will naturally choose 'morally apt agents,' and men who
wish to be chosen will desire truly to become 'morally apt,' for they can only recommend themselves
by showing their desire to serve the general interest.[442] 'All experience testifies to this
theory,' though the evidence is 'too bulky' to be given. Other proofs, however, may at once
be rendered superfluous by appealing to 'the uninterrupted and most notorious experience of
the United States.'[443] To that happy country he often appeals indeed[444] as a model government.
In it, there is no corruption, no useless expenditure, none of the evils illustrated by our
'matchless constitution.'

The constitution deduced from these principles has at least the merit of simplicity. We are
to have universal suffrage, annual parliaments, and vote by ballot. He inclines to give a vote
to women.[445] There is to be no king, no house of peers, no established church. Members of
parliament are not to be re-eligible, till after an interval. Elaborate rules provide for their
regular attendance and exclusive devotion to their masters' business. They are to be simply
'deputies,' not 'representatives.' They elect a prime minister who holds office for four years.
Officials are to be appointed by a complex plan of competitive examination; and they are to
be invited to send in tenders for doing the work at diminished salary. When once in office,
every care is taken for their continual inspection by the public and the verification of their
accounts. They are never for an instant to forget that they are servants, not the masters,
of the public.

Bentham, of course, is especially minute and careful in regard to the judicial organisation--a
subject upon which he wrote much, and much to the purpose. The functions and fees of advocates
are to be narrowly restricted, and advocates to be provided gratuitously for the poor. One
characteristic device is his quasi-jury. The English system of requiring unanimity was equivalent
to enforcing perjury by torture. Its utility as a means of resisting tyranny would disappear
when tyranny had become impossible. But public opinion might be usefully represented by a 'quasi-jury'
of three or five, who should not pronounce a verdict, but watch the judge, interrogate, if
necessary, and in case of need demand a rehearing. Judges, of course, were no longer to make
law, but to propose amendments in the 'Pannomion' or universal code, when new cases arose.

His leading principle may be described in one word as 'responsibility,' or expressed in his
leading rule, 'Minimise Confidence.'[447] 'All government is in itself one vast evil.'[448]
It consists in applying evil to exclude worse evil. Even 'to reward is to punish,'[449] when
reward is given by government. The less government, then, the better; but as governors are
a necessary evil, they must be limited by every possible device to the sole legitimate aim,
and watched at every turn by the all-seeing eye of public opinion. Every one must admit that
this is an application of a sound principle, and that one condition of good government is the
diffusion of universal responsibility. It must be admitted, too, that Bentham's theory represents
a vigorous embodiment and unflinching application of doctrines which since his time have spread
and gained more general authority. Mill says that granting one assumption, the Constitutional
Code is 'admirable.'[450] That assumption is that it is for the good of mankind to be under
the absolute authority of a majority. In other words, it would justify what Mill calls the
'despotism of public opinion.' To protest against that despotism was one of the main purposes
of Mill's political writings. How was it that the disciple came to be in such direct opposition
to his master? That question cannot be answered till we have considered Mill's own position.
But I have now followed Bentham far enough to consider the more general characteristics of
his doctrine.

I have tried, in the first place, to show what was the course of Bentham's own development;
how his observation of certain legal abuses led him to attempt the foundation of a science
of jurisprudence; how the difficulty of obtaining a hearing for his arguments led him to discover
the power of 'Judge and Co.'; how he found out that behind 'Judge and Co.' were George III.
and the base Sidmouth, and the whole band of obstructors entrenched within the 'matchless constitution';
and how thus his attack upon the abuses of the penal law led him to attack the whole political
framework of the country. I have also tried to show how Bentham's development coincided with
that of the English reformers generally. They too began with attacking specific abuses. They
were for 'reform, not revolution.' The constitution satisfied them in the main: they boasted
of the palladia of their liberties, 'trial by jury' and the 'Habeas Corpus' Act, and held Frenchmen
to be frog-eating slaves in danger of lettres de cachet and the Bastille. English public opinion
in spite of many trammels had a potent influence. Their first impulse, therefore, was simply
to get rid of the trammels--the abuses which had grown up from want of a thorough application
of the ancient principles in their original purity. In no case, however, have any of those previously
discovered been of the same magnitude as the one described above. They were generally of from
twelve to fifteen feet in length, and from three to four feet in height, and some only six feet
in length, so that this must have been in its day (when?) a rather aristocratic affair. Have
any similar excavations been found in England? The earliest mention of the parish of Tarland,
of which there is any account, is in a charter granted by Moregun, Earl of Mar, to the Canons
of St. Andrews, of the Church of S. Machulnoche (S. Mochtens, Bishop and Confessor) of Tharuclund,
with its tithes and oblations, its land and mill, and timber from the Earl's woods for the buildings
of the canons, A.D. 1165-71; and a charter of King William the Lion, and one of Eadward, Bishop
of Aberdeen, both of same date, confirming the said grant.

ABREDONENSIS.

* * * * *

FOLK LORE.
Legends of the County Clare.--How Fuen-Vic-Couil (Fingall) obtained
the knowledge of future events.--Once upon a time, when Fuen-Vic-Couil
was young, he fell into the hands of a giant, and was compelled to
serve him for seven years, during which time the giant was fishing
for the salmon which had this property--that whoever ate the first
bit of it he would obtain the gift of prophecy; and during the seven
years the only nourishment which the giant could take was after this
manner: a sheaf of oats was placed to windward of him, and he held
a needle before his mouth, and lived on the nourishment that was blown
from the sheaf of corn through the eye of the needle. His Constitutional Code scarcely differs
from the ideal of the Jacobins', except in pushing the logic further. The machinery by which
he proposed to secure that the so-called rulers should become really the servants of the people
was more thoroughgoing and minutely worked out than that of any democratic constitution that
has ever been adopted. How was it that two antagonist theories led to identical results; and
that the 'rights of man,' absurd in philosophy, represented the ideal state of things in practice?

The general answer may be that political theories are not really based upon philosophy. The
actual method is to take your politics for granted on the one side and your philosophy for
granted on the other, and then to prove their necessary connection. But it is, at any rate,
important to see what was the nature of the philosophical assumptions implicitly taken for
granted by Bentham.

The 'rights of man' doctrine confounds a primary logical canon with a statement of fact. Every
political theory must be based upon facts as well as upon logic. Any reasonable theory about
politics must no doubt give a reason for inequality and a reason, too, for equality. The maxim
that all men were, or ought to be, 'equal' asserts correctly that there must not be arbitrary
differences. Every inequality should have its justification in a reasonable system. But when
this undeniable logical canon is taken to prove that men actually are equal, there is an obvious
begging of the question. In point of fact, the theorists immediately proceeded to disfranchise
half the race on account of sex, and a third of the remainder on account of infancy. They could
only amend the argument by saying that all men were equal in so far as they possessed certain
attributes. But those attributes could only be determined by experience, or, as Bentham would
have put it, by an appeal to 'utility.' It is illogical, said the anti-slavery advocate, to
treat men differently on account of the colour of their skins. No doubt it is illogical if,
in fact, the difference of colour does not imply a difference of the powers which fit a man
for the enjoyment of certain rights. We may at least grant that the burden of proof should
be upon those who would disfranchise all red-haired men. But this is because experience shows
that the difference of colour does not mark a relevant difference. We cannot say, a priori,
whether the difference between a negro and a white man may not be so great as to imply incapacity
for enjoyment of equal rights. The black skin might--for anything a mere logician can say--indicate
the mind of a chimpanzee. The case against slavery does not rest on the bare fact that negroes
and whites both belong to the class 'man,' but on the fact that the negro has powers and sensibilities
which fit him to hold property, to form marriages, to learn his letters, and so forth. But
that fact is undeniably to be proved, not from the bare logic, but from observation of the
particular case.

Bentham saw with perfect clearness that sound political theory requires a basis of solid fact.
The main purpose of his whole system was to carry out that doctrine thoroughly. His view is
given vigorously in the 'Anarchical Fallacies'--a minute examination of the French Declaration
of Rights in 1791. His argument is of merciless length, and occasionally so minute as to sound
like quibbling. The pith, however, is clear enough. 'All men are born and remain free and equal
in respect of rights' are the first words of the Declaration. Nobody is 'born free,' retorts
Bentham. Everybody is born, and long remains, a helpless child. All men born free! Absurd and
miserable nonsense! Why, you are complaining in the same breath that nearly everybody is a
slave.[451] To meet this objection, the words might be amended by substituting 'ought to be'
for 'is.' This, however, on Bentham's showing, at once introduces the conception of utility,
and therefore leads to empirical considerations. The proposition, when laid down as a logical
necessity, claims to be absolute. Therefore it implies that all authority is bad; the authority,
for example, of parent over child, or of husband over wife; and moreover, that all laws to
the contrary are ipso facto void. That is why it is 'anarchical.' It supposes a 'natural right,'
not only as suggesting reasons for proposed alterations of the legal right, but as actually
annihilating the right and therefore destroying all government. 'Natural rights,' says Bentham,[452]
is simple nonsense; natural and imprescriptible rights 'rhetorical nonsense--nonsense upon
stilts.' For 'natural right' substitute utility, and you have, of course, a reasonable principle,
because an appeal to experience. But lay down 'liberty' as an absolute right and you annihilate
law, for every law supposes coercion. One man gets liberty simply by restricting the liberty
of others.[453] What Bentham substantially says, therefore, is that on this version absolute
rights of individuals could mean nothing but anarchy; or that no law can be defended except
by a reference to facts, and therefore to 'utility.'

One answer might be that the demand is not for absolute liberty, but for as much liberty as
is compatible with equal liberty for all. The fourth article of the Declaration says: 'Liberty
consists in being able to do that which is not hurtful to another, and therefore the exercise
of the natural rights of each man has no other bounds than those which ensure to the other
members of the society the enjoyment of the same rights.' This formula corresponds to a theory
held by Mr. Herbert Spencer; and, as he observes,[454] held on different grounds by Kant. Bentham's
view, indicated by his criticism of this article in the 'Anarchical Fallacies,' is therefore
worth a moment's notice. The formula does not demand the absolute freedom which would condemn
all coercion and all government; but it still seems to suggest that liberty, not utility, is
the ultimate end. Bentham's formula, therefore, diverges. All government, he holds, is an evil,
because coercion implies pain. We must therefore minimise, though we cannot annihilate, government;
but we must keep to utility as the sole test. Government should, of course, give to the individual
all such rights as are 'useful'; but it does not follow, without a reference to utility, that
men should not be restrained even in 'self-regarding' conduct. Some men, women, and children
require to be protected against the consequences of their own 'weakness, ignorance, or imprudence.'[455]
Bentham adheres, that is, to the strictly empirical ground. The absolute doctrine requires
to be qualified by a reference to actual circumstances: and, among those circumstances, as
Bentham intimates, we must include the capacity of the persons concerned to govern themselves.
Carried out as an absolute principle, it would imply the independence of infants; and must
therefore require some reference to 'utility.'

Bentham, then, objects to the Jacobin theory as too absolute and too 'individualist.' The doctrine
begs the question; it takes for granted what can only be proved by experience; and therefore
lays down as absolute theories which are only true under certain conditions or with reference
to the special circumstances to which they are applied. That is inconsistent with Bentham's
thoroughgoing empiricism. But he had antagonists to meet upon the other side: and, in meeting
them, he was led to a doctrine which has been generally condemned for the very same faults--as
absolute and individualist. We have only to ask in what sense Bentham appealed to 'experience'
to see how he actually reached his conclusions. The adherents of the old tradition appealed
to experience in their own way. The English people, they said, is the freest, richest, happiest
in the world; it has grown up under the British Constitution: therefore the British Constitution
is the best in the world, as Burke tells you, and the British common law, as Blackstone tells
you, is the 'perfection of wisdom.' Bentham's reply was virtually that although he, like Burke,
appealed to experience, he appealed to experience scientifically organised, whereas Burke appealed
to mere blind tradition. Bentham is to be the founder of a new science, founded like chemistry
on experiment, and his methods are to be as superior to those of Burke as those of modern chemists
to those of the alchemists who also invoked experience. The true plan was not to throw experience
aside because it was alleged by the ignorant and the prejudiced, but to interrogate experience
systematically, and so to become the Bacon or the Newton of legislation, instead of wandering
off into the a priori constructions of a Descartes or a Leibniz.

Bentham thus professes to use an 'inductive' instead of the deductive method of the Jacobins;
but reaches the same practical conclusions from the other end. The process is instructive.
He objected to the existing inequalities, not as inequalities simply, but as mischievous inequalities.
He, as well as the Jacobins, would admit that inequality required justification; and he agreed
with them that, in this case, there was no justification. The existing privileges did not promote
the 'greatest happiness of the greatest number.' The attack upon the 'Anarchical Fallacies'
must be taken with the Book of Fallacies, and the Book of Fallacies is a sustained and vigorous,
though a curiously cumbrous, assault upon the Conservative arguments. Its pith may be found
in Sydney Smith's Noodle's Oration; but it is itself well worth reading by any one who can
recognise really admirable dialectical power, and forgive a little crabbedness of style in
consideration of genuine intellectual vigour. I only notice Bentham's assault upon the 'wisdom
of our ancestors.' After pointing out how much better we are entitled to judge now that we
have got rid of so many superstitions, and have learned to read and write, he replies to the
question, 'Would you have us speak and act as if we never had any ancestors?' 'By no means,'
he replies; 'though their opinions were of little value, their practice is worth attending
to; but chiefly because it shows the bad consequences of their opinions.' 'From foolish opinion
comes foolish conduct; from foolish conduct the severest disaster; and from the severest disaster
the most useful warning. It is from the folly, not from the wisdom, of our ancestors that we
have so much to learn.'[456] Bentham has become an 'ancestor,' and may teach us by his errors.
Pointed and vigorous as is his exposure of many of the sophistries by which Conservatives defended
gross abuses and twisted the existence of any institution into an argument for its value, we
get some measure from this of Bentham's view of history. In attacking an abuse, he says, we
have a right to inquire into the utility of any and every arrangement. The purpose of a court
of justice is to decide litigation; it has to ascertain facts and apply rules: does it then
ascertain facts by the methods most conducive to the discovery of truth? Are the rules needlessly
complex, ambiguous, calculated to give a chance to knaves, or to the longest purse? If so,
undoubtedly they are mischievous. Bentham had done inestimable service in stripping away all
the disguises and technical phrases which had evaded the plain issue, and therefore made of
the laws an unintelligible labyrinth. He proceeded to treat in the same way of government generally.
Does it work efficiently for its professed ends? Is it worked in the interests of the nation,
or of a special class, whose interests conflict with those of the nation? He treated, that
is, of government as a man of business might investigate a commercial undertaking. If he found
that clerks were lazy, ignorant, making money for themselves, or bullying and cheating the
customers, he would condemn the management. Bentham found the 'matchless constitution' precisely
in this state. He condemned political institutions worked for the benefit of a class, and leading,
especially in legal matters, to endless abuses and chicanery. The abuses everywhere imply 'inequality'
in some sense; for they arise from monopoly. The man who holds a sinecure, or enjoys a privilege,
uses it for his own private interest. The 'matter of corruption,' as Bentham called it, was
provided by the privilege and the sinecure. The Jacobin might denounce privileges simply as
privileges, and Bentham denounce them because they were used by the privileged class for corrupt
purposes. So far, Bentham and the Jacobins were quite at one. It mattered little to the result
which argument they preferred to use, and without doubt they had a very strong case, and did
in fact express a demand for justice and for a redress of palpable evils. The difference seems
to be that in one case the appeal is made in the name of justice and equality; in the other
case, in the name of benevolence and utility.

The important point here, however, is to understand Bentham's implicit assumptions. J. S. Mill,
in criticising his master, points out very forcibly the defects arising from Bentham's attitude
to history. He simply continued, as Mill thinks, the hostility with which the critical or destructive
school of the eighteenth century regarded their ancestors. To the revolutionary party history
was a record of crimes and follies and of little else. The question will meet us again; and
here it is enough to ask what is the reason of his tacit implication of Bentham's position.
Bentham's whole aim, as I have tried to show, was to be described as the construction of a
science of legislation. The science, again, was to be purely empirical. It was to rest throughout
upon the observation of facts. That aim--an admirable aim--runs through his whole work and
that of his successors. I have noticed, indeed, how easily Bentham took for granted that his
makeshift classification of common motives amounted to a scientific psychology. A similar assumption
that a rough sketch of a science is the same thing as its definite constitution is characteristic
of the Utilitarians in general. A scientific spirit is most desirable; but the Utilitarians
took a very short cut to scientific certainty. Though appealing to experience, they reach formulæ
as absolute as any 'intuitionist' could desire. What is the logical process implied? To constitute
an empirical science is to show that the difference between different phenomena is due simply
to 'circumstances.' The explanation of the facts becomes sufficient when the 'law' can be stated,
as that of a unit of constant properties placed in varying positions. This corresponds to the
procedure in the physical sciences, where the ultimate aim is to represent all laws as corresponding
to the changes of position of uniform atoms. In social and political changes the goal is the
same. J. S. Mill states in the end of his Autobiography[457] that one main purpose of his writing
was to show that 'differences between individuals, races, or sexes' are due to 'differences
in circumstances.' In fact, this is an aim so characteristic from the beginning of the whole
school, that it may be put down almost as a primary postulate. It was not, indeed, definitely
formulated; but to 'explain' a social theorem was taken to be the same thing as to show how
differences of character or conduct could be explained by 'circumstance'--meaning by 'circumstance'
something not given in the agent himself. We have, however, no more right as good empiricists
to assert than to deny that all difference comes from 'circumstance.' If we take 'man' as a
constant quantity in our speculations, it requires at least a great many precautions before
we can assume that our abstract entity corresponds to a real concrete unit. Otherwise we have
a short cut to a doctrine of 'equality.' The theory of 'the rights of man' lays down the formula,
and assumes that the facts will correspond. The Utilitarian assumes the equality of fact, and
of course brings out an equally absolute formula. 'Equality,' in some sense, is introduced
by a side wind, though not explicitly laid down as an axiom.[458] This underlying tendency
may partly explain the coincidence of results--though it would require a good many qualifications
in detail; but here I need only take Bentham's more or less unconscious application.

Bentham's tacit assumption, in fact, is that there is an average 'man.' Different specimens
of the race, indeed, may vary widely according to age, sex, and so forth; but, for purposes
of legislation, he may serve as a unit. We can assume that he has on the average certain qualities
from which his actions in the mass can be determined with sufficient accuracy, and we are tempted
to assume that they are mainly the qualities obvious to an inhabitant of Queen's Square Place
about the year 1800. Mill defends Bentham against the charge that he assumed his codes to be
good for all men everywhere. To that, says Mill,[459] the essay upon the 'Influence of Time
and Place in Matters of Legislation' is a complete answer. Yet Mill[460] admits in the same
breath that Bentham omitted all reference to 'national character.' In fact, as we have seen,
Bentham was ready to legislate for Hindoostan as well as for his own parish; and to make codes
not only for England, Spain, and Russia, but for Morocco. The Essay mentioned really explains
the point. Bentham not only admitted but asserted as energetically as became an empiricist,
that we must allow for 'circumstances'; and circumstances include not only climate and so forth,
but the varying beliefs and customs of the people under consideration. The real assumption
is that all such circumstances are superficial, and can be controlled and altered indefinitely
by the 'legislator.' The Moor, the Hindoo, and the Englishman are all radically identical;
and the differences which must be taken into account for the moment can be removed by judicious
means. Without pausing to illustrate this from the Essay, I may remark that for many purposes
such an assumption is justifiable and guides ordinary common sense. If we ask what would be
the best constitution for a commercial company, or the best platform for a political party,
we can form a fair guess by arguing from the average of Bentham and his contemporaries--especially
if we are shrewd attornies or political wirepullers. Only we are not therefore in a position
to talk about the 'science of human nature' or to deal with problems of 'sociology.' This,
however, gives Bentham's 'individualism' in a sense of the phrase already explained. He starts
from the 'ready-made man,' and deduces all institutions or legal arrangements from his properties.
I have tried to show how naturally this view fell in with the ordinary political conceptions
of the time. It shows, again, why Bentham disregards history. When we have such a science,
empirical or a priori, history is at most of secondary importance. We can deduce all our maxims
of conduct from the man himself as he is before us. History only shows how terribly he blundered
in the pre-scientific period. The blunders may give us a hint here and there. Man was essentially
the same in the first and the eighteenth century, and the differences are due to the clumsy
devices which he made by rule of thumb. We do not want to refer to them now, except as illustrations
of errors. We may remark how difficult it was to count before the present notation was invented;
but when it has once been invented, we may learn to use it without troubling our heads about
our ancestors' clumsy contrivances for doing without it. This leads to the real shortcoming.
There is a point at which the historical view becomes important--the point, namely, where it
is essential to remember that man is not a ready-made article, but the product of a long and
still continuing 'evolution.' Bentham's attack (in the Fragment) upon the 'social contract'
is significant. He was, no doubt, perfectly right in saying that an imaginary contract could
add no force to the ultimate grounds for the social union. Nobody would now accept the fiction
in that stage. And yet the 'social contract' may be taken to recognise a fact; namely, that
the underlying instincts upon which society alternately rests correspond to an order of reasons
from those which determine more superficial relations. Society is undoubtedly useful, and its
utility may be regarded as its ground. But the utility of society means much more than the
utility of a railway company or a club, which postulates as existing a whole series of already
established institutions. To Bentham an 'utility' appeared to be a kind of permanent and ultimate
entity which is the same at all periods--it corresponds to a psychological currency of constant
value. To show, therefore, that the social contract recognises 'utility' is to show that the
whole organism is constructed just as any particular part is constructed. Man comes first and
'society' afterwards. I have already noticed how this applies to his statements about the utility
of a law; how his argument assumes an already constituted society, and seems to overlook the
difference between the organic law upon which all order essentially depends, and some particular
modification or corollary which may be superinduced. We now have to notice the political version
of the same method. The 'law,' according to Bentham, is a rule enforced by a 'sanction.' The
imposer of the rule in the phrase which Hobbes had made famous is the 'sovereign.' Hobbes was
a favourite author, indeed, of the later Utilitarians, though Bentham does not appear to have
studied him. The relation is one of natural affinity. When in the Constitutional Code Bentham
transfers the 'sovereignty' from the king to the 'people,'[461] he shows the exact difference
between his doctrine and that of the Leviathan. Both thinkers are absolutists in principle,
though Hobbes gives to a monarch the power which Bentham gives to a democracy. The attributes
remain though their subject is altered. The 'sovereign,' in fact, is the keystone of the whole
Utilitarian system. He represents the ultimate source of all authority, and supplies the motive
for all obedience. As Hobbes put it, he is a kind of mortal God.

Mill's criticism of Bentham suggests the consequences. There are, he says,[462] three great
questions: What government is for the good of the people? How are they to be induced to obey
it? How is it to be made responsible? The third question, he says, is the only one seriously
considered by Bentham; and Bentham's answer, we have seen, leads to that 'tyranny of the majority'
which was Mill's great stumbling-block. Why, then, does Bentham omit the other questions? or
rather, how would he answer them? for he certainly assumes an answer. People, in the first
place, are 'induced to obey' by the sanctions. They don't rob that they may not go to prison.
That is a sufficient answer at a given moment. It assumes, indeed, that the law will be obeyed.
The policeman, the gaoler, and the judge will do what the sovereign--whether despot or legislature--orders
them to do. The jurist may naturally take this for granted. He does not go 'behind the law.'
That is the law which the sovereign has declared to be the law. In that sense, the sovereign
is omnipotent. He can, as a fact, threaten evildoers with the gallows; and the jurist simply
takes the fact for granted, and assumes that the coercion is an ultimate fact. No doubt it
is ultimate for the individual subject. The immediate restraint is the policeman, and we need
not ask upon what does the policeman depend. If, however, we persist in asking, we come to
the historical problems which Bentham simply omits. The law itself, in fact, ultimately rests
upon 'custom,'--upon the whole system of instincts, beliefs, and passions which induce people
to obey government, and are, so to speak, the substance out of which loyalty and respect for
the law is framed. These, again, are the product of an indefinitely long elaboration, which
Bentham takes for granted. He assumes as perfectly natural and obvious that a number of men
should meet, as the Americans or Frenchmen met, and create a constitution. That the possibility
of such a proceeding involves centuries of previous training does not occur to him. It is assumed
that the constitution can be made out of hand, and this assumption is of the highest importance,
not only historically, but for immediate practice. Mill assumes too easily that Bentham has
secured responsibility. Bentham assumes that an institution will work as it is intended to
work--perhaps the commonest error of constitution-mongers. If the people use the instruments
which he provides, they have a legal method for enforcing obedience. To infer that they will
do so is to infer that all the organic instincts will operate precisely as he intends; that
each individual, for example, will form an independent opinion upon legislative questions,
vote for men who will apply his opinions, and see that his representatives perform his bidding
honestly. That they should do so is essential to his scheme; but that they will do so is what
he takes for granted. He assumes, that is, that there is no need for inquiring into the social
instincts which lie beneath all political action. You can make your machine and assume the
moving force. That is the natural result of considering political and legislative problems
without taking into account the whole character of the human materials employed in the construction.
Bentham's sovereign is thus absolute. He rules by coercion, as a foreign power may rule by
the sword in a conquered province. Thus, force is the essence of government, and it is needless
to go further. To secure the right application of the force, we have simply to distribute it
among the subjects. Government still means coercion, and ultimately nothing else; but then,
as the subjects are simply moved by their own interests, that is, by utility, they will apply
the power to secure those interests. Therefore, all that is wanted is this distribution, and
Mill's first problem, What government is for the good of the people? is summarily answered.
The question, how obedience is to be secured, is evaded by confining the answer to the 'sanctions,'
and taking for granted that the process of distributing power is perfectly simple, or that
a new order can be introduced as easily as parliament can pass an act for establishing a new
police in London. The 'social contract' is abolished; but it is taken for granted that the
whole power of the sovereign can be distributed, and rules made for its application by the
common sense of the various persons interested. Finally, the one bond outside of the individual
is the sovereign. He represents all that holds society together; his 'sanctions,' as I have
said, are taken to be on the same plane with the 'moral sanctions'--not dependent upon them,
but other modes of applying similar motives. As the sovereign, again, is in a sense omnipotent,
and yet can be manufactured, so to speak, by voluntary arrangements among the individual members
of society, there is no limit to the influence which he may exercise. I note, indeed, that
I am speaking rather of the tendencies of the theory than of definitely formulated conclusions.
Most of the Utilitarians were exceedingly shrewd, practical people, whose regard for hard facts
imposed limits upon their speculations. They should have been the last people to believe too
implicitly in the magical efficacy of political contrivances, for they were fully aware that
many men are knaves and most men fools. They probably put little faith in Bentham's Utopia,
except as a remote ideal, and an ideal of unimaginative minds. The Utopia was constructed on
'individualist' principles, because common sense naturally approves individualism. The whole
social and political order is clearly the sum of the individuals, who combine to form an aggregate;
and theories about social bonds take one to the mystical and sentimental. The absolute tendency
is common to Bentham and the Jacobins. Whether the individual be taken as a unit of constant
properties, or as the subject of absolute rights, we reach equally absolute conclusions. When
all the social and political regulations are regarded as indefinitely modifiable, the ultimate
laws come to depend upon the absolute framework of unalterable fact. This, again, is often
the right point of view for immediate questions in which we may take for granted that the average
individual is in fact constant; and, as I have said in regard to Bentham's legislative process,
leads to very relevant and important, though not ultimate, questions. But there are certain
other results which require to be noticed. 'Individualism,' like other words that have become
watchwords of controversy, has various shades of meaning, and requires a little more definition.

NOTES:

[434] Works, v. 97, etc.

[435] See preface to Constitutional Code in vol. ix.

[436] Bentham's nephew, George, who died when approaching his eighty-fourth birthday, devoted
the last twenty-five years of his life with equal assiduity to his Genera Plantarum. See a
curious anecdote of his persistence in the Dictionary of National Biography.

[437] Works, iii. 573.

[438] Works, ix. 5, 8.

[439] The theory, as Mill reminds us, had been very pointedly anticipated by Helvétius. Bentham's
practical experience, however, had forced it upon his attention.

[440] Works, ix. 141. The general principle, however, is confirmed by the case of George III.

[441] Ibid. ix. 45.

[442] Ibid. ix. 98.

[443] Works, ix. 98.

[444] e.g. Ibid. ix. 38, 50, 63, 99, etc.

[445] Ibid. ('Plan of Parliamentary Reform,') iii. 463.

[446] Works, ix. 594.

[447] Ibid. ix. 62.

[448] Ibid. ix. 24.

[449] Ibid. ix. 48.

[450] Dissertations, i. 377.

[451] Works, ii. 497.

[452] Ibid. ii. 501.

[453] Ibid. ii. 503.

[454] Justice, p. 264; so Price, in his Observations on Liberty, lays it down that government
is never to entrench upon private liberty, 'except so far as private liberty entrenches on
the liberty of others.'

[455] Works, ii. 506.

[456] Works, ii. 401.

[457] Autobiography, p. 274.

[458] Hobbes, in the Leviathan (chap. xiii.), has in the same way to argue for the de facto
equality of men.

[459] Dissertations, i. 375.

[460] I remark by anticipation that this expression implies a reference to Mill's Ethology,
of which I shall have to speak.

[461] Works, ix. 96, 113.

[462] Dissertations, i. 376.

VII. INDIVIDUALISM

'Individualism' in the first place is generally mentioned in a different connection. The 'ready-made'
man of whom I have spoken becomes the 'economic man.' Bentham himself contributed little to
economic theory. His most important writing was the Defence of Usury, and in this, as we have
seen, he was simply adding a corollary to the Wealth of Nations. The Wealth of Nations itself
represented the spirit of business; the revolt of men who were building up a vast industrial
system against the fetters imposed by traditional legislation and by rulers who regarded industry
in general, as Telford is said to have regarded rivers. Rivers were meant to supply canals,
and trade to supply tax-gatherers. With this revolt, of course, Bentham was in full sympathy,
but here I shall only speak of one doctrine of great interest, which occurs both in his political
treatises and his few economical remarks. Bentham objected, as we have seen, to the abstract
theory of equality; yet it was to the mode of deduction rather than to the doctrine itself
which he objected. He gave, in fact, his own defence; and it is one worth notice.[463] The
principle of equality is derivative, not ultimate. Equality is good because equality increases
the sum of happiness. Thus, as he says,[464] if two men have £1000, and you transfer £500 from
one to the other, you increase the recipient's wealth by one-third, and diminish the loser's
wealth by one-half. You therefore add less pleasure than you subtract. The principle is given
less mathematically[465] by the more significant argument that 'felicity' depends not simply
on the 'matter of felicity' or the stimulus, but also on the sensibility to felicity which
is necessarily limited. Therefore by adding wealth--taking, for example, from a thousand labourers
to give to one king--you are supersaturating a sensibility already glutted by taking away from
others a great amount of real happiness. With this argument, which has of late years become
conspicuous in economics, he connects another of primary importance. The first condition of
happiness, he says, is not 'equality' but 'security.' Now you can only equalise at the expense
of security. If I am to have my property taken away whenever it is greater than my neighbour's,
I can have no security.[466] Hence, if the two principles conflict, equality should give way.
Security is the primary, which must override the secondary, aim. Must the two principles, then,
always conflict? No; but 'time is the only mediator.'[467] The law may help to accumulate inequalities;
but in a prosperous state there is a 'continual progress towards equality.' The law has to
stand aside; not to maintain monopolies; not to restrain trade; not to permit entails; and
then property will diffuse itself by a natural process, already exemplified in the growth of
Europe. I've shown you all what happens when black or white men disobey my orders."

No one came forward. From her knees beside Max Sanda rose up slim and straight and stood facing
the Arabs and negroes.

"Men," she cried to them, "I've done my best for you. I've defended you, when I could, from
injustice. When you have been sick with fevers or with wounds I have nursed you. Now my father's
friend, and my friend, who to-night has saved my life, lies wounded. If you leave him, you leave
me, too, for I stay as his nurse. What do you decide?"

Stanton was on her in two strides. Seizing her arm he twisted it with
a savage wrench and flung her tottering behind him.

The pain forced a cry from the girl, and Ahmara laughed. That was more than the men could stand,
for to them Sanda was always the White Angel, Ahmara the Black; and over there by the fire they
had discussed a deputation to Stanton, announcing that, since starting, they had heard too
much evil of the haunted Libyan desert to dare venture across its waterless wastes. The spirit
of mutiny was in them, having smouldered and flashed up, smouldered and flamed again at Stanton's
cruelty. This was too much! The spark was fired. A Senegalese whom Sanda had cured of a scorpion
bite--a black giant to whom Max had lent his camel when Stanton would have left him in the desert--leaped
like a tiger on the Chief. Steel flashed under the moon, and Stanton fell back without a groan,
striking the hard sand and staining it red.

For an instant there was silence. Then burst forth a wild shout of hate and joy....

CHAPTER XXIX

OUT OF THE DREAM, A PLAN

Stanton was dead, hacked in pieces by the men he had cursed and beaten. Ahmara had fled to Dardaï
to live as she could by her beauty; and the murderers, taking with
them, in a rage of haste and terror, camels, water, and provisions,
had disappeared.

The caravan of the great explorer had vanished like a mirage; and the Lost Oasis lay hidden forever
from despoiling eyes and hands in the uncharted Libyan desert.

At dawn Sanda sat beside Max in his tent, where two of the few men who remained had carried him. Through
the hideous hours he had lain as one dead. But light, touching his eyelids, waked him with a
shuddering start.

"You!" he whispered. "Safe! I've had horrible dreams."

"Only dreams," she soothed him.

"How pale you are!" He stared at her, still half dazed.

"Perhaps it's the light."

"No, it's not the light. I remember now.... What happened after he--I----"

"I'll tell you when you're stronger."

"I'm strong enough for anything. Only a little odd in my head."

"And your poor wounded hand? I bathed it and bandaged it again, and you never knew."

"Queer! I thought if I were dead I should have known if you touched me!" He spoke more to himself
than to Sanda, and she did not answer. His eyelids drooped, and presently he slept again.
Hours later, when he woke, she was still there. It seemed to the girl that the world had fallen
to pieces, leaving only her and this man in the ruins. All around
them lay the vast desert. To go back whence they had come was impossible.
To go on seemed equally impossible. There was nowhere to go. But they
were together. She knew that nothing could part them now, not life,
and even less death, yet she could see no future. Everything had come
to a standstill, and their souls might as well be out of their bodies.
It would be so much simpler!

She gave Max tea that she had made;
and when she had looked at his hand and bandaged it again, she told
him all that had happened. How the Senegalese, whose brother Stanton
had shot for pilfering, a month ago, had stabbed Stanton in the breast,
and fifty others in blood-madness had rushed to finish his work. How
Ahmara had run shrieking to the village, and the men, still in madness,
had stolen the camels and gone off into the desert; not the murderers
only, but their friends who saw that it was well to disappear, that
it might never be known who were the men that saw Richard Stanton
die.

Two months and more ago, when the caravan left Touggourt, there
were over a hundred men who marched with it. Between that time and
reaching Dardaï thirty had deserted, and a few had died. Now all had
flown except a dozen of the oldest and most responsible who refused
to be carried away by their comrades' vague fear of reprisals. Just
these twelve were left with fifteen camels and a small store of arms
and provisions. There was money also, untouched in Stanton's tent,
and some bales of European rugs, clocks, and musical boxes, which
the explorer had brought as gifts for native rulers. The question
pressed: what was to be done? Sanda could find no answer; but Max
had two. They might turn back and go the way they had come. Or they
might go on, not trying to cross the Libyan desert in the direction
of Assouan, as Stanton had hoped to do, but skirting southward by
a longer route where the desert was charted and oases existed.
This comes out curiously in the Constitutional Code. He there lays down the 'self-preference
principle'--the principle, namely, that 'every human being' is determined in every action by
his judgment of what will produce the greatest happiness to himself, 'whatsoever be the effect
... in relation to the happiness of other similar beings, any or all of them taken together.'[471]
Afterwards, however, he observes that it is 'the constant and arduous task of every moralist'
and of every legislator who deserves the name to 'increase the influence of sympathy at the
expense of that of self-regard and of sympathy for the greater number at the expense of sympathy
for the lesser number.'[472] He tries to reconcile these views by the remark 'that even sympathy
has its root in self-regard,' and he argues, as Mr. Herbert Spencer has done more fully, that
if Adam cared only for Eve and Eve only for Adam--neither caring at all for himself or herself--both
would perish in less than a year. Self-regard, that is, is essential, and sympathy supposes
its existence. Hence Bentham puts himself through a catechism.[473] What is the 'best' government?
That which causes the greatest happiness of the given community. What community? 'Any community,
which is as much as to say, every community.' But why do you desire this happiness? Because
the establishment of that happiness would contribute to my greatest happiness. And how do you
prove that you desire this result? By my labours to obtain it, replies Bentham. This oddly
omits the more obvious question, how can you be sure that your happiness will be promoted by
the greatest happiness of all? What if the two criteria differ? I desire the general happiness,
he might have replied, because my benevolence is an original or elementary instinct which can
override my self-love; or I desire it, he would perhaps have said, because I know as a fact
that the happiness of others will incidentally contribute to my own. The first answer would
fall in with some of his statements; but the second is, as I think must be admitted, more in
harmony with his system. Perhaps, indeed, the most characteristic thing is Bentham's failure
to discuss explicitly the question whether human action is or is not necessarily 'selfish.'
He tells us in regard to the 'springs of action' that all human action is always 'interested,'
but explains that the word properly includes actions in which the motive is not 'self-regarding.'[474]
It merely means, in fact, that all conduct has motives. The statement, which I have quoted
about the 'self-preference' principle may only mean a doctrine which is perfectly compatible
with a belief in 'altruism'--the doctrine, namely, that as a fact most people are chiefly interested
by their own affairs. The legislator, he tells us, should try to increase sympathy, but the
less he takes sympathy for the 'basis of his arrangements'--that is, the less call he makes
upon purely unselfish motives--the greater will be his success.[475] This is a shrewd and,
I should say, a very sound remark, but it implies--not that all motives are selfish in the
last analysis, but--that the legislation should not assume too exalted a level of ordinary
morality. The utterances in the very unsatisfactory Deontology are of little value, and seem
to imply a moral sentiment corresponding to a petty form of commonplace prudence.[476]

Leaving this point, however, the problem necessarily presented itself to Bentham in a form
in which selfishness is the predominating force, and any recognition of independent benevolence
rather an incumbrance than a help. If we take the 'self-preference principle' absolutely, the
question becomes how a multitude of individuals, each separately pursuing his own happiness,
can so arrange matters that their joint action may secure the happiness of all. Clearly a man,
however selfish, has an interest generally in putting down theft and murder. He is already
provided with a number of interests to which security, at least, and therefore a regular administration
of justice, is essential. His shop could not be carried on without the police; and he may agree
to pay the expenses, even if others reap the benefit in greater proportion. A theory of legislation,
therefore, which supposes ready formed all the instincts which make a decent commercial society
possible can do without much reference to sympathy or altruism. Bentham's man is not the colourless
unit of a priori writing, nor the noble savage of Rousseau, but the respectable citizen with
a policeman round the corner. Such a man may well hold that honesty is the best policy; he
has enough sympathy to be kind to his old mother, and help a friend in distress; but the need
of romantic and elevated conduct rarely occurs to him; and the heroic, if he meets it, appears
to him as an exception, not far removed from the silly. He does not reflect--especially if
he cares nothing for history--how even the society in which he is a contented unit has been
built up, and how much loyalty and heroism has been needed for the work; nor even, to do him
justice, what unsuspected capacities may lurk in his own commonplace character. For example,
they get knee injuries and think there is something wrong with their knee. Or they get shoulder
injuries and think their shoulder is weak. These people are only half right. Yes, their knee or their
shoulder is weak. There we
shall meet it again.

