
He singularly argues in his private despatches that Europe being in a fuzzle generally; that
England having enough to do at keeping her grumbling people quiet, and fighting her old friend
Russia; that Monsieur Napoleon, the very Republican Emperor, having three large kettles of
fish to fry--one in helping England to whip Russia, by which means he hoped to wipe off an
old score; the second, to affect a great determination to fight for the independence of the
Turks, who say they will lend a hand when they get in cash; and the third, to crush all revolutionary
movements at home; and that all having enough to do in their work of protecting despotism and
neglecting liberty, the time is singularly opportune for America's making one grand demonstration.
Thus, he said, Pierce argued. It was all very well showing a saucy front to mankind in general,
but if we undertook to bag Cuba, there must be something more than threats and war messages
to back it up.' I could not throw up my commission; therefore begged my friend Buck would consider
my position, and excuse in me what seemed fast. And then I had despatched my Corporal Noggs
to arrange matters with Monsieur Souley, who was to play the part of engine-driver, crowding
charcoal for the whole team. After the manifestation of much indecision, my friend Buck consented
to go, at the same time stipulating that he should not be led by certain fast spirits. 'If
I go, Smooth,' said he, 'it will be with virtuous reluctance; the whole thing is sure to come
out. Further, my boy Dan (a sharp fellow he is!) has gone on a little affair respecting Cuba,
by which he expects to make hit No. 1.'

"At this moment we were interrupted by the brusque figure of George Saunders appearing in the
room. George instantly recognized me, and said he anticipated my mission, having received sundry
private and very confidential letters from Pierce on the same subject. It seemed that Pierce
and his boy Fourney had written any amount of private and confidential letters on this to be
kept very secret affair. George made himself quite at home. Indeed, the uninitiated might have
mistaken him and the cat for fixtures of the establishment. Calling me on one side, he begged
I would consider Mr. Buckanan entirely in his hands. In order to bring his speed to the right
gauge, Dan and himself had, he said, spent several months hard labor; but now he was happy
to say they had found the key to his movements, and nothing more was wanting. As for Buck's
presence at the Ostend convention, just leave the arranging that to him. Further, in order
to make a demonstration while it was sitting, he would write an epistle to the Emperor of Austria,
forewarning him of the sympathy in America for the spirits he held down in oppression. This
would be a decided hit, he added, with a knowing wink. So confident was George of his mastery
over the venerable old man, that I felt it would not be prejudicing Mr. Pierce's interests
to leave the matter entirely in his hands: so bidding them a very good morning, I signified
my intention of calling again in ten days, when I expected he would be ready to move on; if
not, I should be under the painful necessity of bagging him, as directed by the State Department.

"I had left the legation, and was passing into Portland place, when, to my surprise, I was
overtaken by the indomitable George, who insisted that I join him in some gin-and-bitters at
the first drinking-place. To have declined George's amiability would have been immaculate folly:
he always bagged his friends, precisely as Pierce directed me to bag the ambassador. Having
stopped at the first crossing, as they say in Georgia, we drunk ourselves, wished Pierce much
joy with his project, and parted, George saying he would turn steam on the old man, and have
him all right when I called.

"Prompt to the hour, no sooner had the allotted time expired than I presented myself at the
Legation with an express wagon, for the accommodation of the old man indispensable. Corporal
Noggs had got the boys all right on the continent, and such a jolly time as was expected! George
had evidently been screwing up the old man, for I found him in the very best humor. There he
sat, portly and venerable, surrounded by boxes, carpet-bags, and trunks; all, he assured me,
containing various diplomatic implements of great value. At his feet purred the cat diplomatic,
as if anxious to accompany him. 'These boxes are a great trouble to me,' said the old man,
getting up with some effort, and pointing to three, about two feet square each, and labelled
as follows:--No. 1, 'Cuba by purchase,' below--'Copies of Correspondence with our Minister
to Spain, some years ago,' at the left corner the words--'Promiscus.' No. 2. 'Cuba at any price'--underneath--'This
side up, with care?' No. 3. 'Cuba of necessity, and as a link in the manifest fulfilment of
destiny?'--underneath--'Handled only by the experienced porter.'

"The hall now rang loud of confusion,--the fiery-eyed cat ran screaming to the door, maids'
eyes were seen wanting to weep, Prompt affected great grief,--he would be worked to death,--porters
were seen carrying out the luggage, and then waited to convey the old man. Then Prompt said--the
negro, as if to make the picture complete, was making all sorts of grimaces in a corner,--if
Dan should by some accident return, what a deal of extra work he would make! But Smooth made
up his mind that such complaints were the natural consequences of an irregular system. At last,
having got boxes one, two, and three nicely cared for, we bundled in the rest of the traps,
following then with the old man indispensable. Saunders being present by appointment, insisted
upon his right to drive the team, and suddenly springing upon the box, seized unceremoniously
the reins, and put the horses into full gallop. Increasing his speed, until it became frightful
to delicate nerves, the poor old man's fears for his safety became so excited that it required
all my strength to keep him from jumping out and breaking his neck, notwithstanding I had tucked
him away so nicely among the boxes before starting. Down Portland place, through Oxford street,
up Holborn, and down Cheapside, to the Bank (astonishing the natives as we went) we drove,
and from thence to St. Katherine's Dock, where was moored the trim little steamboat chartered
to convey Mr. Pierce's plenipotentiaries safe to Ostend. Buck was in a sad state of excitement
when we stopped; he resembled an individual just escaped from a perilous adventure. He discharged
himself clumsily from the wagon, his face undergoing singular changes of color the while, and
cast a few savage glances at Saunders, who very composedly sat on the box endeavoring with
might and main to suppress a vagabond laugh. 'Now, Saunders,' indistinctly sputtered the old
man, as that bluff-sided individual turned upon his seat, rather knavely casting a comical
glance over his shoulder, 'I'm not afraid--my courage never fails me; but that steamer don't
take me to Ostend if you're a passenger! Mind that now!' Saunders lowered himself gravely from
the box, and with serious countenance assured the old man that no danger could result while
he drove the team. In reply to this, the old man declared that with Saunders on board a blowing-up
was certain. The much-dreaded gentleman, however, soon quieted the envoy's fears by assuring
him that accompanying us to Ostend was farthest from his thoughts, he having made all the necessary
arrangements for throwing a bomb-shell into the camp from this side of the water, as directed
by the Uncle Caleb and the boy Fourney. Boxes one, two, and three being safely on board, we
supported the old governor after them--Saunders on one side, and Smooth on the other. Then
the bell rang, and the steam thundered and roared, and the little craft glided on her way,
Saunders waving his adieus from the wharf, and crying out at the very top of his voice--'Don't
forget Cuba!' and 'go it, Buck! Go it, Smooth!!'

CHAPTER XX.

ARRIVAL AND GRAND RECEPTION AT OSTEND.

"Our passage was attended with extremely pleasant weather; and nothing remarkable occurred,
except that the Dutch crew thought Mr. Buckhanan a very great man, and the object of his mission
the overthrow of European dynasties in general. Twice they undertook to regale him with sour-krout,
which he pronounced inferior to that made in York county, Pennsylvane. As to me, they declined
to be convinced that I was not Governor of Kentucky, having a singular belief in the peculiarities
of that State for growing long citizens--the tallest man always being elected governor. Perhaps
I should have added that the Schiedam was only tolerable, the brandy bad; and that Buck, having
forgotten his tobacco, was compelled to resort to very bad Dutch loggerhead, with which he
kept the swabs busily employed.

"As we entered the port of Ostend, once so celebrated for the defence of its garrison, a salute
of thirteen guns was fired from the old fort, which we attempted to answer with a rusty swivel,
Buck waving his hat, and singing 'Yankee Doodle' to the burghers who filed along the dilapidated
dyke. As the steamer neared a landing-place, we descried the coarse figure of Corporal Noggs,
surrounded by numerous of his fellow citizens, prominent among whom was Monsieur Souley and
the Chevalier Belmont. In addition to these welcoming spirits, there came also a Dutch band,
which, ere we had made fast alongside, struck up something they intended for Hail, Columbia!
The reader will please appeal to his imagination as to what our reception must have been, when
I tell him that shouts and huzzas, interspersed with this discordant 'Hail Columbia!' rent
the very air, and made faint the roaring of the steam from the funnel of our little craft.
Boxes one, two, and three, were now sent forward under an escort to the hotel, while a triumphal
chair secured to two long poles was placed in proper order for the reception of my friend Buck.
Rather against his inclination, and not without expressing some doubt as to the propriety of
displaying so much pageantry in a foreign country, was he packed into it by Monsieurs Souley
and Belmont. Corporal Noggs now formed in order the procession, which moved in state through
the city, headed by the band playing the 'Rogue's March,' which it mistook for 'Yankee Doodle.'
Such a funny procession! The reader may imagine the figure cut by my venerable friend, when
I tell him that the triumphal chair was borne on the shoulders of Monsieurs Souley, Belmont,
Daniels, and O'Sullivan--the two former being in the lead. Close in the rear of the chair,
your humble servant, Smooth, took up his position, riding a female jackass, an animal domesticated
by Monsieur Souley, under whose saddle she had borne up until the flesh was nearly off her
bones. This was tapered off with an everlasting string of seedy citizens, for whom an innumerable
quantity of goats seemed to have a fellow sympathy, so close did they follow. At the hotel,
from the balcony of which streamed the stars and stripes, the uproar and confusion was beyond
description. Could some of the old burghers have risen from the tomb, they might have imagined
a modern siege of that city they so nobly defended in times gone by. Staggering and sweating,
the four envoys bore their precious burden to the great porch, whence he was escorted to the
balcony, upon which he stood, like a Roman of old, and, by the advice of Monsieur Souley, delivered
a stunning speech, that versatile functionary translating it into Dutch. It will scarcely be
necessary to add that the speech proved a decided hit, and was received with shouts and acclamations.
Not a little done over, the old statesman was now regaled on delicious krout and gin-slings,
and put carefully to bed by a Dutch chambermaid. This was at three o'clock in the afternoon.
At seven I marshalled all hands for a grand banquet, which had been prepared without any regard
to expense, it being intimated that Uncle Sam would settle for the whole thing.

"Fresh and refreshed we all appeared ready for action, and as bright as could possibly be expected
after such a fatigue. The table was set out in grand style; indeed, it literally groaned under
every delicacy of the season--not excepting krout, the glows of which impregnated the atmosphere.
Buck said he would sit opposite the krout; but that was objected to, on the ground of his eating
so much as to change the tone of his speech, which was expected to be more than usually spirited.
After so little opposition from Monsieur Souley, who wanted the place himself, it was voted
that I should take the chair. Of course I could not refuse the honor; but in order to illustrate
the three principles of our political policy, I was cautious to stipulate that Buck sit on
my right and Monsieur Souley on my left. Here we were--steady, very steady, and very fast.
Belmont insinuated, rather ironically, that Buck could no longer be considered of the steady
school; in fact, Saunders had so cultivated his component parts that he might now, without
any fear of contradiction be put down as remarkably fast. I need scarcely add that the viands
were discussed with great gusto, Monsieur Souley absorbing so much of the fricasee frog that
his glossy black hair, which had before beautifully undulated over his shoulders, now curled
tighter, his eyes sparkled brighter, his face became more olive, and his periods more intensely
French. O'Sullivan, too, had procured some capital Irish whiskey, which he said he already
felt in his boots. At ten o'clock there was a general secession of knife and fork, and a resort
to the less tasteful amusement of speech-making. Souley, however, had all the while said all
manner of things about, and brought all sorts of charges against Louis Napoleon, whose government
he denounced in very general terms, not dreaming that that shrewd sovereign had introduced
two spies in the capacity of waiters. The cloth being removed, Monsieur rose, considering he
was in duty bound, and commenced throwing off the rounded sentences of the first part of a
very long speech,--at one moment denouncing princes and kings in general, and in the next threatening
to smother Spain with an interesting exposition of her perfidy. Her puppet government was a
base mockery; he said Espartero had grossly deceived him!--Here he was brought to a stand by
Mr. O'Sullivan, 'It's meself thinks the gintleman 's about debatin matter what 'll cum afore
the Convention to-morrow,' interposed that gentleman. Monsieur Souley replied somewhat tartly:
he hoped the gentleman from Ireland would not interrupt him. Order! was now called for on every
side, and an appeal made to the chair, without whose interposition a savage encounter must
have resulted. The whole company were now on foot, interposing for peace; nor had I time to
assert my authority, when, decanters of port and claret standing close at hand, Souley seized
one, and O'Sullivan the other, as if for weapons of mortal combat, and commenced a series of
threatening menaces. The waiters were not accustomed to such feints, and one, before we were
conscious, of it had run down stairs and alarmed the house. Landlord, servants, and a whole
troup of police, came rushing into the hall, as the two gentlemen of Verona, revealing the
joke, made the politest bows over their glasses, which they gracefully emptied. I was about
deciding that Monsieur Souley's language was decidedly personal, when he proclaimed his determination
to postpone his speech until to-morrow. He would however, conclude by proposing a toast, which
he need scarcely add would be heartily responded to by every one present. He would propose
the health of the venerable statesman on the chairman's right--a man who had long and worthily
maintained the highest rank among his country's statesmen, and whose opinions (although he
differed with them at times) were world-wide! (Great sensation). Mr. Buckhanan now rose, evidently
affected by the immensity of the cheers. His mien was at once dignified, and when contrasted
with the promiscuous countenances that surrounded him, wore an air singularly American. He
began by saying he was happy to say he did not feel himself a stranger in a strange land. (This
being translated into Dutch by Monsieur Souley, the invited guests present received it with
loud acclamations). We read the same books; we were animated by a kindred love of liberty;
we spoke the same language; we enjoyed the same immunities of a constitutional government;
and that spirit which animated us to fight for liberty had its origin in the same stock! Here
Mr. Belmont interposed by reminding the venerable statesman that the Dutch of Pennsylvania
and New York could not be said properly to represent the whole American Union. Order being
demanded and restored, Mr. Buckhanan apologised for the grave error, which he charged to the
delicious quality of the krout. He seemed unconscious of what he had been saying, and suddenly
became aware that he had mistaken his theme, and was letting off the big end of his model speech,
with which he had so often entertained his friends at feeds given by sundry Lord Mayors of
London. The joke was too good; the old man could not suppress a laugh at his own mistake, and
sat down, intimating that as he would have something to say to-morrow he would now bring his
speech to a close. (Uproarious applause). Again Monsieur Souley rose, and amid shouts of--'question!'
said the question was of no kind of consequence, that he always went on the principle of making
himself heard. Further attempts to rein up Monsieur Souley would have been sheer madness; so
he continued his speech, which included fifty irrelevant topics without discussing one. He
even charged Louis Napoleon with poisoning the champagne. Whatever of truth there might be
in the charge, we only know that the speaker ere he had concluded his speech found himself
standing alone, the whole Congress having dropped off into a profound sleep. Becoming indignant
at this display of indifference, he stopped suddenly, commanded the waiters to wake up the
sleepers, and himself commenced an uproar by smashing the tumblers and decanters, after the
fashion of a French fiddler in for a frolic. The company with one accord offered an apology,
joined in drinking the health of the speaker, charged the delinquency to the strength of the
poisoned champagne rather than that of the speech--(which was narcotic, rather), and adjourned
to meet in Duitenethipicgnisher's Hall, at twelve o'clock on the following morning. I must
not omit to inform the reader that those who were unable to see their way up stairs were carried
there by the waiters. Smooth, as a matter of course, had no bricks in his hat.

"Bright and early on the following morning I tumbled out, made a hasty toilet, and set about
waking up the Congress of sleepers. Souley I found in a sad plight; Buck was snoring like great
guns; O'Sullivan I thought had either been dreaming of the Pampero expedition, or taken too
much whiskey during the delivery of Monsieur Souley's speech; Belmont had made a pillow of
his Dutch bonds--indeed the only specimen of humanity up and moving was Corporal Noggs, who
expressed his anxiety to know what Marcy would say were he an eye-witness to the preliminaries.
As for Pierce! it mattered little what he thought, he being a mere cypher among the boys. Having
succeeded in moving the Congress we sallied out to view those suburbs so full of historical
lore. To our surprise we were surrounded wherever we went by a clamorous and grotesque crowd
of discontented individuals, each bearing a document in his or her hand, on which was prominently
described the great seal of the United States of America. For a time the mystery involved seemed
as undefinable as the jargon of the motley group. Indeed, the whole city seemed not only agog,
but panic stricken. Nor was its influence confined to any class. It had delved alike into the
palace of the king and cabin of the burgher. Wherever a delegate made his appearance he was
sure to be followed or surrounded by a clamorous group, pouring forth its jargon in a rhapsody
of praise to America, which singularly enough they supposed had sent the first instalment of
her intention to overthrow the dynasties of Europe, and relieve mankind in general. Monsieur
Souley, whom they happily mistook for a Greek, was the only member of the Congress exempt from
the annoyance.

"A little more light was soon reflected on the mystery! Saunders had inundated the city--not
with his promised bombshells: his missile was more alarming, but less dangerous. Having ingeniously
changed the object of a very long epistle, he dedicated it to the French people instead of
the Austrian Emperor. The mould of its dictum was decidedly strong; but in order to add more
point he gave his periods a peculiar slant, at the head of Napoleon the Third. That a fellow-feeling
as lasting as the mountain chain existed between the French and American peoples, there was,
according to the circular, not a doubt. In reference to other heads, there were strong doubts!
The Congress now assembling was an earnest of what he said: that august body George strongly
recommended to the esteem of all aggrieved citizens. Did any one doubt the genuineness or the
national character of these epistles he had but to refer to the great seal on their front,
which was none other than that of the Legation at London.

"The reader may now easily imagine our increasing difficulties. On proceeding to the Hall at
the appointed time, I found our Ministers in a general state of alarm. Souley had received
a private and very confidential letter from his agent in Paris, forewarning him of Louis Napoleon's
intention to descend upon the Congress, perform a coup-d'etat, and having nicely bagged the
game, appropriate it to his own table. In view of this, Monsieur Souley recommended an adjournment
to a more congenial atmosphere. Messrs. Buckhanan and Belmont rising together, objected to
any such movement, inasmuch as it would discover a spirit of weakness, to guard against which
Uncle Caleb and Master Fourney had given express instructions. Here a long cross-fire of discussion
ensued. I thought it had neither head nor tail, and was something after the order of what Mr.
Pierce conceived to be the object of this Congress, for it resulted in nothing, the speakers
all agreeing to withdraw what they had said. As a first move to the organization of the body,
it was agreed that Hanz Voghnine, who was privileged to open a bar for the sale of good liquors
in one corner of the hall, would be the only outsider admitted. Hanz was accordingly examined
in reference to his being a spy; the result being satisfactory, he was enjoined to keep nothing
but a first-rate article. On the second balloting I found myself elected President, which high
distinction, having been conducted to the chair amidst soul-stirring acclamations, I acknowledged
in what is generally termed a neat and appropriate speech. Noggs was at the first ballot elected
Sergeant-at-Arms and door-keeper in general, the duty of which offices he promised to fill
to the very best of his abilities. A vagrant-opinion was rife that Monsieur Souley would have
filled the office of door-keeper much better, himself being so easily opened and shut. However,
as Noggs had been voted the office, we all reconciled ourselves to the selection, each member
providing himself with a gin-sling, and taking his seat. A silence, as of the tomb, prevailed,
while I rose to open the proceedings of the first day. I first made my own bow, then drew forth
the State paper commissioning me to call together 'this august body.' Mr. O'Sullivan suggesting
it was agreed that there being out so many documents of a similar character the reading was
rendered unnecessary. I bowed to the decision. A similar fate awaited an attempt to read several
of Mr. Pierce's private opinions. Mr. Buckhanan said we better hear what Pierce had to say,
and then make up our minds as to whether it was entitled to the consideration of 'this important
body.' Monsieur Souley replied, with great fervency, that it were better Pierce be left entirely
out of the question, and the Congress proceed to deliberate on its own hook. A good many dissenting
voices here interposed; but the speaker, very pertinaciously, said he had the floor, and was
prepared to discuss the question with any gentleman (here he turned a meaning glance at Buck)
disposed to accept the challenge. The dread of a lengthy speech brought gentlemen to their
senses: rather than endure it they agreed that Pierce should be left entirely out. It was,
now generally expected that Monsieur Souley would sit down. No such intention had he. Turning
to me, he bowed, and said: 'Your Excellency will observe, that as the order in which the many
questions to come before this Congress has not been produced, and the question of the acquisition
of Cuba to the United States being the most important one in the schedule, I move that the
order be suspended, and that the discussion of that all-important subject be commenced.' Souley
was inclined, I saw, to absorb time very unprofitably. I was about to pronounce him out of
order, when there came a loud knocking at the door, followed by a band attempting to play a
Dutch medley. The door was immediately thrown open. Ten citizens, savage and hairy of visage
entered, to the consternation of the Congress assembled. One of their number advanced, having
exchanged the countersign with Noggs; but he failed to make himself understood until Monsieur
Souley politely tendered his aid, introducing him in succession to every one present. They
were, according to the rendering of Monsieur, a deputation from the 'Very ancient and honorable
order of Red Republicans,' who, having become aware of the many grand objects for which our
Congress was convened (as set forth in the circular of the great Saunders), had appeared before
it to pray that their grievances might be duly redressed and themselves reinstated in the government
of France. Monsieur Souley made a speech of more than ordinary length on the subject, which
he brought to a close by calling upon the President (me) not to permit this patriotic body
of suffering men to depart without an assurance that their case would receive immediate attention.
This I did in the very best manner possible, adding that Hanz might treat them to gin-slings
all round. This done, Monsieur politely bowed them into the street, the last bow being his
very best. The reader will by this time have discovered that Monsieur Souley constituted the
Congress and Mr. Pierce thrown in.

"Scarcely had the deputation of very ancient and honorable red republicans taken itself into
the street, when entrance was demanded by a deputation from 'The Hopeful Order of Polish Exiles.'
The individuals constituting it were lighter of person and complexion than the reds; and, too,
there was about them an air of melancholy which at once touched the tender of my feelings.
They bore with them a long petition, and humbly but devoutly prayed America to make their cause
her own (here they produced several of Saunders' circulars): they asked only to enlist in her
bond of brotherhood. Long had they waited the coming of this day--the day when she would invade
Europe, and fight the battle of Liberty against despotism. Sweet was the recollection of a
fatherland; to them it became sweeter as they contemplated that great star of liberty all powerful
in the West. They spoke Scandinavian in silvery accents. Monsieur Souley's genius was for once
at fault: he spoke only French, Dutch, and bad Spanish, rendering it necessary to call in the
aid of Hanz, who, having rendered it into Dutch, Monsieur did the rest. Dismissing this very
distinguished deputation with a positive assurance that their case should be at once referred
to the great George Saunders, nothing more was required. 'I would suggest,' spoke Mr. Belmont,
rising with great gravity, as the satisfied gentlemen made their last bow at the door, 'whether
it be not necessary to close the door against further deputations, it being expedient to proceed
with the transaction of more important business?' To this Messrs. Sullivan, Buckhanan, and
Souley rose, greatly agitated. Souley said he had the floor, and would not yield an inch. Mr.
Buckhanan had only a word to say. Mr. Sullivan gave way. Monsieur Souley said he had great
sympathy for all oppressed citizens. He could not but characterize such language as had been
used by the learned statesman, Mr. Belmont in reference to these very respectable bodies, as
contrary to the spirit of our institutions. Mr. Belmont bowed, and left the speaker to indulge
his love of speech, which was again interrupted by a terrific thundering at the door, which
opened,--not to a deputation, but to a whole platform of rejected humanity, presenting the
most grotesque appearance. Falstaff's invincibles would convey no comparison. Some were hatless
and shoeless; some had sleeveless coats and tattered trousers: others had collars but no shirts;
all had faces immersed in massive beards. Two-and-two abreast, they walked, in with an independent
air, each provided with a Saunder's circular, and took up a position in a half-circle just
behind the seats of the several members of the Congress. The person who represented them, and
who could boast of but one shoe, and one sleeve to his coat, and had a countenance smothered
in hair, now approached Monsieur Souley as Monsieur Souley approached him, and both bowed.
I ought to have mentioned that this last procession was preceded by one of their number, wheeling
a barrow, on which was a monster petition, specifying the fifty thousand grievances they hoped
would be redressed by the Congress. Buck, who it was more than suspected looked with suspicion
upon the mixture of reds in general, was seen squinting steadily in the faces of the savage-looking
intruders, while others could not suppress a laugh at the singular quaintness of the picture
they presented. The leader having extended his hand to Monsieur, a consultation ensued, and
was continued with innumerable gestures, grimaces, and contortions of the face. The Chair begged
to remind gentlemen of the importance of time. The Chair hoped Monsieur Souley would find it
convenient to report. That versatile statesman replied,--He had the honor to inform this august
body, that these gentlemen--externally so deficient!--constituted the 'Forlorn Order of Very
Red Republicans.' Here Monsieur turned to the forlorn order, as it, with one accord bowed,
in confirmation of what he said. 'Gentlemen!' continued the speaker with a rhetorical flourish,
'you must not judge these men by their exteriors. We have here the rough bark covering the
fine tree. Gentlemen! have not these men hearts of oak, nerves of steel, and bone that, like
their souls, never breaks in time of need?'

"The Chair thought it time to interrupt the speaker by inquiring what the forlorn order prayed
for? Monsieur Souley resumed. 'Learning from the authority they held in their hands (epistle
de la Saunders), what were the true objects of this Congress, they had nobly come forward to
tender their services, and to express in person their readiness to take up arms in America's
cause. He proposed a vote of thanks for this patriotic manifestation.' This was voted without
a dissentient voice, seeing that it cost nothing. The spokesman of the order again held a consultation
with Monsieur Souley, the result of which was, that gentleman's making a charitable appeal
to the Congress, and concluding by proposing that a contribution be taken in aid of the forlorns.
This brought Mr. Belmont suddenly to his feet. He would oppose any such thing. Their difficulties
had already increased beyond calculation; and, were this proposition acceded to, it would not
only confirm a singular belief outside--that the object of this Congress was the general relief
of mankind, but so increase their responsibilities as to render it impossible to proceed with
legitimate business. No sane man--much less one accustomed to dealing in coin--could have entertained
such an idea. I need scarcely add that the proposition was negatived without a dissenting voice,
Monsieur Souley not voting. It was now pretty evident to all present that the Congress would
have its time and attention pretty well absorbed in receiving deputations of citizens deluded
by Saunders' letters, and listening to the very pathetic speeches of Monsieur. The day was
now far gone; the Congress began to feel its appetite; the forlorns withdrew in discontent;
the presence of many other deputations surrounding the doors was announced; and the Congress
drank all round, and adjourned to meet on the following morning for the dispatch of business.

"The 'following morning' came, and with it troubles insurmountable. Scarcely had the Congress
resumed its sitting, when an avalanche of deputations was announced, waiting an audience. Monsieur
Souley proposed that they be received in their order. Of course I was bound to submit his proposal,
but could not suppress a smile. I thought the order would be the most difficult thing to ascertain.
However, as we are naturally good-natured, and love to turn the gravest subjects into the lightest
jokes, that they be received in their order was agreed to without a dissenting vote. By four
o'clock in the afternoon we had received and heard the prayers of all sorts of deputations.
There was--'The Ancient Order of Roman Republicans;' the 'Lone Band of Oppressed Brothers;'
the 'Universal Brotherhood of Exiled Patriots;' the 'Hopeful Band of Hungarian Refugees;' the
'Polish Perpetuators;'--in fact, there came all kinds of orders, and bonds, and leagues, and
societies, all with innumerable grievances about they knew not what. There were the oppressed,
and very oppressed; the hopeful, and very hopeful; the patriotic, and very patriotic; all praying
that their grievances might be redressed. Indeed, they illustrated the fact that Europe was
in no want of spirits. Some of these forlorn brothers marched with bands of music, not only
keeping the city in a state of general alarm, but seriously disturbing the nervous systems
of many very respectable persons, high in office.

"It was now six o'clock, and as the Congress was hungry, and fatigued with its labors, and
Hanz was literally worn out with mixing slings and smashes, I rose to propose we adjourn until
to-morrow, seeing there was no time to receive any more deputations; but was interrupted by
Noggs, who significantly announced a platoon of soldiery in front of the hall. Monsieur Souley
now turned a pale brown color; Belmont was seen looking for a back-door; and Buck's hair changed
two shades whiter:--indeed, the alarm that had prevailed in sundry palaces outside seemed to
have seized upon our Congress.

"'A demand from the King!' announced Noggs, with ominous accent. Suddenly a suspicious-looking
gent, smothered in dark uniform bespread with a profusion of lace, was ushered in, and with
an elastic step, and quick, wandering eye, approached gracefully the President (me) and announced
himself as King's Messenger. For a moment he stood uncovered, as if taking a bird's-eye-view
of the mental qualities of America; then, raising his right hand, which held a scroll, he extended
it to the Chair as Mr. O'Sullivan demanded--'Hats off!' The silence of a minute was then broken
by Monsieur Souley, who, having regained his courage, interposed sarcastically,--'a messenger
from the King of the Dutch?' The official gave a glance in return, and bowed. A seat was now
provided for the stranger, who, as he was about to sit down, intimated that in the event of
the terms of his Majesty's proclamation not being complied with, painful as it would be to
his feelings, he would, in deference to his orders, be compelled to resort to arms. It was
a moment full of painful anxiety: the Chair cast an eye over the document, as every one waited
with eager suspense its being read aloud. At length, summoning to my aid all the dignity my
composition entertained, I rose as each restless eye denoted hope and anxiety, and said I would
read the King's commands, which were to the following effect:--'That whereas sundry evil-disposed
persons, not having the fear of God before their eyes, and representing themselves as citizens
of the American Republic, have come into this country with ill intent, and have, in defiance
of law and order, held sundry meetings for the purpose of conspiring against the peace of the
State and safety of the throne; and whereas the said persons herein set forth have, since their
landing on our beloved soil, conducted themselves in a manner so riotous as to cause suspicion
of their deliberations, be it known to all concerned in this mysterious gathering, that by
this my proclamation I forbid the holding of any such assemblies; and further, that unless
that now in deliberation be at once dispersed, the persons found engaged in it will be dealt
with according to the law made and provided for the punishment of vagrants in general. Signed
and sealed with our hands, &c., &c.' Need I say that the reading this proclamation created
a wonderful sensation, which was here and there interspersed with marks of contempt for its
authority. The Chair, I insinuated, would await any remarks. Mr. Buckhanan immediately rose,
and proposed that we bow to the authority, and move to a more congenial atmosphere. Messrs.
Souley, Belmont (having come back), and Jackson, rose to oppose. The King's Messenger also
rose: seeing the first symptoms of a powerful opposition manifesting itself, he would warn
gentlemen of the Congress that it was of no use--they must move on! By way of adding tone to
his demand, he intimated that it might be necessary to motion his guard. As things began to
look rather squally, I said the Chair would like to say a few words, provided Monsieur Souley
did not interrupt, and was perfectly willing to yield the floor. That gentleman firmly declined;
adding that he stood upon the order of his reputation, nor would ever yield to Pierce, Marcy,
and the King of the Dutch thrown in. He firmly believed it a trick of Marcy's own; he was known
to be in league with the Queen of Spain, Louis Napoleon, and the Dutch King, with whom he had
compromised the Gibson case. Mr. O'Sullivan, with good logic clothed in very bad English, now
rose to the rescue, and was fortunate enough to hit upon the identical expedient by which we
all got honorably out of a very bad affair. He proposed (Mr. Souley continued talking) that
it being evident to this Congress that insurmountable difficulties of a local character having
arisen, thereby impeding the progress of legitimate business; that whereas the oysters are
found to be diseased; the gin-and-bitters intolerable; the champagne poisoned by Louis Napoleon;
and the sour krout absolutely indigestible, an adjournment is thereby imperatively necessary.
In consideration of all the foregoing facts, the speaker moved that this Congress do adjourn
to the more congenial atmosphere of Aix-la-Chapelle. The motion was carried with shouts of
laughter, and the Congress broke up in the very best humor, leaving Monsieur Souley in possession
of the floor. In addition to this, the King's Messenger was carried captive to the first hotel
and treated, while Noggs received orders to draw on Sam for all outstanding bills.

"On the following morning the Congress took up its march for Aix-la-Chapelle, resembling somewhat
the children of Israel on their historical pilgrimage. In straggling order did the grotesque
train wend its way,--Monsieur Souley mounted on the before-named jackass, which, having so
long been accustomed to Monsieur's riding, obstinately refused to be mounted by my friend Buck,
who was in consequence seated on boxes 'one, two and three,' which were placed on a Dutch van,
and drawn by two more docile donkeys, bringing up the rear. The world knows the rest--that
is, with one exception! Buck told me, very confidentially, that the Congress had been fast
enough for anything; that Pierce was soft enough to think good would come of it; and that he
only put his signature to that remarkable document proclaiming our natural right to Cuba with
virtuous reluctance,--merely to keep peace in the house!

CHAPTER XXI.

FASHIONABLE DEBTS AND FASHIONABLE DIPLOMATISTS.

"In days not altogether halcyon, I had a venerable great-uncle, a quaint specimen of human
infirmity, the singularity of the parish. Though eccentric at times, he was not destitute of
good qualities. These, had they been properly applied, might have served to distinguish him
among men in what is pedantically called the higher walks of life. But he had a fault, and
one that is very unpopular even at this day: he would get vexed at the short-comings of his
neighbors, at whom he would level truths exceedingly unpalatable. Indeed, he never failed to
put very keen edges on his sayings. Even now, I have the old man in my mind's eye, as in the
hey-day of youth my boyish fancy sported with his infirmities. Never shall I forget his slender,
stooping figure; his bright bald crown, curtained with locks that pended snowy over his coat
collar; his weeping, watchful eye; his tottering mien; his high and furrowed brow, lengthening
a sharp, corrugated face; his blunt, warty nose, made more striking by a sunken mouth and the
working motion of his lower jaw; and his crutch, for he was a cripple. They left a deep impression
on my mind. I speak of him as he was in the dawn of his eightieth summer--when pale blue spots
bespread his hands, and his bony fingers he would when excited frisk across the polished crown
of his head. His great hobby was his knowledge of diplomacy. And, too, he was forever talking
about the affairs of the nation, and would not unfrequently get put out with the whole parish,
because it withheld from him, he said, that deference his experience was entitled to. He had,
many years ago, been in some way attached to the diplomatic corps, which he ever after regarded
with a sort of religious awe; and whenever a strange fit came over him he would do something
he said was to prop up its dignity, of which none could be more jealous. I have, known him
declare, that to maintain untarnished the character of the polite corps, he would swear by
its virtue and his crutch. He would not have it held in suspicion by the vulgar world, and
would go straight into a fit of sickness at the news of one its members doing aught to sully
the fair name he described it as possessing. Sometimes I thought my great-uncle had been attached
to some foreign mission in the mean capacity of butler, or footman, for he was scrupulous of
his bow, had an excellent taste for wine, and would spend much valuable time in bringing to
light and brushing, and then putting carefully away again, certain velvet inexpressibles of
great brightness, and richly embroidered waistcoats, of wonderful length. 'These,' he would
say with an air of exultation, 'have a mysterious but mighty influence in changing and directing
the affairs of powerful nations.' He had also a boyish fondness for displaying a lithograph
of the Countess Hopenpap's family arms, presented, he said, by that august lady to the legation,
of which he had the honor of being a member, and from thence stolen by Thomas, footman in ordinary
to the establishment. For this heinous offence, Thomas, though his knowledge of etiquette was
invaluable to the mission (the gentlemen up stairs always fashioned their bows after his!),
was discharged, having been detected in the act of offering it for sale at the counter of a
dealer in old clothes.

"On the other hand, there was that about my great-uncle which completely overthrew the suspicion
of his having been a kitchen diplomatist: he was an excellent judge of dancing, and what stronger
evidence of his forming one of the polite body up-stairs, does the reader want? In addition
to this,--he not only discoursed glibly about diplomacy, but sagaciously gave out that he would
turn his back to no one in his knowledge of treaties; which said knowledge, and his crutch,
he was always ready to swear by. Those great brass buttons with the eagles, and his blue small
clothes, too, he wore to the day of his death. The parish had a feeling that no fourth of July
could be celebrated without him; and I well remember how on that day I used to think him rather
too fond of laying his crutch over the heads of all who differed with him on a question of
state policy. My readers will please understand that I have no particular interest in raising
the question as to whether my great uncle got his knowledge of diplomacy up-stairs or in the
kitchen. The fruits of my research would neither be interesting here, nor serve the object
I have in view. Enough is it to know that he would now and then get into a funny vein, and
in the outpouring of his child-like enthusiasm, let out some exceedingly rich jokes, touching
the manner in which certain gentlemen paid their, to him, most fashionable debts. And, although
the old man did at first seem himself to enjoy the recital, he was as sure to end in a great
passion. And with every deference to the feelings of certain of Mr. Pierce's gentry, who have
so recently figured upon the stage of London and Paris fashionable life, I may add that he
would testily declare nothing would so please him as to cudgel every diplomatic dandy that
brought disgrace upon his country abroad and left his countrymen to bear the smart. Indeed,
he once honestly admitted that foreigners were just foolish enough to look for exponents of
our national character among our representatives. If they were not inclined to form the most
exalted opinion of it through that test, it was because they never once took into consideration
the nature of the accomplishments necessary to our office-holders, at the door of which the
blame lay. My great-uncle said that it was not that two or three conducted themselves in a
manner unbecoming their positions, but, that, representing us in a national capacity, they
saddled the responsibility on their honester fellow-countrymen. This, to me, had something
about it I could not clearly understand; but I have since thought that if my eccentric uncle
had lived to this day, and been in possession of his crutch, a reckoning with General Pierce
had been the result. Either he had made the splinters fly, or that worthy gentleman's ear tingle
with certain facts relative to the manner in which his gentry have strutted upon the stage
we have before mentioned. I say this of the old man because his regard for the feelings of
the nation was almost equal to his reverence for the diplomatic body. And I am sure he, in
the earnestness of his soul, had prayed Mr. Pierce to take into his pious consideration the
means of remedying an evil so gross as that of his diplomatists making it the fashion of paying
their debts with that sacred character the comity of nations has granted all missions. He would
have told General Pierce that he was but a man, whose little day would soon pass on the wheel
of time, but that the country had a name to maintain among the nations, an exacting posterity
to account to! Will his men in the bye-ways have done anything to which it may recur with pride?
The stages we have twice named can answer.

"The story of Mr. Secretary Bolt, as facetiously related by my great-uncle, when in one of
his funny moods, may not be inappropriate here, inasmuch as it bears a strong resemblance to
certain realities perpetrated at this day, but which my habitual modesty forbids me transcribing
here.

'Of Bolt, morally,' my great-uncle would say, 'nothing have I to say.' This said, he would
rub his hands awhile, and then continue: 'He was correct of person--extremely so--had fine
limbs, was tall of stature, courtly in his movements, spoke with great preciseness, and a clear,
musical accent; had model features, was not a little vain of them, and always employed a tailor
prince, who dressed him with exact taste, but at an enormous cost. His motion, too, was as
graceful as needs be; indeed nature had done well her part, lavishing on his person a goodly
number of those endowments so necessary to a modern diplomatist, whose chief function is to
ornament the drawing-room, and create a flutter among certain of the fair sex. You must understand
that in Europe, as well as America, the corps diplomatic rules the roost of fashion, and, in
addition to its enrolling within its precious precincts numbers of the legitimate aristocracy,
creates a great fluttering among that of a more doubtful hue, who seek it and worship it as
the idol of their ambition. It always reminded me of birds with weak minds permitting themselves
to be charmed by snakes. However, be this as it may, the knowing ones of York State (Bolt was
a three-quarter blood Dutchman, and from that State!) declared it no scandal, when they said
his great popularity with the ladies more than made up for his lack of law knowledge. Honester
people said, if his mind was not exactly Websterian, there could not be a doubt that nature
had intended him for the profession of diplomacy rather than one requiring more profound thought.
His make-up was unexceptionable, his smile exquisite. Then he had dark moustaches, which he
would gracefully finger into such an exact curve; and he had his small whiskers so neatly combed,
and every hair on his head lay in unexceptional smoothness. The legation was not a little proud
of Bolt, and on drawing-room days, when he blazed out in his gold lace and sword, would delight
in watching the many dark, languishing eyes that would ogle him over the down of gorgeous fans.
Bolt was not dead to this admiration, for we learned, from the constant wandering of his eye,
that he rather appreciated his own popularity. For a lady to say she did not admire Mr. Secretary
Bolt, was strong evidence of her want of taste. I do not choose to enlighten the world as to
how Bolt came to be Secretary of Legation!' Here the old man would make a desperate flourish
with his crutch, by which I was led to believe that the means were none of the cleanest; in
fact that they were of a character very similar to those used at this day, and to which may
be traced the cause of certain of Mr. Pierce's diplomatists having so distinguished themselves
in Europe. 'Zounds!' the old man would continue, testily making a cross on the floor with his
crutch, 'a desperate set was soon made on our Bolt by that little world of fashion and intrigue
which, lizard-like, crawls about our Legations, and did more particularly so about the one
he honored with his handsome person. The Countess of Longblower, very distinguished (according
to the gossip of the kitchen), and wife of the celebrated Earl of that name, took him at once
into the velvet of her good graces. Here, after a little ripening at the hands of Samuel, the
polite footman in ordinary, he shone out the star of her small but wonderfully select firmament.
There were suspicious whisperings and some scandal concerning what afterwards took place between
my lady and Bolt; but as scandal and diplomacy seemed inseparable to an European atmosphere,
we as noiselessly as possible laid the charge at the door of a certain sin.' Here he would
fling down his crutch. 'The Countess's carriage was forever at the door, waiting the pleasure
of Mr. Secretary Bolt; he had a plate reserved at her table; he was the Adonis of her drawing-room;
there was a seat for him in her opera-box. In the front of the latter, facing the stately front
of her ladyship, one of her sweetest smiles forced over her hard face, sat the handsome Bolt,
now playing with the tassel of her fan, then passing upon the Cavatina a sort of rosewater
approval. He had a fund of small talk always at hand, and as her mightiness was extremely fond
of such wares, so also did Bolt become a very agreeable person. The Countess, too, would smile
so condescendingly, and keep up such a conversation with her eyes, now and then glancing at
the Earl, who dozed at a respectful distance in the rear. If unexpectedly he exhibited signs
of consciousness, Bolt would immediately divert the subject by passing some facetious criticisms
on the rotundity of the primadonna. And then my lady would chime in, having enjoyed her laugh:
'Your lordship never did enjoy anything.' The Earl's nap over, and the last act near its close
(her highness never condescended to remain for the vulgar ballet, and generally retired at
the close of the fourth act), our hero would tenderly arrange her satin, make himself so polite!
and then she took his arm so condescendingly, and exchanged the sweetest glances! How often
I pitied the poor Earl, as in the mightiness of his gravity he would bring up the rear, bearing
her ladyship's perfumed cambric. Several times a tingle of wrath came over me, and I could
not resist the thought, that had I been in the place of the poor Earl when my lady hung so
rolickingly on the arm of Secretary Bolt, and sailed with such an affected youthfulness through
the grand hall, to the no small danger of all muslin dresses in the way, my crutch had served
as a means to separate them. The old man, with weeping eyes, would now finger his bandanna
and resume his crutch. And then Samuel, in the full blaze of his livery, would stand conspicuously
at the grand entrance, and ere her highness's head loomed out at the top of the great stairs,
announced her coming in a voice that seemed to strike dismay into all unliveried bystanders.'

"One thing Secretary Bolt would, do that always displeased me, as did everything that tended
to lower the dignity of the corps. It was this:--My lady loved dearly her drives in the park,
and took them nearly every day, at the most fashionable hour of five. Bolt, in cloth exquisite,
had always his seat at her side, where his special office seemed that of nursing her favorite
poodle and smoothing the Earl, who on the front seat sat with icy straightness, all over with
cheap compliments. This was all very fine as far as it went! Being proud of Bolt, as I have
before related, we generously overlooked in him those errors which are rather the result of
vanity than the natural offspring of an imperfect education. But we, as a nation have a worthy
aversion to paying a dear price for the maintenance of dignity; hence Bolt, whose salary was
but a paltry pittance in an atmosphere of singular extravagance, soon found himself becoming
involved for the adjuncts necessary to such a connection. A happy thought, however, soon flashed
across his mind: was he not protected by the sacred character of the mission? Of course he
was!--away all misgivings! What was the contemplation of such dreary matter to the pleasing
recollection of those fair ones whose hearts he had made flutter! And then, not a day passed
but he received no end of pretty missives, perfumed and enveloped with curiously wrought lace,
and virtuous satin,--all bearing the tenderest burdens of love and despair. Bolt was indeed
fairly set upon by rival candidates for his heart, which was supposed to possess a large portion
of susceptibility. Nor were his admirers merely confined to the satin and velvet of the aristocracy,
for 'pretty Betty,' maid of all work to the Legation, and on that account so vain of the honor
that she would not condescend to associate with servants not attached to the corps, was by
Thomas, a wonderfully sagacious footman, discovered to be the writer of an highly scented missive,
directed as an arrow at the heart of Bolt. That this little shaft of the tender passion contained
some truly original lines the enlightened cannot doubt; and I think I may assert without fear
of contradiction that Betty did in these lines, notwithstanding they evinced a sovereign contempt
for orthography and versification, discover a deep knowledge of diplomacy. I say this for the
reason that her diction could be construed to mean anything but what she intended; albeit there
was such an openness about it generally that any clever gentleman might walk in at the back
door. I thought it highly creditable in Betty to attempt a thing so mighty as the conquest
of Bolt's heart--indeed there was an admirable heroism about it; but it caused a great flutter
in the kitchen, where the sensitive Thomas brought forward a motion for her extradition. Thomas
would not for the world have the character of gentlemen up stairs sullied by vulgar hands.

"'Bolt had scarcely reached the full blaze of his glory when a series of material obligations
truly alarming commenced; and as I then regretted the manner in which he discharged them, so
am I now less ashamed to relate them than sorry for their existence on the page of the past.
As nearly all Bolt's acquaintances had carriages, it seemed imperative on him to follow their
example, which he was not long in doing. And this item of expense necessarily entailed that
of two very worthy gentlemen--viz.: Mr. Fripp the coachman, and Mr. Still the footman--without
whom no turn-out can be considered complete. Well, these worthy personages were put in possession
of the carriage, but scarcely a week had passed before a great deficiency was discovered. Messrs.
Fripp and Still had acted in similar capacities to my Lady Brackenbridge, and now declared
it beneath their dignity to remain in a service not honored with livery. They laid their grievance
before Bolt, who, appreciating the deficiency, forthwith ordered the requisite plush and cockades,
to the no small joy of those worthies. If you ask me the cost of these adjuncts so necessary
to a very fine gentleman, my answer is that I cannot enlighten you; and this for the very reason,
that the cost of an article depends very much on the manner in which you pay for it.'

"As my great-uncle said this he would grasp tighter his crutch and look wrathfully about the
room for a seat. 'Bolt!' he would continue, having adjusted his shabby drab hat, 'soon learned
that in Europe tradesmen are exceedingly impressible, and notwithstanding they are held in
utter contempt by the fine gentlemen of the diplomatic world, will be their humble servant
to any amount, asking no other security than the, to them, immaculate character of the mission.
I do not mean to say that Bolt made such facilities a study; nor would I be understood as casting
a sneer at the diplomatic body in general, but when modern instances prove notorious facts,
how can I turn a deaf ear to the belief that our diplomacy has embodied another function?--that
of practising the most fashionable way of paying the most fashionable debts. Pardon this little
digression. There was a never ending demand for Bolt's custom. Mr. Peppers, the distinguished
jeweller of Regent street, would fill his order to any amount; Broadwood & Willow, tailors
in ordinary to Her Majesty, always had a newly arrived fashion, the senior partner knew his
honor would be pleased with; Dole, the wine merchant, who counted his customers among the first
nobility of the land, sent a list of his very best importation, humbly soliciting an order.
And as Mr. Secretary Bolt had not the least objection to being driven into dignity, he would
order all sorts of things, from a diamond bracelet down to a tin tea-pot for Mrs. Loveleather
the laundress. It was wonderful to see how credulous these tradesmen gentry were, and how they
would chuckle over an order from one of the legation. But I must here say that Bolt found a
clever diplomatist in Thomas, who was one of the best brought up servants in Picadilly. Thomas
had no end of accomplishments, and as a certain vice in a servant is necessary to certain poor
aristocracy and deeply involved diplomatists, so also could he lie with a facility truly incredible.
If the history of Bolt's wealth, as related to certain tradesmen by Thomas, could be handed
down to posterity, I fear my friend Cresus would find himself eclipsed. This it must be borne
in mind was before Thomas found himself dismissed for purloining the family arms of the Countess
Hopenpop. And while on the subject of purloining propensities let me here say that I fear the
vice of stealing family arms did not end with Thomas, but was transmitted by some of his more
fortunate brethren up stairs to certain diplomatic gentry of Mr. Pierce's choice, else how
comes it that they, notoriously plebian, made cockades and carriage doors bear strange devices.'

"My uncle continued: 'While as many as fifty good gossipers predicted daily the marriage of
Bolt to some aristocratic belle, there came along a lady of the name of Mrs. Bolt. This person,
whose name Mr. Bolt had been extremely careful not to lisp, caused a desperate sensation among
his admirers. My Lady Longblower was seen to cool away like liquid tallow, while not a few
who had been equally fervent just before, said it was a very impertinent thing in Mr. Bolt.
But as that gentleman took a more philosophical view of the matter he returned the compliment
by introducing his lady to several of those damsels who had but a few days before themselves
hoped to win his heart. Indeed the arrival of Mrs. Bolt, though it brought things to a more
legitimate platform, did not in the least lessen his material responsibilities. Mrs. Bolt must
have more fashionable apartments; there was that splendid diamond bracelet at Peppers'? she
must have that rich honitan cape and accompaniments at Stebbin's? drawing-room day was approaching,
and nothing less than one hundred and fifty guineas would suffice to purchase the dress she
would be presented in; Madame Lacelooper, milliner and dressmaker to the Court, urged the necessity
of her orders being in at an early day; and she must have that set of furs at Orchard's, and
Mr. Bolt must give a brilliant introduction party. Many as were the poor fellow's previous
wants Mrs. Bolt's arrival seemed to increase them four-fold. Nor would it have done for him
to have intimated a necessity for retrenchment, inasmuch as she was equally determined to keep
up the dignity of the establishment, and would not hear a word about limitation in anything.
The poor fellow now began to think a time was coming when his diplomacy would be put to the
test. He, too, had an eye to a little popularity at home, liked to be thought well of by his
fellow-citizens, who, when abroad invariably want to see all the sights and dine with their
Minister, and to that end gave them dinners and sundry other little things. Everything except
his salary Bolt found enlarged, and as his time had been principally taken up with the issuing
of orders, so was it thereafter to be arranging certain payments. Isaacs, the Hebrew gentleman
who took corners of advance checks for the convenience of his very aristocratic friends was
seen frequently about the premises, looking very serious. Six months passed and circumstances
were changed with Bolt. The Countess Longblower no longer permitted him to sit at her side
and play with the poodle; his fair admirers had lost all their compliments; and it became absolutely
necessary that Mrs. Bolt return to the more humble precincts of her home on the other side
of the water. When Peppers called for that trifle of ninety-seven guineas--pay for that necklace
that shone so about Mrs. Bolt's neck when at Court--it was curious to see how the genius of
Mr. Bolt would come out; and how in conjunction with Thomas' sagacity quite a comedy of sharps
would be played. Thomas tended door, was rather sleepy of countenance, but could assume an
air of great consequence, and would receive his importuning visitor with unexceptional bows.
'Peppers I think you said?' Thomas would politely inquire, smoothing his chin reflectively,
giving his ear a knowing cant, and concluding by whisking his fingers through his powdered
hair. 'Mr. Peppers presents a little affair this morning;' he would announce blandly, having
left the gentleman standing in the hall. Mr. Bolt, who occupied a sumptuous arm-chair in the
parlor, and generally sat reading leisurely the Morning Post, would receive this announcement
with some change of countenance. 'Peppers! Peppers!' he would reiterate, Thomas watching his
every movement. 'Blast the fellow--he's a perfect torment'--Thomas would interrupt by inquiring
if he should bow the individual out. 'Say, Thomas,' he would rejoin, 'that we are engaged to-day
studying treaties and cannot be disturbed--that he must call at a future day.' Mr. Bolt would
with great complacency, turn to a more comfortable position in his great chair. Thomas always
executed his mission with great skill, informing the unfortunate individual that a little misunderstanding
having broken out between the two nations, the Legation was extremely busy in the study of
treaties, and could not be disturbed. Having digested this piece of information rather doggedly,
Mr. Thomas would politely bow the gentleman into the street, watching his departure through
the side lights. Another time, when Broadwood called for that trifle, having a deal of ready
money to make up, it was despatch day; and upon the same principle despatch day came so often
that people began to think the Great Republic engaged in one eternal controversy with the nations
of Europe. Bolt never could be seen on despatch days. The man with the bill for the tin-teapot
was alike unsuccessful; the gentlemen up-stairs walled themselves up in despatch days, while
Thomas politely bowed out all-importuners. They were a scurvy lot, and might have known better!
Mr. Bolt thought, as he contemplated the sacred character of the mission. I well remember how
I laughed once, when Madame Lacelooper's man of business drove Mr. Secretary Bolt, as I thought,
into close quarters. Thomas, in order to somewhat diversify his apologies, had three different
times satisfied this person by informing him that the gentlemen of the Legation were in consultation
with the Prime Minister; but this time he was determined to see for himself, and regardless
of Thomas' assurance pushed his way into the presence of Mr. Bolt, who I need scarcely add
was extremely put out. 'I ask your honor's pardon' spoke the man; 'you always come,' petulantly
interrupted our hero, 'when we are in a uproar.' The man replied with a bow, that it was the
first time he had gained an audience. He came from Madame Lacelooper's, and would be extremely
glad if Mr. Bolt could make it convenient to discharge that little account, which had stood
over for some time. It was only two hundred and fourteen pounds, he said, in reply to a question
from Mr. Bolt, who encouragingly took the missive from his hand. 'Thank you--thank you!' the
man continued, evidently encouraged as our hero cast his eye over the long list of items, so
neatly carried out with heavy numbers of pounds, shillings, and pence. 'Rather heavy;' sighed
the astonished Secretary. 'I suppose you have orders for all these little affairs?'  The man
replied that he would have them forthcoming if necessary--that Madame Lacelooper's was one
of the most respectable establishments.  With a gracious bow, reaching his hand for a book
which the expectant gentleman mistook for a bank-book, Mr. Bolt replied that it was on that
account he gave it his patronage. The gentleman thanked him for the honor, and hoped he would
continue his favors. And while this little episode was performing in the great parlour, Mr.
Thomas was exercising his skill in diplomacy at the door--informing gentlemen that Mr. Bolt
was engaged over important State affairs, and politely bowing them out.'

"'Then Mr. Bolt having worked the gentleman's anxiety up to the highest pitch, would take up
his great gold pen, and on a piece of whitest paper, figure, and figure, and figure, multiply
and subtract, contort his face and nervously frisk his fingers through his curly black hair.
It was all to no purpose, however he could not twist the plaguy figures into a favorable balance.
In fact the balance, despite all his diplomacy, would get on the wrong page. At length, having
exhausted patience and found language to adapt himself to circumstances, with great blandness
of manner he would beg the gentleman, convey his compliments to Madame Lacelooper, and say
that her little matter will be discharged at a future day. His balance, he was surprised to
find, did not enable him to meet it today; and he further regretted that a very disagreeable
affair having sprung up between the Emperor of the French and his government, requiring for
a few days all the attention of the establishment, deprived him of the opportunity of repairing
to his banker's for the purpose of enlarging his deposit. Ordering an attendant to bring in
the treaties of 1812, he added how sorry he was to give Madame Lacelooper, for whom he entertained
the highest regard, so much trouble. Legations were peculiarly situated at times, he said.
In reply to an intimation from the gentleman in waiting, he said, gentlemen of the diplomatic
corps never paid in piecemeal. Here Thomas would put an end to the comedy by announcing the
arrival of the 'Minister for Foreign Affairs,' and politely bowing out the retiring gentleman,
who, you may well imagine, maintained a reluctant gravity. There was no end of these little
diplomatic comediettas, while Bolt honored the mission with his presence, ending in what was
long afterwards esteemed a capital joke, which, though somewhat against my feelings, I will
confidentially relate. Bolt had named a certain day when all his little affairs would positively
be arranged, and this dawned of a calm and sunny autumn morning, when everything about the
Legation seemed to repose in peace and quietness--when wars and obdurate creditors were forgotten,
and we plumed ourselves on the happy issue of several important international questions. One
very important member of the corps, however, seemed to have something of great importance evolving
in his mind; this was the sagacious Thomas, who paced the hall with more than ordinary superciliousness,
now and then arranging his livery in the mirror. About eleven o'clock there came a great gathering
of serious-looking individuals at the hall door; among them the quick eye of Thomas discovered
the following very respectable gentlemen, viz.:--Broadwood, of the firm of Broadwood & Willow;
Dole, the distinguished wine merchant; Staple, the bootmaker; Madame Lacelooper's man of business;
and Peppers, the jeweller. The opening of the door was succeeded by a great rush. Having expressed
some surprise at their mistake in calling so early, Thomas received his visitors with his customary
equanimity, and begged to remind them that three o'clock was the hour appointed for the interview
between themselves and Mr. Bolt. Here he threw a sly wink at Peppers, which that gentleman
rendered into an intimation to remain, while he politely bowed the remainder out. 'Wonderful
assurance, these fellows have,' said Thomas, turning to Peppers, who began to think he was
all right, 'they won't learn etiquette.' As he concluded he turned to have a view through the
side-light at his friends outside, who hung contemplatively about the door, then addressing
the inside gentleman--'Peppers, I think you said?' he continued, working his lips and smoothing
his chin with the fingers of his right hand. That gentleman bowed affirmatively as Thomas advanced
a few steps toward the parlor door, and then hesitated, as if in a deep study. 'Peppers, Peppers,
Peppers!' he accented somewhat curiously, until the creditor had well nigh lost his patience
in suspense. 'I beg your pardon, sir!' (Thomas faced about with an entirely altered face),
but, may I, ah!--hem,--you see; there is a small affair in the way, Mr. Peppers. The truth
is, Mr. Bolt has ceased his connection with this establishment.'

"'I must see him, nevertheless,' replied the obdurate creditor, permitting his suspicions to
get the better of his judgment. 'If you do,' rejoined Thomas, bowing, 'you may have a longer
drive than is agreeable at this season of the year.'

"'You don't mean to tell me that he has left?' demanded Peppers, stamping his foot, and allowing
himself to become generally excited. 'Now, my friend,' Thomas replied in the coolness of his
nature, making a motion to open the street door, 'just take the matter like a philosopher;
don't let such little affairs trouble a man of your standing. The fact is, between the sundown
of one day, and rosy dawn of another, our gallant Secretary just stepped out--that is, Mr.
Bolt has bolted!' Thomas bowed him politely out, and I leave you to judge how many indignant
threats were thrown out by Peppers, and what occurred when he related the climax to his fellow-creditors,
who having a suspicion that all was not right, waited his appearance among them at the corner
of an adjacent street, against the lamp-post of which they entered a protest deep and solemn.
My great-uncle having concluded his story, adjusted his crutch, wiped his weeping eyes, relieved
his hoarseness with a small quantity of temperance bitters, and limped away.

[Note I.--The chapter is respectfully dedicated to General Pierce.]

[Note II.--The fastidious--I mean those rather inclined to facts, may, to please their peculiar
taste, transfer the scene of Mr. Secretary Bolt's exploits to Paris; they may also add a date
more modern.]

CHAPTER XXII.

HOW SMOOTH GOT HIS MANNERS.

"Readers, and fellow citizens of these United States in general! know ye, that I, Solomon Smooth,
in the first person singular, as Uncle Sam Houston used to say, being worn out with the fatigues
of the Ostend-Aix-la-Chapelle Congress, crossed the Atlantic in two steamships--wanted to do
both a good turn--got busted up by neither--and at last found myself calmly luxuriating in
the velvet and damask of the 'White House.' By way of keeping up the spirit of Young America,
I knocked down all the attendants, stalked in like an independent citizen who felt he was part
owner of the establishment, spread myself upon the softest sofa, and demanded the flunkey,
who stood trembling in the doorway, to bring me a Turkey ottoman, on which to advantageously
take the measure of my extremes. Believe me, Sam, I went it in the way of comforts. The flunkey
shook his head, and kept up a significant silence. This was rather too much for the patience
of any respectable gentleman; and being aware that the Gineral had not larned him proper manners,
I got up and brought it myself. Nor yet did it seem just the thing--something was wanting to
complete the free-and-easy, to which end I pulled out a real Havana regalia, and puffed away
so comfortably. Then I ordered the flunkey, whose hair was seen stiffening on his head with
fright, to bring me a spittoon--felt sorry I neglected to import one from some of our European
Legations!--or I'd hurl the liquid every which way--perhaps storm his high-colored Persian
rugs! I was about to lay off in the very bliss of comfort, when Pierce, followed by his black
pig, came laraping into the room, looking as amiable and undecided as ever. 'Smooth,' he exclaimed,
greeting me with a heartiness of hand little expected, 'I am so glad to see you home once more!'
Here he suddenly paused, gave out ominous looks, lowered his voice to a whisper, and continued:
'In the name of forgiveness, where did you contract such manners?' A little cold sweat bespread
his brow just then. 'Upon the faith of my high position,' he continued, 'I thought my sending
you to Europe would have proved a polishing machine, and prepared you for shining in society.'

"'Mr. Smooth,' I modestly returned, 'would prefer the General sat down and calmly listen to
how he came by his pretty manners. Somebody has said, a man was known by the society he keeps.
Be this as it may, General, I don't come here to cast a single reflection on you; nor would
I proclaim to the fellow citizens of these United States that you are in any wise accountable
for what I am going to say and disclose.' The General, somewhat struck by my demeanor, took
a seat, nervously, and applied his ear, while I extinguished the cigar, and commenced summoning
my thoughts. 'Having no manners when I left home, General, I naturally depended for them upon
those whom my mission brought me in contact with. Now, General!--and this I would were held
strictly confidential between ourselves--when I got on the other side of the water, (here I
gave him a touch he understood), being your Minister in General I naturally fell in and associated
with your Ministers in particular; and such a lot they were! I couldn't trust my virtue in
the company of one of them: albeit, in their company, you were sure not to get into decent
society. Foreign victims of misgovernment had long viewed America as a land from whence came
the plain unostentatious gentleman of sense. How sad to think that they had of late been so
grievously disappointed! They are only men of coarse manners, and low of bringing up, assuming
the democrat, while aping the snobism of the aristocrat. General, they are of your own selecting;
and, mark me, I only name it here out of sincere regard for you, not expecting it to get abroad.
In fact, General, the people of Europe find they have been deluded. They see us affecting contempt
for the very fooleries we seek to imitate; they see these, your chosen, playing the coarse
ruffian to the end. To the foreign mind Americans are America--to its chosen they look for
the embodiment of its institutions It cannot comprehend that the mongrel-mixture you have sent
abroad constitute the very essence of that ill opinion gained of us by misrepresentation. This,
General, is strictly private--only intended for your own good. It were folly to look for pretty
manners in me after my connection with your chosen on the continent of Europe! In London I
found things all in a fuddle,--the head of the house having dwindled into obscurity, while
the juniors had been in all sorts of business but that for which they had been paid and sent
to discharge; indeed, the revolutionary business, into which members of the house had largely
entered, had brought it into all sorts of difficulties and disgraces. Again it was currently
reported that, for being too deeply engaged in the affairs of others, two of the smaller functionaries
had found themselves locked up in a police-station, and only unlocked themselves with that
protection which the sacred character of the mission is supposed to grant:--in fact, General,
and I advance the intimation for your own good, the only thing in real good order was the smoking
and spitting department. In Paris the house was a dead lock, inasmuch as the head couldn't
understand a word the French said, either about himself or his government; while the retinue
were all familiarly known at the cafes. In Madrid, the head of the house, not having the value
of discretion before his eyes, had fuzzled away all his influence, having fought sundry duels,
written himself down an ass in controversy with editors, and failed in his proposal to build
up a young republic on the ruins of an old and dissolute monarchy. Forcibly as the truth may
depict our singular misrepresentation abroad, we cannot forbear to say, that, so far did this
very French-American representative carry his fighting proclivities, that a single instance
of their being excelled--our fighting London Secretary, who had challenged a score of very
aged gentlemen (and had been equally courageous were they double the age!) without finding
a single one to accept--could not be found. At the Hague, the very respectable Hebrew gentleman,
who conducted the affairs of the house, had opened a barber-shop, where needy gentlemen could
be shaved ad libitum--provided always they brought a certain description of notes, nor were
dainty about how much were taken off the corner. The house at Lisbon, report said, had got
into very orderly disorder, which was not in accordance with the character of the very respectable
Irish gentleman who kept it, and who could absorb whiskey and tobacco with any other respectable
gentleman from Kilkenny. To the denizens, among whom he had made an extensive acquaintance,
his being an American and speaking such very good Irish and bad English was a perfect mystery.
You may be sure he likes well his situation, and finds the duties of a Minister Extraordinary
much preferable to leading the retreat of a pampero expedition.' Here the General significantly
opened one eye and shut the other: 'Only telling you this for your own good' I watched him
anxiously as he grasped me by the hand, and replied: 'Smooth! the boldest stroke in my administration
does not please me so much as sending you Minister in General to Europe. But can half you say
be true?'

"'True?' I rejoined--'too true for delicate ears! General, you may accept my word when I say
it is not so much the public duties as the private affairs of men you have got to keep a close
eye upon; when the private affairs of public men get astray the public suffers: this is borne
out in the result of your having appointed foreign gentlemen to misrepresent us abroad. Your
house at Turin is fashionable, but sorely scandalized; the people there love the fair, but
expect fairer things of Americans. Your son of Moses, who plays so well his part at Alexandria,
is a bird vain of his feather, and may to-day be seen carried through the streets in something
resembling a clothes-basket, and to-morrow in the market purchasing Nubian slaves fair to look
upon. These things may be necessary to a very fine gentleman in Alexandria; but the being who
performs them at the expense of his country well earns the pity of its people. And while I
am on this theme, General, I cannot in justice pass over one whom I say in all seriousness
has, when contrasted with others, won for himself immortal honors; I mean our worthy representative
at St. Petersburg, who understanding no language but his own, and that very imperfectly, has
the great good sense to say nothing, seclude himself from the society of the Czar, and seek
only the enjoyment of his own melancholy contemplations. Now General; however much you may
esteem the doings of your chosen, there is in Europe but one opinion of their manners; and
that opinion being, I regret to say, not the very highest, will for some time to come measure
our influence at sundry Courts. I got my manners, General, by mixing with your chosen!' The
General here drew a long breath, said dinner was almost ready; would I not change the subject,
and talk about the war business, and such things.

"Mr. Smooth, a young man of the fast school, has been calculating, during his tour in Europe,
the saving it would be to nations if they would but let their wars out by the job to some enterprising
fellow-citizen. He reckons, in a funny sort of way, he would then pay just in accordance to
the amount and quality of thrashing it were necessary to inflict upon the enemy. That it would
divest war of its glories, and ambitious men of their zeal, he never had a doubt. War taken
by the job, at a given sum for thrashing the enemy right soundly, would resolve itself into
a mere trading commodity, fit only to be dabbled in by shopkeepers and stockbrokers. By this
turn in national affairs, Kings and Czars might curtail their ambition, and their devoted subjects,
being paid to fight by the lump, would hurry through their contract. General Pierce, too, would
find it decidedly more convenient, inasmuch as it would save his benevolent people the trouble
of inflicting that most unwarrantable rebuke--sending bread to the hungry people at Greytown
he has made homeless with his bombshells. Smooth leans no disrespect to Mr. President Pierce,
who, since his wondrous victory over the Mosquitoes, has disappointed the world by demonstrating
the singular fact that he has a gunpowder policy, which he developes when he can find objects
sufficiently small for his purposes. Heretofore, Smooth had got an idea in his head (crosswise
he admits), that if Mr. President Pierce had anything assimilating to a policy, it must be
like his grandmother's hard cider--the longer it remained exposed the flatter it became. That
this was an egregious mistake, is fully proven to a mistaken world by the dauntless and immortal
Admiral Hollins (he should be promoted to the rank), who, to give positive evidence of the
size of his master's spirit, just battered down a defenseless town or two. It may turn out
that the bombshelling was only to practice a little in that sort of gunnery, and that using
up the property of American citizens to illustrate the war principles of Uncle Sam was merely
an evidence of spunk in Mr. Pierce, who expected his people to knock under.

"Smooth has been at the White House, seeing Mr. Pierce, and cautioning him about the look of
things abroad, lest they get kind of snarled up.

"Being a genuine New Englander, with real Puritanic blood in his composition, Smooth considered
himself a good sort of man,--rather a desirable neighbor, conscientious, extremely disinterested,
and always ready to do a bit of a good turn, never forgetting number one. Smooth was just going
to ask the Gineral if this was not so, when he smiled so free and easy that it settled the
point shorter.

"'Now, Smooth, you've seen a good deal, I reckon, and must be a man of profound opinions: tell
us, are we going to get fuzzled up in the breakers on the other side of the big pond?' inquired
the Gineral, looking so serious that Smooth made it a point to get his ideas squared up.

"'Somethin for us citizens to have a go-in-at, you means, I s'pose?'

"'Yes!' replied the Gineral.

"Smooth reckoned 'twas best to have an understanding about how much he was going to get from
Uncle Sam's chink-locker for doing the thrashing for these United States afore he said much
about what was going on in the world. Uncle Sam was a good old soul, and, seeing that he did
not keep the best cash account in the world, Smooth had no objection to entering into the tin
business with him, now that he had a large stock on hand. Smooth, however, must make one single
proviso, and that is, that he be always permitted to work out the p's and q's of his own demands.

"'Ah!' replied the Gineral, good-naturedly; 'Smooth, you're a sharp fellow, with gumption enough
to see through a thing or two; but remember, if we contract for the licking, with some enterprising
individual, we must pay by measurement. There's the democracy to please, the country to satisfy,
Young America to provide with clean shirts! I thought my gallant fellow Hollins would have
done that when I sent him to let strip at the Greytowners; but, as the result was different,
a body can't always tell how such things 'll turn, I now think of letting him out to the Emperor
of Russia, who having granted him means of developing his fighting capacity, by investing him
with full power to thrash the allied fleets of England and France, would not hesitate to pay
a large amount of revenue into the treasury of these United States for his daring services.
But you see, Smooth, my government is merely an experiment, which may or may not please, and
in this sense your experience will be extremely valuable.'

"Smooth saw Mr. President Pierce wanted experience; but, at the same time, he was fearful the
General would get the points, and out-general him. However, as it was always better to have
confidence in each other when pursuing a political question, and knowing the General to be
a sort of clever fellow, ready to do almost anything, he entered upon the decyphering. There
was the S.S.S. (Sickles, Souley, and Saunders) Company, doing a slap-up business in Europe!
He must have them thrown in. While the head of the firm was generously lending a hand to turn
mother monarchy out of doors, and the in-door partner was making sad use of the stock in trade
(which consisted of a very large supply of letter-writing material, only to be used for disseminating
republican principles), the junior of the house, taking advantage of the opportune moment,
thought it quite in keeping with the spirit of the times to make a spec on his own account;
and to that end the said junior partner (not the least sagacious of the three), with a bill
of sale of Cuba in his pocket, had just stepped over to Washington to consummate the purchase,
and revel awhile in the damask of the White House. Borland, finding no more congressional faces
to smash in Washington--from which city it was considered General Pierce had removed an intolerable
perplexity by sending him to foreign parts--had been recompensed by the smashing of his own,
in Central America, where he had raised a tolerable sort of a breeze. He, too, must be thrown
in. Seymour, the blue-stocking governor, of whom so much was expected, and whose mission to
the god of all the Rushas, American statesmen looked upon with great anxiety, it was currently
reported had burrowed in a snow-bank somewhere in the interior of the amiable Czar's vast dominions,
not one word having been heard of him for the last nine months. That he had not lent material
aid to the fighting Cossack, was a source of grievous dissatisfaction to Young America.

"Smooth spread all these things out before the Gineral, just as clear as water. To get Cuba--which
was not just ready to hook on--and St. Domingo, that it would take some nice diplomacy to make
consider the annexation question, and a few slices more of Mexico, ready to make fast any moment;
the Sandwich Islands, yearning to get in; Central America, hardly worth taking in, but nevertheless
acceptable, on the ground of carrying out the universal plan, and Canada only requiring a little
more coaxing, Smooth thought the cost could be reckoned down to a close figure. But there was
Uncle Johnny, and his newly-coined friend Louis Napoleon, to be kept shy while all this was
going on; and just there the plague and expense of the thing hung. However, Smooth scratched
his head, and made up his mind to enter into a bargain to do the licking at a fair showing,
cash down. As to the brush between Nicholas and his neighbor--unhappy wretches; one always
wanting to steal the bits of stray territory--Smooth found it painful to keep his fingers out;
but there was this to be taken into consideration: the getting his fingers in might be the
getting out of his commerce, which said commerce was the model machine of the Model Republic's
power.

"Mr. President Pierce fully believed that Nicholas of all the Rushas had got his eye set to
the East, notwithstanding he had quite enough to do in the West; and, though he declared himself
moved only by christian visions, it seemed curious enough that he had not the slightest objection
to raising most un-christian wars. Nicholas was shrewder than a Connecticut tin pedlar, and
more ambitious than a South Carolina politician, who, ever and anon, is ready to war with the
Britishers, because the fools obstinately refused to admire slavery. Nicholas had got himself
into an interminable fix. Mr. Pierce, merely to please the youthful democracy, would like to
lend Nick a hand to unfix himself, but the hitherto dormant power of the nation quickens to
action, and says, 'It won't do, Mr. General Pierce!' Forced to submit, the General consoles
himself with the fact that his friend Nicholas will draw himself into his invulnerable shell,
sing the Te Deums, and trust the fate of war, for a dozen years or so, to the All-wise Father.

"'Now, Gineral,' said Smooth, addressing himself to Mr. President Pierce, 'the items are all
down!--there will be warm work, depend upon it!--and seeing how Uncle Sam'll have to scratch
in somewhere (just to make a point or two), Cousin Caleb and me will take the job of doing
all the necessary fighting on both sides the big pond, and getting all the stray territory
required to complete these United States, for eighty-six million dollars--two and a half per
cent. off for ready money. Might as well let Smooth have the shiners, seeing how me and Caleb
would give security to do the fighting up brown; and. then somebody was getting the tin out
of Uncle Sam's big bag in a fast kind of way that nobody could explain. Smooth begged Mr. President
Pierce to give the thing a few turns over in his head, and when the problem came as clear as
daylight, send him his figure by the first post.' With this, Mr. Smooth retired to the National.

CHAPTER XXIV.

MR. PIERCE SENDS SMOOTH DOWN AMONG THE BRITISHERS.

"Mr. Smooth (I write after the style most in fashion), having been associated with Mr. Pierce,
whose Minister in general he was, as has been set forth in this history, is come to be regarded
as a very dangerous individual. It is astonishing with what facility we gain bad repute from
association with a certain class of men and things. Our country is a stalwart oasis, rising
in reproachful greatness over the old and dwindling dependencies around it; but our Pierce
government is a waste in its centre, contaminating and casting the blight of intrigue upon
those connected with it. It builds bulwarks for itself, and breaks them down with the mere
fog of its own breakers. It, like a dauntless boy, seizes the helm of State, and steering by
scheme instead of compass, runs the ship ashore in unknown seas. As Smooth is a national Christian,
he believes the timbers of the old ship tough and strong, or they had been bilged ere this.
But, while speaking of contamination in connection with Mr. Pierce, he (Smooth) is forcibly
reminded of the similarity between it and an episode in the life of his great-grandfather.
This venerable ancestor, when fine society was less tenacious of its associations, entered
upon the cultivation of pumpkins as a business, but in after life, as the novelist has it,
became a railroad president, and as an inseparable result, a great financier. When in the latter
position, being a very sensitive person, he tried to get rid of the odor of the pumpkin business;
but all to no purpose. Do what he would, go where he would, contribute to what he would, mix
with what society he would, be as generous as he would, people were heard to whisper 'pumpkins;'
and to construe his motives as prompted by the same spirit which induced him to make a business
of cultivating that vegetable. A similar odor, arising from his connection with Pierce, Smooth
found clinging to his garments. The world in general viewed him as a dangerous man, for the
simple reason that his master was regarded with the same eye of suspicion. Pierce was not ignorant
of this, and to obviate Smooth's difficulties, said he would send him Down East, as before
related. Being of an undecided turn, he could not make up his mind about the war business in
Europe, nor could he exactly define where he stood with regard to Central America. He would
like to give me (Smooth) the job to do the fighting for these United States, for he felt sure
I could not fail to make a grand affair of it. As for Caleb being taken into the contract (he,
the General, shook his head doubtingly), he had some doubt of the policy; he was fast enough,
but there was no knowing which way he would turn at any moment, nor was he at all times to
be trusted. For the present, Smooth must be contented with a first-class mission to Down East,
where he would settle the fish and other questions international; at the same time, he might
be evolving in his mind the affair of the war. Did Minister Smooth deem it expedient, he might
without prejudice, taking the Ostend for example, call together on the Island of St. Paul--or,
if preferable, the Isle of Sables--a Congress of American Ministers, provided, nevertheless,
he invite Major Hammet, of the Pictou Mission, and Governor Darby, of the Isle of Dogs. Pierce
strictly enjoined that no letters be received from Monsieur Souley, nor his dogmatic Secretary,
and that the subjects to be discussed were the internal affairs of Baffin's Bay, Greenland,
the North Pole, the Labrador Coast, and the straits of Bell Isle--from which the importation
of cod oil had sadly fallen off during our fish difficulties. Not to weary the reader, Smooth
is here happy to relieve his mind by stating that simple prudence restrained him from calling
together this august Congress; he left it where he found it--in Mr. Pierce's fruitful head.

"Conscious of the necessity, Smooth bound Mr. Pierce down to detail, particularly stipulating
that he should bear the ultimate responsibility in the event of failure. Now to the result!

"His opinion of the Novascotians had always been favorable, and when he left Mr. Pierce it
was with a promise that he would do all he could to enlighten them. But as impressions will
change at a nearer view, so when he got wrong did he regard both the quality and quantity of
their radicalism as injurious to the best interests of the State. There was in the little green-hilled
province an endless amount of political talking done, with so small an amount of patriotism
evinced, that we were not at a loss for the cause that had kept the State in obscurity. Then
there seemed so much government, that everything was ungoverned. And he (Smooth) thought there
was a want of activity, physical as well as mental, and a recklessness of getting into debt
to Mr. John Bull, who never could infuse a sufficient sense of honor into his Colonial subjects
to make them pay over, or regard their obligations. Want of energy and a criminal dependence
upon the 'home Government' for assistance, with which to develop the resources of the country,
resulted in a want of confidence in the State's own means to better its condition. The Home
Government, and an imported Governor, were blighting to their vital energies. This subject,
however, is not fruitful, hence his reader will please accompany him to a different. Having
left Pierce for a time, Smooth, with that resolution so characteristic of his countrymen, wherever
found, entered into the codfish business. Transforming himself (after the manner of his uncle
Jeff Davis), into a captain of the fishing schooner Starlight, which said schooner he ran over
the treaty line straight into Fox Island, on the coast of Cape Breton, where he proposed making
the acquaintance of the inhabitants, and, if possible, a treaty of friendship and commerce.
The waters in and about the port were alive with mackerel--the finest, plumpest, fattest, and
most willing fish ever seen in any waters. They sported round us, looking clever enough to
make all on board the schooner believe they wanted to come on board. The crew felt like scraping
acquaintance with them, favoring them with a hook, and the like; but then there interposed
that great bugbear--the treaty line. Hard was it to tell where this line was; it might, for
aught to the contrary, be on the top of a wave, upon which we might be tossed, much against
Smooth's inclination, far into the unlawful side. Being, however, inside of the line and surrounded
by mackerel, one would have supposed the Nova Scotians had been on the alert catching them.
The case was just the reverse, for not a Nova Scotiaman was to be seen. To Smooth's mind this
was making a law to protect the lazy, something he never approved of, more especially in these
days of energy and railroads. A determination was come to, after mature deliberation, that
fish there were and fish our boys must have, so you must lend an ear while Smooth relates the
manner in which he got them. Deacon Hawkins kept an inn for the entertainment of man and beast.
It was not the very best kind of an inn, for it was managed by the deacon's wife, whose parsimony
and love of Friday evening meetings had lost her nearly all her guests and driven her children
barefoot into the street. On the day following the Starlight's arrival, as luck would have
it, a 'political meeting' was to be holden at the Deacon's, when a considerable amount of first-rate
drinking was sure to come off. Smooth, being Mr. Pierce's minister in general, was honored
with an invitation which he declined in consideration of his anxiety to be among the mackerel.
Something must indeed be done for the mackerel; the case was a serious one. Had the Britishers
shown a resolution to be among the fish, Smooth had lent them a hand to secure the whole shoal,
and then brought them back, merely to avoid the penalty of the British law, and secure the
bounty given by ours. Well, the Britishers were all gone to a political meeting, where a noisy
politician of the name of Joe Howe, and another of the name of Doyle, having come all the way
from Halifax, and brought with them other great men of the political world of Nova Scotia,
would relieve themselves of ponderous speeches, to hear which all the old men of the parish
would take their promising sons. Smooth never regarded political meetings over highly, and
had more than once thought those so earnest in attending them had done much better attending
their potato fields. With this opinion made stronger in the present instance, he counselled
Mister Splitwater, the mate, whose logic never was known to be at fault. Splitwater, agreed
that it was expedient to be in pursuit of the fish while the Britishers were attending their
political gatherings and prayer-meetings. Mackerel were right knowing fish, he said, and could
with good feed be coaxed across the line, and into the waters not held sacred against American
hooks by British law. And to this end a goodly amount of bait was ground up; and the wind coming
in the quarter most favorable to our movements, canvas was got on the Starlight, and in charge
of Splitwater, who was directed to keep a bright eye on the warships, she put to sea like a
thing of life dancing with snowy wings over the blue, blue waters. While he was taking care
of the fish, Smooth remained on shore, keeping those who attended the political meeting all
right, and making a speech or two when called upon.

"To hear the eloquent Joe Howe tell the Nova Scotians what they would be were it not for James
Johnson and Toryism was really very amusing. He forgot to tell them that he had no serious
objection to being made Colonial Secretary seeing that a nice little salary was attached. When
Smooth made his appearance at the political gathering of course no one thought there was any
fish-taking going on. Then he endeavored to make the credulous citizens feel free and easy,
entertaining them with jokes of a strong kind, and explaining the crude process of electioneering
down in Texas and Arkansas. No sooner had the politicians got through their speeches than they
retired to what was called an 'open house,' where all good radicals could drink ad libitum
and make merry. Smooth was honored with an invitation to join in a few joyous glasses, but
he rather doubted the policy of drinking so much election liquor. It might under certain circumstances
serve the ends of politicians, but never the greater interests of a nation. A drinking man
is sure to fool himself in the end, nor can a man serve the interests of the State who neglects
his own. But, be it here understood Uncle Sam, there is a philosophical way of applying the
practical to make things profitable, which may be carried out with more facility by making
oneself cheerful and courteous with those among whom we may be cast. This Smooth always aimed
to do.

After a while Smooth calculated how he'd got politics enough; an' knowin' how Splitwater was
'commodatin' the mackerel outside the line, he steps down to Deacon Sam Moody's prayer meetin',
what they holds at night after the 'lection meetin. Here it was all right; Smooth was just
as much of a Christian as anybody could honestly be, and a longer face nobody could desire.
Smooth, at the Deacon's, was-well known for his pious principles; but the good folk about there
had never seen Smooth in an anxious way. Well, the deacon congratulated Smooth on his appearance,
his spiritual welfare, his happy prospects of something beyond this. It would have done you
good to see the brothers and sisters crowd round him, lookin' so excited 'bout the care of
somethin' anybody can take care of without neglectin' business. (We here give Smooth's language
in its crude state). It was amazin' to see what an amount of pious a fellow could get into
his face, and then get his face into a right focus; but when brother Smalwood invited him to
pray! that was shavin' the thing a little too close--more nor a man what was thinking about
Splitwater and the mackerel could shoulder. Had not a mite of an objection to 'commodatin'
the good folks with 'most anything, or puttin' on the longest and seriousest face out doors--a
face that would beat the Deacon's; but couldn't go t'other thing. Smooth could rather beat
the Deacon on a serious face; but the old hoss was a regular steamboat when it come to exhortations
and such things. Wouldn't 'a done to have a brush with the Deacon, without being sure of beating
him, for he was mighty egotistical about his prayers. Well, there was no help for it, we must
feel kind and happy to see so many happy ones around one, who could not? It was strictly in
accordance with Smooth's philosophy to make people as happy as possible, and so he kept asking
anxious questions, gettin' satisfactory answers,--answers that would be sure to make me all
straight in the pious, with a day or two's consideration.

"In this way the spirits kept up until the pleasant hour of midnight came; then the Deacon
invited me to go home and hang up at his house. It was just the thing for Smooth, but he had
to decline twice before he got over the polite so to accept: and then he knew Split was taking
the mackerel aboard like sixty. So he went home with the deacon, turned in for the night, and
knew nothing more till daylight.

"Now he must disclose how the Starlight and Split got along, coaxing the mackerel with fresh
bait, just as General Pierce does the Soft Shells. Split meets the schooner Spunk, Skipper
Pluck, afore he begun to get to the line, outside of which he could fish according to law.
Split and he were old cronies, and they just heaves to, and has a talk about what's best to
be done. 'Twarn't long afore they had negotiated the plan, which, when carried out, they were
to divide the spoils equal. Seeing how the Britishers, every year, pay over a million pounds
sterling for keeping open the fishing question, driving the fish out of the water with big
man-o'-war ships and steamships, and making a deal of pleasant fun for a great many fine gentlemen
who threaten to swallow a fisherman for taking a fish; and that the United States pay about
one-fifth as much for the privilege of sending some of their big ships to help the Britishers
play the genteel, while hoping that stupid diplomacy will long continue to give them the same
Opportunity, Split and Pluck reckoned how they'd come a point over the Britishers.

"The great point was to steer clear of the big British steamer, Devastation. Pluck said he
seed her steamin' away down to the northward t'other a'ternoon, and so it was agreed that Pluck,
with the Pinkey Spunk, should run down in her track. If he sighted her in the morning he was
just to play her about some, until Split got the mackerel on board. And so, instead of the
Devastation going in search of him, the Spunk went after her, and, as luck would have it, met
her just inside of the treaty line. The Spunk pretended to be shying--put on the rags as if
he was going to try legs with the Devastation. Crowdin' steam like all Jehu, down the Devastation
came, as if she were going to smash the Spunk, and blow her to Daniel's dungeon. Bang! whang!
boomed a gun or two, but seem' how ther' warn't no iron fallin' about, Pluck reckoned he'd
keep her to it a time longer, knowin' in his soul that every mile further he got the Devastation
away from the Starlight, so much the better for Splitwater and the mackerel. It warn't long,
afore whir! ziz! ziz! came somethin' what made a mighty splashin', and looked savagarous, square
across her stern sheets. Pluck reckoned how the Britisher had got his dander up, and about
cleverest thing would be to round to, seem' how the feller was wastin' his shot, and sendin'
things what might save a body the trouble of puttin' on a night-cap about bedtime. 'Now,' said
Pluck, 'the Devastation feels kind a out o' sorts, and 'll just knock the Spunk into an apple
dumplin';' but she didn't! Well, the skipper and his dandy officers came on board, looking
all so shined up, and vented their indignant feelins' by takin' it all out in a shower of cussin'
that would 'a made yer hair stand on end straight. In a few minutes more, a feller in a monkey
jacket, a brass button on his hat, and otherwise officially costumed, put on the dignity of
the quarter-deck, and out-talked the skipper. 'Now, why the devil didn't you come to when you
saw our signal?' says he, with a face of daggers, and looking at Pluck as if he was goin' to
spring the main-mast with his teeth. 'Hand up yer papers here--quick, bear a hand! Take off
yer hatches, too; you've been fishing inside of the line,' he grumbled out, as quickly as you'd
overhaul a chain cable. Pluck bore it like a philosopher, cool and quietly. 'No we hain't nether,
stranger; hain't hooked a fish for two days. Can't 'commodate us with a sup of fresh water,
can ye? Wanted to get a chance at the shore, but ain't had one for more nor three weeks; true!
by Christopher Columbus,' rejoined Uncle Pluck, puttin' on the most innocent face ye ever did see.

"'We'll talk about that by-and-by,' says the Britisher. 'If you'd a cum to, like a man, as
you should, and not given us this long chase after you, you might have had some claim to our
generosity. We are only carrying out Her Majesty's orders for the benefit of the Colonial fisheries.'

"'Lord love yer soul, stranger! had I but known that, ye wouldn't a seen this salt-water citizen
about these diggings. Pluck had been hum, helping Cousin Gethro to keep school--would!'

"'Never mind that. We don't want yer Yankee soft sauder! Bear a hand, get your hatches off,
and your papers up!'

"'Ye hain't seen Uncle Caleb's craft--her name's the Winking Weazel--as ye come from down north,
have ye?' inquires Pluck, giving the mate a side wink.

"'What the devil do I care about yer Winking Weazels? I'm quite certain you have been fishing
inside of the line, or you had obeyed our summons properly,' he growled out again, like a bear
in trouble. 'Blow my buttons, if I warn't most scared to death when I seed ye comin'! Couldn't
tell what on 'arth ye wanted; and I know'd that if there war' a chance at all, it was to run.
If I'd know'd ye war' such a clever lookin' fellow, and that ye warn't a going to hurt a body,
I'd come to quicker nor lightenin.' Pluck got all the philosophy in his natur' up. 'Suppose
ye step down into the cabin and have a leetle of somethin' to take, seem' what a tarnal ugly
fog's comin' up. Tom Blowers 'll get all the things clear, so ye can take a look round, and
be satisfied how we ain't been takin' advantage of the law, while you and me wets t'other eye
with a little what won't taste bad,' continues Pluck, doing the polite all up. The good natur'
of the chap was a good way down' in him, but talkin' of a little drop just dropped into the
right place, brought it up all over him. 'Well, seeing it's you, providing it's right good,
I don't mind,' he replied, reflectively. It warmed up the tender spot in his stomach, and,
going down below, he wet t'other eye twice. 'Stonishin' to see how good the critter got all
at once. He was just the best natured Britisher that ever came along. 'Twas just the medicine
to cure his disease.

"'Now! here's the dockerments' (Pluck hands him the papers), 'and ye can take a squint into
the hold. Hain't touched a fish for three days. Just so, stranger,' rejoined Pluck, tellin'
the cook to get the skipper of the Devastation to be kind enough to lend him a keg of water.

"'Schooner Spunk, of Barnstable, 84 tons burden, Jacob Pluck, master, &c., &c. Mighty formidable
combination,' ejaculated the Britisher, lookin' his eyes almost out, and runnin' the forefinger
of his right hand over the Spunk's Certificate. Then turning to Pluck, a sort of half-way grin
of good nature on his countenance, he continued: 'You Yankees are curious specimens, after
all. Pretty generous, good-natured when it's profitable, hard to understand, and as cute as--'

"'Don't say the last!' interrupts Pluck. 'Seeing it's you, citizen, we wont argue that point
just now. Satisfied on the dockerments, ain't ye?'

"'Confound the dockerments! I don't want to bother myself with them. Mind your eye next time;
cover when you see the signal,' says the Britisher, whom Pluck had got nicely smoothed down.

"'Reckon how there won't be any mistake about it next time. Give us yer hand, captain.' (Pluck
shakes hands with the Britisher). 'They say the Pinkey, Starlight--you know she's a ripper
to fish inside of the line!--got into a monstrous shoal of fresh mackerel day afore yesterday,
and is now takin' on 'em like sixty, inside of the line, down north-east of us.'

"'Do you tell me that? That fellow Smooth at it, again, fishing inside of the line? And inside
the point as well, I suppose?' The Britisher looked surprised, and listened attentively to
Pluck as he assumed an air of innocence.

"'Just so! Smooth is the keenest feller. Don't care a whit about the line; and the Starlight's
so mighty used to fishin' inside, that even the fish seem to have a likin' for the skipper.'

"'I'll see after that treaty-breaker, I will,' growls the chap, changing his good natur' into
bad again.

"'Down north-east of us ye'll find him, inside the point,' continues Pluck, looking all over
serious.

"'I'll catch the fellow, and right soon, too;' and, being right good friends, they shook hands,
and the Britisher left, quite satisfied. Just as he, in his boat, was leavin' the Spunk for
the Devastation, Pluck bellowed out, fearin' he'd forget it, 'Keep a straight course, north-east
about two points east! about two points east! and yer sure to come upon him.' The last thing
Pluck saw of the Devastation, she was heading for the supposed spot, steering away, drivin'
all the fish into the middle of the Atlantic, and expecting to find the Starlight where Pluck
said she was.

"No sooner was the Devastation put all right than Pluck hauled his wind, and next mornin' came
up with the Starlight, which had taken about eighty barrels of fine fat mackerel. The game
being nicely played, the Starlight and the Spunk both run in for a shelter, where the spoils
could be shared according to practical diplomacy--not the diplomacy that has been twenty years
gettin' the question into an interminable difficulty. This done, Smooth, having helped the
folks on shore with their political meetings, and prayer meetings, and consultation meetings,
stepped on board again, and took command of the Starlight without any extra trouble. But that
was not the end of it. The looks of such fine fat fish raised a mighty fuss in the town, everybody
forgot the politics and the prayer meetings, and begun to talk fish. They declared the Yankees
had encroached on the Britisher's rights. Despatches were next day to go to head-quarters,
a whole British fleet was wanted, and must come down and seize Smooth's Pinkey, the Starlight--fish
and all. The whole talk and noise didn't make much matter to Smooth; he didn't believe in talking--acting
was his motto--go-ahead. 'Blow away, citizens--blow away! A little more energy is worth the
whole. There is fish enough for us all; but politics and prayer meetings will not catch them.'

CHAPTER XXV.

THE PIOUS SQUIRE.

"The good people of Nova Scotia were, in days gone by, exceedingly given to Toryism, and, as
was then held to be the natural result, very loyal. To such an extent was this loyalty and
love of Toryism--as it was then called--carried, that a person who consumed 'Yankee goods'
was seriously suspected of some improper design against the State. The consumption of British
manufactures and British-grown produce was, on the other hand taken as strong testimony of
loyalty and confidence in the wise powers protecting the interests of the State. The very presence
of 'Yankee goods' was ominous of evil; and as it was desirable the good people should be kept
well up to their Toryism, many were the means resorted to for forcing the exclusive consumption
of British produce. Tea from the United States was prohibited for the benefit of the East India
Company--powder must be British! Tobacco paid imperial and colonial duties approximating to
a prohibition; and the consumer of the weed was considered quite an extravagant aristocrat,
who either had dealings with smugglers, or was wasting his fortune in the ways of the devil.
In a word, imperial and colonial duties dried up the energies of the people, and gave new life
to a contraband trade that was fast destroying the best interests of the State. The result
was, that the best smuggler was the most desperate fellow; but it generally happened that the
man who said most against 'Yankee goods' was sure to be deepest implicated in contraband trade.

"To be a scientific smuggler in those days it was necessary to be a justice of the peace: and
if the office were coupled with that of church warden so much the better. About this time there
was, in the Bay of Fundy, an old coaster of the name of Hornblower, who knew every creek, cove,
inlet and headland, together with all the best points for smuggling, from the St. Croix River
to Windsor Bay on the one side, and from Windsor Bay to Barrington on the other. Skipper Hornblower,
as he was then called, had the go-ahead in him, and commanded the schooner Dash, owned by one
Squire Burgle, who carried on a strictly legitimate trade with the Yankees over the line, though
he always gave out that he hated them as a people, nor would ever sell a pennyworth of their
notions which he denounced as worthless. Hornblower was a brusque old salt, but had a right
good heart in him, and, not liking the way trade was restricted by imperial and colonial exactions,
thought it no harm to work to windward of the collectors now and then, and accommodate his
friends in a free-trade sort of way. Tea, 'in them times,' cost six colonial shillings and
a day's journey per pound, and a gallon of molasses about the same. The good old women in more
remote parts of the province, must have their tea, and molasses was an indispensable luxury,
for they were indeed poor. But they were compelled to buy of the established merchant, who
was a sort of prince in his way, and dictated his terms to the people, whom he always kept
in poverty while he got rich. Molasses, tea, tobacco, and rum (New England white-eye, labelled
Jamaica!) constituted his stock in trade. To length of credit he added corresponding prices,
never forgetting to take good security. His medium price for tick was only forty per cent.
addition, which he considered extremely liberal.

"And thus, through a pettifogging colonial policy, commerce was turned into the merest peculation
by a class of persons who made it their object to restrict the agriculturist, and hold his
interests at their mercy. The more the farmer raised, the more he found himself subject to
the shopkeeper's narrow restrictions; and thus the interests of a naturally energetic people
were held in check. The Home Government (God bless it! as the very loyal Provincials used to
say when the Imperial Parliament took their cause under consideration) thought little about
the outside Nova Scotians, except to say, once in a while, that the territory they inhabited
belonged to her Majesty, which fact the people of the province were forcibly reminded of by
the presence of imported gentlemen, whom it had pleased her Majesty to place in all responsible
offices. In fact, the Home Government, through its pewter-headed policy, was for ever making
laws to suit the immediate demands of a favored few, who said good things of loyalty and toryism,
and left the rest to chance.

"During this state of affairs, Skipper Hornblower's fame sounded far and wide, and many were
the stories told of his smuggling exploits, and how Squire Burgle always kept a large stock
of British goods on hand, which he never sold cheaper than any body else, though he got richer.
Hornblower's account of how he and the Squire carried on business together in the good old
times may not be uninteresting, 'Squire Burgle,' said Hornblower, 'was a great man in them
days, said a sight of good things in his prayers every night and morning, denounced smuggling,
and hoped all those fearless men that followed it would see the error of their way, turn to
her Majesty, and make their loyalty honor the State. Squire used to send me to Boston--(the
Dash was the only craft in the trade then)--with little things to sell, and a return cargo
of flour, gin, tobacco, and such like Yankee notions, which the Nova Scotians must have, and
upon which her Majesty lavished most ungracious duties, to fetch home. Well, the Squire lived
at the town of Annapolis, twenty miles up a river, where Digby, at its entrance, was the only
port of entry within a hundred miles. Seeing that I liked to make quick trips, it was not always
convenient to stop at this obdurate port of entry, and so I used to lay the Dash's head for
a piece of dark wood on a point of land outside the entrance (always being careful to have
a clearance in merchandise) and run her close aboard of it. Squire had a cousin living near
that bit of wood, who used to understand the thing, and could sight the Dash's signal ten miles
at sea. Lying off and on until sundown, the Squire's cousin would hang out a light on a tree;
if at the top it was the signal--'All right;' if half-mast, 'Keep out!' 'There's the light--all
right to-night! the boys used to say, when it gleamed at the tree top.' Then into the basin
and up the river we used to dodge, passing on the opposite side of the river, and as far from
the port of entry as it was possible to get, and reaching a point on the banks where the cargo
was to be discharged, while the folks on shore were all nicely sleeping. The Squire, of course,
had said his prayers, or, as it sometimes would happen--though it was always accidental--had
gone to Digby, for the purpose of giving her Majesty's Collector a ride into the country. The
Collector was always an imported gentleman, who maintained a good deal of imported dignity,
which the Nova Scotians had to 'tip' out of him, ere he became a clever fellow, according to
their notion of such a being. In addition to taking the Collector a short pleasure trip into
the country, the Squire had a nigger fellow, of the name of Tom, who, as cunning as a fox,
could tell the Dash was coming, by something he always said he saw was in the clouds. Tom lived
on Pin Point, where the Squire had his half-way warehouse, always full of foreign goods, on
which no one could tell how much duty had been paid. This half-way warehouse, which Tom called
his, used to atone for a monstrous quantity of sins. The Squire, however, declared he had established
it there, in the fulness of his generosity, merely to accommodate his kind customers, whose
means of travelling did not enable them to reach his trading marts at either extreme. But,
when customers called at Pin-Point to do a little trading with the Squire, they generally found
it closed, and Old Tom offering his very best apology, by saying it was where master only did
his wholesale business. This was accepted on the ground that the Squire and Tom were very funny
individuals. Well, we would run to the Point at night, and Tom having everything ready to move
at the word, would shoot the Yankee goods into the warehouse, where, in six hours, they would
be all transferred into real British growth and manufacture. During this time the Squire was
nowhere; but Tom did things as if he knew how. Indeed no sooner were the goods out than we
made the best of our way down the river again.

"Next morning, the sun about two hours up, you would see the Dash away down the bay, as calm
as moonlight, just sighting Digby. Squire--totally ignorant of Hornblower's arrival--would
be putting on the longest face in the town of Annapolis, going up and down the street quite
disconsolate, and climbing into the church steeple to see if he could sight the Dash below.
'Hornblower's gone this time!' he would say, shaking his head, 'must be lost! must be lost!
must be lost!' And the Squire would tell about his horrid dream, seeing Hornblower's ghost
smuggling a chest of tea (real congou), and the Collector catching him on the spot. 'Hornblower's
tricky--he larnt it of the Yankees--and I'm always afraid he'll get cotched smuggling little
things for himself. What a blessing it is to have a clear conscience!' he would say: the last
sentence referring to himself.

"But soon the knowing ones got an inkling of the Squire's secrets, and when he mentioned the
Dash in his prayers at morning, and walked the wharf after breakfast, muttering his misgivings,
she was sure to arrive in the afternoon. There was virtue in the Squire, but the citizens got
the hang of it so well, that whenever I arrived at town they would say: 'It's only Hornblower's
ghost.'

"While the Squire would be doing what he called the straight-forward up in town, I'd be dropping
kedge at Digby, where (the Colonial Parliament having withdrawn the appropriation for a boarding-boat,
that smugglers might get through their little operations without trouble) we would send our
own boat for the collector. Used to have everything as bright as a new sixpence, and colors
flying, and my own face squared up to do the honest, when that imported dignitary came on board,
affecting all the importance of a Port-Admiral.

"'Had a good passage, eh, Hornblower?' the prim collector used to ask, as he mounted the rail.

"'Blowed like cannons, outside, last night! Seeing how we had just ballast in her, like to
tipped her over,' I'd say, bowing, keeping my hat in my hand, and doing the polite all up.

"'Didn't have a chance to smuggle, according to that, eh?'

"'Yer honor knows Hornblower never does that sort of thing. The Squire, my owner, is pious,
you know,' I'd say, keeping the long face hard down.

"'Yes, Hornblower, I know your owner to be conscientious and pious; that is why I always let
you off so easy.' And the collector would look so credulously good-natured that I couldn't
help drawing out a roll of cigars, telling him they were pure Havanas, when presenting them.
It used to do me good to see how it--small as it was--softened things about his heart. I would
immediately follow the cigars with the papers, taking good care to have merchandise enough
in the hold to correspond with what was set forth on the clearance and manifest. 'Ye see, sir,'
I'd remark, 'I never smuggles, except it is a few cigars now and then, for my own smoking!
Old Jacob Grimes says, when a government makes laws what people can't live to, you must live
round them; but them ain't my principles.'

"'Thank you, Mr. Hornblower, I am sure you have more regard for your honor than to smuggle,'
he would resume, keeping his eyes fixed upon me.

"'I am obliged to you for the confidence--the confidence of superiors in spirit or body; and
I hope I may never do anything but what will merit yours. It has been my motto through life
to keep before me the words of my good old mother. Ah! she was a mother. Fond soul, she used
to say, 'Solomon, my boy, let your dealing with the world be marked by honesty, and remember
that one small error in your life may stain forever your character. The eyes of an unforgiving
world once excited to suspicion will ever wear the same glasses.'' Having said this, nothing
more was wanted to make complete the Squire's confidence. Without further detention, he would
have the papers made out, and having received them, we would trim our sheets and sail away
up the river, Old Tom boarding us off Pin Point, and laughing himself almost out of his black
skin--welcoming us after the fashion of friends met after a long absence. All this time the
Squire would be impatiently waiting on the wharf at the little town of Annapolis--so glad to
see Hornblower! 'No contraband goods on board, eh, Hornblower?' he would inquire, affecting
such an amount of piety that it made me laugh in my shoes.

"'Not so much as a plug of tobacco!' I would reply, contemplatively, as the crew commenced
putting out the few things we had entered at Her Majesty's Custom House. We had great regard
for Her Majesty; nor have I the least doubt of the Squire's honesty, which would have been
all right had it not been for the law and parliament. We have only to add that, having played
his part after the manner of a good Christian, he would seek his way home, there to arrange
an evening prayer-meeting.

"But the beauty of the Squire's nature, as illustrated in his pious hatred of smuggling, or
otherwise defrauding Her Majesty, would shine out bright on the day the Dash left on her return
voyage. I was sure of an invitation to breakfast with him on that morning, and he was equally
sure to paint the purity of his conscience in such glowing colors that it was difficult for
me to maintain a serious face. When we had eaten bread, and he had offered up his prayer (in
which he always remembered Her Majesty), he would accompany me to the Dash, when, having got
on board, and cast off, he would mount the most prominent place on the cap-sill, where the
citizens assembled could hear him, and cry out at the top of his voice:--'Hornblower! good-bye.
One word more, Hornblower! Let me entreat you not to smuggle a pennyworth for anybody.' My
reply always was that I would follow his advice with christian strictness. Then he would modestly
finger that cravat so white, and fix in his face such becoming dignity, that I thought his
green glasses, which I never liked, covered his eyes to great advantage. 'Remember what I have
always endeavored to impress on your mind,' he would continue; 'honesty is the best policy--it
is!' Just then everybody would look at the Squire, while it was with great effort I kept from
my face a smile. I knew honesty was the best policy; I knew it was the true policy to all praiseworthy
ends; but how could I help contemplating the necessity of those preaching who never practised
it, seeing that the Squire was not what he seemed, for he smuggled an hundred barrels of flour
for every one he paid duty upon. I had also seen him pass sentence of imprisonment and fine
on the wretch who smuggled a demijohn of bad spirits, when for him I had smuggled a thousand.

"Thanks to a more liberal commercial policy, that has precluded the necessity for such scenes
as the Dash stealing her way into a river at night to land her cargo of contraband goods. Those
violations of law, so prevalent a few years ago, have ceased; and in the improved condition
of the people we see the result of a new and more liberal policy. But a few years ago, that
small craft, the Dash, alone sought to establish what was considered a doubtful trade with
the port of Boston; now, some forty pursue a profitable traffic with the State of Massachusetts,
which has annually brought to her in British bottoms no less than 170,000 cords of Nova Scotia
grown fire-wood.

"Nova Scotia being what a South Carolinian would call a hard country to live in (though the
people were proverbially kind, and hospitable, and loyal, and simple-minded), Smooth, like
many other special ministers, resolved to give up his mission in disgust, and, without further
delay, seek the arms of General Pierce. However, before quitting the province, he visited the
shores of Cape Breton (an island belonging to Her Most Gracious Majesty), and there met with
a singularly eccentric character of the name of Belhash. This Belhash added to a figure of
great rotundity a square, red face, small hazel eyes, a heavy, flat nose, a low, reclining
forehead, and a head covered with red, crispy hair, which he took great pains to part in the
centre. The only expression the Squire's face could lay claim to was that of a pumpkin burned
ripe in the sun. When in his favorite dress of blue-grey homespun, which he judiciously arranged
(for Belhash was a Squire), no greater functionary lived on the island; that is, in his well-developed
opinion of himself! His principal law business consisted in settling all disputes arising between
the people on shore and the Yankee fishermen who, against the law, infested the coast, and
for whom the Squire had a hatred he always made known in his decisions. To Belhash the Americans
were all of a flock, they would steal, smuggle, take a Nova Scotiaman's eyeteeth out, and,
what he most hated, concoct some republican plot to overthrow his darling government. 'Now,'
said the Squire to me, one day, 'I have no bad opinion of you individually, Smooth; for, by
the righteous, you're a sort of clever feller--an exception to Yankees in general--nor do I
think you'll steal!'

"I said, 'No, I didn't think I would!' And he continued: 'You must see I am something of a
man here on these shores; in fact, sir, some call me very distinguished; but I hardly think
I have arrived at that yet, though the honorable attorney-general of the province, when this
way lectioneerin about a year ago, in referring to my position in administering the law, said:
'That distinguished gentleman, Squire Belhash, than whom none is loyaler, or more capable of
administering the law;' he did, sir, I assure you!'

"Of course I bowed to this, and declared the compliment as merited as handsomely bestowed.
And then he continued: 'You see now, sir--and it's no small compliment to a man in this out
of the way part of the world!--I holds her Majesty's commission to alienate (some call it demonstrate)
the laws of the land.' Here the Squire's face broadened and got redder, and the flashy handkerchief
seemed too small for the organic conformation of his big blue-veined neck.

"'Now and then, though, I gets a law case so confoundedly cross-grained, that I'se forced to
call in Lawyer Songster (he's a cute un, ye know), afore I can get the point o'nt halucinated.
Then, Smooth, you see, I isn't one a them kind a folk what run after bigified gentry; and that's
how I'se got where I has! A squire in this part of the world is somebody, I assure ye, sir.
Then, what's more, I've always bin as loyal as a body could be; but, remember ye, I warn't
on the Tory side, and for the very reason that they never appreciated native talent and native
larnin. Them were the days,' said the Squire, accompanying the words with a sort of political
flourish, what tried the souls of us county-folk. Tory Johnson, and Radical Joe Howe, used
to come this way lectioneerin, and set the whole country by the ears; what folk neither of
'em winned over to his party they were sure to get drunk; and poor folks were so fascinated
with politics there was no getting a stroke of work done for a month after. Joe Howe, see ye
I was a perfect Jones on politics--was what them that know most about politics called a champion
of free suffrage; and, what was more nor all, worked himself up from the use of a printer's
stick to holding a stick of stronger cast over the whole province, not even excepting our own
country. In fact, he kicked Sir Rupert George out of the Colonial Office only for himself to
be kicked in. Well, Joe said if I'd put in the strong talk, and lectioneer for him and the
radicals, he'd make me Squire when he got in the place--and he kept his word, you see. Joe
once see'd me try a case, and he was so taken with it, there was no describin' his feelins.
I take it you'd think natur had done her part for me in knowin' so much 'bout law, if ye'd
see me put a case through.'

"The Squire had it all his own way, Smooth not having a chance to put in a word edgewise. 'But,
seem' how you cussed Yankees has upset everything in trade along the coast, I isn't so rich
as I used to be. There wor a time when my little store was as good a gold mine as you could
turn up in Californey; I could get any kind of a price for goods; and New England rum, what
I liquidated with a sprinklin of Jamaica, sold as quick as gold-dust at fifteen shillins a gallon.'

"Here, by the way of diversifying the conversation, I inquired if he remembered the Queen,
in the way of duties paid!

"The Squire opened his spacious mouth, showed his great shark-like teeth, threw away his worn
quid, gave his eyes a significant roll sideways, laughed out heartily, and with his left fist
added a warning pinch under my left ribs. 'Don't ask that unanswerable question! The custom-house
was so far off that nobody thought it any harm to smuggle, just a little! Bless ye! Mr. Smooth,
why (here Belhash wiped his face with a flashy Spitalfields) the Rector used to get all his
tea smuggled; nor a bit of harm did he think it. But, times ain't as they wos then, nor did
folks deal so much in politics and Yankee notions.' Here the Squire gave his head a significant
twist, as his face glowed as expressive as a fatherly pumpkin of venerable age. After another
dissertation on the mode of administering the laws of the land, he invited me into his law
establishment, which was the kitchen of a somewhat dilapidated farm-house, of very small dimensions,
clapboarded and shingled after the old style. I (Smooth) said there could be no objections
to this proceeding, and so, following him very cheerfully into the kitchen, he fussed about
for some time among what seemed the cookery arrangements, and at length drew from a chest that
stood firmly fixed under an old deal table near a spacious fire-place, in which was a monster
back-log, from behind which the ferret eyes of three mischievous urchins peered curious and
comical, his judicial suit. Again from the chest the Squire drew forth a large steel chain,
and a very mysterious-looking book, and began decorating himself in the most shocking manner.
This done, he repaired to the door, in all his profuseness, and seated himself on a block of
wood just outside, where as if suddenly becoming conscious of the absence of something very
necessary to his personal appearance, he doffed his coat, rolled up his shirt-sleeves, and
what, readers, do you suppose he commenced doing?--Getting up the dignity! With nothing less
than a pound of chalk before him, he commenced polishing up a steel chain that might on an
emergency have served to chain up a very large bull-dog; but the Squire adapted it to the more
fashionable use of adorning himself, and making safe his ponderous pinchbeck watch. Belhash
now puffed, and blowed, and swore, and sweated, and piled on the chalk, and rubbed and tugged
criss-crass his knee, until, with the motion and fritting, he had well nigh covered his cloth
with the white substance, from the knee downward. Getting it to the dignity point of brightness
he invited me back into his forum, which served the double purpose of kitchen and law-shop.
Here he again smothered himself in an extra coat of judicial homespun, and solicited my assistance
in securing the bandanna tight about his neck. 'I looks somethin' of a judge, I take it, now?'
he said, waiting my approval of his personal appearance, as he fingered the broad turn of his
shirt-collar, which seriously threatened his ears and chin. I said I never saw a judicial gentleman
look more upish. In fact, nobody could deny that in clothes the Squire was all consequence;
and when he loomed into 'Court,' all over the steel chain, believe it, there were bows and
servilities without stint. Taking his seat on a high birch block, the plank table being set
before him, on which to spread his inseparable law-book, the plaintiffs and defendants assembled,
and took seats on a wooded bench in front. 'All persons whatsoever havin' any business whatever
with this 'ere court--Squire Belhash sitting--must come for'ard now or never,' cries out at
the top of a deep sonorous voice a little scraggy-looking Scotchman, who, without coat or vest
(his shirt-sleeves rolled up, and the right leg of his nether garment tucked away beneath a
coarse deck-boot), acted the double part of usher and constable. Again directing a few legal
phrases to the Squire, who bowed acknowledgingly, he turned to those present--hoped gentlemen
would take their hats off, and spit in the fire-place, seeing how the Court had been newly sanded.

"Having examined a paper, somewhat judicially, the Squire, with an air of dignified endurance,
turning to his usher, said:--'Well, I reckon, it's best to try the case of Hornblower versus
the herrins!' Down he laid Justice's Guide. It seemed that on the previous night sundry fishing
nets had by some mysterious process been relieved of their burden. This, one of the Squire's
sons charged to the ingenuity, and, as he set forth without fear or trembling, stealing propensities
of one skipper Hornblower, who at this time sailed a saucy-looking craft called the 'Virtue
of Cape Cod.' This Hornblower was one of the independent school, cared not seven coppers for
anybody, nor had the most virtuous respect for the nets of his neighbours; he looked the pink-perfection
of a Cape Cod fisherman. The skipper rose before his accusers; his hard, weather-bleached face
looking as if his intention to throw a harpoon into somebody was the very best in the world.
Then his dark eyes flashed lightning at the Squire, who commanded the little Scotchman to read
the indictment. This suspicious looking document set forth that one skipper Hornblower, of
the schooner Virtue, had feloniously, and with malice aforethought, extracted from the nets
of one James Belhash, son by lawful wedlock of the presiding justice, sundry herring, mackerel,
and other fish--such as usually come into such nets, and are found on these Her Majesty's shores.
Here the Squire interrupted by commencing an essay on the enormity of the crime; and concluded
with the following pungent remark:--'Now, Hornblower, I knows, without ginning a look in the
law-book, you're guilty; there's always stealin done when you're about the shore. Anyhow! what
say ye for yourself? Remember, you're in a Magistrate's Court--in the presence of a justice
of the peace!'

"'So far as that is concerned, I'll knock under, Squire; but I just wants to see yer prove
a thing or two afore ye come possum over this salt-water citizen!' returns Hornblower, spunkily,
pulling from the pocket of his pea-coat a fascinating wedge of tobacco, which so tempted the
Squire that he could not resist reaching out his hand and supplying his spacious mouth. As
nature, ever erring, should be generous to nature, so also did I interrupt here by offering
to plead Hornblower's case; to which meritorious object I commenced taking off my coat.

"'Don't want nobody to soft-soap the case--especially a Yankee--for there's the law in that
ar' book (here the high functionary turned down the corner of the very page on which it stood
forcible to his mind), and I knows all about it--d----d if I don't!'

"'Swearin' ain't judiciary, Squire!' says I.

"'Tain't none a' your business,' he rejoined, letting his anger get above his caution. 'Call
Jacob--he'll swar t' what he see'd the skipper do!' Here Jacob, a younger son of the Squire,
was called. Jacob had seen some seventeen summers; and in addition to what larnin' the Squire
had 'gin him,' was well up in the swearing business, for the furtherance of which his abilities
were frequently invoked.

"'There is not a man long shore what don't know and respect Jacob,' continued the Squire, shutting
up his law book, angrily. 'Jacob's a son a' mine--Jacob 's got larnin, too--Jacob 's bin more
nor two years to Master Jacques's school at the corner; and he has taken Master Jacques's place
many a time when that larned gentleman had taken a drop too much. Now, Jacob, tell all you
know; and let it be just as straight!'

"'Well, Dad,' ejaculated Jacob, who, one might seriously have inferred, had been raised on
a guano bag, and slipped very unexpectedly into a suit of linsey-woolsey grey mixed; 'I see'd
the Virtue at anchor right broad off the nets, which the skipper kept a facksinatin eye on,
as he paced up and down the quarter-deck.'

"'The devil you did!' Hornblower cried out, at the top of his deep, coarse voice, letting fly
a stream of juice that e'en most skinned the Squire's nasal organ.

"'Dan'l!--d----mn it! bring a bucket here for the skipper!' interrupted the Squire. He hoped
Jacob would continue with the remainder of his evidence. 'And the skipper looked so all-fired
strong at the nets that I couldn't help tellin Uncle Enoch how they'd be stripped afore morning.
Sure enough, just as I said, there warn't a herrin left in the mornin. Seeing how the game
war' going, I went aboard to take breakfast with the skipper; and there, if his table warn't
spread with the fattest fried fresh herrin--'

"'That's all ye knows, ain't it, Jacob? That's more en enough; my own mind was made up afore
I read the law, and heard the testimony,' rejoined the Squire, looking suddenly wise. 'Yes,
dad!' emphatically returned Jacob, 'but I know'd they were the very same herrin, by the taste
on 'em: they tasted as if they wor stolen!' And Jacob having delivered himself of this tart
and somewhat strange rejoinder, gave his shoulder a significant shrug, as he watched dad's
eyes, without faltering.

"'That's plump testimony--there's no coming yer Yankee twist over that! Ye see, Hornblower,
I knows the hang of the law, slap up. The public should know these outrages; the Parliament
should be apprised of such breaches of law and moral honesty; the Home Government should know
what cussed pests the Yankees are! We don't want you here at all, Hornblower; you've turned
pedler, and upset all our trade--there now!' Here the Squire worked himself up into a perfect
fever of excitement, pressing his law-book firmly on the table while addressing his legal observations
to his auditory. 'I shall pronounce you guilty, Hornblower, and judge you to pay a fine of
twenty pounds currency, according to the sovereign law of this Her Most Gracious Britannic
Majesty's province.'

"I interrupted by telling him to go-ahead. 'Squire, if you warn't so fast, I'd try to get a
word in edgewise for Hornblower,' said I. But, before the Squire had time to retort, Hornblower
himself took up the weapon. 'Great Jehu----e! Squire,' he ejaculated, 'you know no more about
the law than Dobbin Dobson's donkey--ye hain't worth two cents!' Hornblower's face blazed with
red rage, and the Squire got himself all on his pins.

"'Keep your clapper shut, Hornblower,' returned the Squire, telling Hornblower, how, if he
doubted his capacity for the law business, he would read him Haliburton's opinions, and convince
him that they precisely conformed with his. 'Remember you're in the presence of a Justice of
the Peace!' he added, as Hornblower replied by informing him that so long as he was before
him nothing more was necessary to remind him of the fact. Then he begged the Squire to keep
cool, and not get into a fuzzle: and after he had bestowed some sharp retorts, in not very
fashionable language, which he hoped the Squire would not take as personal, he made an explanation
of the whole thing. 'Go on,' rejoined the Squire, getting warmer and warmer.

"'Well,' returned Hornblower; 'first I motion to adjourn the Court and go drink all round,
at your store; after which I further motion that Jacob and me go down into the cellar of your
house--'

"'Into my cellar!' interrupted the Squire, suddenly: 'not a step!--I'se settled the case, and
there's no moving judgment.'

"Here Hornblower charged the Squire with having a suspicious quantity of fresh herring in his
own cellar. 'I don't say how they got there this morning afore daylight, Squire,' said he,
'but there's a citizen not far off what will.'

"'It's the ram--d----d'st false ever told against a gentleman of my high standing!'

"'What is Squire?' interpolated Hornblower, keeping as cool as the face of a March morning.
Why!' returns the Squire, 'to say I stole 'em myself!'

"'There can be no mistaking it Squire,' chimes in Hornblower; 'and the stronger evidence is
the fact of your being the only son of a man who has yet preferred the charge of stealing them.
Now, Squire, I'll stake the schooner Virtue, that on proceeding into your cellar the herring
will be recovered and injured justice satisfied: just grant us a warrant to search your cellar,
Squire.' Here Hornblower looked thunder and lightning at the Squire whose wrath and misgiving
seemed carrying out a sad conflict in his heart. The result was a strange clatter of tongues.
Notwithstanding the Squire's estimate of his own popularity, the good people on the coast well
understood his singular process of doing up the law business. 'You'll get your straight ups
to jail, or pay the coin right down, Hornblower!' demanded the Squire, making a flourish with
his law-book, and preparing to adjourn for the purpose of doing a small quantity of drinking.

"'The Squire's a humbug!--he is!--I'll blow the Court to thunder. Just clar the kitchen,' cried
out the skipper, stripping off his coat, as if to have a tug and hug with the Squire, who at
that moment wanted to get a word in edgewise. The next Smooth saw, the Squire was letting fly
at Hornblower's head the law-book; which rather summary demonstration was replied to by a stream
of tobacco juice, with which Hornblower blinded the Squire, setting him nearly frantic. By
the way, the law-book missed its intended object, and stormed the end of Uncle Seth Sprague's
nose, nearly knocking off an inch or two.

"'Now, if that is Colonial law, Squire, I think how a little home-made Yankee justice won't
be a bad application,' said Hornblower, making ready to administer the medicine; then he squared
off, and sent his mauler right into the Squire's dumplin depot, so sharp and strong, as to
produce a decided conviction. At length the Squire was floored, and found working the rule
of three on the boards. Here the diplomacy became so warm, that Smooth having the very highest
regard for Mr. Pierce and his fighting diplomatists who deemed getting up duels, and writing
down editors very necessary preliminaries to their mission, thought he would withdraw, leaving
the intricacy to Hornblower's settlement, seeing that he was producing the strongest kind of
notes and protocols.

CHAPTER XVII.

SMOOTH SETTLES ALL INTERNATIONAL DIFFICULTIES.

"Smooth, on returning to the arms of Mr. Pierce, concluded it would not be bad policy to touch
at Halifax, meet Uncle John Bull's Commissioner, and with him make a final settlement of all
international questions. And now, being alongside of George's Island, which rises abruptly
in the centre of Halifax harbor, and nearly opposite the old tower on Point Pleasant--and from
which a splendid view of the surrounding country may be obtained, I feel a desire to relate
some scenes of singular import which have been enacted in this place. My respect for the feelings
of great men and governors, however, causes me to withhold some few of them. Indeed, my character
for modesty being pretty well established, I am more than cautions how I bring it in contact
with the nervous system of such gentry. Nevertheless, seeing that not uncommonly the greatest
and most powerful nations turn the smallest beings into very great men, and spend no end of
money to do nobody any good, a short, and I may say, a very modest account from the catalogue
of my experience, may not be out of place. Well, I, Smooth, Minister-in-General to General
Pierce, received, in addition to my own previous conclusion, an incentive to the object in
view, conveyed in a dispatch from my Grandpapa Marcy, in which he advised the repairing immediately
to Halifax, there to witness the grand battle that was to for ever settle the fish question,
and give peace to fishermen and fish in general. It was sincerely hoped that in the settlement
of this long unsettled question, Mr. Pierce would keep his black-pig at home. The result proved
the mistake: war was declared. And the day on which the great struggle would be decided ushered
in upon a scene at once gloomy and ominous. Mysterious and fleecing clouds now obscured the
heavens, and again shadowed with their silvery mists the surface of the sullen stream. A contest
of mighty import was to be decided. The hazard was great, but the point to be gained small
indeed; and men moved along the busy streets whispering their strong misgivings. Monster war-ships,
with ponderous engines supplied, rode like sleeping demons upon the water's leaden surface.
An hour of anxiety passed, a signal of war echoed forth, and murmured over the landscape like
distant thunder coursing along the heavens. Then the murmuring sound re-echoed, as if the battlements
above had opened upon the earth and sea. Soon Britannia's wooden walls were seen veering into
line and preparing for action; America's ranged in the same order, waiting the dread moment.
Anxious eyes and thoughts strained in expectation of the bloody struggle; then the boatswain's
shrill whistle sounded forth, the leaden clouds overhead chased away, and bolder outlined became
the figures of venerable Admirals, who, immersed in glittering uniforms, paced their quarter-decks.
Again the ominous mouths of fierce cannon suddenly protruded more savagely from the sides of
the huge hulks, and the shrill whistle sounded; all was bustle and confusion--eager thousands
of both sexes crowded wharves lining the shore, and many struggled for space to stand upon
while witnessing the terrible conflict. Again all was hushed into stillness; in breathless
suspense did excitement sit on every countenance, as if waiting for the signal flash soon to
break forth and turn everything into a chaos. A quarter-master was seen passing a speaking
trumpet to the burly old British admiral, who, judging from his deportment, might have supplied
the place of a rare curiosity in any cabinet of ancient relics. With it in his hand the ancient
veteran mounted a gun on the starboard quarter, and shouted forth the ominous sound: 'I accept
your challenge--all ready?' A terrible movement was now perceptible among the spectators on shore.

"'You ill-treated myself and officers while on shore a few days ago; and you shall pay the
penalty of your insult. I'll lick you; I'll be damned if I don't,' answered the American, saucily.

"'You're spunk; but we'll take a little of it out, by the way of reducing your pretensions--that's
all. Now, my good cousin, just look out for the shivering of your timbers. I'm going to load
with grape, a jolly mixture I shall slap right into you.'

"'That's e'en jist the medicine!' rejoined the Yankee: that's jist what I'm going to load with;
and if it won't kill, we'll take cogniac canister! But old fellow, we'll larn ye how the Britishers
can't take the spunk out of us Yankees: s'pose ye come on board my craft, lay off yer old notions,
and play the good fellow in the jolly free-and-easy way. We'll then consider the horrors of
war; and see if the matter can't be discussed in a different way atween decks.'

"'Well, seeing it's you--not a bad sort of a chap, by the way, I don't much care if I do; but
don't let go any grape until I gets under yer lee--perhaps we'd better fight it out on your
gun-deck. Captain, my dear fellow (here the captain looked as good-natured as a turtle studying
law) any way to suit your own canister!' returned the rear-admiral of Uncle John's best blue.

"'I say, while you are about it, Admiral,' rejoined the Yankee, with a sort of half flirtish,
half earnest air--while you are about to come broad on, just bring all the good folks with
you--and don't forget the ladies; bring them, too. There's nothing like plenty of fair faces
when a strong battle is to be fought!' This was a right good say on the part of Commodore Shubrick
(such was the Yankee skipper's name), who smiled all over his wrinkled face. It was quite enough.
The gallant Britisher's face, too, brightened up with good-nature, the boatswain sounded his
whistle, the savage guns disappeared in their ports; the yards were manned with jolly tars,
and away streaked the admiral in his barge, skimming the sullen water, towards the Yankee,
under a heavy cannonade of grape. The ladies, loving and affectionate souls! couldn't stand
it another minute, and, with a Joan of Arc heroism, volunteered to follow the gallant admiral,
for the purpose of seeing that their sweethearts and husbands were not seriously wounded by
the Commander's grape and other missiles most dangerous. Again loud reports were heard--pop!
pop! pop!--ziz! ziz! ziz! went the shots of ordinary mixture: then whole broadsides began to
be poured into the belligerents in grand style. After a few hours' cannonading, all was again
bustle and confusion; wounded men were seen tumbling over the sides of the ship, fair ladies
became unfairly terrified, and then, disgusted with the cowardice of their husbands and sweethearts,
might be seen nearly fainting in the arms of gallant officers. After the whole affair was over,
a great many wounded husbands, whose cases were extremely doubtful, were conveyed to their
homes; others dreaded the application of Caudle lecture medicine from wives who had long preceded
them to their domestic hearths. A facetious contemporary has described this great affair in
the following graphic manner:

"On attempting to mount the stairs hung at the side, Commodore Shubrick, standing on the quarter-deck,
let drive a fish-ball, which he held in his hand, and struck the Admiral a little below the
left eye. The Admiral, nothing daunted, ran up the steps, his officers following close behind,
and seized the Commodore by the hand, and gave him such a shaking as made him tremble again.
General Gore, on reaching the 'poop,' was grossly insulted by the first lieutenant of the Princeton,
who, in the most cool and deliberate manner, told him, if he would come below, he would give
him 'something to eat.'

"The General, in reply, said he would like to catch him at it. And to show his courage he went
below, when one of the middies at the foot of the companion-way took aim at the General with
a champagne bottle, and let drive the contents into the General's glass. The Mayor of Halifax,
and members of the Corporation, got into a skirmish with the marines. It seems that Alderman
Nugent asked the boatswain, in a sneering sort of way, if they had any turtle on board. The
answer was, 'No--but we've got turtle soup, if that will do for you.' The Mayor stepped up,
and said he would rather have turtle soup than fish any day. The boatswain answered that he
was tired of hearing so much said about fish. For his own part, he didn't see anything in fish
to fight about. If it was mutton, he was on hand for anybody. One word led on to another--by
this time the steamer was crowded from stem to stern--until at length there was a general row;
every man became a body corporate, and pitched into himself with right good will.

"The ladies got snappish on account of their husbands, and in turn pitched into the officers
of the Princeton with their--eyes. The sailors were piped to quarters. Pistols were freely
used. The 'big guns' were charged and fired, doing much damage to the feelings of the company,
in the way of compliments. In short, it was the greatest battle ever fought in Halifax harbor,
real or sham. After quarrelling in this way, until eight o'clock in the evening, and destroying
all the eatables that could be found on board the Princeton, the invaders retired, and left
the Commodore and officers to their reflections. The retreat was effected in gallant style--so
say the ladies. It is said that the Commodore has sent a despatch to Washington, informing
the authorities of the insult received. We earnestly entreat that our American contemporaries
will fully discuss this serious matter, on account of the honor of the 'stars and stripes,'
to say nothing of the 'fish story.'

"'Now, Mr. Pierce, in this manner was a very grave question--the fish question, in which many
millions had been spent for the purpose of pleasing diplomacy--put through a course of settlement.
When will the wisdom of the two most free and enlightened nations of the earth devise some
plan of mutual compromise, by which the interests of their subjects may be settled without
giving to pedantic diplomatists the means to for ever keep alive an international agitation,
which can only give out food for the very smallest of demagogues? We cannot and must not quarrel
with Uncle John; no, our birthright, our freedom-loving spirit, our indomitable energy, our
kindred institutions, and the interests of our commerce, should make stronger the bonds of
peace. We must, in defiance of that pitiable ambition of political tools, who so interrupt
the harmony that should exist between nations kindred in spirit and interests, continue our
friendly relations. Let England lay aside her restrictions on commerce; let her apply to a
better purpose those millions spent in useless attempts to enforce the observance of laws which
only serve to cripple her energies; and let a policy mutually liberal serve to elevate that
international forbearance which is the father of the greatest good,' thought I. At this juncture,
Mr. Pierce's black pig, always found where he was not wanted, was discovered in the after cabin,
which he disputed with every one who attempted to enter, until at length it was voted that
I should capture him, and convey him safely home to Mr. Pierce at Washington:--which, be it
understood, was done, though not without a struggle."

THE END.