There were two or three intelligent and agreeable passengers on board, who showed a more than
usual knowledge of America and her institutions. The captain, however, as we walked the deck
together, betrayed the same general impression which prevails throughout the Continent (Germany
in particular), that we are a thoroughly material people, having little taste for or appreciation
of anything which is not practical and distinctly utilitarian. Nothing can be further from
the truth; yet I have the greatest difficulty in making people comprehend that a true feeling
for science, art, and literature can co-exist with our great practical genius. There is more
intellectual activity in the Free States than in any other part of the world, a more general
cultivation, and, taking the collective population, I venture to say, a more enlightened taste.
Nowhere are greater sums spent for books and works of art, or for the promotion of scientific
objects. Yet this cry of "Materialism" has become the cant and slang of European talk concerning
America, and is obtruded so frequently and so offensively that I have sometimes been inclined
to doubt whether the good breeding of Continental society has not been too highly rated.

While on the steamer, I heard an interesting story of a Swedish nobleman, who is at present
attempting a practical protest against the absurd and fossilised ideas by which his class is
governed. The nobility of Sweden are as proud as they are poor, and, as the father's title
is inherited by each of his sons, the country is overrun with Counts and Barons, who, repudiating
any means of support that is not somehow connected with the service of the government, live
in a continual state of debt and dilapidation. Count R----, however, has sense enough to know
that honest labour is always honourable, and has brought up his eldest son to earn his living
by the work of his own hands. For the past three years, the latter has been in the United States,
working as a day-labourer on farms and on Western railroads. His experiences, I learn, have
not been agreeable, but he is a young man of too much spirit and courage to give up the attempt,
and has hitherto refused to listen to the entreaties of his family, that he shall come home
and take charge of one of his father's estates. The second son is now a clerk in a mercantile
house in Gottenburg, while the Count has given his daughter in marriage to a radical and untitled
editor, whose acquaintance I was afterwards so fortunate as to make, and who confirmed the
entire truth of the story.

We were to pass the locks at Trollhätta in the middle of the night, but I determined to visit
the celebrated falls of the Gotha River, even at such a time, and gave orders that we should
be called. The stupid boy, however, woke up the wrong passenger, and the last locks were reached
before the mistake was discovered. By sunrise we had reached Lilla Edet, on the Gotha River,
where the buds were swelling on the early trees, and the grass, in sunny places, showed a little
sprouting greenness. We shot rapidly down the swift brown stream, between brown, bald, stony
hills, whose forests have all been stripped off to feed the hostile camp-fires of past centuries.
Bits of bottom land, held in the curves of the river, looked rich and promising, and where
the hills fell back a little, there were groves and country-houses--but the scenery, in general,
was bleak and unfriendly, until we drew near Gottenburg. Two round, detached forts, built according
to Vauban's ideas (which the Swedes say he stole from Sweden, where they were already in practice)
announced our approach, and before noon we were alongside the pier. Here, to my great surprise,
a Custom-house officer appeared and asked us to open our trunks. "But we came by the canal
from Stockholm!" "That makes no difference," he replied; "your luggage must be examined." I
then appealed to the captain, who stated that, in consequence of the steamer's being obliged
to enter the Baltic waters for two or three hours between Södertelje and Söderköping, the law
took it for granted that we might have boarded some foreign vessel during that time and procured
contraband goods. In other words, though sailing in a narrow sound, between the Swedish islands
and the Swedish coast, we had virtually been in a foreign country! It would scarcely be believed
that this sagacious law is of quite recent enactment.

We remained until the next morning in Gottenburg. This is, in every respect, a more energetic
and wide-awake place than Stockholm. It has not the same unrivalled beauty of position, but
is more liberally laid out and kept in better order. Although the population is only about
40,000, its commerce is much greater than that of the capital, and so are, proportionately,
its wealth and public spirit. The Magister Hedlund, a very intelligent and accomplished gentleman,
to whom I had a letter from Mügge, the novelist, took me up the valley a distance of five or
six miles, to a very picturesque village among the hills, which is fast growing into a manufacturing
town. Large cotton, woollen and paper mills bestride a strong stream, which has such a fall
that it leaps from one mill-wheel to another for the distance of nearly half a mile. On our
return, we visited a number of wells hollowed in the rocky strata of the hills, to which the
country people have given the name of "The Giant's Pots." A clergyman of the neighbourhood,
even, has written a pamphlet to prove that they were the work of the antediluvian giants, who
excavated them for the purpose of mixing dough for their loaves of bread and batter for their
puddings. They are simply those holes which a pebble grinds in a softer rock, under the rotary
action of a current of water, but on an immense scale, some of them being ten feet in diameter,
by fifteen or eighteen in depth. At Herr Hedlund's house, I met a number of gentlemen, whose
courtesy and intelligence gave me a very favourable impression of the society of the place.

The next morning, at five o'clock, the steamer Viken, from Christiania, arrived, and we took
passage for Copenhagen. After issuing from the Skärgaard, or rocky archipelago which protects
the approach to Gottenburg from the sea, we made a direct course to Elsinore, down the Swedish
coast, but too distant to observe more than its general outline. This part of Sweden, however--the
province of Halland--is very rough and stony, and not until after passing the Sound does one
see the fertile hills and vales of Scania. The Cattegat was as smooth as an inland sea, and
our voyage could not have been pleasanter. In the afternoon Zealand rose blue from the wave,
and the increase in the number of small sailing craft denoted our approach to the Sound. The
opposite shores drew nearer to each other, and finally the spires of Helsingborg, on the Swedish
shore, and the square mass of Kronborg Castle, under the guns of which the Sound dues have
been so long demanded, appeared in sight. In spite of its bare, wintry aspect, the panorama
was charming. The picturesque Gothic buttresses and gables of Kronborg rose above the zigzag
of its turfed outworks; beyond were the houses and gardens of Helsingör (Elsinore)--while on
the glassy breast of the Sound a fleet of merchant vessels lay at anchor, and beyond, the fields
and towns of Sweden gleamed in the light of the setting sun. Yet here, again, I must find fault
with Campbell, splendid lyrist as he is. We should have been sailing

     "By thy wild and stormy steep,
                           Elsinore!"

only that the level shore, with its fair gardens and groves wouldn't admit the possibility
of such a thing. The music of the line remains the same, but you must not read it on the spot.

There was a beautiful American clipper at anchor off the Castle. "There," said a Danish passenger
to me, "is one of the ships which have taken from us the sovereignty of the Sound." "I am very
glad of it," I replied; "and I can only wonder why the maritime nations of Europe have so long
submitted to such an imposition." "I am glad, also," said he, "that the question has at last
been settled, and our privilege given up--and I believe we are all, even the Government itself,
entirely satisfied with the arrangement." I heard the same opinion afterwards expressed in
Copenhagen, and felt gratified, as an American, to hear the result attributed to the initiative
taken by our Government; but I also remembered the Camden and Amboy Railroad Company, and could
not help wishing that the same principle might be applied at home. We have a Denmark, lying
between New-York and Philadelphia, and I have often paid sand dues for crossing her territory.

At dusk, we landed under the battlements of Copenhagen. "Are you travellers or merchants?"
asked the Custom-house officers. "Travellers," we replied. "Then," was the answer, "there is
no necessity for examining your trunks," and we were politely ushered out at the opposite door,
and drove without further hindrance to a hotel. A gentleman from Stockholm had said to me:
"When you get to Copenhagen, you will find yourself in Europe:" and I was at once struck with
the truth of his remark. Although Copenhagen is by no means a commercial city--scarcely more
so than Stockholm--its streets are gay, brilliant and bustling, and have an air of life and
joyousness which contrasts strikingly with the gravity of the latter capital. From without,
it makes very little impression, being built on a low, level ground, and surrounded by high
earthen fortifications, but its interior is full of quaint and attractive points. There is
already a strong admixture of the German element in the population, softening by its warmth
and frankness the Scandinavian reserve. In their fondness for out-door recreation, the Danes
quite equal the Viennese, and their Summer-garden of Tivoli is one of the largest and liveliest
in all Europe. In costume, there is such a thing as individuality; in manners, somewhat of
independence. The Danish nature appears to be more pliant and flexible than the Swedish, but
I cannot judge whether the charge of inconstancy and dissimulation, which I have heard brought
against it, is just. With regard to morals, Copenhagen is said to be an improvement upon Stockholm.

During our short stay of three days, we saw the principal sights of the place. The first, and
one of the pleasantest to me, was the park of Rosenborg Palace, with its fresh, green turf,
starred with dandelions, and its grand avenues of chestnuts and lindens, just starting into
leaf. On the 11th of May, we found spring at last, after six months of uninterrupted winter.
I don't much enjoy going the round of a new city, attended by a valet-de-place, and performing
the programme laid down by a guide-book, nor is it an agreeable task to describe such things
in catalogue style; so I shall merely say that the most interesting things in Copenhagen are
the Museum of Northern Antiquities, the Historical Collections in Rosenborg Palace, Thorwaldsen's
Museum, and the Church of our Lady, containing the great sculptor's statues of Christ and the
Apostles. We have seen very good casts of the latter in New-York, but one must visit the Museum
erected by the Danish people, which is also Thorwaldsen's mausoleum, to learn the number, variety
and beauty of his works. Here are the casts of between three and four hundred statues, busts
and bas reliefs, with a number in marble. No artist has ever had so noble a monument.

