Perhaps the most whimsical thing in the whole situation was the fact that the government, pressed
as it was by demands of all sorts, continued to issue the old assignats at the same time that
it was discrediting them by issuing the new mandats. And yet in order to make the mandats "as
good as gold" it was planned by forced loans and other means to reduce the quantity of assignats
in circulation, so that the value of each assignat should be raised to one-thirtieth of the
value of gold, then to make mandats legal tender and to substitute them for assignats at the
rate of one for thirty. Never were great expectations more cruelly disappointed. Even before
the mandats could be issued from the press they fell to thirty-five per cent of their nominal
value; from this they speedily fell to fifteen, and soon after to five per cent, and finally,
in August, 1796, six months from their first issue, to three per cent. This plan failed--just
as it failed in New England in 1737; just as it failed under our own Confederation in 1781;
just as it failed under the Southern Confederacy during our Civil War. [72]

To sustain this new currency the government resorted to every method that ingenuity could devise.
Pamphlets suited to people of every capacity were published explaining its advantages. Never
was there more skillful puffing. A pamphlet signed "Marchant" and dedicated to "People of Good
Faith" was widely circulated, in which Marchant took pains to show the great advantage of the
mandats as compared with assignats,--how land could be more easily acquired with them; how
their security was better than with assignats; how they could not, by any possibility, sink
in values as the assignats had done. But even before the pamphlet was dry from the press the
depreciation of the mandats had refuted his entire argument. [73]

The old plan of penal measures was again pressed. Monot led off by proposing penalties against
those who shall speak publicly against the mandats; Talot thought the penalties ought to be
made especially severe; and finally it was enacted that any persons "who by their discourse
or writing shall decry the mandats shall be condemned to a fine of not less than one thousand
francs or more than ten thousand; and in case of a repetition of the offence, to four years
in irons." It was also decreed that those who refused to receive the mandats should be fined,--the
first time, the exact sum which they refuse; the second time, ten times as much; and the third
time, punished with two years in prison. But here, too, came in the action of those natural
laws which are alike inexorable in all countries. This attempt proved futile in France just
as it had proved futile less than twenty years before in America. Hinzelmeier entered the room and leaned his staff in the
lounge area, then sat still and tired in the big armchair. The host put a jug of wine before
him and said gently: "You seem tired, dear; only drink that will strengthen you! "

"Yes," said Hinzelmeier and took the jug with both hands, "very tired, I'm long wandered a
long time. "Then he closed his eyes and took a train from the thirsty
wine pitcher. Another expedient was seen in the decree
that paper money should be made to accord with a natural and immutable standard of value and
that one franc in paper should thenceforth be worth ten pounds of wheat. This also failed.
On July 16th another decree seemed to show that the authorities despaired of regulating the
existing currency and it was decreed that all paper, whether mandats or assignats, should be
taken at its real value, and that bargains might be made in whatever currency people chose.
The real value of the mandats speedily sank to about two per cent of their nominal value and
the only effect of this legislation seemed to be that both assignats and mandats went still
lower. Then from February 4 to February 14, 1797, came decrees and orders that the engraving
apparatus for the mandats should be destroyed as that for the assignats had been, that neither
assignats nor mandats should longer be a legal tender and that old debts to the state might
be paid for a time with government paper at the rate of one per cent of their face value. [75]
Then, less than three months later, it was decreed that the twenty-one billions of assignats
still in circulation should be annulled. Finally, on September 30, 1797, as the culmination
of these and various other experiments and expedients, came an order of the Directory that
the national debts should be paid two-thirds in bonds which might be used in purchasing confiscated
real estate, and the remaining "Consolidated Third," as it was called, was to be placed on
the "Great Book" of the national debt to be paid thenceforth as the government should think best.

As to the bonds which the creditors of the nation were thus forced to take, they sank rapidly,
as the assignats and mandats had done, even to three per cent of their value. As to the "Consolidated
Third," that was largely paid, until the coming of Bonaparte, in paper money which sank gradually
to about six per cent of its face value. Since May, 1797, both assignats and mandats had been
virtually worth nothing.

So ended the reign of paper money in France. The twenty-five hundred millions of mandats went
into the common heap of refuse with the previous forty-five thousand millions of assignats:
the nation in general, rich and poor alike, was plunged into financial ruin from one end to
the other.

On the prices charged for articles of ordinary use light is thrown by extracts from a table
published in 1795, reduced to American coinage.

                                1790            1795
     For a bushel of flour    40 cents      45     dollars
     For a bushel of oats     18 cents      10     dollars
     For a cartload of wood    4 dollars   500     dollars
     For a bushel of coal      7 cents       2     dollars
     For a pound of sugar     18 cents      12 1/2 dollars
     For a pound of soap      18 cents       8     dollars
     For a pound of candles   18 cents       8     dollars
     For one cabbage           8 cents       5 1/2 dollars
     For a pair of shoes       1 dollar     40     dollars
     For twenty-five eggs     24 cents       5     dollars

But these prices about the middle of 1795 were moderate compared with those which were reached
before the close of that year and during the year following. Perfectly authentic examples were
such as the following:

     A pound of bread        9 dollars
     A bushel of potatoes   40 dollars
     A pound of candles     40 dollars
     A cartload of wood    250 dollars

So much for the poorer people. Typical of those esteemed wealthy may be mentioned a manufacturer
of hardware who, having retired from business in 1790 with 321,000 livres, found his property
in 1796 worth 14,000 francs. [76]

For this general distress arising from the development and collapse of "fiat" money in France,
there was, indeed, one exception. In Paris and a few of the other great cities, men like Tallien,
of the heartless, debauched, luxurious, speculator, contractor and stock-gambler class, had
risen above the ruins of the multitudes of smaller fortunes. Tallien, one of the worst demagogue
"reformers," and a certain number of men like him, had been skillful enough to become millionaires,
while their dupes, who had clamored for issues of paper money, had become paupers.

The luxury and extravagance of the currency gamblers and their families form one of the most
significant features in any picture of the social condition of that period. [77]

