THE CELTIC TWILIGHT

by

W. B. YEATS

    Time drops in decay
    Like a candle burnt out.
    And the mountains and woods
    Have their day, have their day;
    But, kindly old rout
    Of the fire-born moods,
    You pass not away.

THIS BOOK

I

I have desired, like every artist, to create a little world out of the beautiful, pleasant,
and significant things of this marred and clumsy world, and to show in a vision something of
the face of Ireland to any of my own people who would look where I bid them. I have therefore
written down accurately and candidly much that I have heard and seen, and, except by way of
commentary, nothing that I have merely imagined. I have, however, been at no pains to separate
my own beliefs from those of the peasantry, but have rather let my men and women, dhouls and
faeries, go their way unoffended or defended by any argument of mine. The things a man has
heard and seen are threads of life, and if he pull them carefully from the confused distaff
of memory, any who will can weave them into whatever garments of belief please them best. I
too have woven my garment like another, but I shall try to keep warm in it, and shall be well
content if it do not unbecome me.

Hope and Memory have one daughter and her name is Art, and she has built her dwelling far from
the desperate field where men hang out their garments upon forked boughs to be banners of battle.
O beloved daughter of Hope and Memory, be with me for a little.

1893.

II

I have added a few more chapters in the manner of the old ones, and would have added others,
but one loses, as one grows older, something of the lightness of one's dreams; one begins to
take life up in both hands, and to care more for the fruit than the flower, and that is no
great loss per haps. In these new chapters, as in the old ones, I have invented nothing but
my comments and one or two deceitful sentences that may keep some poor story-teller's commerce
with the devil and his angels, or the like, from being known among his neighbours. I shall
publish in a little while a big book about the commonwealth of faery, and shall try to make
it systematical and learned enough to buy pardon for this handful of dreams.

1902.

W. B. YEATS.

A TELLER OF TALES

Many of the tales in this book were told me by one Paddy Flynn, a little bright-eyed old man,
who lived in a leaky and one-roomed cabin in the village of Ballisodare, which is, he was wont
to say, "the most gentle"--whereby he meant faery--"place in the whole of County Sligo." Others
hold it, however, but second to Drumcliff and Drumahair. The first time I saw him he was cooking
mushrooms for himself; the next time he was asleep under a hedge, smiling in his sleep. He
was indeed always cheerful, though I thought I could see in his eyes (swift as the eyes of
a rabbit, when they peered out of their wrinkled holes) a melancholy which was well-nigh a
portion of their joy; the visionary melancholy of purely instinctive natures and of all animals. 

"God may have softened his heart," said Madame de Lescure; "if he has really spared our friends, we
will not speak ill of him."
"If he has done so," said Marie, "he will have his reward; for I
am sure Charles and Henri will spare him now that he is in their power."
 He was fond, for instance, of telling how Collumcille
cheered up his mother. "How are you to-day, mother?" said the saint. "Worse," replied the mother.
"May you be worse to-morrow," said the saint. The next day Collumcille came again, and exactly
the same conversation took place, but the third day the mother said, "Better, thank God." And
the saint replied, "May you be better to-morrow." He was fond too of telling how the Judge
smiles at the last day alike when he rewards the good and condemns the lost to unceasing flames.
He had many strange sights to keep him cheerful or to make him sad. I asked him had he ever
seen the faeries, and got the reply, "Am I not annoyed with them?" I asked too if he had ever
seen the banshee. "I have seen it," he said, "down there by the water, batting the river with
its hands."

I have copied this account of Paddy Flynn, with a few verbal alterations, from a note-book
which I almost filled with his tales and sayings, shortly after seeing him. I look now at the
note-book regretfully, for the blank pages at the end will never be filled up. Paddy Flynn
is dead; a friend of mine gave him a large bottle of whiskey, and though a sober man at most
times, the sight of so much liquor filled him with a great enthusiasm, and he lived upon it
for some days and then died. His body, worn out with old age and hard times, could not bear
the drink as in his young days. He was a great teller of tales, and unlike our common romancers,
knew how to empty heaven, hell, and purgatory, faeryland and earth, to people his stories.
He did not live in a shrunken world, but knew of no less ample circumstance than did Homer
himself. Perhaps the Gaelic people shall by his like bring back again the ancient simplicity
and amplitude of imagination. What is literature but the expression of moods by the vehicle
of symbol and incident? Everything exists, everything is true, and the earth is only a little
dust under our feet.

BELIEF AND UNBELIEF

There are some doubters even in the western villages. One woman told me last Christmas that
she did not believe either in hell or in ghosts. Hell she thought was merely an invention got
up by the priest to keep people good; and ghosts would not be permitted, she held, to go "trapsin
about the earth" at their own free will; "but there are faeries," she added, "and little leprechauns,
and water-horses, and fallen angels." I have met also a man with a mohawk Indian tattooed upon
his arm, who held exactly similar beliefs and unbeliefs. No matter what one doubts one never
doubts the faeries, for, as the man with the mohawk Indian on his arm said to me, "they stand
to reason." Even the official mind does not escape this faith.

A little girl who was at service in the village of Grange, close under the seaward slopes of
Ben Bulben, suddenly disappeared one night about three years ago. There was at once great excitement
in the neighbourhood, because it was rumoured that the faeries had taken her. "Madame," replied
my master, turning red with rage, "I am a candidate for election to the crown of Courland.
If elected by that august body, the Diet of Courland, I shall accept,
and I shall defend my right."

"August fiddlestick!" cried Peggy. The local constable was applied to, and he at once instituted
a house-to-house search, and at the same time advised the people to burn all the bucalauns
(ragweed) on the field she vanished from, because bucalauns are sacred to the faeries. They
spent the whole night burning them, the constable repeating spells the while. In the morning
the little girl was found, the story goes, wandering in the field. She said the faeries had
taken her away a great distance, riding on a faery horse. At last she saw a big river, and
the man who had tried to keep her from being carried off was drifting down it--such are the
topsy-turvydoms of faery glamour--in a cockleshell. On the way her companions had mentioned
the names of several people who were about to die shortly in the village.

Perhaps the constable was right. It is better doubtless to believe much unreason and a little
truth than to deny for denial's sake truth and unreason alike, for when we do this we have
not even a rush candle to guide our steps, not even a poor sowlth to dance before us on the
marsh, and must needs fumble our way into the great emptiness where dwell the mis-shapen dhouls.
And after all, can we come to so great evil if we keep a little fire on our hearths and in
our souls, and welcome with open hand whatever of excellent come to warm itself, whether it
be man or phantom, and do not say too fiercely, even to the dhouls themselves, "Be ye gone"?
When all is said and done, how do we not know but that our own unreason may be better than
another's truth? for it has been warmed on our hearths and in our souls, and is ready for the
wild bees of truth to hive in it, and make their sweet honey. Come into the world again, wild
bees, wild bees!

MORTAL HELP

One hears in the old poems of men taken away to help the gods in a battle, and Cuchullan won
the goddess Fand for a while, by helping her married sister and her sister's husband to overthrow
another nation of the Land of Promise. I have been told, too, that the people of faery cannot
even play at hurley unless they have on either side some mortal, whose body, or whatever has
been put in its place, as the story-teller would say, is asleep at home. Without mortal help
they are shadowy and cannot even strike the balls. One day I was walking over some marshy land
in Galway with a friend when we found an old, hard-featured man digging a ditch. My friend
had heard that this man had seen a wonderful sight of some kind, and at last we got the story
out of him. When he was a boy he was working one day with about thirty men and women and boys.
They were beyond Tuam and not far from Knock-na-gur. Presently they saw, all thirty of them,
and at a distance of about half-a-mile, some hundred and fifty of the people of faery. There
were two of them, he said, in dark clothes like people of our own time, who stood about a hundred
yards from one another, but the others wore clothes of all colours, "bracket" or chequered,
and some with red waistcoats.

He could not see what they were doing, but all might have been playing hurley, for "they looked
as if it was that." Sometimes they would vanish, and then he would almost swear they came back
out of the bodies of the two men in dark clothes. These two men were of the size of living
men, but the others were small. He saw them for about half-an- hour, and then the old man he
and those about him were working for took up a whip and said, "Get on, get on, or we will have
no work done!" I asked if he saw the faeries too, "Oh, yes, but he did not want work he was
paying wages for to be neglected." He made every body work so hard that nobody saw what happened
to the faeries.

1902.

A VISIONARY

A young man came to see me at my lodgings the other night, and began to talk of the making
of the earth and the heavens and much else. I questioned him about his life and his doings.
He had written many poems and painted many mystical designs since we met last, but latterly
had neither written nor painted, for his whole heart was set upon making his mind strong, vigorous,
and calm, and the emotional life of the artist was bad for him, he feared. He recited his poems
readily, however. He had them all in his memory. Some indeed had never been written down. They,
with their wild music as of winds blowing in the reeds,[FN#1] seemed to me the very inmost
voice of Celtic sadness, and of Celtic longing for infinite things the world has never seen.
Suddenly it seemed to me that he was peering about him a little eagerly. "Do you see anything,
X-----?" I said. "A shining, winged woman, covered by her long hair, is standing near the doorway,"
he answered, or some such words. "Is it the influence of some living person who thinks of us,
and whose thoughts appear to us in that symbolic form?" I said; for I am well instructed in
the ways of the visionaries and in the fashion of their speech. "No," he replied; "for if it
were the thoughts of a person who is alive I should feel the living influence in my living
body, and my heart would beat and my breath would fail. It is a spirit. It is some one who
is dead or who has never lived."

