Before dyeing yarn or raffia, bind the skeins loosely in several places to prevent tangling.
"Having prepared the bath, gather the cloth in the right hand at half a dozen places along
one selvedge, and drop it in, spreading it at once, using two stout sticks, lifting it up and
down continually so as to expose all parts to the dye. The temperature should be increased
to the boiling point and continued for three-quarters of an hour. Then lift the cloth up and
drain it, then rinse in cold water, wring dry, but do not press with an iron, as the soft wooly
texture is very desirable. When a quantity of the same color is desired, the same water can
be used again by adding acid and Glauber salts, together with more dyestuff with each fresh
dip of cloth. It must be stated, however, that the color will not be so clear with succeeding
dips, but that does not matter, as a difference is desired. The process of dyeing is very delicate,
and the utmost precision must be observed in following proportions and directions regarding
temperature, etc. Dyeing is more successful in clear weather than on rainy days, and soft water
is required to get good results. If water contains much lime or earthy salts it is unfit for
dyeing, and must be neutralized by acetic acid. In such cases it would be still better to use
rain water.

[Sidenote: Vegetable dyes and chemical dyes compared]

"There is a curious conviction prevailing in some quarters that beautiful durable colors are
obtainable only from vegetable dyes. My first experiments were with barks, mosses, etc., but
the difficulty of getting them, the enormous amount necessary to dye any quantity of goods,
the tedious process in their use, and the fact that after all only a narrow range of colors
is obtainable from them, compelled me to abandon them altogether. I began to investigate chemical
dyes, and to gain information I applied to one of the largest woolen mills in New England,
one which maintains a high reputation for the class of goods it manufactures; also to two wholesale
houses dealing in all kinds of dyestuffs; and finally to one of the best experts in color in
the country. Their verdict was unanimous, and is summed up in the opinion of the expert which
he expressed in a letter to me on this question:

"'In regard to the use of vegetable dyes, I would say that they have almost disappeared from
commerce, certainly for the purpose of dyeing fabrics.

[Sidenote: Aniline colors]

"'We know, of course, that there are strong prejudices still existing in the layman's mind
in regard to the use of aniline colors, who supposes that they are not only fugitive, but that
the resulting tones are harsh and unattractive. This, unfortunately, was so twenty-five years
ago, and the impression made then upon the layman's mind has not been changed during all these
years; but I can assure you that all the beautiful silk goods, tapestries, cloths, and all
the colors which we see in fabrics to-day, are made, without exception, from aniline colors,
which are immeasurably more permanent than are the vegetable dyes used up to, say, 1875.'

[Sidenote: Formulas to be followed]

"In using my range of eight colors I provide myself with large, strong glass bottles in which
I keep my diluted colors. I use a pint measure for diluting the dyes. In preparing the fluid
I put one half or one quarter of an ounce of dry color, whichever amount the formula calls
for, into the pint measure and mix it thoroughly with a little cold water. The reason for using
cold water is that the dyes are a tar product, and if mixed with hot water first, they are
apt to grow waxy under the heat and not dissolve readily. Having dissolved them, I fill up
the measure with hot water, stirring all the time. This makes a pint of liquid which is of
uniform strength under all circumstances, and every formula is based upon this invariable pint
measure of water. These formulas I have tried over and over again. They are made with special
reference to the grade of flannel I have adopted, and doubtless will vary in results if used
on other weights or weaves of wool goods."

DYE FORMULAS

NO. 1. DARK TERRA COTTA

[Sidenote: Dark terra cotta]

Dissolve 1/2 oz. of dull red in 1 pint of water.

Dissolve 1/4 oz. of green in 1 pint of water.

Take full pint measure of dull red dye and 4 tablespoonfuls of green dye to 6 yds. of cloth.

Mordants: 3/4 oz. sulphuric acid and 3 oz. Glauber salts. Boil 3/4 of an hour.

NO. 2.

NO. 3.

NO. 4.

Use 24 tablespoonfuls of dull red dye and 3 tablespoonfuls of green dye to 6 yds. of cloth.

Mordants: Same as No. 1.

NO. 5.

Dissolve 1/4 oz. of dull yellow in 1 pint of water.

Use 16 tablespoonfuls of dull red dye, and 1 tablespoonful of bright blue dye, and 3 tablespoonfuls
of dull yellow dye to 6 yds. of cloth.

Mordants: Same as in No. 1.

NO. 6.

Dissolve 1 oz. of dark blue in 1 pint of water.

Use 6 tablespoonfuls of dull red dye, and 3 tablespoonfuls of dull yellow dye, and 1-1/2 teaspoonfuls
of dark blue dye to 6 yds. of cloth.

Mordants: Same as in No. 1.

NO. 7.

NO. 8.

NO. 9.

NO. 10.

NO. 11.

Use full pint measure of dark blue dye to 6 yds. of goods.

NO. 13.

Use 10 tablespoonfuls of dark blue dye, 6 tablespoonfuls of green dye to 6 yds. of cloth.

Mordants: Same as in No. 12.

NO. 14.

NO. 15.

NO. 16.

NO. 17.

Use 16 tablespoonfuls of green dye, 4 tablespoonfuls of bright yellow dye, and 3 tablespoonfuls
of dull red to 6 yds. of cloth.

Mordants: Same as in No. 1.

NO. 18.

Use full pint measure of green dye and 15 tablespoonfuls of bright yellow dye to 6 yds. of cloth.

Mordants: 3 oz. of Glauber salts and 1 oz. of sulphuric acid. Boil 3/4 of an hour.

NO. 19.

Use 20 tablespoonfuls of dull yellow dye, 5 tablespoonfuls of dull red dye, 15 tablespoonfuls
of green dye to 6 yds. of cloth.

Mordants: Same as in No. 18.

NO. 20.

Redip in 4 tablespoonfuls of green dye and 5 tablespoonfuls of bright yellow dye.

Mordants: Repeat the one above.

[Sidenote: These formulas are the basis for numerous tones]

"These formulas can be taken as the basis of many other tones and shades which can be secured
by a slight alteration of proportions. By adding a trifle more dull red, green, indigo, or
drab liquid dyes, a color can be darkened. By using less of these than the formulas call for,
the colors will be lighter. By using more of dull or bright yellow a color can often be made
richer without darkening it. Beginners are cautioned against making changes until they become
familiar with the dyes. In making new experiments, try them on yard lengths, carefully subdividing
any given formula for both dyes and mordants, and increasing the proportion of any particular
color desired. If the cloth should fail to take up the dye properly after boiling the full
time, increase the quantity of acid, lifting the cloth out when adding the acid to the dye bath."

Excellent suggestions by Miss Albee for color schemes in stripes may be found on pages 64 and 65.

[Mrs. Albee is prepared to furnish any of the foregoing dyes at 20 cents an ounce. Her address
is Mrs. Helen R. Albee, Pequaket, Silver Lake P. O., N. H.]

Chapter Seven

METHODS OF SPLICING MATERIALS FOR WEAVING

[Sidenote: Woolens, fine worsteds, ravelings, and cottons]

Such materials as carpet and oriental wools, fine worsteds, carpet ravelings, darning and knitting
cotton should, in splicing, be run past each other. In weaving, run the wool through the warp
to the very end. Start the new piece a few warp threads back, being careful to go over and
under exactly the same warp threads as you did when finishing the end. As you pass these threads
you will find that you are taking up the right warp threads, and that no mistake has been made.
It is best to run the threads past each other in the middle of the mat rather than on the sides.
The children learn this method of splicing very quickly and the result is much more satisfactory
than knotting, because the back of the rug or mat will be smooth. As Mrs. Wiggin says: "There
should never be a wrong side to work any more than there should be to folks."

[Sidenote: Silkoline, cheese cloth, rags]

[Sidenote: Candle-wicking, chenille, and macremé cord]

In splicing such materials as silkoline, rags, candle-wicking, chenille, and macremé cord,
lay the end of one piece over another, each lapping about one-quarter inch, and sew securely
with silk or thread of like color. Cut off the selvedge ends of rags. These strips can be run
past each other, but the work will not be so smooth.

[Sidenote: Germantown wool, heavy worsteds, and rope silk]

In splicing Germantown wool, heavy worsteds, or rope silk, thread a worsted needle with one
strand obtained by unwinding the wool or silk, lay one end over the other, and sew over and
over. Twist the part just sewn between the thumb and finger and the splicing will be hardly
visible.

When weaving stripes, splice the wool so that the piecing will come on top of the rod. In this
way the new color will start at the edge of the rug, as it should, and the number of loops
on the rod will be the same on each side. Consider the under side of the weaving as the right
side. It is always smoother and cleaner, and the splicing can be done more neatly on top of
the rod.

[Sidenote: Raffia]

Splicing raffia is the most difficult of all, and the method used in braiding and basket weaving
is the best. As you near the end of a strip in weaving it usually becomes narrower. Find another
strip having a narrow end, and place one over the other, securing, if necessary, by winding
a very narrow piece--just a thread torn from a long piece--and fastening this by sewing a few
times over and over. Or, the two narrow ends may be run past each other, as in carpet ravelings.
Care should be taken to have the splicing the same width as the other parts of the weaving,
so that the spliced parts will not be noticeable.

[Sidenote: Leather, leatherette, and celluloid strips]

Leather, leatherette, and celluloid strips should be long enough to extend the entire width
and length of the frame without splicing. The ends can be cut, as is done in paper weaving,
or turned in some pretty way like that in the splint work.

Chapter Eight

WOOL AND SILKOLINE RUGS OR MATS

[Sidenote: Plain rug with end stripes]

[Sidenote: Finishing the ends]

Silkoline rugs or mats are by far the prettiest for doll-house use. The method of preparing
the strips is explained under Materials (page 51). Make the warp with twine of the same color
as the silkoline. It should be a three-eighths-inch warp. Choose a plain color for the body
of the rug, and a short distance from each end weave several stripes of a contrasting color.
The rug in the illustration is of deep cardinal. The stripes can be of olive green, black,
or any preferred color. Mottled stripes are also attractive and effective. When the stripes
at the foot are woven, ascertain the distance from the foot piece to the last one. To know
where to commence the first stripe at the head, measure the distance just found from the head
piece down, and mark on both rods by tying or sewing a colored string to the warp. This helps
the child to understand where the stripe should begin, which he soon learns to measure for
himself; and this training in accuracy and independence is most excellent. There is nothing
better than learning self-reliance, and the child who has been taught it, is not apt to ask
others to do his examples for him. To learn the manner of making the stripes and spaces each
of the same width, count the loops on the rods (one has to weave twice across the loom to have
one loop on a rod), and have the same number on each side. Care should be taken not to twist
the strips in weaving. The method of splicing the strips and fastening the warp strings is
explained in Chapter V. The rug may be finished with a wool or silk fringe of the predominating
color, or a fringe of the combined colors. If desired, it may be left plain, catching the woof
strips together at each end to conceal the warp strings. When a mistake has been made, run
the needle back under the same strings instead of pulling out what is wrong. It prevents stretching
and a destruction of the material.

[Sidenote: Mottled rugs made of figured silkoline]

Mottled rugs are made of figured silkoline. Choose oriental colors, no matter how gaudy the
silkoline may look in the piece. It will have a beautiful effect when woven. Portières are
pretty made in this way. These rugs should always be plain--that is, without stripes. Adjust
the frame for the size required, and decide how wide the border is to be. It is necessary to
have an extra pair of rods, if one desires a smooth and well-finished rug. The border of the
rug represented in the illustration is two inches. This should be woven with a tape needle.
Weave the border at the foot of the loom. This extends the entire width. Place the extra rods
two inches toward the center from the side rods on the outside of the rug, keeping them back
of the border already woven at the foot. This will outline the sides of the plain oblong in
the center. Weave the left and right hand borders up to a point two inches from the head piece,
taking care to go around the rods just placed. Then begin the plain center. As you come to
the border on each side, run your tape needle through the loops of mottled silkoline which
are around the rod, but do not go around the rod itself with the plain silkoline, since doing
so would make a ridge in the rug. Draw the woof strips tightly and firmly, so that the work
will lie flat and smooth when removed from the loom. Be sure to weave the center far enough,
remembering that the upper woof strips in the border will crowd it down. When the center is
finished, remove the extra rods and finish weaving the border to the head piece. In selecting
a color for the center, match one of the colors in the figured silkoline. The color for the
center in the rug of the illustration on page 90 is green, and the same color appears also
in the mottled border, with yellow and brown. The ends should be left plain, the warp strings
being concealed as directed. These rugs are very beautiful, and can be made in an infinite
variety through the use of different colors, and by reversing the center and border. They can
be made of carpet or Germantown wool, in two colors or in two tones of one color. In weaving
rugs with centers and borders, weave a little farther than the exact measure, because the next
woof threads will push down the woof already made, and you may find that you have not woven
the correct measure. These rugs are useful as "heel rugs"; they are placed under the piano
near the pedal to protect the carpet from the pressure of the heel. (See also page 82.)

[Sidenote: Holder or mat]

[Sidenote: Many squares joined together]

[Sidenote: Small rug with fringe]

[Sidenote: Stair and hall carpets]

