It was in vain that the pastor opposed this resolve. Patience departed, carrying with him as
his only belonging the coat he had on his back, and an abridgment of the teachings of Epictetus.
For this book he had a great affection, and, thanks to much study of it, could read as many
as three of its pages a day without unduly tiring himself. The rustic anchorite went into the
desert to live. At first he built himself a hut of branches in a wood. Then, as wolves attacked
him, he took refuge in one of the lower halls of Gazeau Tower, which he furnished luxuriously
with a bed of moss, and some stumps of trees; wild roots, wild fruit, and goat's milk constituted
a daily fare very little inferior to what he had had in the village. This is no exaggeration.
You have to see the peasants in certain parts of Varenne to form an idea of the frugal diet
on which a man can live and keep in good health. In the midst of these men of stoical habits
all round him, Patience was still exceptional. Never had wine reddened his lips, and bread
had seemed to him a superfluity. Besides, the doctrine of Pythagoras was not wholly displeasing
to him; and in the rare interviews which he henceforth had with his friend he would declare
that, without exactly believing in metempsychosis, and without making it a rule to eat vegetables
only, he felt a secret joy at being able to live thus, and at having no further occasion to
see death dealt out every day to innocent animals.

Patience had formed this curious resolution at the age of forty. He was sixty when I saw him
for the first time, and he was then possessed of extraordinary physical vigour. In truth, he
was in the habit of roaming about the country every year. However, in proportion as I tell
you about my own life, I shall give you details of the hermit life of Patience.

At the time of which I am about to speak, the forest rangers, more from fear of his casting
a spell over them than out of compassion, had finally ceased their persecutions, and given
him full permission to live in Gazeau Tower, not, however, without warning him that it would
probably fall about his head during the first gale of wind. To this Patience had replied philosophically
that if he was destined to be crushed to death, the first tree in the forest would do the work
quite as well as the walls of Gazeau Tower.

Before putting my actor Patience on the stage, and with many apologies for inflicting on you
such a long preliminary biography, I have still to mention that during the twenty years of
which I have spoken the cure's mind had bowed to a new power. He loved philosophy, and in spite
of himself, dear man, could not prevent this love from embracing the philosophers too, even
the least orthodox. The works of Jean Jacques Rousseau carried him away into new regions, in
spite of all his efforts at resistance; and when one morning, when returning from a visit to
some sick folk, he came across Patience gathering his dinner of herbs from the rocks of Crevant,
he sat down near him on one of the druidical stones and made, without knowing it, the profession
of faith of the Savoyard vicar. Patience drank more willingly of this poetic religion than
of the ancient orthodoxy. The pleasure with which he listened to a summary of the new doctrines
led the cure to arrange secret meetings with him in isolated parts of Varenne, where they agreed
to come upon each other as if by chance. At these mysterious interviews the imagination of
Patience, fresh and ardent from long solitude, was fired with all the magic of the thoughts
and hopes which were then fermenting in France, from the court of Versailles to the most uninhabitable
heath. He became enamoured of Jean Jacques, and made the cure read as much of him as he possibly
could without neglecting his duties. Then he begged a copy of the Contrat Social, and hastened
to Gazeau Tower to spell his way through it feverishly. At first the cure had given him of
this manna only with a sparing hand, and while making him admire the lofty thoughts and noble
sentiments of the philosopher, had thought to put him on his guard against the poison of anarchy.
But all the old learning, all the happy texts of bygone days--in a word, all the theology of
the worthy priest--was swept away like a fragile bridge by the torrent of wild eloquence and
ungovernable enthusiasm which Patience had accumulated in his desert. The vicar had to give
way and fall back terrified upon himself. There he discovered that the shrine of his own science
was everywhere cracking and crumbling to ruin. The new sun which was rising on the political
horizon and making havoc in so many minds, melted his own like a light snow under the first
breath of spring. The sublime enthusiasm of Patience; the strange poetic life of the man which
seemed to reveal him as one inspired; the romantic turn which their mysterious relations were
taking (the ignoble persecutions of the convent making it noble to revolt)--all this so worked
upon the priest that by 1770 he had already travelled far from Jansenism, and was vainly searching
all the religious heresies for some spot on which he might rest before falling into the abyss
of philosophy so often opened at his feet by Patience, so often hidden in vain by the exorcisms
of Roman theology.

IV

After this account of the philosophical life of Patience, set forth by me now in manhood (continued
Bernard, after a pause), it is not altogether easy to return to the very different impressions
I received in boyhood on meeting the wizard of Gazeau Tower. I will make an effort, however,
to reproduce my recollections faithfully.

It was one summer evening, as I was returning from bird-snaring with several peasant-boys,
that I passed Gazeau Tower for the first time. My age was about thirteen, and I was bigger
and stronger than any of my comrades; besides, I exercised over them, sternly enough, the authority
I drew from my noble birth. In fact, the mixture of familiarity and etiquette in our intercourse
was rather fantastic. Sometimes, when the excitement of sport or the fatigue of the day had
greater powers over them than I, they used to have their own way; and I already knew how to
yield at the right moment, as tyrants do, so as always to avoid the appearance of being compelled.
However, I generally found a chance for revenge, and soon saw them trembling before the hated
name of my family.

Well, night was coming on, and we were walking along gaily, whistling, knocking down crab-apples
with stones, imitating the notes of birds, when the boy who was ahead suddenly stopped, and,
coming back to us, declared that he was not going by the Gazeau Tower path, but would rather
cut across the wood. This idea was favoured by two others. A third objected that we ran the
risk of losing ourselves if we left the path, that night was near, and that there were plenty
of wolves about.

"Come on, you funks!" I cried in a princely tone, pushing forward the guide; "follow the path,
and have done with this nonsense."

"Not me," said the youngster. "I've just seen the sorcerer at his door saying magic words,
and I don't want to have a fever all the year."

"Bah!" said another; "he doesn't do harm to everybody. He never hurts children; and, besides,
we have only to pass by very quietly without saying anything to him. What do you suppose he'll
do to us?"

"Oh, it would be all right if we were alone," answered the first; "but M. Bernard is here;
we're sure to have a spell cast on us."

"What do you say, you fool?" I cried, doubling my fist.

"It's not my fault, my lord," replied the boy. "That old wretch doesn't like the gentry, and
he has said he would be glad to see M. Tristan and all his sons hanging from the same bough."

"He said that, did he? Good!" I answered. "Come on, and you shall see. All who are my friends
will follow; any one that leaves me is a coward."

Two of my companions, out of vanity, let themselves be drawn on. The others pretended to imitate
them; but, after a few steps, they had all taken flight and disappeared into the copse. However,
I went on proudly, escorted by my two acolytes. Little Sylvain, who was in front, took off
his hat as soon as he saw Patience in the distance; and when we arrived opposite him, though
the man was looking on the ground without appearing to notice us, he was seized with terror,
and said, in a trembling voice:

"Good evening, Master Patience; a good night's rest to you."

The sorcerer, roused out of his reverie, started like a man waked from sleep; and I saw, not
without a certain emotion, his weather-beaten face half covered with a thick gray beard. His
big head was quite bald, and the bareness of his forehead only served to make his bushy eyebrows
more prominent. Behind these his round deepset eyes seemed to flash like lightning at the end
of summer behind the fading foliage. He was of small stature, but very broad-shouldered; in
fact, built like a gladiator. The rags in which he was clad were defiantly filthy. His face
was short and of a vulgar type, like that of Socrates; and if the fire of genius glowed in
his strongly marked features, I certainly could not perceive it. He appeared to me a wild beast,
an unclean animal. Filled with a sense of loathing, and determined to avenge the insult he
had offered to my name, I put a stone in my sling, and without further ado hurled it at him
with all my might.

At the moment the stone flew out, Patience was in the act of replying to the boy's greeting.

"Good evening, lads; God be with you!" he was saying when the stone whistled past his ear and
struck a tame owl of which Patience had made a pet, and which at the approach of night was
beginning to rouse itself in the ivy above the door.

The owl gave a piercing cry and fell bleeding at the feet of its master, who answered it with
a roar of anger. For a few seconds he stood motionless with surprise and fury. Then suddenly,
taking the palpitating victim by the feet, he lifted it up, and, coming towards us, cried in
a voice of thunder:

"Which of you wretches threw that stone?"

The boy who had been walking behind, flew with the swiftness of the wind; but Sylvain, seized
by the great hand of the sorcerer, fell upon his knees, swearing by the Holy Virgin and by
Saint Solange, the patroness of Berry, that he was innocent of the death of the bird. I felt,
I confess, a strong inclination to let him get out of the scrape as best he could, and make
my escape into the thicket. I had expected to see a decrepit old juggler, not to fall into
the hands of a robust enemy; but pride held me back.

"If you did this," said Patience to my trembling comrade, "I pity you; for you are a wicked
child, and you will grow into a dishonest man. You have done a bad deed; you have made it your
pleasure to cause pain to an old man who never did you any harm; and you have done this treacherously,
like a coward, while feigning politeness and bidding him good-evening. You are a liar, a miscreant;
you have robbed me of my only society, my only riches; you have taken delight in evil. God
preserve you from living if you are going on in this way."

"Oh, Monsieur Patience!" cried the boy, clasping his hands; "do not curse me; do not bewitch
me; do not give me any illness; it wasn't I! May God strike me dead if it was!"

"If it wasn't you, it was this one, then!" said Patience, seizing me by the coat-collar and
shaking me like a young tree to be uprooted.

"Yes, I did it," I replied, haughtily; "and if you wish to know my name, learn that I am called
Bernard Mauprat, and that a peasant who lays a hand on a nobleman deserves death."

"Death! You! You would put me to death, Mauprat!" cried the old man, petrified with surprise
and indignation. "And what would God be, then, if a brat like you had a right to threaten a
man of my age? Death! Ah, you are a genuine Mauprat, and you bite like your breed, cursed whelp!
Such things as they talk of putting to death the very moment they are born! Death, my wolf-cub!
Do you know it is yourself who deserves death, not for what you have just done, but for being
the son of your father, and the nephew of your uncles? Ah! I am glad to hold a Mauprat in the
hollow of my hand, and see whether a cur of a nobleman weighs as much as a Christian."

As he spoke he lifted me from the ground as he would have lifted a hare.

"Little one," he said to my comrade, "you can run home; you needn't be afraid. Patience rarely
gets angry with his equals; and he always pardons his brothers, because his brothers are ignorant
like himself, and know not what they do; but a Mauprat, look you, is a thing that knows how
to read and write, and is only the viler for it all. Run away, then. But no; stay; I should
like you once in your life to see a nobleman receive a thrashing from the hand of a peasant.
And that is what you are going to see; and I ask you not to forget it, little one, and to tell
your parents about it."

Livid, and gnashing my teeth with rage, I made desperate efforts to resist. Patience, with
hideous calmness, bound me to a tree with an osier shoot. At the touch of his great horny hand
I bent like a reed; and yet I was remarkably strong for my age. He fixed the owl to a branch
above my head, and the bird's blood, as it fell on me drop by drop, caused me unspeakable horror;
for though this was only the correction we administer to sporting dogs that worry game, my
brain, bewildered by rage, despair, and my comrades' cries, began to imagine some frightful
witchcraft. However, I really think I would rather have been metamorphosed into an owl at once
than undergo the punishment he inflicted on me. In vain did I fling threats at him; in vain
did I take terrible vows of vengeance; in vain did the peasant child throw himself on his knees
again and supplicate:

"Monsieur Patience, for God's sake, for your own sake, don't harm him; the Mauprats will kill you."

He laughed, and shrugged his shoulders. Then, taking a handful of holly twigs, he flogged me
in a manner, I must own, more humiliating than cruel; for no sooner did he see a few drops
of my blood appear, than he stopped and threw down the rod. I even noticed a sudden softening
of his features and voice, as if he were sorry for his severity.

"Mauprat," he said, crossing his arms on his breast and looking at me fixedly, "you have now
been punished; you have now been insulted, my fine gentleman; that is enough for me. As you
see, I might easily prevent you from ever harming me by stopping your breath with a touch of
my finger, and burying you under the stone at my door. Who would think of coming to Gaffer
Patience to look for this fine child of noble blood? But, as you may also see, I am not fond
of vengeance; at the first cry of pain that escaped you, I stopped. No; I don't like to cause
suffering; I'm not a Mauprat. Still, it was well for you to learn by experience what is to
be a victim. May this disgust you of the hangman's trade, which had been handed down from father
to son in your family. Good-evening! You can go now; I no longer bear you malice; the justice
of God is satisfied. You can tell your uncles to put me on their gridiron; they will have a
tough morsel to eat; and they will swallow flesh that will come to life again in their gullets
and choke them."

Then he picked up the dead owl, and looking at it sadly:

"A peasant's child would not have done this," he said. "This is sport for gentle blood."

