During the great revival which followed Brother Patterson's first sermon and effective prayer,
the hour for the old-fashioned Methodist love feast arrived. Old Brother Estep, in his enthusiasm
on such occasions sometimes "stretched his blanket." It was his glory to get up a sensation
among the brethren. He rose and said: "Bretheren, while I was a-walkin' in my gyardin late
yisterday evenin', a-meditatin' on the final eend of the world, I looked up, an' I seed Gabrael
raise his silver trumpet, which was about fifty foot long, to his blazin' lips, an' I hearn
him give it a toot that knocked me into the fence corner an' shuck the very taters out'n the
ground."

"Tut, tut," said the old parson, "don't talk that way in this meeting; we all know you didn't
hear Gabrael blow his trumpet." The old man's wife jumped to her feet to help her husband out,
and said: "Now parson, you set down there. Don't you dispute John's word that-away--He mout
a-hearn a toot or two."

"WAMPER-JAW" AT THE JOLLIFICATION.

The sideboard of those good old times would have thrown the prohibition candidate of to-day
into spasms. It sparkled with cut glass decanters full of the juices of corn, and rye, and
apple. The old Squire of the mill "Deestrict" had as many sweet, buzzing friends as any flower
garden or cider press in Christendom. The most industrious bee that sucked at the Squire's
sideboard was old "Wamper-jaw." His mouth reached from ear to ear, and was inlaid with huge
gums as red as vermilion; and when he laughed it had the appearance of lightning. On the triumphant
day of the Squire's re-election to his great office, when everything was lovely and "the goose
hung high," he was surrounded by a large crowd of his fellow citizens, and Thomas Jefferson,
in his palmiest days, never looked grander than did the Squire on this occasion. He was attired
in his best suit of homespun, the choicest product of his wife's dye pot. His immense vest
with its broad luminous stripes, checked the rotundity of his ample stomach like the lines
of latitude and longitude, and resembled a half finished map of the United States. His blue
jeans coat covered his body as the waters cover the face of the great deep, and its huge collar
encircled the back of his head like the belts of light around a planet.

The Squire was regaling his friends with his latest side-splitting jokes. Old "Wamper-jaw"
threw himself back in his chair and exploded with peal after peal of laughter. But suddenly
he looked around and said: "Gen-tul-men, my jaw's flew out'n jint!"

His comrades seized him and pulled him all over the yard trying to get it back. Finally old
"Wamper-jaw" mounted his mule, and with pounding heels, rode, like Tam O'Shanter, to the nearest
doctor who lived two miles away. The doctor gave his jaw a mysterious yank and it popped back
into socket. "Wamper-jaw" rushed back to join in the festivities at the Squire's. The glasses
were filled again; another side-splitting joke was told, another peal of laughter went 'round,
when "Wamper-jaw" threw his hand to his face and said: "Gen-tul-men, she's out agin!!!" There
was another hasty ride for the doctor. But in the years that followed; "Wamper-jaw" was never
known to laugh aloud. On the most hilarious occasions he merely showed his gums.

THE TINTINNABULATION OF THE DINNER BELLS.

How many millions dream on the lowest planes of life! How few ever reach the highest and like
stars of the first magnitude, shed their light upon the pathway of the marching centuries!
What multitudes there are whose horizons are lighted with visions and dreams of the flesh pots
and soup bowls,--whose Fallstaffian aspirations never rise above the fat things of this earth,
and whose ear flaps are forever inclined forward, listening for the dinner bells!

  "The bells, bells, bells!
   What a world of pleasure their harmony foretells!
   The bells, bells, bells, bells, bells, bells!
   The tintinnabulation of the dinner bells!"

In my native mountains there once lived one of these old gluttonous dreamers. I think he was
the champion eater of the world. Many a time I have seen him at my grandfather's table, and
the viands and battercakes vanished "like the baseless fabric of a vision,"--he left not "a
wreck behind." But one day, in the voracity of his shark-like appetite, he unfortunately undertook
too large a contract for the retirement of an immense slice of ham. It scraped its way down
his rebellious esophagus for about two inches, and lodged as tightly as a bullet in a rusty
gun. His prodigious Adam's apple suddenly shot up to his chin; his eyes protruded, and his
purple neck craned and shortened by turns, like a trombone in full blast. He scrambled from
the table and pranced about the room like a horse with blind staggers. My grandfather sprang
at him and dealt him blow after blow in the back, which sounded like the blows of a mallet
on a dry hide; but the ham wouldn't budge. The old man ran out into the yard and seized a plank
about three feet long, and rushed into the room with it drawn.

"Now William," said he, "get down on your all-fours." William got down. "Now William, when
I hit, you swallow." He hit, and it popped like a Winchester rifle.

William shot into the corner of the room like a shell from a mortar, but in a moment he was
seated at his place at the table again, with a broad grin on his face. "Is it down William?"
shouted the old man. "Yes, Mr. Haynes, the durned thing's gone,--please pass the ham."

I thought how vividly that old glutton illustrated the fools who, in their effort to gulp down
the sensual pleasures of this world, choke the soul, and nothing but the clap-board of hard
experience, well laid on, can dislodge the ham, and restore the equilibrium.

PHANTOMS OF THE WINE CUP.

A little below the glutton lies the plane of the drunkard whose visions and dreams are bounded
by the horizon of a still tub. "A little wine for the stomach's sake is good," but in the trembling
hand of a drunkard, every crimson drop that glows in the cup is crushed from the roses that
once bloomed on the cheeks of some helpless woman. Every phantom of beauty that dances in it
is a devil; and yet, millions quaff, and with a hideous laugh, go staggering to the grave.

THE MISSING LINK.

A little below the plane of the drunkard is the dude, that missing link between monkey and
man, whose dream of happiness is a single eye-glass, a kangaroo strut, and three hours of conversation
without a sensible sentence; whose only conception of life is to splurge, and flirt, and spend
his father's fortune.

"Out of the fullness of his heart his mouth singeth:"

  "I'm a dandy; I'm a swell.
   Just from college, can't you tell?
   I'm the beau of every belle;
   I'm the swellest of the swell.

   I'm the King of all the balls,
   I'm a Prince in banquet halls.
   My daddy's rich, they know it well,
   I'm the swellest of the swell."

NIGHTMARE.

