SERMONS ON EVIL SPEAKING

BY ISAAC BARROW, D.D.

CONTENTS.

Introduction by Professor Henry Morley.

Against Foolish Talking and Jesting.

Against Rash and Vain Swearing.

Of Evil-speaking in General.

The Folly of Slander. Part 1.

The Folly of Slander. Part 2.

INTRODUCTION.

Isaac Barrow was born in London in 1630.  His father was draper to  the king.  His mother died
when he was four years old.  He was named  Isaac after an uncle, who died in 1680, Bishop of
St. Asaph.  Young  Isaac Barrow was educated at the Charterhouse School, and at  Felstead,
before he went, in 1643, to Cambridge.  He entered first  at Peterhouse, where his uncle Isaac
was a Fellow, but at that time  his uncle was ejected from his Fellowship for loyalty to the
King's  cause, and removed to Oxford; the nephew, who entered at Cambridge,  therefore avoided
Peterhouse, and went to Trinity College.  Young  Barrow's father also was at Oxford, where
he gave up all his worldly  means in service of the King.

The young student at Cambridge did not conceal his royalist feeling,  but obtained, nevertheless,
a scholarship at Trinity, with some  exemptions from the Puritan requirements of subscription.
He took  his B.A. degree in 1648, and in 1649 was elected to a fellowship of  Trinity, on the
same day with his most intimate college friend John  Ray, the botanist.  Ray held in the next
year several college  offices; was made in 1651 lecturer in Greek, and in 1653 lecturer in
Mathematics.  Barrow proceeded to his M.A. in 1652, and was admitted  to the same degree at
Oxford in 1653.  In 1654, Dr. Dupont, who had  been tutor to Barrow and Ray, and held the University
Professorship  of Greek, resigned, and used his interest, without success, to get  Barrow appointed
in his place.  Isaac Barrow was then a young man of  four-and-twenty, with the courage of his
opinions in politics and in  church questions, which were not the opinions of those in power.

In 1655 Barrow left Cambridge, having sold his books to raise money  for travel.  He went to
Paris, where his father was with other  royalists, and gave some help to his father.  Then
he went on to  Italy, made stay at Florence, and on a voyage from Leghorn to Smyrna  stood
to a gun in fight with a pirate ship from Algiers that was  beaten off.  At college and upon
his travels Barrow was helped by  the liberality of public spirited men who thought him worth
their  aid.  He went on to Constantinople, where he studied the Greek  Fathers of the Church;
and he spent more than a year in Turkey.  He  returned through Germany and Holland, reached
England in the year  before the Restoration, and then, at the age of twenty-nine, he  entered
holy orders, for which in all his studies he had been  preparing.

The Cambridge Greek Professorship, which had before been denied him,  was obtained by Barrow
immediately after the Restoration.  Soon  afterwards he was chosen to be Professor of Geometry
at Gresham  College.  In 1663 he preached the sermon in Westminster Abbey at the  consecration
of his uncle, Isaac, as Bishop of St. Asaph.  In that  year also he became, at Cambridge, the
first Lucasian Professor of  Mathematics, for which office he resigned his post at Gresham
College.

As Lucasian Professor of Mathematics, Isaac Barrow had among his  pupils Isaac Newton.  Newton
succeeded to the chair in 1669.  Barrow  resigned because he feared that the duties of the
mathematical chair  drew his thoughts too much from the duties of the pulpit, towards  the
full performance of which he had desired all studies to be aids.   He was then intent upon
the writing of an "Exposition of the Creed,  Decalogue, and Sacraments."  He held a prebend
in Salisbury  Cathedral, and a living in Wales, that yielded little for his  support after
the Professorship had been resigned.  But he was one  of the King's chaplains, was made D.D.
by the King in 1670, and in  1672 he was appointed Master of Trinity by Charles II., who said,
when he appointed Isaac Barrow, "that he gave the post to the best  scholar in England."  Barrow
was Vice-Chancellor of the University  when he died in 1677, during a visit to London on the
business of  his college.

The sermons here given were first published in 1678, in a volume  entitled "Several Sermons
against Evil-speaking."  That volume  contained ten sermons, of which the publisher said that
"the two  last, against pragmaticalness and meddling in the affairs of others,  do not so properly
belong to this subject."  The sermons here given  follow continuously, beginning with the second
in the series.  The  text of the first sermon was "If any man offend not in word, he is a 
perfect man."  The texts to the last three were:  "Speak not evil  one of another, brethren;"
"Judge not;" and "That ye study to be  quiet, and to do your own business."

There were also published in 1678, the year after Barrow's death, a  sermon preached by him
on the Good Friday before he died, a volume  of "Twelve Sermons preached upon several Occasions,"
and the second  edition of a sermon on the "Duty and Reward of Bounty to the Poor."   Barrow's
works were collected by Archbishop Tillotson, and  published, in four folio volumes, in the
years 1683-1687.  There  were other editions in three folios in 1716, in 1722, and in 1741.
Dr. Dibdin said of Barrow that he "had the clearest head with which  mathematics ever endowed
an individual, and one of the purest and  most unsophisticated hearts that ever beat in the
human breast."  In  these sermons against Evil Speaking he distinguishes as clearly as  Shakespeare
does between the playfulness of kindly mirth that draws  men nearer to each other and the words
that make division.  No man  was more free than Isaac Barrow from the spirit of unkindness.
The  man speaks in these sermons.  Yet he could hold his own in wit with  the light triflers
of the court of Charles the Second.  It is of him  that the familiar story is told of a playful
match at mock courtesy  with the Earl of Rochester, who meeting Dr. Barrow near the king's
chamber bowed low, saying, "I am yours, doctor, to the knee  strings."  Barrow (bowing lower),
"I am yours, my lord, to the shoe- tie."  Rochester:  "Yours, doctor, down to the ground."
Barrow:   "Yours, my lord, to the centre of the earth."  Rochester (not to be  out-done): 
"Yours, doctor, to the lowest pit of hell."  Barrow:   "There, my lord, I must leave you."

Barrow's mathematical power gave clearness to his sermons, which 
were full of sense and piety.  They were very carefully written, 
copied and recopied, and now rank with the most valued pieces of the 
literature of the pulpit.  He was deeply religious, although he had, 
besides learning, a lively wit, and never lost the pluck that taught 
him how to man a gun against a pirate.  He was "low of stature, 
lean, and of a pale complexion," so untidy that on one occasion his 
appearance in the pulpit is said to have caused half the 
congregation to go out of church.  He gave his whole mind and his 
whole soul to his work for God.  Mythical tales are told of the 
length of some of his sermons, at a time when an hour's sermon was 
not considered long.  Of one charity-sermon the story is that it 
lasted three hours and a half, and that Barrow was requested to 
print it--"with the other half which he had not had time to 
deliver."  But we may take this tale as one of the quips at which 
Barrow himself would have laughed very good-humouredly.
                                             H. M.

SERMONS ON EVIL-SPEAKING.

AGAINST FOOLISH TALKING AND JESTING.

"Nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient."-- Ephes. v.4.

Moral and political aphorisms are seldom couched in such terms that  they should be taken as
they sound precisely, or according to the  widest extent of signification; but do commonly
need exposition, and  admit exception:  otherwise frequently they would not only clash  with
reason and experience, but interfere, thwart, and supplant one  another.  The best masters
of such wisdom are wont to interdict  things, apt by unseasonable or excessive use to be perverted,
in  general forms of speech, leaving the restrictions, which the case  may require or bear,
to be made by the hearer's or interpreter's  discretion; whence many seemingly formal prohibitions
are to be  received only as sober cautions. We have a common form for all those things, as to
foretelling the weather, we never meddle with that, but leave it to the printer, who takes it out
of any old almanack, as he thinks fit; the rest was my own invention, to make my almanack sell,
having a wife to maintain, and no other way to get my bread; for mending old shoes is a poor livelihood;
and, (added he, sighing) I wish I may not have done more mischief by my physick than my astrology;
tho' I had some good receipts from my grandmother, and my own compositions were such as I thought
could at least do no hurt.

I had some other discourse with him, which now I cannot call to mind; and I fear I have already
tired your Lordship. I shall only add one circumstance, That on his death-bed he declared himself
a Nonconformist, and had a fanatick preacher to be his spiritual guide. After half an hour's
conversation I took my leave, being half stifled by the closeness
of the room.

I imagine he could not hold out long, and therefore withdrew to a little coffee-house hard by,
leaving a servant at the house with orders to come immediately, and tell me, as near as he could,
the minute when Partridge should expire, which was not above two hours after; when, looking upon
my watch, I found it to be above five minutes after seven; by which it is clear that Mr. Bickerstaff
was mistaken almost four hours in his calculation. In the other circumstances he was exact
enough. But whether he has not been the cause of this poor man's death, as well as the predictor,
may be very reasonably disputed. However, it must be confess'd the matter is odd enough, whether
we should endeavour to account for it by chance, or the effect of
imagination: For my own part, tho' I believe no man has less faith
in these matters, yet I shall wait with some impatience, and not without
some expectation, the fulfilling of Mr. Bickerstaff's second prediction,
that the Cardinal de Noailles is to die upon the fourth of April,
and if that should be verified as exactly as this of poor Partridge,
I must own I should be wholly surprized, and at a loss, and should
infallibly expect the accomplishment of all the rest.

*****

An Elegy on the supposed Death of Partridge, the Almanack-Maker.

Well, 'tis as Bickerstaff has guess'd, Tho' we all took it for a jest;
Partridge is dead, nay more, he dy'd E're he could prove the good
'Squire ly'd. Strange, an Astrologer shou'd die, Without one Wonder
in the Sky!

Not one of all his Crony Stars To pay their Duty at his Herse? No Meteor, no Eclipse appear'd?
No Comet with a flaming Beard? The Sun has rose, and gone to Bed, Just as if partridge were not
dead: Nor hid himself behind the Moon, To make a dreadful Night at Noon. He at fit Periods
walks through Aries, Howe'er our earthly Motion varies; And twice a Year he'll cut th' Equator,
As if there had been no such Matter.

Some Wits have wonder'd what Analogy There is 'twixt Cobbling* and Astrology: How Partridge
made his Optics rise, From a Shoe-Sole, to reach the Skies.
  Many at least (to
purchase this glory, to be deemed considerable in this faculty, and  enrolled among the wits)
do not only make shipwreck of conscience,  abandon virtue, and forfeit all pretences to wisdom;
but neglect  their estates, and prostitute their honour:  so to the private  damage of many
particular persons, and with no small prejudice to  the public, are our times possessed and
transported with this  humour.  To repress the excess and extravagance whereof, nothing in
way of discourse can serve better than a plain declaration when and  how such a practice is
allowable or tolerable; when it is wicked and  vain, unworthy of a man endued with reason,
and pretending to  honesty or honour.

This I shall in some measure endeavour to perform.

But first it may be demanded what the thing we speak of is, or what  this facetiousness doth
import?

But saying no more concerning what it is, and leaving it to your  imagination and experience
to supply the defect of such explication,  I shall address myself to show, first, when and
how such a manner of  speaking may be allowed; then, in what matters and ways it should be
condemned.

1.  Such facetiousness is not absolutely unreasonable or unlawful,  which ministereth harmless
divertisement, and delight to  conversation (harmless, I say, that is, not entrenching upon
piety,  not infringing charity or justice, not disturbing peace).  For  Christianity is not
so tetrical, so harsh, so envious, as to bar us  continually from innocent, much less from
wholesome and useful  pleasure, such as human life doth need or require.  And if jocular  discourse
may serve to good purposes of this kind; if it may be apt  to raise our drooping spirits, to
allay our irksome cares, to whet  our blunted industry, to recreate our minds being tired and
cloyed  with graver occupations; if it may breed alacrity, or maintain good  humour among us;
if it may conduce to sweeten conversation and  endear society; then is it not inconvenient,
or unprofitable.  If  for those ends we may use other recreations, employing on them our  ears
and eyes, our hands and feet, our other instruments of sense  and motion, why may we not as
well to them accommodate our organs of  speech and interior sense?  Why should those games
which excite our  wits and fancies be less reasonable than those whereby our grosser  parts
and faculties are exercised?  Yea, why are not those more  reasonable, since they are performed
in a manly way, and have in  them a smack of reason; feeling also they may be so managed, as
not  only to divert and please, but to improve and profit the mind,  rousing and quickening
it, yea sometimes enlightening and  instructing it, by good sense conveyed in jocular expression?

It would surely be hard that we should be tied ever to knit the  brow, and squeeze the brain
(to be always sadly dumpish, or  seriously pensive), that all divertisement of mirth and pleasantness
should be shut out of conversation; and how can we better relieve  our minds, or relax our
thoughts, how can we be more ingenuously  cheerful, in what more kindly way can we exhilarate
ourselves and  others, than by thus sacrificing to the Graces, as the ancients  called it?
Are not some persons always, and all persons sometimes,  incapable otherwise to divert themselves,
than by such discourse?   Shall we, I say, have no recreation? or must our recreations be ever
clownish, or childish, consisting merely in rustical efforts, or in  petty sleights of bodily
strength and activity?  Were we, in fine,  obliged ever to talk like philosophers, assigning
dry reasons for  everything, and dropping grave sentences upon all occasions, would  it not
much deaden human life, and make ordinary conversation  exceedingly to languish?  Facetiousness
therefore in such cases, and  to such purposes, may be allowable.

2.  Facetiousness is allowable when it is the most proper instrument  of exposing things apparently
base and vile to due contempt.  It is  many times expedient, that things really ridiculous
should appear  such, that they may be sufficiently loathed and shunned; and to  render them
such is the part of a facetious wit, and usually can  only be compassed thereby.  When to impugn
them with down-right  reason, or to check them by serious discourse, would signify  nothing,
then representing them in a shape strangely ugly to the  fancy, and thereby raising derision
at them, may effectually  discountenance them.  Thus did the prophet Elias expose the wicked
superstition of those who worshipped Baal:  "Elias (saith the text)  mocked them, and said,
'Cry aloud; for he is a god, either he is  talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey,
or peradventure  he sleeps, and must be awaked.'"  By which one pregnant instance it  appeareth
that reasoning pleasantly-abusive in some cases may be  useful.  The Holy Scripture doth not
indeed use it frequently (it  not suiting the Divine simplicity and stately gravity thereof
to do  so); yet its condescension thereto at any time sufficiently doth  authorise a cautious
use thereof.  When sarcastic twitches are  needful to pierce the thick skins of men, to correct
their lethargic  stupidity, to rouse them out of their drowsy negligence, then may  they well
be applied when plain declarations will not enlighten  people to discern the truth and weight
of things, and blunt  arguments will not penetrate to convince or persuade them to their  duty,
then doth reason freely resign its place to wit, allowing it  to undertake its work of instruction
and reproof.

3.  Facetious discourse particularly may be commodious for reproving  some vices, and reclaiming
some persons (as salt for cleansing and  curing some sores).  It commonly procureth a more
easy access to the  ears of men, and worketh a stronger impression on their hearts, than  other
discourse could do. Can't say that House of Commons has taken to me kindly; but toward what may
be the close of a Parliamentary career, the tribute of this honest Verger is, I will admit,
soothing."

(12:25.)--GEDGE moves Count; bells ring; SQUIRE OF MALWOOD strolls in with the pleased expression
of a man who might be at the Derby, but isn't; HORACE DAVY and some others; all told only 13.
"If you'll excuse me. Gentlemen," said the SPEAKER, "I'll retire; look in again little later."

(1
P.M.)--SPEAKER back in Chair; ATTORNEY-GENERAL moves Count; bells ring as before; SQUIRE OF MALWOOD
again comes in; no deception; wasn't lurking about with intent to show up in House, then rush
off to catch half-past twelve train for Epsom. Heads counted; only 19 present; must have forty
or no House. "Look here, Gentlemen," said the SPEAKER, "this won't do. The Chair is not to
be trifled with. I shall again retire, and won't come back till four o'clock, or till I am assured
there are forty Members present."

SPEAKER gathered up skirts and strode forth. Three hours before House can be Counted Out. What's to be
done in the time? ELLIOT LEES determines to make a book; 6 to 4 no House (t. and o.); HENRY FOWLER
wouldn't bet; but ROBY put something on, and ALBERT ROLLIT staked
a fiver.

(4 P.M.)--SPEAKER back again; House much fuller now; ELLIOT
LEES looking anxious; made a nice book if he can only pull it off.
But arrival of half a dozen Members would upset everything.  Good reason may be apparelled
in the garb of wit,  and therein will securely pass whither in its native homeliness it  could
never arrive:  and being come thither, it with especial  advantage may impress good advice,
making an offender more clearly  to see, and more deeply to feel his miscarriage; being represented
to his fancy in a strain somewhat rare and remarkable, yet not so  fierce and frightful.  The
severity of reproof is tempered, and the  reprover's anger disguised thereby.  The guilty person
cannot but  observe that he who thus reprehends him is not disturbed or out of  humour, and
that he rather pitieth than hateth him; which breedeth a  veneration to him, and imparteth
no small efficacy to his wholesome  suggestions.  Such a reprehension, while it forceth a smile
without,  doth work remorse within; while it seemeth to tickle the ear, doth  sting the heart.
In fine, many whose foreheads are brazed and  hearts steeled against all blame, are yet not
of proof against  derision; divers, who never will be reasoned, may be rallied in  better order:
in which cases raillery, as an instrument of so  important good, as a servant of the best charity,
may be allowed.

4.  Some errors likewise in this way may be most properly and most  successfully confuted;
such as deserve not, and hardly can bear a  serious and solid confutation.  He that will contest
things  apparently decided by sense and experience, or who disavows clear  principles of reason,
approved by general consent and the common  sense of men, what other hopeful way is there of
proceeding with  him, than pleasantly to explode his conceits?  To dispute seriously  with
him were trifling; to trifle with him is the proper course.   Since he rejecteth the grounds
of reasoning, 'tis vain to be in  earnest; what then remains but to jest with him?  To deal
seriously  were to yield too much respect to such a baffler, and too much  weight to his fancies;
to raise the man too high in his courage and  conceit; to make his pretences seem worthy the
considering and  canvassing. If I had leave to print the Latin letters transmitted to me from
foreign parts, they would fill a volume, and be a full defence against all that Mr. Partridge, or
his accomplices of the Portugal Inquisition, will be able to object;
who, by the way, are the only enemies my predictions have ever met
with at home or abroad.

But I hope I know better what is due to the honour of a learned correspondence in so tender
a point. Yet some of those illustrious persons will perhaps excuse me from transcribing a passage
or two in my own vindication. The most learned Monsieur Leibnits thus addresses to me his third
letter: Illustrissimo Bickerstaffio Astrologiae instauratori, etc. Monsieur le Clerc, quoting
my predictions in a treatise he published last year, is pleased to
say, Ita nuperrime Bickerstaffius magnum illud Angliae fidus.

Another great professor writing of me, has these words: Bickerstaffius, nobilis Anglus, Astrologorum
hujusce Saeculi facile Princeps. Signior Magliabecchi, the Great Duke's famous library-keeper,
spends almost his whole letter in compliments and praises. 'Tis true, the renowned Professor of
Astronomy at Utrecht, seems to differ from me in one article; but it is in a modest manner,
that becomes a philosopher; as, Pace tanti viri dixerim: And pag.55, he seems to lay the error
upon the printer (as indeed it ought) and says, vel forsan error typographi, cum alioquin Bickerstaffius
ver doctissimus, etc.

If Mr. Partridge had followed this example in the controversy between us, he might have spared
me the trouble of justifying myself in so publick a manner. I believe few men are readier to own their
errors than I, or more thankful to those who will please to inform me of them. But it seems
this gentleman, instead of encouraging the progress of his own art, is pleased to look upon
all attempts of that kind as an invasion of his province. He has been indeed so wise to make
no objection against the truth of my predictions, except in one single point, relating to himself:
And to demonstrate how much men are blinded by their own partiality, I do solemnly assure the
reader, that he is the only person from whom I ever heard that objection
offered; which consideration alone, I think, will take off all its
weight.

With my utmost endeavours, I have not been able to trace above two objections ever made against
the truth of my last year's prophecies: The first was of a French man, who was pleased to publish
to the world, that the Cardinal de Noailles was still alive, notwithstanding the pretended prophecy
of Monsieur Biquerstaffe: But how far a Frenchman, a papist, and an enemy is to be believed in his own
case against an English Protestant, who is true to his government, I shall leave to the candid
and impartial reader.

The other objection is the unhappy occasion of this discourse, and relates to an article in my predictions,
which foretold the death of Mr. Partridge, to happen on March 29, 1708. This he is pleased to
contradict absolutely in the almanack he has published for the present
year, and in that ungentlemanly manner (pardon the expression) as
I have above related.

In that work he very roundly asserts, That he is not only now alive, but was likewise alive
upon that very 29th of March, when I had foretold he should die. This is the subject of the
present controversy between us; which I design to handle with all brevity, perspicuity, and
calmness: In this dispute, I am sensible the eyes not only of England, but of all Europe, will be
upon us; and the learned in every country will, I doubt not, take part on that side, where they
find most appearance of reason and truth.

Without entering into criticisms of chronology about the hour of his death, I shall only prove
that Mr. Partridge is not alive.

And my first argument is thus: Above a thousand gentelmen having bought his almanacks for this
year, merely to find what he said against me; at every line they read, they would lift up
their eyes, and cry out, betwixt rage and laughter, "They were sure no man alive ever writ
such damn'd stuff as this." Neither did I ever hear that opinion disputed: So that Mr. Partridge
lies under a dilemma, either of disowning his almanack, or allowing himself to be "no man alive".
But now if an uninformed carcase walks still about, and is pleased to call itself Partridge,
Mr. Bickerstaff does not think himself any way answerable for that. Neither had the said carcase
any right to beat the poor boy who happen'd to pass by it in the street, crying, "A full and
true account of Dr. Partridge's death, etc."

Secondly, Mr. Partridge pretends to tell fortunes, and recover stolen goods; which all the parish
says he must do by conversing with the devil and other evil spirits: And no wise man will ever
allow he could converse personally with either, till after he was dead.

Thirdly, I will plainly prove him to be dead out of his own almanack for this year, and from
the very passage which he produces to make us think him alive. He there says, "He is not only
now alive, but was also alive on the very 29th of March, which I foretold he should die on":
By this, he declares his opinion, that a man may be alive now, who
was not alive a twelvemonth ago.

And indeed, there lies the sophistry of this argument. He dares not assert, he was alive ever
since that 29th of March, but that he is now alive, and was so on that day: I grant the latter;
for he did not die till night, as appears by the printed account of his death, in a letter to a lord;
and whether he is since revived I leave the world to judge. This indeed is perfect cavilling,
and I am ashamed to dwell any longer upon it.

Fourthly, I will appeal to Mr. Partridge himself, whether it be probable I could have been so indiscreet,
to begin my predictions with the only falsehood that ever was pretended to be in them; and this
in an affair at home, where I had so many opportunities to be exact; and must have given such advantages
against me to a person of Mr. Partridge's wit and learning, who, if he could possibly have
raised one single objection more against the truth of my prophecies, would hardly have spared me.

And here I must take occasion to reprove the above mention'd writer
of the relation of Mr. Partridge's death, in a letter to a lord; who
was pleased to tax me with a mistake of four whole hours in my calculation
of that event.

I must confess, this censure pronounced with an air of certainty, in a matter that so nearly
concerned me, and by a grave judicious author, moved me not a little. But tho' I was at that time
out of town, yet several of my friends, whose curiosity had led them to be exactly informed (for
as to my own part, having no doubt at all in the matter, I never once thought of it) assured
me, I computed to something under half an hour: which (I speak my private opinion) is an error of
no very great magnitude, that men should raise a clamour about it. I shall only say, it would
not be amiss, if that author would henceforth be more tender of other men's reputations as well
as his own. It is well there were no more mistakes of that kind; if there had, I presume he
would have told me of them with as little ceremony.

There is one objection against Mr. Partridge's death, which I have sometimes met with, though
indeed very slightly offered, That he still continues to write almanacks. But this is no more
than what is common to all that profession; Gadbury, Poor Robin,
Dove, Wing, and several others, do yearly publish their almanacks,
though several of them have been dead since before the Revolution.

Now the natural reason of this I take to be, that whereas it is the privilege of other authors
to live after their deaths; almanack-makers are alone excluded, because their dissertations
treating only upon the minutes as they pass, become useless as those go off. In consideration
of which, Time, whose registers they are, gives them a lease in reversion, to continue their
works after their death.

I should not have given the publick or myself the trouble of this vindication, if my name had not
been made use of by several persons, to whom I never lent it; one of which, a few days ago,
was pleased to father on me a new sett of predictions. But I think those are things too serious
to be trifled with. It grieved me to the heart, when I saw my labours, which had cost me so
much thought and watching, bawl'd about by common hawkers, which I only intended for the weighty consideration
of the gravest persons. This prejudiced the world so much at first, that several of my friends
had the assurance to ask me whether I were in jest? To which I only answered coldly, that the
event would shew. But it is the talent of our age and nation, to turn things of the greatest
importance into ridicule. When the end of the year had verified all my predictions, out comes
Mr. Partridge's almanack, disputing the point of his death; so that I am employed, like the general
who was forced to kill his enemies twice over, whom a necromancer had raised to life. If Mr.
Partridge has practised the same experiment upon himself, and be again alive, long may he continue
so; that does not in the least contradict my veracity: But I think I have clearly proved, by
invincible demonstration, that he died at farthest within half an hour of the time I foretold, and
not four hours sooner, as the above-mentioned author, in his letter to a lord, hath maliciously
suggested, with design to blast my credit, by charging me with so
gross a mistake.

*****

A famous prediction of Merlin, the British wizard.

Written above a thousand years ago, and relating to the year 1709, with explanatory notes.

Last year was publish'd a paper of predictions, pretended to be written by one Isaac Bickerstaff,
Esq; but the true design of it was to ridicule the art of astrology, and expose its professors
as ignorant or impostors. Against this imputation, Dr. Partridge hath vindicated himself in his
almanack for that year.

For a farther vindication of this famous art, I have thought fit to present the world with the
following prophecy. The original is said to be of the famous Merlin, who lived about a thousand years
ago; and the following translation is two hundred years old, for it seems to be written near
the end of Henry the Seventh's reign. I found it in an old edition of Merlin's Prophecies, imprinted
at London by John Hawkins in the year 1530, page 39. I set it down word for word in the old
orthography, and shall take leave to subjoin a few explanatory notes.

Seven and Ten addyd to Nyne, Of Fraunce her Woe this is the Sygne, Tamys Rivere twys y-frozen, Walke
sans wetyng Shoes ne Hozen. Then comyth foorthe, ich understonde, From Town of Stoffe to farryn
Londe, An herdye Chyftan, woe the Morne To Fraunce, that evere he was born. Than shall the
fyshe beweyle his Bosse; Nor shall grin Berrys make up the Losse. Yonge Symnele shall again miscarrye:
And Norways Pryd again shall marrye. And from the tree where Blosums feele, Ripe Fruit shall
come, and all is wele, Reaums shall daunce Honde in Honde, And it shall be merrye in old Inglonde,
Then old Inglonde shall be no more, And no man shall be sorre therefore. Geryon shall have three
Hedes agayne, Till Hapsburge makyth them but twayne.

Explanatory notes.

Seven and Ten. This line describes the year when these events shall happen. Seven and ten makes seventeen,
which I explain seventeen hundred, and this number added to nine, makes the year we are now
in; for it must be understood of the natural year, which begins the first of January.

Tamys Rivere twys, etc. The River Thames, frozen twice in one year, so as men to walk on it, is
a very signal accident, which perhaps hath not fallen out for several hundred years before,
and is the reason why some astrologers have thought that this prophecy could never be fulfilled,
because they imagine such a thing would never happen in our climate.

From Town of Stoffe, etc. This is a plain designation of the Duke of Marlborough: One kind of
stuff used to fatten land is called marle, and every body knows that borough is a name for a
town; and this way of expression is after the usual dark manner of old astrological predictions.

Then
shall the Fyshe, etc. By the fish, is understood the Dauphin of France, as their kings eldest
sons are called: 'Tis here said, he shall lament the loss of the
Duke of Burgundy, called the Bosse, which is an old English word for
hump-shoulder, or crook-back, as that Duke is known to be; and the
prophecy seems to mean, that he should be overcome or slain.

By the green berrys, in the next line, is meant the young Duke of Berry, the Dauphin's third
son, who shall not have valour or fortune enough to supply the loss of his eldest brother.

Yonge Symnele, etc. By Symnele is meant the pretended Prince of Wales, who, if he offers to attempt
anything against England, shall miscarry as he did before. Lambert Symnele is the name of a young
man, noted in our histories for personating the son (as I remember) of Edward the fourth.

And Norway's Pryd, etc. I cannot guess who is meant by Norway's Pride, perhaps the reader may, as
well as the sense of the two following lines.

Reaums shall, etc. Reums, or, as the word is now, realms, is the old name for kingdoms: And this
is a very plain prediction of our happy Union, with the felicities that shall attend it. It
is added that Old England shall be no more, and yet no man shall
be sorry for it.

And indeed, properly speaking, England is now no more, for the whole island is one Kingdom,
under the name of Britain.

Geryon shall, etc. This prediction, tho' somewhat obscure, is wonderfully adapt. Geryon is said to
have been a king of Spain, whom Hercules slew. It was a fiction of the poets, that he had three heads,
which the author says he shall have again: That is, Spain shall have three kings; which is now
wonderfully verified; for besides the King of Portugal, which properly is part of Spain, there
are now two rivals for Spain, Charles and Philip: But Charles being descended fro the Count of Hapsburgh,
founder of the Austrian family, shall soon make those heads but two; by overturning Philip,
and driving him out of Spain.

Some of these predictions are already fulfilled; and it is highly probable the rest may be in due
time; and, I think, I have not forced the words, by my explication, into any other sense than what
they will naturally bear. If this be granted, I am sure it must be also allow'd, that the author
(whoever he were) was a person of extraordinary sagacity; and that astrology brought to such perfection
as this, is by no means an art to be despised, whatever Mr. Bickerstaff, or other merry gentlemen
are pleased to think. As to the tradition of these lines having been writ in the original by Merlin,
I confess I lay not much weight upon it: But it is enough to justify their authority, that the
book from whence I have transcrib'd them, was printed 170 years ago, as appears by the title-page.
For the satisfaction of any gentleman, who may be either doubtful
of the truth, or curious to be inform'd; I shall give order to have
the very book sent to the printer of this paper, with directions to
let anybody see it that pleases, because I believe it is pretty scarce.

*****

Dr.

John Arbuthnot and Alexander Pope

Annus Mirabilis: or, The wonderful effects of the approaching conjunction of the planets Jupiter,
Mars, and Saturn.

By Mart. Scriblerus, Philomath.

In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas corpora.....

I suppose
every body is sufficiently appriz'd of, and duly prepar'd for, the
famous conjunction to be celebrated the 29th of this instant December,
1722, foretold by all the sages of antiquity, under the name of the
Annus Mirabilis, or the metamorphostical conjunction: a word which
denotes the mutual transformation of sexes, (the effect of that configuration
of the celestial bodies) the human males being turn'd into females,
and the human females into males.

The Egyptians have represented this great transformation by several significant hieroglyphicks,
particularly one very remarkable. There are carv'd upon an obelisk, a barber and a midwife;
the barber delivers his razor to the midwife, and she her swadling-cloaths to the barber.
Accordingly Thales Milesius (who like the rest of his countrymen, borrow'd his learning from
the Egyptians) after having computed the time of this famous conjunction, "Then," says he, "shall
men and women mutually exchange the pangs of shaving and child-bearing."

Anaximander modestly describes this metamorphosis in mathematical
terms: "Then," says he, "shall the negative quantity of the women
be turn'd into positive, their - into +;"

(i.e.) their minus into plus.

Plato not only speaks of this great change, but describes all the preparations towards it. "Long before
the bodily transformation, (says he) nature shall begin the most difficult part of her work,
by changing the ideas and inclinations of the two sexes: Men shall turn effeminate, and women manly;
wives shall domineer, and husbands obey; ladies shall ride a horseback, dress'd like cavaliers;
princes and nobles appear in night-rails and petticoats; men shall squeak upon theatres with
female voices, and women corrupt virgins; lords shall knot and cut paper; and even the northern
people.........:" A Greek phrase (which for modesty's sake I forbear to translate) which denotes
a vice too frequent amongst us.

That the Ministry foresaw this great change, is plain from the Callico-Act; whereby it is now become the
occupation of women all over England, to convert their useless female
habits into beds, window-curtains, chairs, and joint-stools; undressing
themselves (as it were) before their transformation.

The philosophy of this transformation will not seem surprizing to people who search into the bottom of
things. Madam Bourignon, a devout French lady, has shewn us, how man was at first created male
and female in one individual, having the faculty of propagation within himself: A circumstance
necessary to the state of innocence, wherein a man's happiness was not to depend upon the caprice
of another. It was not till after he had made a faux pas, that he had his female mate. Many
such transformations of individuals have been well attested; particularly one by Montaigne, and
another by the late Bishop of Salisbury. From all which it appears, that this system of male
and female has already undergone and may hereafter suffer, several alterations. Every smatterer
in anatomy knows, that a woman is but an introverted man; a new fusion and flatus will turn
the hollow bottom of a bottle into a convexity; but I forbear, (for the sake of my modest
men-readers, who are in a few days to be virgins.)

In some subjects, the smallest alterations will do: some men are sufficiently spread about the
hips, and contriv'd with female softness, that they want only the negative quantity to make
them buxom wenches; and there are women who are, as it were, already
the ebauche of a good sturdy man.

If nature cou'd be puzzl'd, it will be how to bestow the redundant matter of the exuberant
bubbies that now appear about town, or how to roll out the short dapper fellows into well-siz'd
women.

This great conjunction will begin to operate on Saturday the 29th instant. Accordingly, about
eight at night, as Senezino shall begin at the Opera, si videte, he shall be observ'd to make
an unusual motion; upon which the audience will be affected with a red suffusion over their countenance:
And because a strong succession of the muscles of the belly is necessary towards performing this
great operation, both sexes will be thrown into a profuse involuntary laughter. Then (to use
the modest terms of Anaximander) shall negative quantity be turn'd into positive, etc. Time
never beheld, nor will it ever assemble, such a number of untouch'd virgins within those walls!
but alas! such will be the impatience and curiosity of people to act in their new capacity, that
many of them will be compleated men and women that very night. To prevent the disorders that
may happen upon this occasion, is the chief design of this paper.

Gentlemen have begun already to make use of this conjunction to compass
their filthy purposes.

They tell the ladies forsooth, that it is only parting with a perishable commodity, hardly of
so much value as a callico under-petticoat; since, like its mistress, it will be useless in
the form it is now in. If the ladies have no regard to the dishonour and immorality of the
action, I desire they will consider, that nature who never destroys her own productions, will exempt
big-belly'd women till the time of their lying-in; so that not to
be transformed, will be the same as to be pregnant.

If they don't think it worth while to defend a fortress that is to be demolish'd in a few days,
let them reflect that it will be a melancholy thing nine months hence, to be brought to bed
of a bastard; a posthumous bastard as it were, to which the quondam father can be no more than a dry
nurse.

This wonderful transformation is the instrument of nature, to balance matters between the sexes. The
cruelty of scornful mistresses shall be return'd; the slighted maid
shall grow into an imperious gallant, and reward her undoer with a
big belly, and a bastard.

It is hardly possible to imagine the revolutions that this wonderful
phaenomenon will occasion over the face of the earth. I long impatiently
to see the proceedings of the Parliament of Paris, as to the title
of succession to the crown, this being a case not provided for by
the salique law. There will be no preventing disorders amongst friars
and monks; for certainly vows of chastity do not bind but under the
sex in which they were made. The same will hold good with marriages,
tho' I think it will be a scandal amongst Protestants for husbands
and wives to part, since there remains still a possibility to perform
the debitus conjugale, by the husband being femme couverte. I submit
it to the judgment of the gentlemen of the long robe, whether this
transformation does not discharge all suits of rapes?

The Pope must
undergo a new groping; but the false prophet Mahomet has contriv'd
matters well for his successors; for as the Grand Signior has now
a great many fine women, he will then have as many fine young gentelmen,
at his devotion.

These are surprizing scenes; but I beg leave to
affirm, that the solemn operations of nature are subjects of contemplation,
not of ridicule. Therefore I make it my earnest request to the merry
fellows, and giggling girls about town, that they would not put themselves
in a high twitter, when they go to visit a general lying-in of his
first child; his officers serving as midwives, nurses and rockers
dispensing caudle; or if they behold the reverend prelates dressing
the heads and airing the linnen at court, I beg they will remember
that these offices must be fill'd with people of the greatest regularity,
and best characters. For the same reason, I am sorry that a certain
prelate, who notwithstanding his confinement (in December 1723), still
preserves his healthy, chearful countenance, cannot come in time to
be a nurse at court.

I likewise earnestly intreat the maids of honour,
(then ensigns and captains of the guard) that, at their first setting
out, they have some regard to their former station, and do not run
wild through all the infamous houses about town: That the present
grooms of the bed-chamber (then maids of honour) would not eat chalk
and lime in their green-sickness: And in general, that the men would
remember they are become retromingent, and not by inadvertency lift
up against walls and posts.

Petticoats will not be burdensome to
the clergy; but balls and assemblies will be indecent for some time.

As
for you, coquettes, bawds, and chamber-maids, (the future ministers,
plenipotentiaries, and cabinet-counsellors to the princes of the earth,)
manage the great intrigues that will be committed to your charge,
with your usual secrecy and conduct; and the affairs of your masters
will go better than ever.

O ye exchange women! (our right worshipful
representatives that are to be) be not so griping in the sale of your
ware as your predecessors, but consider that the nation, like a spend-thrift
heir, has run out: Be likewise a little more continent in your tongues
than you are at present, else the length of debates will spoil your
dinners.  The  shop
and exchange will scarce endure jesting in their lower  transactions:  the Senate, the Court
of Justice, the Church do much  more exclude it from their more weighty consultations.  Whenever
it  justleth out, or hindereth the despatch of other serious business,  taking up the room
or swallowing the time due to it, or indisposing  the minds of the audience to attend it, then
it is unseasonable and  pestilent.  [Greek] (to play, that we may be seriously busy), is the
good rule (of Anacharsis), implying the subordination of sport to  business, as a condiment
and furtherance, not an impediment or clog  thereto.  He that for his sport neglects his business,
deserves  indeed to be reckoned among children; and children's fortune will  attend him, to
be pleased with toys, and to fail of substantial  profit.

'Tis again improper (because indeed uncivil, and inhuman) to jest  with persons that are in
a sad or afflicted condition; as arguing  want of due considering or due commiserating their
case.  It appears  a kind of insulting upon their misfortune, and is apt to foment  their grief.
Even in our own case (upon any disastrous occurrence  to ourselves), it would not be seemly
to frolic it thus; it would  signify want of due regard to the frowns of God, and the strokes
of  His hand; it would cross the wise man's advice, "In the day of  prosperity be joyful, but
in the day of adversity consider."

It is also not seasonable, or civil, to be jocund in this way with  those who desire to be
serious, and like not the humour.  Jocularity  should not be forcibly obtruded, but by a kindly
conspiracy (or  tacit compact) slip into conversation; consent and complaisance give  all the
life thereto.  Its design is to sweeten and ease society;  when to the contrary it breedeth
offence or encumbrance, it is worse  than vain and unprofitable.  From these instances we may
collect  when in other like cases it is unseasonable, and therefore culpable.   Further--

5.  To affect, admire, or highly to value this way of speaking  (either absolutely in itself,
or in comparison to the serious and  plain way of speech), and thence to be drawn into an immoderate
use  thereof, is blamable.  A man of ripe age and sound judgment, for  refreshment to himself,
or in complaisance to others, may sometimes  condescend to play in this, or any other harmless
way; but to be  fond of it, to prosecute it with a careful or painful eagerness, to  dote and
dwell upon it, to reckon it a brave or a fine thing, a  singular matter of commendation, a
transcendent accomplishment,  anywise preferable to rational endowments, or comparable to the
moral excellencies of our mind (to solid knowledge, or sound wisdom,  or true virtue and goodness),
this is extremely childish, or  brutish, and far below a man.  What can be more absurd than
to make  business of play, to be studious and laborious in toys, to make a  profession or drive
a trade of impertinency?  What more plain  nonsense can there be, than to be earnest in jest,
to be continual  in divertisement, or constant in pastime; to make extravagance all  our way,
and sauce all our diet?  Is not this plainly the life of a  child that is ever busy, yet never
hath anything to do?  Or the life  of that mimical brute which is always active in playing
uncouth and  unlucky tricks; which, could it speak, might surely pass well for a  professed wit?

The proper work of man, the grand drift of human life, is to follow  reason (that noble spark
kindled from Heaven; that princely and  powerful faculty, which is able to reach so lofty objects,
and  achieve so mighty works), not to soothe fancy, that brutish, shallow  and giddy power,
able to perform nothing worthy much regard.  We are  not (even Cicero could tell us) born for
play and jesting, but for  severity, and the study of graver and greater affairs.  Yes, we
were  purposely designed, and fitly framed, to understand and contemplate,  to affect and delight
in, to undertake and pursue most noble and  worthy things; to be employed in business considerably
profitable to  ourselves, and beneficial to others.  We do therefore strangely  debase ourselves,
when we do strongly bend our minds to, or set our  affections upon, such toys.

Especially to do so is unworthy of a Christian; that is, of a person  who is advanced to so
high a rank, and so glorious relations; who  hath so excellent objects of his mind and affections
presented  before him, and so excellent rewards for his care and pains proposed  to him; who
is engaged in affairs of so worthy nature, and so  immense consequence:  for him to be zealous
about quibbles, for him  to be ravished with puny conceits and expressions, 'tis a wondrous
oversight, and an enormous indecency.

He indeed that prefers any faculty to reason, disclaims the  privilege of being a man, and
understands not the worth of his own  nature; he that prizes any quality beyond virtue and
goodness,  renounces the title of a Christian, and knows not how to value the  dignity of his
profession.  It is these two (reason and virtue) in  conjunction which produce all that is
considerably good and great in  the world.  Fancy can do little; doth never anything well,
except as  directed and wielded by them.  Do pretty conceits or humorous talk  carry on any
business, or perform any work?  No; they are  ineffectual and fruitless:  often they disturb,
but they never  despatch anything with good success.  It is simple reason (as dull  and dry
as it seemeth) which expediteth all the grand affairs, which  accomplisheth all the mighty
works that we see done in the world.   In truth, therefore, as one diamond is worth numberless
bits of  glass; so one solid reason is worth innumerable fancies:  one grain  of true science
and sound wisdom in real worth and use doth outweigh  loads (if any loads can be) of freakish
wit.  To rate things  otherwise doth argue great weakness of judgment, and fondness of  mind.
So to conceit of this way signifieth a weak mind; and much to  delight therein rendereth it
so--nothing more debaseth the spirit of  a man, or more rendereth it light and trifling.

Hence if we must be venting pleasant conceits, we should do it as if  we did it not, carelessly
and unconcernedly; not standing upon it,  or valuing ourselves for it:  we should do it with
measure and  moderation; not giving up ourselves thereto, so as to mind it or  delight in it
more than in any other thing:  we should not be so  intent upon it as to become remiss in affairs
more proper or needful  for us; so as to nauseate serious business, or disrelish the more 
worthy entertainments of our minds.  This is the great danger of it,  which we daily see men
to incur; they are so bewitched with a humour  of being witty themselves, or of hearkening
to the fancies of  others, that it is this only which they can like or favour, which  they
can endure to think or talk of.  'Tis a great pity that men who  would seem to have so much
wit, should so little understand  themselves.  But further--

6.  Vainglorious ostentation this way is very blamable.  All  ambition, all vanity, all conceitedness,
upon whatever ground they  are founded, are absolutely unreasonable and silly; but yet those
being grounded on some real ability, or some useful skill, are wise  and manly in comparison
to this, which standeth on a foundation so  manifestly slight and weak.  The old philosophers
by a severe father  were called animalia gloriae (animals of glory), and by a satirical  poet
they were termed bladders of vanity; but they at least did  catch at praise from praiseworthy
knowledge; they were puffed up  with a wind which blew some good to mankind; they sought glory
from  that which deserved glory if they had not sought it; it was a  substantial and solid
credit which they did affect, resulting from  successful enterprises of strong reason, and
stout industry:  but  these animalculae gloriae, these flies, these insects of glory,  these,
not bladders, but bubbles of vanity, would be admired and  praised for that which is nowise
admirable or laudable; for the  casual hits and emergencies of roving fancy; for stumbling
on an odd  conceit or phrase, which signifieth nothing, and is as superficial  as the smile,
as hollow as the noise it causeth.  Nothing certainly  in nature is more ridiculous than a
self-conceited wit, who deemeth  himself somebody, and greatly pretendeth to commendation from
so  pitiful and worthless a thing as a knack of trifling.

7.  Lastly, it is our duty never so far to engage ourselves in this  way as thereby to lose
or to impair that habitual seriousness,  modesty and sobriety of mind, that steady composedness,
gravity and  constancy of demeanour, which become Christians.  We should  continually keep
our minds intent upon our high calling, and grand  interests; ever well tuned, and ready for
the performance of holy  devotions, and the practice of most serious duties with earnest  attention
and fervent affection.  Wherefore we should never suffer  them to be dissolved into levity,
or disordered into a wanton frame,  indisposing us for religious thoughts and actions.  We
ought always  in our behaviour to maintain, not only [Greek] (a fitting decency),  but also
[Greek] (a stately gravity), a kind of venerable majesty,  suitable to that high rank which
we bear of God's friends and  children; adorning our holy profession, and guarding us from
all  impressions of sinful vanity.  Wherefore we should not let ourselves  be transported into
any excessive pitch of lightness, inconsistent  with or prejudicial to our Christian state
and business.  Gravity  and modesty are the senses of piety, which being once slighted, sin
will easily attempt and encroach upon us.  So the old Spanish  gentleman may be interpreted
to have been wise who, when his son  upon a voyage to the Indies took his leave of him, gave
him this odd  advice, "My son, in the first place keep thy gravity, in the next  place fear
God;" intimating that a man must first be serious, before  he can be pious.

To conclude, as we need not be demure, so must we not be impudent;  as we should not be sour,
so ought we not to be fond; as we may be  free, so we should not be vain; as we may well stoop
to friendly  complaisance, so we should take heed of falling into contemptible  levity.  If
without wronging others, or derogating from ourselves,  we can be facetious, if we can use
our wits in jesting innocently,  and conveniently, we may sometimes do it:  but let us, in
compliance  with St. Paul's direction, beware of "foolish talking and jesting  which are not
convenient."  Amen."

AGAINST RASH AND VAIN SWEARING.

"But above all things, my brethren, swear not."
                               St. James v. 12.

Among other precepts of good life (directing the practice of virtue  and abstinence from sin)
St. James doth insert this about swearing,  couched in expression denoting his great earnestness,
and apt to  excite our special attention.  Therein he doth not mean universally  to interdict
the use of oaths, for that in some cases is not only  lawful, but very expedient, yea, needful,
and required from us as a  duty; but that swearing which our Lord had expressly prohibited
to  His disciples, and which thence, questionless, the brethren to whom  St. James did write
did well understand themselves obliged to  forbear, having learned so in the first catechisms
of Christian  institution; that is, needless and heedless swearing in ordinary  conversation,
a practice then frequent in the world, both among Jews  and Gentiles; the which also, to the
shame of our age, is now so  much in fashion, and with some men in vogue; the invoking God's
name, appealing to His testimony, and provoking His judgment upon  any slight occasion, in
common talk, with vain incogitancy, or  profane boldness.  From such practice the Holy Apostle
exhorteth in  terms importing his great concernedness, and implying the matter to  be of highest
importance; for, [Greek], saith he, "(Before all  things), my brethren, do not swear;" as if
he did apprehend this sin  of all others to be one of the most heinous and pernicious.  Could
he have said more? would he have said so much, if he had not  conceived the matter to be of
exceeding weight and consequence?  And  that it is so, I mean now, by God's help, to show you,
by proposing  some considerations, whereby the heinous wickedness, together with  the monstrous
folly, of such rash and vain swearing will appear; the  which being laid to heart will, I hope,
effectually dissuade and  deter from it.

I.  Let us consider the nature of an oath, and what we do when we  adventure to swear.

It is (as it is phrased in the Decalogue, and elsewhere in Holy  Scripture) an assuming the
name of God, and applying it to our  purpose; to countenance and confirm what we say.

It is an invocation of God as a most faithful Witness, concerning  the truth of our words,
or the sincerity of our meaning.

It is an appeal to God as a most upright Judge whether we do  prevaricate in asserting what
we do not believe true, or in  promising what we are not firmly resolved to perform.

It is a formal engagement of God to be the Avenger of our  trespassing in violation of truth
or faith.

It is a binding our souls with a most strict and solemn obligation,  to answer before God,
and to undergo the issue of His judgment about  what we affirm or undertake.

Such an oath is represented to us in Holy Scripture.

Whence we may collect, that swearing doth require great modesty and  composedness of spirit,
very serious consideration and solicitous  care, that we be not rude and saucy with God, in
taking up His name,  and prostituting it to vile or mean uses; that we do not abuse or  debase
His authority, by citing it to aver falsehoods or  impertinences; that we do not slight His
venerable justice, by  rashly provoking it against us; that we do not precipitately throw 
our souls into most dangerous snares and intricacies.

For let us reflect and consider:  What a presumption is it without  due regard and reverence
to lay hold on God's name; with unhallowed  breath to vent and toss that great and glorious,
that most holy,  that reverend, that fearful and terrible name of the Lord our God,  the great
Creator, the mighty Sovereign, the dreadful Judge of all  the world; that name which all heaven
with profoundest submission  doth adore, which the angelical powers, the brightest and purest
Seraphim, without hiding their faces, and reverential horror, cannot  utter or hear; the very
thought whereof should strike awe through  our hearts, the mention whereof would make any sober
man to tremble?   [Greek], "For how," saith St. Chrysostom, "is it not absurd that a  servant
should not dare to call his master by name, or bluntly and  ordinarily to mention him, yet
that we slightly and contemptuously  should in our mouth toss about the Lord of angels?

"How is it not absurd, if we have a garment better than the rest,  that we forbear to use it
continually, but in the most slight and  common way do wear the name of God?"

How grievous indecency is it, at every turn to summon our Maker, and  call down Almighty God
from heaven, to attend our leisure, to vouch  our idle prattle, to second our giddy passions,
to concern His  truth, His justice, His power in our trivial affairs!

What a wildness is it, to dally with that judgment upon which the  eternal doom of all creatures
dependeth, at which the pillars of  heaven are astonished, which hurled down legions of angels
from the  top of heaven and happiness into the bottomless dungeon:  the which,  as grievous
sinners, of all things we have most reason to dread; and  about which no sober man can otherwise
think than did that great  king, the holy psalmist, who said, "My flesh trembleth for Thee,
and  I am afraid of Thy judgments!"

How prodigious a madness is it, without any constraint or needful  cause, to incur so horrible
a danger, to rush upon a curse; to defy  that vengeance, the least touch of breath whereof
can dash us to  nothing, or thrust us down into extreme and endless woe?

Who can express the wretchedness of that folly, which so entangleth  us with inextricable knots,
and enchaineth our souls so rashly with  desperate obligations?

Wherefore he that would but a little mind what he doeth when he  dareth to swear, what it is
to meddle with the adorable name, the  venerable testimony, the formidable judgment, the terrible
vengeance  of the Divine Majesty, into what a case he putteth himself, how  extreme hazard
he runneth thereby, would assuredly have little heart  to swear, without greatest reason, and
most urgent need; hardly  without trembling would he undertake the most necessary and solemn
oath; much cause would he see [Greek], to adore, to fear an oath:   which to do, the divine
preacher maketh the character of a good man.   "As," saith he, "is the good, so is the sinner;
and he that  sweareth, as he that feareth an oath."

In fine, even a heathen philosopher, considering the nature of an  oath, did conclude the unlawfulness
thereof in such cases.  For,  "seeing," saith he, "an oath doth call God for witness, and 
proposeth Him for umpire and voucher of the things it saith;  therefore to induce God so upon
occasion of human affairs, or, which  is all one, upon small and slight accounts, doth imply
contempt of  Him:  wherefore we ought wholly to shun swearing, except upon  occasions of highest
necessity."

II.  We may consider that swearing, agreeably to its nature, or  natural aptitude and tendency,
is represented in Holy Scripture as a  special part of religious worship, or devotion towards
God; in the  due performance whereof we do avow Him for the true God and Governor  of the world;
we piously do acknowledge His principal attributes and  special prerogatives; His omnipresence
and omniscience, extending  itself to our most inward thoughts, our secretest purposes, our
closest retirements; His watchful providence over all our actions,  affairs, and concerns;
His faithful goodness, in favouring truth and  protecting right; His exact justice, in patronising
sincerity, and  chastising perfidiousness; His being Supreme Lord over all persons,  and Judge
paramount in all causes; His readiness in our need, upon  our humble imploration and reference,
to undertake the arbitration  of matters controverted, and the care of administering justice,
for  the maintenance of truth and right, of loyalty and fidelity, of  order and peace among
men.  Swearing does also intimate a pious  truth and confidence in God, as Aristotle observeth.

Such things a serious oath doth imply, to such purposes swearing  naturally serveth; and therefore
to signify or effectuate them,  Divine institution hath devoted it.

God in goodness to such ends hath pleased to lend us His great name;  allowing us to cite Him
for a witness, to have recourse to His bar,  to engage His justice and power, whenever the
case deserveth and  requireth it, or when we cannot by other means well assure the  sincerity
of our meaning, or secure the constancy of our  resolutions.

Yea, in such exigencies He doth exact this practice from us, as an  instance of our religious
confidence in Him, and as a service  conducible to His glory.  For it is a precept in His law,
of moral  nature, and eternal obligation, "Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God;  Him shalt thou
serve, and to Him shalt thou cleave, and shalt swear  by His name."  It is the character of
a religious man to swear with  due reverence and upright conscience.  For, "The king," saith
the  psalmist, "shall rejoice in God; every one that sweareth by Him  shall glory:  but the
mouth of them that speak lies shall be  stopped."  It is a distinctive mark of God's people,
according to  that of the prophet Jeremy, "And it shall come to pass, if they will  diligently
learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name . . .  then shall they be built in the midst
of my people."  It is  predicted concerning the evangelical times, "Unto Me every knee  shall
bow, every tongue shall swear:" and, "That he who blesseth  himself in the earth, shall bless
himself by the God of Truth; and  he that sweareth in the earth, shall swear by the God of Truth."

As therefore all other acts of devotion, wherein immediate  application is made to the Divine
Majesty, should never be performed  without most hearty intention, most serious consideration,
most  lowly reverence; so neither should this grand one, wherein God is so  nearly touched,
and His chief attributes so much concerned:  the  which indeed doth involve both prayer and
praise, doth require the  most devotional acts of faith and fear.

We therefore should so perform it as not to incur that reproof:   "This people draweth nigh
unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me  with their lips, but their heart is far from me."

When we seem most formally to avow God, to confess His omniscience,  to confide in His justice,
we should not really disregard Him, and  in effect signify that we do not think He doth know
what we say, or  what we do.

If we do presume to offer this service, we should do it in the  manner appointed by himself,
according to the conditions prescribed  in the prophet, "Thou shalt swear, the Lord liveth,
in truth, in  judgment, and in righteousness:" in truth, taking heed that our  meaning be conformable
to the sense of our words, and our words to  the verity of things; in judgment, having with
careful deliberation  examined and weighed that which we assert or promise; in  righteousness,
being satisfied in conscience that we do not therein  infringe any rule of piety toward God,
of equity toward men, or  sobriety and discretion in regard to ourselves.

The cause of our swearing must be needful, or very expedient; the  design of it must be honest
and useful to considerable purposes  (tending to God's honour, our neighbour's benefit, our
own welfare);  the matter of it should be not only just and lawful, but worthy and  weighty;
the manner ought to be grave and solemn, our mind being  framed to earnest attention, and endued
with pious affections  suitable to the occasion.

Otherwise, if we do venture to swear, without due advice and care,  without much respect and
awe, upon any slight or vain (not to say  bad or unlawful) occasion, we then desecrate swearing,
and are  guilty of profaning a most sacred ordinance:  the doing so doth  imply base hypocrisy,
or lewd mockery, or abominable wantonness and  folly; in bodily invading and vainly trifling
with the most august  duties of religion.  Such swearing therefore is very dishonourable  and
injurious to God, very prejudicial to religion, very repugnant  to piety.

III.  We may consider that the swearing prohibited is very noxious  to human society.

The great prop of society (which upholdeth the safety, peace, and  welfare thereof, in observing
laws, dispensing justice, discharging  trusts, keeping contracts, and holding good correspondence
mutually)  is conscience, or a sense of duty toward God, obliging to perform  that which is
right and equal; quickened by hope of rewards and fear  of punishments from Him:  secluding
which principle, no worldly  confederation is strong enough to hold men fast, or can further
dispose many to do right, or observe faith, or hold peace, than  appetite or interest, or humour
(things very slippery and uncertain)  do sway them.

That men should live honestly, quietly, and comfortably together, it  is needful that they
should live under a sense of God's will, and in  awe of the divine power, hoping to please
God, and fearing to offend  Him, by their behaviour respectively.

That justice should be administered between men, it is necessary  that testimonies of fact
be alleged; and that witnesses should  apprehend themselves greatly obliged to discover the
truth,  according to their conscience, in dark and doubtful cases.

That men should uprightly discharge offices serviceable to public  good, it doth behove that
they be firmly engaged to perform the  trusts reposed in them.

That in affairs of very considerable importance men should deal with  one another with satisfaction
of mind, and mutual confidence, they  must receive competent assurances concerning the integrity,
fidelity, and constancy each of other.

That the safety of governors may be preserved, and the obedience due  to them maintained secure
from attempts to which they are liable (by  the treachery, levity, perverseness, timorousness,
ambition, all  such lusts and ill humours of men), it is expedient that men should  be tied
with the strictest bands of allegiance.

That controversies emergent about the interests of men should be  determined, and an end put
to strife by peremptory and satisfactory  means, is plainly necessary for common quiet.

Wherefore for the public interest and benefit of human society it is  requisite that the highest
obligations possible should be laid upon  the consciences of men.

And such are those of oaths, engaging them to fidelity and constancy  in all such cases, out
of regard to Almighty God, as the infallible  patron of truth and right, the unavoidable chastiser
of  perfidiousness and improbity.

To such purposes, therefore, oaths have ever been applied, as the  most effectual instruments
of working them; not only among the  followers of true and perfect religion, but even among
all those who  had any glimmering notions concerning a Divine Power and Providence;  who have
deemed an oath the fastest tie of conscience, and held the  violation of it for the most detestable
impiety and iniquity.  So  that what Cicero saith of the Romans, that "their ancestors had
no  band to constrain faith more strait than an oath," is true of all  other nations, common
reason not being able to devise any engagement  more obliging than it is; it being in the nature
of things [Greek],  and [Greek], the utmost assurance, the last resort of human faith,  the
surest pledge that any man can yield of his trustiness.  Hence  ever in transactions of highest
moment this hath been used to bind  the faith of men.

Hereby nations have been wont to ratify leagues of peace and amity  between each other (which
therefore the Greeks call [Greek]).

Hereby princes have obliged their subjects to loyalty:  and it hath  ever been the strongest
argument to press that duty, which the  Preacher useth, "I counsel thee to keep the king's
commandment, and  that in regard of the oath of God."

Hereby generals have engaged their soldiers to stick close to them  in bearing hardships and
encountering dangers.

Hereby the nuptial league hath been confirmed; the solemnisation  whereof in temples before
God is in effect a most sacred oath.

Hereon the decision of the greatest causes concerning the lives,  estates, and reputations
of men have depended; so that, as the  Apostle saith, "an oath for confirmation is to them
an end of all  strife."

Indeed, such hath the need hereof been ever apprehended, that we may  observe, in cases of
great importance, no other obligation hath been  admitted for sufficient to bind the fidelity
and constancy of the  most credible persons; so that even the best men hardly could trust 
the best men without it.  For instance,

When Abimelech would assure to himself the friendship of Abraham,  although he knew him to
be a very pious and righteous person, whose  word might be as well taken as any man's, yet,
for entire  satisfaction, he thus spake to him:  "God is with thee in all that  thou doest:
Now therefore swear unto me here by God, that thou wilt  not deal falsely with me."

Abraham, though he did much confide in the honesty of his servant  Eliezer, having entrusted
him with all his estate, yet in the affair  concerning the marriage of his son he could not
but thus oblige him:   "Put," saith he, "I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and I will 
make thee swear by the Lord, the God of heaven and the God of the  earth, that thou wilt not
take a wife unto my son of the daughters  of the Canaanites."

Laban had good experience of Jacob's fidelity; yet that would not  satisfy, but, "The Lord,"
said he, "watch between me and thee, when  we are absent one from another. If thou shalt afflict
my daughters,  or if thou shalt take other wives beside my daughters, no man is  with us; see,
God is witness between thee and me.

So did Jacob make Joseph swear that he would bury him in Canaan:   and Joseph caused the children
of Israel to swear that they would  translate his bones.  So did Jonathan cause his beloved
friend David  to swear that he would show kindness to him and to his house for  ever.  The
prudence of which course the event showeth, the total  excision of Jonathan's family being
thereby prevented; for "the  king," 'tis said, "spared Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan, because
of the Lord's oath that was between them."

These instances declare that there is no security which men can  yield comparable to that of
an oath; the obligation whereof no man  wilfully can infringe without renouncing the fear of
God and any  pretence to His favour.

Wherefore human society will be extremely wronged and damnified by  the dissolving or slackening
these most sacred bands of conscience;  and consequently by their common and careless use,
which soon will  breed a contempt of them, and render them insignificant, either to  bind the
swearers, or to ground a trust on their oaths.

As by the rare and reverent use of oaths their dignity is upheld and  their obligation kept
fast, so by the frequent and negligent  application of them, by the prostituting them to every
mean and  toyish purpose, their respect will be quite lost, their strength  will be loosed,
they will prove unserviceable to public use.

If oaths generally become cheap and vile, what will that of  allegiance signify?  If men are
wont to play with swearing anywhere,  can we expect they should be serious and strict therein
at the bar  or in the church.  Will they regard God's testimony, or dread His  judgment, in
one place, or at one time, when everywhere upon any,  upon no occasion they dare to confront
and contemn them?  Who then  will be the more trusted for swearing?  What satisfaction will
any  man have from it?  The rifeness of this practice, as it is the sign,  so it will be the
cause of a general diffidence among man.

Incredible therefore is the mischief which this vain practice will  bring in to the public;
depriving princes of their best security,  exposing the estates of private men to uncertainty,
shaking all the  confidence men can have in the faith of one another.

For which detriments accruing from this abuse to the public every  vain swearer is responsible;
and he would do well to consider that  he will never be able to make reparation for them. 
And the public  is much concerned that this enormity be retrenched.

IV.  Let us consider, that rash and vain swearing is very apt often  to bring the practiser
of it into that most horrible sin of perjury.   For "false swearing," as the Hebrew wise man
saith, "naturally  springeth out of much swearing:" and, "he," saith St. Chrysostom,  "that
sweareth continually, both willingly and unwillingly, both  ignorantly and knowingly, both
in earnest and in sport, being often  transported by anger and many other things, will frequently
forswear.  It is confessed and manifest, that it is necessary for  him that sweareth much to
be perjurious."  [Greek], "For," saith he  again, "it is impossible, it is impossible for a
mouth addicted to  swearing not frequently to forswear."  He that sweareth at random,  as blind
passion moveth, or wanton fancy prompteth, or the temper  suggesteth, often will hit upon asserting
that which is false, or  promising that which is impossible:  that want of conscience and of
consideration which do suffer him to violate God's law in swearing  will betray him to the
venting of lies, which backed with oaths  become perjuries.  If sometime what he sweareth doth
happen to be  true and performable, it doth not free him of guilt; it being his  fortune, rather
than his care or conscience, which keepeth him from  perjury.

V.  Such swearing commonly will induce a man to bind himself by oath  to unlawful practices;
and consequently will entangle him in a  woeful necessity either of breaking his oath, or of
doing worse, and  committing wickedness:  so that "swearing," as St. Chrysostom saith,  "hath
this misery attending it, that, both trangressed and observed,  it plagueth those who are guilty
of it."

Of this perplexity the Holy Scripture affordeth two notable  instances:  the one of Saul, forced
to break his rash oaths; the  other of Herod, being engaged thereby to commit a most horrid
murder.

Had Saul observed his oaths, what injury had he done, what mischief  had he produced, in slaughtering
his most worthy and most innocent  son, the prop and glory of his family, the bulwark of his
country,  and the grand instrument of salvation to it; in forcing the people  to violate their
cross oath, and for prevention of one, causing many  perjuries?  He was therefore fain to desist,
and lie under the guilt  of breaking his oaths.

And for Herod, the excellent father thus presseth the consideration  of his case:  "Take,"
saith he, "I beseech you, the chopped off head  of St. John, and his warm blood yet trickling
down; each of you bear  it home with you, and conceive that before your eyes you hear it  uttering
speech, and saying, Embrace the murderer of me, an oath.   That which reproof did not, this
an oath did do; that which the  tyrant's wrath could not, this the necessity of keeping an
oath did  effect.  For when the tyrant was reprehended publicly in the  audience of all men,
he bravely did bear the rebuke; but when he had  cast himself into the necessity of oaths,
then did he cut off that  blessed head."

VI.  Likewise the use of rash swearing will often engage a man in  undertakings very inconvenient
and detrimental to himself.  A man is  bound to perform his vows to the Lord, whatever they
be, whatever  damage or trouble thence may accrue to him, if they be not unlawful.   It is
the law, that which is gone out of thy lips, thou shalt keep  and perform.  It is the property
of a good man, that he sweareth to  his own hurt, and changeth not.  Wherefore 'tis the part
of a sober  man to be well advised what he doth swear or vow religiously, that  he do not put
himself into the inextricable strait of committing  great sin, or undergoing great inconvenience;
that he do not rush  into that snare of which the wise man speaketh, "It is a snare to a  man
to devour that which is holy (or, to swallow a sacred  obligation), and after vows to make
inquiry," seeking how he may  disengage himself the doing which is a folly offensive to God,
as  the Preacher telleth us.  "When," saith he, "thou vowest a vow unto  God, defer not to
pay it; for He hath no pleasure in fools:  pay  that which thou hast vowed."  God will not
admit our folly in vowing  as a plea for non-performance; He will exact it from us both as
a  due debt, and as a proper punishment of our impious folly.

For instance, into what loss and mischief, what sorrow, what regret  and repentance, did the
unadvised vow of Jephthah throw him; the  performance whereof, as St. Chrysostom remarketh,
God did permit,  and order to be commemorated with solemn lamentation, that all  posterity
might be admonished thereby, and deterred from such  precipitant swearing.

VII.  Let us consider that swearing is a sin of all others  peculiarly clamorous, and provocative
of Divine judgment.  God is  hardly so much concerned, or in a manner constrained, to punish
any  other sin as this.  He is bound in honour and interest to vindicate  His name from the
abuse, His authority from the contempt, His holy  ordinance from the profanation, which it
doth infer.  He is  concerned to take care that His providence be not questioned, that  the
dread of His majesty be not voided, that all religion be not  overthrown by the outrageous
commission thereof with impunity.

It immediately toucheth His name, it expressly calleth upon Him to  mind it, to judge it, to
show himself in avenging it.  He may seem  deaf, or unconcerned, if, being so called and provoked,
He doth not  declare Himself.

There is understood to be a kind of formal compact between Him and  mankind, obliging Him to
interpose, to take the matter into His  cognisance, being specially addressed to Him.

The bold swearer doth importune Him to hear, doth rouse Him to mark,  doth brave Him to judge
and punish his wickedness.

Hence no wonder that "the flying roll," a quick and inevitable  curse, doth surprise the swearer,
and cut him off, as it is in the  prophet.  No wonder that so many remarkable instances do
occur in  history of signal vengeance inflicted on persons notably guilty of  this crime. 
No wonder that a common practice thereof doth fetch  down public judgments; and that, as the
prophets of old did  proclaim, "because of swearing the land mourneth."

VIII.  Further (passing over the special laws against it, the  mischievous consequences of
it, the sore punishments appointed to  it), we may consider, that to common sense vain swearing
is a very  unreasonable and ill-favoured practice, greatly misbecoming any  sober, worthy,
or honest person; but especially most absurd and  incongruous to a Christian.

For in ordinary conversation what needful or reasonable occasion can  intervene of violating
this command?  If there come under discourse  a matter of reason, which is evidently true and
certain, then what  need can there be of an oath to affirm it, it sufficing to expose it  to
light, or to propose the evidences for it?  If an obscure or  doubtful point come to be debated,
it will not bear an oath; it will  be a strange madness to dare, a great folly to hope the
persuading  it thereby.  What were more ridiculous than to swear the truth of a  demonstrable
theorem?  What more vain than so to assert a disputable  problem:  oaths (like wagers) are
in such cases no arguments, except  silliness in the users of them.

If a matter of history be started, then if a man be taken for  honest, his word will pass for
attestation without further  assurance; but if his veracity or probity be doubted, his oath
will  not be relied on, especially when he doth obtrude it.  For it was no  less truly than
acutely said by the old poet, [Greek], "The man doth  not get credit from an oath, but an oath
from the man."  And a  greater author, "An oath," saith St. Chrysostom, "doth not make a  man
credible; but the testimony of his life, and the exactness of  his conversation, and a good
repute.  Many often have burst with  swearing, and persuaded no man; others only nodding have
deserved  more belief than those who swore so mightily."  Wherefore oaths, as  they are frivolous
coming from a person of little worth or  conscience, so they are superfluous in the mouth of
an honest and  worthy person; yea, as they do not increase the credit of the  former, so they
may impair that of the latter.

"A good man," as Socrates did say, "should apparently so demean  himself, that his word may
be deemed more credible than an oath;"  the constant tenour of his practice vouching for it,
and giving it  such weight, that no asseveration can further corroborate it.

He should [Greek], "swear by his good deeds," and exhibit [Greek],  "a life deserving belief,"
as Clemens Alex. saith:  so that no man  should desire more from him than his bare assertion;
but willingly  should yield him the privilege which the Athenians granted to  Xenocrates, that
he should testify without swearing.

He should be like the Essenes, of whom Josephus saith, that  everything spoken by them was
more valid than an oath; whence they  declined swearing.

He should so much confide in his own veracity and fidelity, and so  much stand upon them, that
he should not deign to offer any pledge  for them, implying them to want confirmation.

"He should," as St. Jerome saith, "so love truth, that he should  suppose himself to have sworn
whatsoever he hath said;" and  therefore should not be apt to heap another oath on his words.

Upon such accounts common reason directed even pagan wise men wholly  to interdict swearing
in ordinary conversation, or about petty  matters, as an irrational and immoral practice, unworthy
of sober  and discreet persons.  "Forbear swearing about any matter," said  Plato, cited by
Clem. Alex.  "Avoid swearing, if you can, wholly,"  said Epictetus.  "For money swear by no
god, though you swear  truly," said Socrates.  And divers the like precepts occur in other
heathens; the mention whereof may well serve to strike shame into  many loose and vain people
bearing the name of Christians.

Indeed, for a true and real Christian, this practice doth especially  in a far higher degree
misbecome him, upon considerations peculiar  to his high calling and holy profession.

Plutarch telleth us that among the Romans the flamen of Jupiter was  not permitted to swear,
of which law among other reasons he assigned  this:  "Because it is not handsome that he to
whom divine and  greatest things are entrusted should be distrusted about small  matters."
The which reason may well be applied to excuse every  Christian from it, who is a priest to
the most High God, and hath  the most celestial and important matters concredited to him; in
comparison to which all other matters are very mean and  inconsiderable.  The dignity of his
rank should render his word  verbum honoris, passable without any further engagement.  He hath
opinions of things, he hath undertaken practices inconsistent with  swearing.  For he that
firmly doth believe that God is ever present  with him, and auditor and witness of all his
discourse; he that is  persuaded that a severe judgment shall pass on him, wherein he must
give an account for every idle word which slippeth from him, and  wherein, among other offenders,
assuredly liars will be condemned to  the burning lake; he that in a great Sacrament (once
most solemnly  taken, and frequently renewed) hath engaged and sworn, together with  all other
divine commandments, to observe those which most expressly  do charge him to be exactly just,
faithful, and veracious in all his  words and deeds; who therefore should be ready to say with
David, "I  have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous  judgments," to him
every word hath the force of an oath; every lie,  every breach of promise, every violation
of faith doth involve  perjury:  for him to swear is false heraldry, an impertinent  accumulation
of one oath upon another; he of all men should disdain  to allow that his words are not perfectly
credible, that his promise  is not secure, without being assured by an oath.

IX.  Indeed, the practice of swearing greatly disparageth him that  useth it, and derogateth
from his credit upon divers accounts.

It signifieth (if it signifieth anything) that he doth not confide  in his own reputation,
and judgeth his own bare word not to deserve  credit:  for why, if he taketh his word to be
good, doth he back it  with asseverations? why, if he deemeth his own honesty to bear  proof,
doth he cite Heaven to warrant it?

"It is," saith St. Basil, "a very foul and silly thing for a man to  accuse himself as unworthy
of belief, and to proffer an oath for  security."

By so doing a man doth authorise others to distrust him; for it can  be no wrong to distrust
him who doth not pretend to be a credible  person, or that his saying alone may safely be taken:
who, by  suspecting that others are not satisfied with his simple assertion,  implieth a reason
known to himself for it.

It rendereth whatever he saith to be in reason suspicious, as  discovering him void of conscience
and discretion; for he that  flatly against the rules of duty and reason will swear vainly,
what  can engage him to speak truly?  He that is so loose in so clear and  so considerable
a point of obedience to God, how can he be supposed  staunch in regard to any other?  "It being,"
as Aristotle hath it,  "the part of the same men to do ill things, and not to regard  forswearing."
It will at least constrain any man to suspect all his  discourse of vanity and unadvisedness,
seeing he plainly hath no  care to bridle his tongue from so gross an offence.

It is strange, therefore, that any man of honour or honesty should  not scorn, by such a practice,
to shake his own credit, or to  detract from the validity of his word; which should stand firm
on  itself, and not want any attestation to support it.  It is a  privilege of honourable persons
that they are excused from swearing,  and that their verbum honoris passeth in lieu of an oath:
is it not  then strange, that when others dispense with them, they should not  dispense with
themselves, but voluntarily degrade themselves, and  with sin forfeit so noble a privilege?

X.  To excuse these faults, the swearer will be forced to confess  that his oaths are no more
than waste and insignificant words,  deprecating being taken for serious, or to be understood
that he  meaneth anything by them, but only that he useth them as expletive  phrases, [Greek],
to plump his speech, and fill up sentences.  But  such pleas do no more than suggest other
faults of swearing, and  good arguments against it; its impertinence, its abuse of speech,
its disgracing the practiser of it in point of judgment and  capacity.  For so it is, oaths
as they commonly pass are mere  excrescences of speech, which do nothing but encumber and deform
it;  they so embellish discourse, as a wen or a scab do beautify a face,  as a patch or a spot
do adorn a garment.

To what purpose, I pray, is God's name hooked and haled into our  idle talk? why should we
so often mention Him, when we do not mean  anything about Him? would it not, into every sentence
to foist a dog  or a horse, to intrude Turkish, or any barbarous gibberish, be  altogether
as proper and pertinent?

What do these superfluities signify, but that the venter of them  doth little skill the use
of speech, or the rule of conversation,  but meaneth to sputter and prate anything without
judgment or wit;  that his invention is very barren, his fancy beggarly, craving the  aid of
any stuff to relieve it?  One would think a man of sense  should grudge to lend his ear, or
incline his attention to such  motley ragged discourse; that without nauseating he scarce should
endure to observe men lavishing time, and squandering their breath  so frivolously.  'Tis an
affront to good company to pester it with  such talk.

XI.  But further, upon higher accounts this is a very uncivil and  unmannerly practice.

XII.  Further, the words of our Lord, when He forbade this practice,  do suggest another consideration
against it, deducible from the  causes and sources of it; from whence it cometh, that men are
so  inclined or addicted thereto.  The roots of it, He assureth us, are evil, and therefore
the  fruit cannot be good:  it is no grape which groweth from thorns, or  fig from thistles.
Consult experience, and observe whence it doth  proceed.

Sometimes it ariseth from exorbitant heats of spirit, or transports  of unbridled passion.
When a man is keenly peevish, or fiercely  angry, or eagerly contentious, then he blustereth,
and dischargeth  his choler in most tragical strains; then he would fright the  objects of
his displeasure by the most violent expressions thereof.   This is sometime alleged in excuse
of rash swearing:  I was  provoked, the swearer will say, I was in passion; but it is strange
that a bad cause should justify a bad effect, that one crime should  warrant another, that
what would spoil a good action should excuse a  bad one.

Sometimes it proceedeth from arrogant conceit, and a tyrannical  humour; when a man fondly
admireth his own opinion, and affecting to  impose it on others, is thence moved to thwack
it on with lusty  asseverations.

Sometimes it issueth from wantonness and levity of mind, disposing a  man to sport with anything,
how serious, how grave, how sacred and  venerable soever.

Sometimes its rise is from stupid inadvertency, or heady  precipitancy; when the man doth not
heed what he saith, or consider  the nature and consequence of his words, but snatcheth any
expression which cometh next, or which his roving fancy doth offer,  for want of that caution
of the psalmist, "I said, I will take heed  to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue; I will
keep my mouth with  a bridle, while the wicked is before me."

Sometimes (alas! how often in this miserable age!) it doth spring  from profane boldness; when
men design to put affronts on religion,  and to display their scorn and spite against conscience,
affecting  the reputation of stout blades, of gallant hectors, of resolute  giants, who dare
do anything, who are not afraid to defy Heaven, and  brave God Almighty Himself.

Sometimes it is derived from apish imitation, or a humour to comply  with a fashion current
among vain and dissolute persons.

It always doth come from a great defect in conscience, of reverence  to God, of love to goodness,
of discretion and sober regard to the  welfare of a man's soul.

From such evidently vicious and unworthy sources it proceedeth, and  therefore must needs be
very culpable.  No good, no wise man can  like actions drawn from such principles.  Further--

XIII.  This offence may be particularly aggravated by considering  that it hath no strong temptation
alluring to it, that it yieldeth  no sensible advantage, that it most easily may be avoided
or  corrected.

"Every sin," saith St. Chrysostom, "hath not the same punishment;  but those things which may
easily be reformed do bring on us greater  punishment:" and what can be more easy than to reform
this fault?   "Tell me," saith he, "what difficulty, what sweat, what art, what  hazard, what
more doth it require beside a little care" to abstain  wholly from it?  It is but willing,
or resolving on it, and it is  instantly done; for there is not any natural inclination disposing
to it, any strong appetite to detain us under its power.

It gratifieth no sense, it yieldeth no profit, it procureth no  honour; for the sound of it
is not very melodious, and no man surely  did ever get an estate by it, or was preferred to
dignity for it.   It rather to any good ear maketh a horrid and jarring noise; it  rather with
the best part of the world produceth displeasure,  damage, and disgrace.  What therefore, beside
monstrous vanity and  unaccountable perverseness, should hold men so devoted thereto?

A fantastic humour possesseth him of spurning at piety and  soberness; he inconsiderately followeth
a herd of wild fops, he  affecteth to play the ape.  What more than this can he say for  himself?

XIV.  Finally, let us consider that as we ourselves, with all our  members and powers, were
chiefly designed and framed to glorify our  Maker, the which to do is indeed the greatest perfection
and noblest  privilege of our nature, so our tongue and speaking faculty were  given to us
to declare our admiration and reverence of Him, to  exhibit our due love and gratitude toward
Him, to profess our trust  and confidence in Him, to celebrate His praises, to avow His  benefits,
to address our supplications to Him, to maintain all kinds  of devotional intercourse with
Him, to propagate our knowledge,  fear, love, and obedience to Him, in all such ways to promote
His  honour and service.  This is the most proper, worthy, and due use of  our tongue, for
which it was created, to which it is dedicated, from  whence it becometh, as it is so often
styled, our glory, and the  best member that we have; that whereby we excel all creatures here
below, and whereby we are no less discriminated from them, than by  our reason; that whereby
we consort with the blessed angels above in  the distinct utterance of praise and communication
of glory to our  Creator.  Wherefore, applying this to any impious discourse with  which to
profane God's blessed name, with this to violate His holy  commands, with this to unhallow
His sacred ordinance, with this to  offer dishonour and indignity to Him, is a most unnatural
abuse, a  horrid ingratitude toward Him.

It is that indeed whereby we render this noble organ incapable of  any good use.  For how,
as the excellent father doth often urge, can  we pray to God for mercies, or praise God for
His benefits, or  heartily confess our sins, or cheerfully partake of the holy  mysteries,
with a mouth defiled by impious oaths, with a heart  guilty of so heinous disobedience.

Likewise, whereas a secondary very worthy use of our speech is to  promote the good of our
neighbour, and especially to edify him in  piety, according to that wholesome precept of the
Apostle, "Let no  corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is  good
to the use of edifying, that it may administer grace unto the  hearers."  The practice of swearing
is an abuse very contrary to  that good purpose, serving to corrupt our neighbour, and to instil
into him a contempt of religion; or however grievously to scandalise  him.

XV.  I shall add but two words more.  One is, that we would  seriously consider that our Blessed
Saviour, who loved us so dearly,  who did and suffered so much for us, who redeemed us by His
blood,  who said unto us, "If ye love Me, keep My commandments," He thus  positively hath enjoined,
"But I say unto you, Swear not at all;"  and how then can we find in our heart directly to
thwart His word.  From the  which infinite mischief, and from all sin that may cause it, God
in  mercy deliver us through our Blessed Redeemer Jesus, to whom for  ever be all glory and praise.

OF EVIL-SPEAKING IN GENERAL.

"To speak evil of no man."--Titus iii. 2.

These words do imply a double duty; one incumbent on teachers,  another on the people who are
to be instructed by them.

The teacher's duty appeareth from reflecting on the words of the  context, which govern these,
and make them up an entire sentence:   put them in mind, or, rub up their memory to do thus.
It is St.  Paul's injunction to Titus, a bishop and pastor of the Church, that  he should admonish
the people committed to his care and instruction,  as of other great duties (of yielding obedience
to magistrates, of  behaving themselves peaceably, of practising meekness and equity  towards
all men, of being readily disposed to every good work), so  particularly of this, [Greek],
to revile or speak evil of no man.

Whence it is apparent that this is one of the principal duties that  preachers are obliged
to mind people of, and to press upon them.   And if this were needful then, when charity, kindled
by such  instructions and examples, was so lively; when Christians, by their  sufferings, were
so inured to meekness and patience; even every one,  for the honour of his religion, and the
safety of his person, was  concerned in all respects to demean himself innocently and  inoffensively;
then is it now especially requisite, when (such  engagements and restraints being taken off,
love being cooled,  persecution being extinct, the tongue being set loose from all  extraordinary
curbs) the transgression of this duty is grown so  prevalent and rife, that evil-speaking is
almost as common as  speaking, ordinary conversation extremely abounding therewith, that  ministers
should discharge their office in dehorting and dissuading  from it.

Well indeed it were, if by their example of using mild and moderate  discourse, of abstaining
from virulent invectives, tauntings, and  scoffings, good for little but to inflame anger,
and infuse ill- will, they would lead men to good practice of this sort:  for no  examples
can be so wholesome, or so mischievous to this purpose, as  those which come down from the
pulpit, the place of edification,  backed with special authority and advantage.

However, it is to preachers a ground of assurance and matter of  satisfaction, that in pressing
this duty they shall perform their  duty:  their text being not so much of their own choosing,
as given  them by St. Paul; they can surely scarce find a better to discourse  upon:  it cannot
be a matter of small moment or use, which this  great master and guide so expressly directeth
us to insist upon.   And to the observance of his precept, so far as concerneth me, I  shall
immediately apply myself.

It is then the duty of all Christian people (to be taught and  pressed on them) not to reproach,
or speak evil of any man.  The  which duty, for your instruction, I shall first endeavour somewhat
to explain, declaring its import and extent; then, for your further  edification, I shall inculcate
it, proposing several inducements  persuasive to the observance of it.

I.  For explication, we may first consider the object of it, no man;  then the act itself,
which is prohibited, to blaspheme, that is, to  reproach, to revile, or (as we have it rendered)
to speak evil.

No man.  St. Paul questionless did especially mean hereby to hinder  the Christians at that
time from reproaching the Jews and the pagans  among whom they lived, men in their lives very
wicked and corrupt,  men in opinion extremely dissenting from them, men who greatly did  hate,
and cruelly did persecute them; of whom therefore they had  mighty provocations and temptations
to speak ill; their judgment of  the persons, and their resentment of injuries, making it difficult
to abstain from doing so.  Whence by a manifest analogy may be  inferred that the object of
duty is very large, indeed universal and  unlimited:  that we must forbear reproach not only
against pious and  virtuous persons, against persons of our own judgment or party,  against
those who never did harm or offend us, against our  relations, our friends, our benefactors,
in respect of whom there is  no ground or temptation of evil-speaking; but even against the
most  unworthy and wicked persons, against those who most differ in  opinion and practice from
us, against those who never did oblige us,  yea, those who have most disobliged us, even against
our most bitter  and spiteful enemies.  There is no exception or excuse to be  admitted from
the quality, state, relation, or demeanour of men; the  duty (according to the proper sense,
or due qualifications and  limits of the act) doth extend to all men:  for, "Speak evil of
no  man."

As for the act, it may be inquired what the word [Greek] (to  blaspheme) doth import.  I answer,
that it is to vent words  concerning any person which do signify in us ill-opinion, or  contempt,
anger, hatred, enmity conceived in our minds towards him;  which are apt in him to kindle wrath,
and breed ill-blood towards  us; which tend to beget in others that hear ill-conceit or ill-will
towards him; which are much destructive of his reputation,  prejudicial to his interests, productive
of damage or mischief to  him.  It is otherwise in Scripture termed [Greek], to rail or  revile,
(to use bitter and ignominious language); [Greek], to speak  contumeliously; [Greek], to bring
railing accusation (or reproachful  censure); [Greek], to use obloquy, or detraction; [Greek],
to curse,  that is, to speak words importing that we do wish ill to a person.

Such is the language we are prohibited to use.  To which purpose we  may observe that whereas,
in our conversation and commerce with men,  there do frequently often occur occasions to speak
of men and to men  words apparently disadvantageous to them, expressing our dissent in  opinion
from them, or a dislike in us of their proceedings, we may  do this in different ways and terms;
some of them gentle and  moderate, signifying no ill mind or disaffection towards them;  others
harsh and sharp, arguing height of disdain, disgust, or  despite, whereby we bid them defiance,
and show that we mean to  exasperate them.  Thus, telling a man that we differ in judgment
from him, or conceive him not to be in the right, and calling him a  liar, a deceiver, a fool,
saying that he doeth amiss, taketh a wrong  course, transgresseth the rule, and calling him
dishonest, unjust,  wicked, to omit more odious and provoking names, unbecoming this  place,
and not deserving our notice, are several ways of expressing  the same things whereof the latter,
in relating passages concerning  our neighbour, or in debating cases with him, is prohibited:
for  thus the words reproaching, reviling, railing, cursing, and the like  do signify, and
thus our Lord Himself doth explain them in His  divine sermon, wherein he doth enact this law:
"Whosoever," saith  He, "shall say to his brother, Raca"

The reason of things also doth help to explain those words, and to  show why they are prohibited
because those harsh terms are needless,  mild words serving as well to express the same things:
because they  are commonly unjust, loading men with greater defect or blame than  they can
be proved to deserve, or their actions do import; for every  man that speaketh falsehood is
not therefore a liar, every man that  erreth is not thence a fool, every man that doeth amiss
is not  consequently dishonest or wicked; the secret intentions and habitual  dispositions
of men not being always to be collected from their  outward actions; because they are uncharitable,
signifying that we  entertain the worst opinions of men, and make the worst construction  of
their doings, and are disposed to show them no favour or  kindness:  because, also, they produce
mischievous effects, such as  spring from the worst passions raised by them.

This in gross is the meaning of the precept.  But since there are  some other precepts seeming
to clash with this; since there are  cases wherein we are allowed to use the harsher sort of
terms, there  are great examples in appearance thwarting this rule; therefore it  may be requisite
for determining the limits of our duty, and  distinguishing it from transgression, that such
exceptions or  restrictions should be somewhat declared.

1.  First, then, we may observe that it may be allowable to persons  in anywise concerned in
the prosecution or administration of  justice, to speak words which in private intercourse
would be  reproachful.  A witness may impeach of crimes hurtful to justice, or  public tranquillity;
a judge may challenge, may rebuke, may condemn  an offender in proper terms (or forms of speech
prescribed by law),  although most disgraceful and distasteful to the guilty:  for it  belongeth
to the majesty of public justice to be bold, blunt,  severe; little regarding the concerns
or passions of particular  persons, in comparison to the public welfare.

A testimony, therefore, or sentence against a criminal, which  materially is a reproach, and
morally would be such in a private  mouth, is not yet formally so according to the intent of
this rule.   For practices of this kind, which serve the exigencies of justice,  are not to
be interpreted as proceeding from anger, hatred, revenge,  any bad passion or humour; but in
way of needful discipline for  God's service, and common benefit of men.  It is not, indeed,
so  much the minister of justice, as God Himself, our absolute Lord; as  the Sovereign, God's
representative, acting in the public behalf; as  the commonwealth itself, who by His mouth
do rebuke the obnoxious  person.

2.  God's ministers in religious affairs, to whom the care of men's  instruction and edification
is committed, are enabled to inveigh  against sin and vice, whoever consequentially may be
touched  thereby:  yea, sometimes it is their duty with severity and  sharpness to reprove
particular persons, not only privately, but  publicly, for their correction, and for the edification
of others.

Thus St. Paul directeth Timothy:  "Them that sin" (notoriously and  scandalously, he meaneth),
"rebuke before all, that others may  fear:" that is, in a manner apt to make impression on
the minds of  the hearers, so as to scare them from like offences.  And to Titus  he writes,
"Rebuke them sharply, that they may be found in the  faith."  And, "Cry aloud, spare not, lift
up thy voice like a  trumpet, and show my people their transgressions, and the house of  Jacob
their sins," saith the Lord to the prophet.  Such are the  charges and commissions laid on
and granted to His messengers.

Thus we may observe that God's prophets of old, St. John the  Baptist, our Lord Himself, the
holy apostles did in terms most  vehement and biting reprove the age in which they lived, and
some  particular persons in them.  The prophets are full of declamations  and invectives against
the general corruption of their times, and  against the particular manners of some persons
in them.  "Ah, sinful  nation; people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil-doers, children 
that are corrupters!  They are all adulterers, an assembly of  treacherous men; and they bend
their tongues like their bow for  lies.  Thy princes are rebellious and companions of thieves;
every  one loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards:  they judge not the  fatherless, neither
doth the cause of the widow come before them.   The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests
rule by their means.   As troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of priests  murder
in the way by consent, and commit lewdness."  Such is their  style commonly.  St. John the
Baptist calleth the Scribes and  Pharisees a "generation of vipers."  Our Saviour speaketh
of them in  the same terms; calleth them an "evil and adulterous generation,  serpents, and
children of vipers.  Hypocrites, painted sepulchres,  obscure graves ([Greek]), blind guides;
fools and blind, children of  the devil."  St. Paul likewise calleth the schismatical heretical
teachers "dogs, false apostles, evil and deceitful workers, men of  corrupt minds, reprobates
and abominable."  With the like colours do  St. Peter, St. Jude, and other apostles paint them.
Which sort of  speeches are to be supposed to proceed, not from private passion or  design,
but out of holy zeal for God's honour, and from earnest  charity towards men, for to work their
amendment and common  edification.  They were uttered also by special wisdom and peculiar 
order; from God's authority, and in His name; so that, as God by  them is said to preach, to
entreat, to warn, and to exhort, so by  them also He may be said to reprehend and reproach.

3.  Even private persons in due season, with discretion and temper,  may reprove others, whom
they observe to commit sin, or follow bad  courses, out of charitable design, and with hope
to reclaim them.   This was an office of charity imposed anciently even upon the Jews;  much
more doth it lie upon Christians, who are obliged more  earnestly to tender the spiritual good
of those who by the stricter  and more holy bands of brotherhood are allied to them.  "Thou
shalt  not hate thy brother; thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour,  and not suffer sin
upon him," was a precept of the old law:  and,  [Greek], to admonish the disorderly, is an
evangelical rule.  Such  persons we are enjoined to shun and decline; but first we must  endeavour
by sober advice and admonition to reclaim them; we must  not thus reject them till they appear
contumacious and incorrigible,  refusing to hear us, or becoming deaf to reproof.  This, although
it  necessarily doth include setting out their faults, and charging  blame on them (answerable
to their offences), is not the culpable  reproach here meant, it being needful towards a wholesome
effect,  and proceeding from charitable intention.

4.  Some vehemency, some smartness and sharpness of speech may  sometimes be used in defence
of truth, and impugning errors of bad  consequence; especially when it concerneth the interest
of truth,  that the reputation and authority of its adversaries should somewhat  be abased
or abated.  If by partial opinion or reverence towards  them, however begotten in the minds
of men, they strive to overbear  or discountenance a good cause, their faults (so far as truth
permitteth and need requireth) may be detected and displayed.  For  this cause particularly
may we presume our Lord (otherwise so meek  in His temper, and mild in His carriage towards
all men) did  characterise the Jewish scribes in such terms, that their authority,  being then
so prevalent with the people, might not prejudice the  truth, and hinder the efficacy of His
doctrine.  This is part of  that [Greek], that duty of contending earnestly for the faith,
which  is incumbent on us.

5.  It may be excusable upon particular emergent occasions, with  some heat of language to
express dislike of notorious wickedness.   As our Lord doth against the perverse incredulity
and stupidity in  the Pharisees, their profane misconstruction of His words and  actions, their
malicious opposing truth, and obstructing His  endeavours in God's service.  As St. Peter did
to Simon Magus,  telling him that he was in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond  of iniquity.
The same spirit which enabled him to inflict a  sore punishment on that wicked wretch, did
prompt him to use that  sharp language towards him; unquestionably deserved, and seasonably
pronounced.  As also when the high priest commanded him illegally  and unjustly to be misused,
that speech from a mind justly sensible  of such outrage broke forth, "God shall smite thee,
thou whited  wall."  So when St. Peter presumptuously would have dissuaded our  Lord from compliance
with God's will, in undergoing those crosses  which were appointed to Him by God's decree,
our Lord calleth him  Satan; . . . .

These sort of speeches, issuing from just and honest indignation,  are sometimes excusable,
oftentimes commendable; especially when  they come from persons eminent in authority, of notable
integrity,  endued with special measures of Divine grace, of wisdom, of  goodness; such as
cannot be suspected of intemperate anger, of ill- nature, of ill-will, or of ill-design.

In such cases as are above mentioned, a sort of evil-speaking about  our neighbour may be allowable
or excusable.  But, for fear of  overdoing, great caution and temper is to be used; and we
should  never apply any such limitations as cloaks to palliate unjust or  uncharitable dealing.
Generally it is more advisable to suppress  such eruptions of passion than to vent it; for
seldom passion hath  not inordinate motions joined with it, or tendeth to good ends.   And,
however, it will do well to reflect on those cases, and to  remark some particulars about them.

First, we may observe that in all these cases all possible  moderation, equity, and candour
are to be used; so that no ill- speaking be practised beyond what is needful or convenient.
Even in  prosecution of offences, the bounds of truth, of equity, of humanity  and clemency
are not to be transgressed.  A judge must not lay on  the most criminal person more blame or
contumely than the case will  bear, or than serveth the designs of justice.  However our neighbour
doth incur the calamities of sin and of punishment, we must not be  insolent or contemptuous
towards him.  Whence appears that we should  be careful of not vilifying an offender beyond
measure.  And how  mildly governors should proceed in the administration of justice,  the example
of Joshua may teach us, who thus examineth Achan, the  cause of so great mischief to the public:
"My son, give, I pray  thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto Him;
and tell me now what thou hast done, and hide it not from me."  "My  son;" what compellation
could be more benign and kind? "I pray  thee;" what language could be more courteous and gentle?
"give glory  to God, and make confession;" what words could be more inoffensively  pertinent?
And when he sentenced that great malefactor, the cause  of so much mischief, this was all he
said, "Why hast thou troubled  us? the Lord will trouble thee;" words void of contumely or
insulting, containing only a close intimation of the cause, and a  simple declaration of the
event he was to undergo.  Thus did St. Peter  temper his reproof of Simon Magus with this wholesome
and  comfortable advice:  "Repent, therefore, from this thy wickedness,  and pray God if perhaps
the thought of thine heart may be forgiven  thee."

Thirdly, as for fraternal censure and reproof of faults (when it is  just and expedient to
use it), ordinarily the calmest and mildest  way is the most proper, and most likely to obtain
good success; it  commonly doth in a more kindly manner convey the sense thereof into  the
heart, and therein more powerfully worketh remorse, than the  fierce and harsh way.  Clearly
to show a man his fault, with the  reason proving it such, so that he becometh thoroughly convinced
of  it, is sufficient to breed in him regret, and to shame him before  his own mind:  to do
more (in way of aggravation, of insulting on  him, of inveighing against him), as it doth often
not well consist  with humanity, so it is seldom consonant to discretion, if we do, as  we
ought, seek his health and amendment.  Humanity requireth that  when we undertake to reform
our neighbour, we should take care not  to deform him (not to discourage or displease him more
than is  necessary); when we would correct his manners, that we should also  consider his modesty,
and consult his reputation; "curam agentes,"  as Seneca speaketh, "non tantum salutis, sed
et honestae cicatricis"  (having care not only to heal the wound, but to leave a comely scar
behind).  "Be," adviseth St. Austin, "so displeased with iniquity,  as to consider and consult
humanity;" for, "Zeal void of humanity is  not," saith St. Chrysostom, "zeal, but rather animosity;
and reproof  not mixed with good-will appeareth a kind of malignity."  We should  so rebuke
those who, by frailty or folly incident to mankind, have  fallen into misdemeanours, that they
may perceive we do sincerely  pity their ill case, and tender their good; that we mean not
to  upbraid their weakness or insult upon their misfortune; that we  delight not to inflict
on them more grief than is plainly needful  and unavoidable; that we are conscious and sensible
of our own  obnoxiousness to the like slips or falls, and do consider that we  also may be
tempted, and being tempted, may be overborne.  This they  cannot perceive or be persuaded of,
except we temper our speech with  benignity and mildness.  Such speech prudence also dictateth,
as  most useful and hopeful for producing the good ends honest  reprehension doth aim at; it
mollifieth and it melteth a stubborn  heart, it subdueth and winneth a perverse will, it healeth
distempered affections.  Whereas roughly handling is apt to defeat  or obstruct the cure: 
rubbing the sore doth tend to exasperate and  inflame it.  Harsh speech rendereth advice odious
and unsavoury;  driveth from it and depriveth it of efficacy; it turneth regret for  a fault
into displeasure and disdain against the reprover; it looks  not like the dealing of a kind
friend, but like the persecution of a  spiteful enemy; it seemeth rather an ebullition of gall,
or a  defluxion from rancour, than an expression of good-will; the  offender will take it for
a needless and pitiless tormenting, or for  a proud and tyrannical domineering over him.  He
that can bear a  friendly touch, will not endure to be lashed with angry and  reproachful words.
In fine, all reproof ought to be seasoned with  discretion, with candour, with moderation,
and meekness.

Fourthly, likewise in defence of truth, and maintenance of a good  cause, we may observe that
commonly the fairest language is most  proper and advantageous, and that reproachful or foul
terms are most  improper and prejudicial.  A calm and meek way of discoursing doth  much advantage
a good cause, as arguing the patron thereof to have  confidence in the cause itself, and to
rely upon his strength:  that  he is in a temper fit to apprehend it himself, and to maintain
it;  that he propoundeth it as a friend, wishing the hearer for his own  good to follow it,
leaving him the liberty to judge, and choose for  himself.  But rude speech, and contemptuous
reflections on persons,  as they do signify nothing to the question, so they commonly bring
much disadvantage and damage to the cause, creating mighty  prejudices against it; they argue
much impotency in the advocate,  and consequently little strength in what he maintains; that
he is  little able to judge well, and altogether unapt to teach others;  they intimate a diffidence
in himself concerning his cause, and  that, despairing to maintain it by reason, he seeks to
uphold it by  passion; that not being able to convince by fair means, he would  bear down by
noise and clamour:  that not skilling to get his suit  quietly, he would extort it by force,
obtruding his conceits  violently as an enemy, or imposing them arbitrarily as a tyrant.  
Thus doth he really disparage and slur his cause, however good and  defensible in itself.

A modest and friendly style doth suit truth; it, like its author,  doth usually reside (not
in the rumbling wind, nor in the shaking  earthquake, nor in the raging fire, but) in the small
still voice;  sounding in this, it is most audible, most penetrant, and most  effectual; thus
propounded, it is willingly hearkened to:  for men  have no aversion from hearing those who
seem to love them, and wish  them well.  It is easily conceived, no prejudice or passion clouding
the apprehensive faculties; it is readily embraced, no animosity  withstanding or obstructing
it.  It is the sweetness of the lips,  which, as the wise man telleth us, increaseth learning;
disposing a  man to hear lessons of good doctrine, rendering him capable to  understand them,
insinuating and impressing them upon the mind; the  affections being thereby unlocked, the
passage becomes open to the  reason.

But it is plainly a preposterous method of instructing, of deciding  controversies, of begetting
peace, to vex and anger those concerned  by ill language.  Nothing surely doth more hinder
the efficacy of  discourse, and prevent conviction, than doth this course, upon many  obvious
accounts.  It doth first put in a strong bar to attention:   for no man willingly doth afford
an ear to him whom he conceiveth  disaffected towards him:  which opinion harsh words infallibly
will  produce; no man can expect to hear truth from him whom he  apprehendeth disordered in
his own mind, whom he seeth rude in his  proceedings, whom he taketh to be unjust in his dealing;
as men  certainly will take those to be, who presume to revile others for  using their own
judgment freely, and dissenting from them in  opinion.  Again, this course doth blind the hearer's
mind, so that  he cannot discern what he that pretends to instruct him doth mean,  or how he
doth assert his doctrine.  Truth will not be discerned  through the smoke of wrathful expressions;
right being defaced by  foul language will not appear, passion being excited will not suffer
a man to perceive the sense or the force of an argument.  The will  also thereby is hardened
and hindered from submitting to truth.  In  such a case, non persuadebis, etiamsi persuaseris;
although you stop  his mouth, you cannot subdue his heart; although he can no longer  fight,
yet he never will yield:  animosity raised by such usage  rendereth him invincibly obstinate
in his conceits and courses.   Briefly, from this proceeding men become unwilling to mark,
unfit to  apprehend, indisposed to embrace any good instruction or advice; it  maketh them
indocile and intractable, averse from better  instruction, pertinacious in their opinions,
and refractory in their  ways.

"Every man," saith the wise man, "shall kiss his lips that giveth a  right answer;" but no
man surely will be ready to kiss those lips  which are embittered with reproach, or defiled
with dirty language.

It is said of Pericles, that with thundering and lightning he put  Greece into confusion; such
discourse may serve to confound things,  it seldom tendeth to compose them.  If reason will
not pierce, rage  will scarce avail to drive it in.  Satirical virulency may vex men  sorely,
but it hardly ever soundly converts them.  "Few become wiser  or better by ill words."  Children
may be frightened into compliance  by loud and severe reprimands; but men are to be allured
by rational  persuasion backed with courteous usage; they may be sweetly drawn,  they cannot
be violently driven to change their judgment and  practice.  Whence that advice of the apostle,
"With meekness  instruct those that oppose themselves," doth no less savour of  wisdom than
of goodness.

Fifthly, as for examples of extraordinary persons, which in some  cases do seem to authorise
the practice of evil-speaking, we may  consider that, as they had especial commission enabling
them to do  some things beyond ordinary standing rules, wherein they are not to  be imitated:
as they had especial illumination and direction, which  preserved them from swerving in particular
cases from truth and  equity; so the tenor of their life did evidence that it was the  glory
of God, the good of men, the necessity of the case, which  moved them to it.  And of them also
we may observe, that on divers  occasions (yea, generally, whenever only their private credit
or  interest was concerned), although grievously provoked, they did out  of meekness, patience,
and charity, wholly forbear reproachful  speech.  Our Saviour, who sometimes upon special reason
in His  discourses used such harsh words, yet when He was most spitefully  accused, reproached,
and persecuted, did not open His mouth, or  return one angry word:  "Being reviled, He did
not," as St. Peter,  proposing His example to us, telleth us, "revile again; suffering,  He
did not threaten."  He used the softest language to Judas, to the  soldiers, to Pilate and
Herod, to the priests, etc.  And the  apostles, who sometimes inveigh so zealously against
the opposers  and perverters of truth, did in their private conversation and  demeanour strictly
observe their own rules, of abstinence from  reproach:  "Being reviled, we bless; being persecuted,
we suffer  it;" so doth St. Paul represent their practice.  And in reason we  should rather
follow them in this their ordinary course, than in  their extraordinary sallies of practice.

In fine, however in some cases and circumstances the matter may  admit such exceptions, so
that all language disgraceful to our  neighbour is not ever culpable; yet the cases are so
few and rare in  comparison, the practice commonly so dangerous and ticklish, that  worthily
forbearing to reproach doth bear the style of a general  rule; and particularly (for clearer
direction) we are in the  following cases obliged carefully to shun it; or in speaking about
our neighbour we must observe these cautions.

1.  We should never in severe terms inveigh against any man without  reasonable warrant, or
presuming upon a good call and commission  thereto.  As every man should not assume to himself
the power of  administering justice (of trying, sentencing, and punishing  offenders), so must
not every man take upon him to speak against  those who seem to do ill; which is a sort of
punishment, including  the infliction of smart and damage upon the persons concerned.   Every
man hath indeed a commission, in due place and season, with  discretion and moderation to admonish
his neighbour offending; but  otherwise to speak ill of him, no private man hath just right
or  authority, and therefore, in presuming to do it, he is disorderly  and irregular, trespassing
beyond his bounds, usurping an undue  power to himself.

2.  We should never speak ill of any man without apparent just  cause.  It must be just; we
must not reproach men for things  innocent or indifferent; for not concurring in disputable
opinions  with us, for not complying with our humour, for not serving our  interest, for not
doing anything to which they are not obliged, or  for using their liberty in any case:  it
must be at least some  considerable fault, which we can so much as tax.  It must also be  clear
and certain, notorious and palpable; for to speak ill upon  slender conjectures, or doubtful
suspicions, is full of iniquity.   "[Greek], "They rail at things which they know not," is
part of  those wicked men's character, whom St. Jude doth so severely  reprehend.  If, indeed,
these conditions being wanting, we presume  to reproach any man, we do therein no less than
slander him; which  to do is unlawful in any case, is in truth a most diabolical and  detestable
crime.  To impose odious names and characters on any  person, which he deserveth not, or without
ground of truth, is to  play the devil; and hell itself scarce will own a fouler practice.

3.  We should not cast reproach upon any man without some necessary  reason.  In charity (that
charity which "covereth all sins," which  "covereth a multitude of sins") we are bound to connive
at the  defects, and to conceal the faults of our brethren; to extenuate and  excuse them,
when apparent, so far as we may in truth and equity.   We must not therefore ever produce them
to light, or prosecute them  with severity, except very needful occasion urgeth--such as is
the  glory and service of God, the maintenance of truth, the vindication  of innocence, the
preservation of public justice and peace; the  amendment of our neighbour himself, or securing
others from  contagion.  Barring such reasons (really being, not affectedly  pretended), we
are bound not so much as to disclose, as to touch our  neighbour's faults; much more, not to
blaze them about, not to  exaggerate them by vehement invectives.

4.  We should never speak ill of any man beyond measure; be the  cause never so just, the occasion
never so necessary, we should yet  nowise be immoderate therein, exceeding the bounds prescribed
by  truth, equity, and humanity.  We should never speak worse of any man  whatever than he
certainly deserveth, according to the most  favourable construction of his doings; never more
than the cause  absolutely requireth.  We should rather be careful to fall short of  what in
rigorous truth might be said against him, than in the least  to pass beyond it.  The best cause
had better seem to suffer a  little by our reservedness in its defence, than any man be wronged
by our aspersing him; for God, the patron of truth and right, is  ever able to secure them
without the succour of our unjust and  uncharitable dealing.  The contrary practice hath indeed
within it a  spice of slander, that is, of the worst iniquity.

5.  We must never speak ill of any man out of bad principles, or for  bad ends.

No sudden or rash anger should instigate us thereto.  For, "Let all  bitterness, and wrath,
and anger, and clamour, and evil-speaking be  put away from you, with all malice," is the apostolical
precept;  they are all associates and kindred, which are to be cast away  together.  Such anger
itself is culpable, as a work of the flesh,  and therefore to be suppressed; and all its brood
therefore is also  to be smothered; the daughter of such a mother cannot be legitimate.   "The
wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God."

We must not speak ill out of inveterate hatred or ill-will.  For  this murderous, this viperous
disposition should itself be rooted  out of our hearts:  whatever issueth from it cannot be
otherwise  than very bad; it must be a poisonous breath that exhaleth from that  foul source.

We must not be provoked thereto by any revengeful disposition, or  rancorous spleen, in regard
to any injuries or discourtesies  received.  For, as we must not revenge ourselves, or render
evil in  any other way, so particularly not in this, which is commonly the  special instance
expressly prohibited.  "Render not evil for evil,"  saith St. Peter, "nor railing for railing;
but contrariwise bless,"  or speak well; and "Bless them," saith the Lord, "which curse you;"
"Bless," saith St. Paul, "and curse not."

We must not also do it out of contempt; for we are not to slight our  brethren in our hearts.
No man really, considering what he is,  whence he came, how he is related, what he is capable
of, can be  despicable.  Extreme naughtiness is indeed contemptible; but the  unhappy person
that is engaged therein is rather to be pitied than  despised.  However, charity bindeth us
to stifle contemptuous  motions of heart, and not to vent them in vilifying expression.   Particularly,
it is a barbarous practice, out of contempt to  reproach persons for natural imperfections,
for meanness of  condition, for unlucky disasters, for any involuntary defects; this  being
indeed to reproach mankind, unto which such things are  incident; to reproach Providence, from
the disposal whereof they do  proceed.  "Whoso mocketh the poor, despiseth his Maker," saith
the  wise man; and the same may be said of him that reproachfully mocketh  him that is dull
in parts, deformed in body, weak in health or  strength, defective in any such way.

Likewise we must not speak ill out of envy; because others do excel  us in any good quality,
or exceed us in fortune.  To harbour this  base and ugly disposition in our minds is unworthy
of a man (who  should delight in all good springing up anywhere, and befalling any  man, naturally
allied unto him); it is most unworthy of a Christian,  who should tender his brother's good
as his own, and rejoice with  those that rejoice.  From thence to be drawn to cast reproach
upon  any man, is horrible and heinous wickedness.

Neither should we ever use reproach as a means of compassing any  design we do affect or aim
at; 'tis an unwarrantable engine of  raising us to wealth, dignity, or repute.  To grow by
the  diminution, to rise by the depression, to shine by the eclipse of  others, to build a
fortune upon the ruins of our neighbour's  reputation, is that which no honourable mind can
affect, no honest  man will endeavour.  Our own wit, courage, and industry, managed  with God's
assistance and blessing, are sufficient, and only lawful  instruments of prosecuting honest
enterprises; we need not, we must  not instead of them employ our neighbour's disgrace; no
worldly good  is worth purchasing at such a rate, no project worth achieving by  such foul ways.

Neither should we out of malignity, to cherish or gratify ill  humour, use this practice. 
It is observable of some persons, that  not out of any formed displeasure, grudge, or particular
disaffection, nor out of any particular design, but merely out of a  [Greek], an ill disposition,
springing up from nature, or contracted  by use, they are apt to carp at any action, and with
sharp reproach  to bite any man that comes in their way, thereby feeding and  soothing that
evil inclination.  But as this inhuman and currish  humour should be corrected, and extirpated
from our hearts; so  should the issues thereof at our mouths be stopped; the bespattering 
our neighbour's good name should never afford any satisfaction or  delight unto us.

Nor out of wantonness should we speak ill, for our divertisement or  sport.  For our neighbour's
reputation is too great and precious a  thing to be played with, or offered up to sport; we
are very foolish  in so disvaluing it, very naughty in so misusing it.  Our wits are  very
barren, our brains are ill furnished with store of knowledge,  if we can find no other matter
of conversation.

Nor out of negligence and inadvertency should we sputter out  reproachful speech; shooting
ill words at rovers, or not regarding  who stands in our way.  Among all temerities this is
one of the most  noxious, and therefore very culpable.

In fine, we should never speak concerning our neighbour from any  other principle than charity,
or to any other intent but what is  charitable; such as tendeth to his good, or at least is
consistent  therewith.  "Let all your things," saith St. Paul, "be done in  charity;" and words
are most of the THINGS we do concerning our  neighbour, wherein we may express charity.  In
all our speeches,  therefore, touching him, we should plainly show that we have a care  of
his reputation, that we tender his interest, that we even desire  his content and repose. 
Even when reason and need do so require  that we should disclose and reprehend his faults,
we may, we should  by the manner and scope of our speech signify thus much.  Which  rule, were
it observed, if we should never speak ill otherwise than  out of charity, surely most ill-speaking
would be cut off; most, I  fear, of our tattling about others, much of our gossiping would
be  marred.

Indeed, so far from bitter or sour our language should be, that it  ought to be sweet and pleasant;
so far from rough and harsh, that it  should be courteous and obliging; so far from signifying
wrath, ill- will, contempt, or animosity, that it should express tender  affection, good esteem,
sincere respect towards our brethren; and be  apt to produce the like in them towards us. 
The sense of them  should be grateful to the heart; the very sound and accent of them  should
be delightful to the ear.  Every one should please his  neighbour for his good to edification.
Our words should always be  [Greek], with grace, seasoned with salt; they should have the grace
of courtesy, they should be seasoned with the salt of discretion, so  as to be sweet and savoury
to the hearers.  Commonly ill language is  a certain sign of inward enmity and ill-will.  Good-will
is wont to  show itself in good terms; it clotheth even its grief handsomely,  and its displeasure
carrieth favour in its face; its rigour is civil  and gentle, tempered with pity for the faults
and errors which it  disliketh, with the desire of their amendment and recovery whom it  reprehendeth.
It would inflict no more evil than is necessary; it  would cure its neighbour's disease without
exasperating his  patience, troubling his modesty, or impairing his credit.  As it  always
judgeth candidly, so it never condemneth extremely.

II.  But so much for the explication of this precept, and the  directive part of our discourse.
I shall now briefly propound some  inducements to the observance thereof.

1.  Let us consider that nothing more than railing and reviling is  opposite to the nature,
and inconsistent with the tenor of our  religion; which (as even a heathen did observe of it)
nil nisi  justum suadet, et lene, doth recommend nothing but what is very just  and mild; which
propoundeth the practices of charity, meekness,  patience, peaceableness, moderation, equity,
alacrity, or good  humour, as its principal laws, and declareth them the chief fruits  of the
Divine spirit and grace; which chargeth us to curb and  compose all our passions; more particularly
to restrain and repress  anger, animosity, envy, malice, and such-like dispositions, as the
fruits of carnality and corrupt lust; which consequently drieth up  all the sources or dammeth
up the sluices of bad language.  As it  doth above all things oblige us to bear no ill-will
in our hearts,  so it chargeth us to vent none with our mouths.

2.  It is therefore often expressly condemned and prohibited as  evil.  'Tis the property of
the wicked; a character of those who  work iniquity, to "whet their tongues like a sword, and
bend their  bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words."

3.  No practice hath more severe punishments denounced to it than  this. (without the heavenly
city) "are dogs," saith St. John in his Revelation; that is, those  chiefly who out of currish
spite or malignity do frowardly bark at  their neighbours, or cruelly bite them with reproachful
language.

4.  If we look upon such language in its own nature, what is it but  a symptom of a foul, a
weak, a disordered and a distempered mind?   'Tis the smoke of inward rage and malice:  'tis
a stream that cannot  issue from a sweet spring; 'tis a storm that cannot bluster out of a
calm region.  "The words of the pure are pleasant words," as the  wise man saith.

5.  This practice doth plainly signify low spirit, ill-breeding, and  bad manners; and thence
misbecometh any wise, any honest, any  honourable person.  It agreeth to children, who are
unapt and  unaccustomed to deal in matters considerable, to squabble; to women  of meanest
rank (apt, by nature, or custom, to be transported with  passion) to scold.  In our modern
languages it is termed villainy,  as being proper for rustic boors, or men of coarsest education
and  employment; who, having their minds debased by being conversant in  meanest affairs, do
vent their sorry passions, and bicker about  their petty concernments, in such strains; who
also, being not  capable of a fair reputation, or sensible of disgrace to themselves,  do little
value the credit of others, or care for aspersing it.  But  such language is unworthy of those
persons, and cannot easily be  drawn from them, who are wont to exercise their thoughts about
nobler matters, who are versed in affairs manageable only by calm  deliberation and fair persuasion,
not by impetuous and provocative  rudeness; which do never work otherwise upon masculine souls
than so  as to procure disdain and resistance.  Such persons, knowing the  benefit of a good
name, being wont to possess a good repute, prizing  their own credit as a considerable good,
will never be prone to  bereave others of the like by opprobrious speech.  A noble enemy  will
never speak of his enemy in bad terms.

We may further consider that all wise, all honest, all ingenuous  persons have an aversion
from ill-speaking, and cannot entertain it  with any acceptance or complacence; that only ill-natured,
unworthy,  and naughty people are its willing auditors, or do abet it with  applause.  The
good man, in Psalm xv., non accipit opprobrium, doth  not take up, or accept, a reproach against
his neighbour:  "but a  wicked doer," saith the wise man, "giveth heed to false lips, and a
liar giveth ear to a naughty tongue."  And what reasonable man will  do that which is disgustful
to the wise and good, is grateful only  to the foolish and baser sort of men?  I pretermit
that using this  sort of language doth incapacitate a man for benefiting his  neighbour, and
defeateth his endeavours for his edification,  disparaging a good cause, prejudicing the defence
of truth,  obstructing the effects of good instruction and wholesome reproof;  as we did before
remark and declare.  Further--

6.  He that useth this kind of speech doth, as harm and trouble  others, so create many great
inconveniences and mischiefs to himself  thereby.  Nothing so inflameth the wrath of men, so
provoketh their  enmity, so breedeth lasting hatred and spite, as do contumelious  words. 
They are often called swords and arrows; and as such they  pierce deeply, and cause most grievous
smart; which men feeling are  enraged, and accordingly will strive to requite them in the like
manner and in all other obvious ways of revenge.  Hence strife,  clamour, and tumult, care,
suspicion, and fear, danger and trouble,  sorrow and regret, do seize on the reviler; and he
is sufficiently  punished for this dealing.  No man can otherwise live than in  perpetual fear
of reciprocal like usage from him whom he is  conscious of having so abused.  Whence, if not
justice, or charity  towards others, yet love and pity of ourselves should persuade us to 
forbear it as disquietful, incommodious, and mischievous to us.

We should indeed certainly enjoy much love, much concord, much  quiet, we should live in great
safety and security, we should be  exempted from much care and fear, if we would restrain ourselves
from abusing and offending our neighbour in this kind:  being  conscious of so just and innocent
demeanour towards him, we should  converse with him in a pleasant freedom and confidence, not
suspecting any bad language or ill usage from him.

7.  Hence with evidently good reason is he that useth such language  called a fool:  and he
that abstaineth from it is commended as wise.   "A fool's lips enter into contention, and his
mouth calleth for  strokes.  He that refraineth his tongue is wise.  In the  tongue of the
wise is health.  He that keepeth his lips, keepeth his  life:  but he that openeth wide his
mouth" (that is, in evil- speaking, gaping with clamour and vehemency) "shall have  destruction.
The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious:  but the  lips of a fool will swallow up himself.
Abstinence from ill-speaking he seemeth to propose as the  first step towards the fruition
of a durably happy life.

8.  Lastly, we may consider that it is a grievous perverting of the  design of speech, that
excellent faculty, which so much  distinguisheth us from, so highly advanceth us above other
creatures, to use it to the defaming and disquieting of our  neighbour.   Amen."

THE FOLLY OF SLANDER.

Part 1.

"He that uttereth slander is a fool."--Prov. x. 18.

General declamations against vice and sin are indeed excellently  useful, as rousing men to
consider and look about them:  but they do  often want effect, because they only raise confused
apprehensions of  things, and indeterminate propensions to action; which usually,  before men
thoroughly perceive or resolve what they should practise,  do decay and vanish.  As he that
cries out "Fire!" doth stir up  people, and inspireth them with a kind of hovering tendency
every  way, yet no man thence to purpose moveth until he be distinctly  informed where the
mischief is; then do they, who apprehend  themselves concerned, run hastily to oppose it: 
so, till we  particularly discern where our offences lie (till we distinctly know  the heinous
nature and the mischievous consequences of them), we  scarce will effectually apply ourselves
to correct them.  Whence it  is requisite that men should be particularly acquainted with their
sins, and by proper arguments be dissuaded from them.

In order whereto I have now selected one sin to describe, and  dissuade from, being in nature
as vile, and in practice as common,  as any other whatever that hath prevailed among men. 
It is slander,  a sin which in all times and places hath been epidemical and rife;  but which
especially doth seem to reign and rage in our age and  country.

There are principles innate to men, which ever have, and ever will  incline them to this offence.
Eager appetites to secular and  sensual goods; violent passions, urging the prosecution of
what men  affect; wrath and displeasure against those who stand in the way of  compassing their
desires; emulation and envy towards those who  happen to succeed better, or to attain a greater
share in such  things; excessive self-love; unaccountable malignity and vanity, are  in some
degrees connatural to all men, and ever prompt them to this  dealing, as appearing the most
efficacious, compendious, and easy  way of satisfying such appetites, of promoting such designs,
of  discharging such passions.  Slander thence hath always been a  principal engine whereby
covetous, ambitious, envious, ill-natured,  and vain persons have striven to supplant their
competitors, and  advance themselves; meaning thereby to procure, what they chiefly  prize
and like, wealth, or dignity, or reputation, favour and power  in the court, respect and interest
with the people.

But from especial causes our age peculiarly doth abound in this  practice; for, besides the
common dispositions inclining thereto,  there are conceits newly coined, and greedily entertained
by many,  which seem purposely levelled at the disparagement of piety,  charity, and justice,
substituting interest in the room of  conscience, authorising and commending for good and wise,
all ways  serving to private advantage.  There are implacable dissensions,  fierce animosities,
and bitter zeals sprung up; there is an extreme  curiosity, niceness, and delicacy of judgment:
there is a mighty  affectation of seeming wise and witty by any means; there is a great  unsettlement
of mind, and corruption of manners, generally diffused  over people:  from which sources it
is no wonder that this flood  hath so overflown, that no banks can restrain it, no fences are
able  to resist it; so that ordinary conversation is full of it, and no  demeanour can be secure
from it.

If we do mark what is done in many (might I not say, in most?)  companies, what is it but one
telling malicious stories of, or  fastening odious characters upon another?  What do men commonly
please themselves in so much, as in carping and harshly censuring,  in defaming and abusing
their neighbours?  Is it not the sport and  divertisement of many, to cast dirt in the faces
of all they meet  with; to bespatter any man with foul imputations?  Doth not in every  corner
a Momus lurk, from the venom of whose spiteful or petulant  tongue no eminency of rank, dignity
of place, or sacredness of  office, no innocence or integrity of life, no wisdom or  circumspection
in behaviour, no good-nature or benignity in dealing  and carriage, can protect any person?
Do not men assume to  themselves a liberty of telling romances, and framing characters  concerning
their neighbour, as freely as a poet doth about Hector or  Turnus, Thersites or Draucus?  Do
they not usurp a power of playing  with, or tossing about, of tearing in pieces their neighbour's
good  name, as if it were the veriest toy in the world?  Do not many  having a form of godliness
(some of them, demurely, others  confidently, both without any sense of, or remorse for what
they do)  backbite their brethren?  Is it not grown so common a thing to  asperse causelessly
that no man wonders at it, that few dislike,  that scarce any detest it? that most notorious
calumniators are  heard, not only with patience, but with pleasure; yea, are even held  in
vogue and reverence as men of a notable talent, and very  serviceable to their party? so that
slander seemeth to have lost its  nature, and not to be now an odious sin, but a fashionable
humour, a  way of pleasing entertainment, a fine knack, or curious feat of  policy; so that
no man at least taketh himself or others to be  accountable for what is said in this way? 
This he wished in an age so  resembling ours, that I fear the description with equal patness
may  suit both:  "Take ye heed" (said he then, and may we not advise the  like now?) "every
one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any  brother:  for every brother will utterly supplant,
and every  neighbour will walk with slanders.

Such being the state of things, obvious to experience, no discourse  may seem more needful,
or more useful, than that which serveth to  correct or check this practice:  which I shall
endeavour to do (1)  by describing the nature, (2) by declaring the folly of it:  or  showing
it to be very true which the wise man here asserteth, "He  that uttereth slander is a fool."
Which particulars I hope so to  prosecute, that any man shall be able easily to discern, and
ready  heartily to detest this practice.

I.  For explication of its nature, we may describe slander to be the  uttering false (or equivalent
to false, morally false) speech  against our neighbour, in prejudice to his fame, his safety,
his  welfare, or concernment in any kind, out of malignity, vanity,  rashness, ill-nature,
or bad design.  That which is in Holy  Scripture forbidden and reproved under several names
and notions:   of bearing false witness, false accusation, railing censure,  sycophantry, tale-bearing,
whispering, backbiting, supplanting,  taking up reproach:  which terms some of them do signify
the nature,  others denote the special kinds, others imply the manners, others  suggest the
ends of this practice.  But it seemeth most fully  intelligible by observing the several kinds
and degrees thereof; as  also by reflecting on the divers ways and manners of practising it.

The principal kinds thereof I observe to be these:

1.  The grossest kind of slander is that which in the Decalogue is  called, bearing false testimony
against our neighbour; that is,  flatly charging him with facts which he never committed, and
is  nowise guilty of.  As in the case of Naboth, when men were suborned  to say, "Naboth did
blaspheme God and the king:" and as was David's  case, when he thus complained, "False witnesses
did rise up, they  laid to my charge things that I knew not of."  This kind in the  highest
way (that is, in judicial proceedings) is more rare; and of  all men, they who are detected
to practise it, are held most vile  and infamous; as being plainly the most pernicious and
perilous  instruments of injustice, the most desperate enemies of all men's  right and safety
that can be.  But also out of the court there are  many knights-errant of the post, whose business
it is to run about  scattering false reports; sometimes loudly proclaiming them in open  companies,
sometimes closely whispering them in dark corners; thus  infecting conversation with their
poisonous breath:  these no less  notoriously are guilty of this kind, as bearing always the
same  malice, and sometimes breeding as ill effects.

2.  Another kind is, affixing scandalous names, injurious epithets,  and odious characters
upon persons, which they deserve not.  As when  Corah and his accomplices did accuse Moses
of being ambitious,  unjust, and tyrannical:  when the Pharisees called our Lord an  impostor,
a blasphemer, a sorcerer, a glutton and wine-bibber, an  incendiary and perverter of the people,
one that spake against  Caesar, and forbade to give tribute:  when the apostles were charged
with being pestilent, turbulent, factious and seditious fellows.   This sort being very common,
and thence in ordinary repute not so  bad, yet in just estimation may be judged, even worse
than the  former; as doing to our neighbour more heavy and more irreparable  wrong.  For it
imposeth on him really more blame, and that such  which he can hardly shake off:  because the
charge signifieth habit  of evil, and includeth many acts; then, being general and  indefinite,
can scarce be disproved.  He, for instance, that calleth  a sober man drunkard, doth impute
to him many acts of such  intemperance (some really past, others probably future), and no 
particular time or place being specified, how can a man clear  himself of that imputation,
especially with those who are not  thoroughly acquainted with his conversation?  So he that
calleth a  man unjust, proud, perverse, hypocritical, doth load him with most  grievous faults,
which it is not possible that the most innocent  person should discharge himself from.

3.  Like to that kind is this:  aspersing a man's actions with harsh  censures and foul terms,
importing that they proceed from ill  principles, or tend to bad ends; so as it doth not or
cannot appear.   Thus when we say of him that is generously hospitable, that he is  profuse;
of him that is prudently frugal, that he is niggardly; of  him that is cheerful and free in
his conversation, that he is vain  or loose; of him that is serious and resolute in a good
way, that he  is sullen or morose; of him that is conspicuous and brisk in  virtuous practice,
that it is ambition or ostentation which prompts  him; of him that is close and bashful in
the like good way, that it  is sneaking stupidity, or want of spirit; of him that is reserved,
that it is craft; of him that is open, that it is simplicity in him;  when we ascribe a man's
liberality and charity to vainglory, or  popularity; his strictness of life, and constancy,
in devotion, to  superstition, or hypocrisy.

Whoever, indeed, pronounceth concerning his neighbour's intentions  otherwise than as they
are evidently expressed by words, or  signified by overt actions, is a slanderer; because he
pretendeth to  know, and dareth to aver, that which he nowise possibly can tell  whether it
be true; because the heart is exempt from all  jurisdiction here, is only subject to the government
and trial of  another world; because no man can judge concerning the truth of such  accusations,
because no man can exempt or defend himself from them:   so that apparently such practice doth
thwart all course of justice  and equity.

4.  Another kind is, perverting a man's words or actions  disadvantageously by affected misconstruction.
All words are  ambiguous, and capable of different senses, some fair, some more  foul; all
actions have two handles, one that candour and charity  will, another that disingenuity and
spite may lay hold on; and in  such cases to misapprehend is a calumnious procedure, arguing
malignant disposition and mischievous design.  Thus when two men did  witness that our Lord
affirmed, He "could demolish the temple, and  rear it again in three days"--although He did
indeed speak words to  that purpose, meaning them in a figurative sense, discernible enough
to those who would candidly have minded His drift and way of  speaking--yet they who crudely
alleged them against Him are called  false witnesses.

5. A List of Coblers Temples Ties, To keep the Hair out of their Eyes; From whence 'tis plain
the Diadem That Princes wear, derives from them. And therefore Crowns are now-a-days Adorn'd with
Golden Stars and Rays, Which plainly shews the near Alliance 'Twixt cobling and the Planets
Science.

Besides, that slow-pac'd Sign Bootes, As 'tis miscall'd, we know not who 'tis? But Partridge ended
all Disputes, He knew his Trade, and call'd it **Boots.

The Horned Moon, which heretofore Upon their Shoes the Romans wore, Whose Wideness kept their
Toes from Corns, And whence we claim our Shooing-Horns; Shows how the Art of Cobling bears A
near Resemblance to the Spheres.

A Scrap of Parchment hung by Geometry (A great Refinement in Barometry) Can, like the Stars,
foretel the Weather; And what is Parchment else but Leather? Which an Astrologer might use, Either
for Almanacks or Shoes.

Thus Partridge, by his Wit and Parts, At once did practise both these Arts; And as the boading
Owl (or rather The Bat, because her Wings are Leather) Steals from her private Cell by Night,
And flies about the Candle-Light; So learned Partridge could as well
Creep in the Dark from Leathern Cell, And, in his Fancy, fly as fair,
To peep upon a twinkling Star.

Besides, he could confound the Spheres, And set the Planets by the Ears; To shew his Skill,
he Mars could join To Venus in Aspect Mali'n; Then call in Mercury for Aid, And cure the Wounds that Venus
made.

Great Scholars have in Lucian read, When Philip, King of Greece was dead, His Soul and Spirit
did divide, And each Part took a diff'rent Side; One rose a Star, the other fell Beneath, and
mended Shoes in Hell.

Thus Partridge still shines in each Art, The Cobling and Star-gazing Part, And is install'd
as good a Star As any of the Caesars are.

Triumphant Star! some Pity shew On Coblers militant below, Whom roguish Boys in stormy Nights
Torment, by pissing out their Lights; Or thro' a Chink convey their Smoke; Inclos'd Artificers to choke.

Thou,
high exalted in thy Sphere, May'st follow still thy Calling there. To thee the Bull will lend
his hide, By Phoebus newly tann'd and dry'd. For thee they Argo's Hulk will tax, And scrape her pitchy
Sides for Wax. Then Ariadne kindly lends Her braided Hair to make thee Ends. The Point of Sagittarius'
Dart Turns to an awl, by heav'nly Art; And Vulcan, wheedled by his Wife, Will forge for thee
a Paring-Knife. For want of Room, by Virgo's Side, She'll strain a Point, and sit astride***,
To take thee kindly in between, And then the Signs will be Thirteen.

*Partridge was a Cobler.

** See his Almanack

***Tibi brachia contrahet ingens Scorpius, etc.

*****

An Epitaph on Partridge.

*****

Partridge's reply

'Squire Bickerstaff detected; or, the astrological impostor convicted;

by John Partridge, student in physick and astrology.

It is hard, my dear countrymen of these united nations, it is very hard that a Briton born, a Protestant
astrologer, a man of revolution principles, an assertor of the liberty and property of the people,
should cry out, in vain, for justice against a Frenchman, a Papist, an illiterate pretender to
science; that would blast my reputation, most inhumanly bury me alive, and defraud my native
country of those services, that, in my double capacity, I daily offer to the publick.

What great provocations I have receiv'd, let the impartial reader judge, and how unwillingly, even
in my own defence, I now enter the lists against falsehood, ignorance and envy: But I am exasperated,
at length, to drag out this cacus from the den of obscurity where he lurks, detect him by the
light of those stars he has so impudently traduced, and shew there's not a monster in the
skies so pernicious and malevolent to mankind, as an ignorant pretender to physick and astrology.
I shall not directly fall on the many gross errors, nor expose the notorious absurdities of
this prostituted libeller, till I have let the learned world fairly into the controversy depending,
and then leave the unprejudiced to judge of the merits and justice of the cause.

It was towards the conclusion of the year 1707, when an impudent pamphlet crept into the world,
intituled, 'Predictions, etc.' by Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq;--Amongst the many arrogant assertions
laid down by that lying spirit of divination, he was pleas'd to pitch on the Cardinal de Noailles
and myself, among many other eminent and illustrious persons, that were to die within the compass
of the ensuing year; and peremptorily fixes the month, day, and hour of our deaths: This, I
think, is sporting with great men, and publick spirits, to the scandal of religion, and reproach
of power; and if sovereign princes and astrologers must make diversion for the vulgar---- why
then farewel, say I, to all governments, ecclesiastical and civil. But, I thank my better stars,
I am alive to confront this false and audacious predictor, and to make him rue the hour he ever
affronted a man of science and resentment. The Cardinal may take what measures he pleases with
him; as his excellency is a foreigner, and a papist, he has no reason to rely on me for his
justification; I shall only assure the world he is alive---- but as he was bred to letters, and
is master of a pen, let him use it in his own defence. In the mean time I shall present the
publick with a faithful narrative of the ungenerous treatment and hard usage I have received
from the virulent papers and malicious practices of this pretended astrologer.

A true and impartial account of the proceedings of Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq; against me----

The 28th of March, Anno Dom. 1708, being the night this sham-prophet had so impudently fix'd for
my last, which made little impression on myself; but I cannot answer for my whole family; for my wife,
with a concern more than usual, prevailed on me to take somewhat to sweat for a cold; and,
between the hours of eight and nine, to go to bed: The maid, as she was warming my bed, with a
curiosity natural to young wenches, runs to the window, and asks of one passing the street,
who the bell toll'd for? Dr. Partridge, says he, that famous almanack-maker, who died suddenly
this evening: The poor girl provoked, told him he ly'd like a rascal; the other very sedately
reply'd, the sexton had so informed him, and if false, he was to
blame for imposing upon a stranger.

She asked a second, and a third, as they passed, and every one was in the same tone. Now I don't
say these are accomplices to a certain astrological 'squire, and that one Bickerstaff might be
sauntring thereabouts; because I will assert nothing here but what I dare attest, and plain
matter of fact. My wife at this fell into a violent disorder; and I must own I was a little discomposed
at the oddness of the accident. In the mean time one knocks at my door, Betty runs down, and opening,
finds a sober grave person, who modestly enquires if this was Dr. Partridge's? She taking him for
some cautious city-patient, that came at that time for privacy, shews him into the dining room.
As soon as I could compose myself, I went to him, and was surprized to find my gentleman mounted
on a table with a two-foot rule in his hand, measuring my walls, and taking the dimensions of
the room. Pray sir, says I, not to interrupt you, have you any business with me? Only, sir,
replies he, order the girl to bring me a better light, for this is but a very dim one. Sir,
says I, my name is Partridge: Oh! the Doctor's brother, belike, cries he; the stair-case,
I believe, and these two apartments hung in close mourning, will be sufficient, and only a strip
of bays round the other rooms. The Doctor must needs die rich, he had great dealings in his
way for many years; if he had no family coat, you had as good use the escutcheons of the company,
they are as showish, and will look as magnificent as if he was descended from the blood royal.
With that I assumed a great air of authority, and demanded who employ'd him, or how he came
there? Why, I was sent, sir, by the Company of Undertakers, says he, and they were employed
by the honest gentleman, who is executor to the good Doctor departed; and our rascally porter,
I believe, is fallen fast asleep with the black cloth and sconces, or he had been here, and we might
have been tacking up by this time. Sir, says I, pray be advis'd by a friend, and make the best
of your speed out of my doors, for I hear my wife's voice, (which by the by, is pretty distinguishable)
and in that corner of the room stands a good cudgel, which somebody has felt e're now; if that
light in her hands, and she know the business you come about, without consulting the stars,
I can assure you it will be employed very much to the detriment of your person. Sir, cries he,
bowing with great civility, I perceive extreme grief for the loss of the Doctor disorders you a little
at present, but early in the morning I'll wait on you with all necessary
materials.

Now I mention no Mr. Bickerstaff, nor do I say, that a certain star-gazing 'squire has been playing
my executor before his time; but I leave the world to judge, and
if he puts things and things fairly together, it won't be much wide
of the mark.

Well, once more I got my doors clos'd, and prepar'd for bed, in hopes of a little repose after
so many ruffling adventures; just as I was putting out my light in order to it, another bounces
as hard as he can knock; I open the window, and ask who's there, and what he wants? I am Ned
the sexton, replies he, and come to know whether the Doctor left any orders for a funeral
sermon, and where he is to be laid, and whether his grave is to be
plain or bricked?

Why, sirrah, says I, you know me well enough; you know I am not dead, and how dare you affront
me in this manner? Alack-a-day, replies the fellow, why 'tis in print, and the whole town knows
you are dead; why, there's Mr. White the joiner is but fitting screws to your coffin, he'll be
here with it in an instant: he was afraid you would have wanted it before this time. Sirrah, Sirrah,
says I, you shall know tomorrow to your cost, that I am alive, and alive like to be. Why, 'tis
strange, sir, says he, you should make such a secret of your death to us that are your neighbours;
it looks as if you had a design to defraud the church of its dues; and let me tell you, for
one that has lived so long by the heavens, that's unhandsomely done.

Hist, Hist, says another rogue that stood by him, away Doctor, in your flannel gear as fast
as you can, for here's a whole pack of dismals coming to you with their black equipage, and how
indecent will it look for you to stand fright'ning folks at your window, when you should have
been in your coffin this three hours? In short, what with undertakers, imbalmers, joiners,
sextons, and your damn'd elegy hawkers, upon a late practitioner in physick and astrology, I
got not one wink of sleep that night, nor scarce a moment's rest ever since. Now I doubt not
but this villainous 'squire has the impudence to assert, that these are entirely strangers to him;
he, good man, knows nothing of the matter, and honest Isaac Bickerstaff, I warrant you, is more a
man of honour, than to be an accomplice with a pack of rascals, that walk the streets on nights,
and disturb good people in their beds; but he is out, if he thinks the whole world is blind;
for there is one John Partridge can smell a knave as far as Grubstreet,--tho' he lies in the most
exalted garret, and writes himself 'Squire:--

But I'll keep my temper, and proceed in the narration.

I could not stir out of doors for the space of three months after this, but presently one comes
up to me in the street; Mr Partridge, that coffin you was last buried in I have not been yet paid for:
Doctor, cries another dog, How d'ye think people can live by making of graves for nothing? Next
time you die, you may e'en toll out the bell yourself for Ned.

A third rogue tips me by the elbow, and wonders how I have the conscience to sneak abroad
without paying my funeral expences. Lord, says one, I durst have swore that was honest Dr. Partridge,
my old friend; but poor man, he is gone. I beg your pardon, says another, you look so like my
old acquaintance that I used to consult on some private occasions; but, alack, he's gone the
way of all flesh---- Look, look, look, cries a third, after a competent space of staring at
me, would not one think our neighbour the almanack-maker, was crept out of his grave to take t'other
peep at the stars in this world, and shew how much he is improv'd in fortune-telling by having
taken a journey to the other?

Nay, the very reader, of our parish, a good sober, discreet person, has sent two or three times
for me to come and be buried decently, or send him sufficient reasons to the contrary, if
I have been interr'd in any other parish, to produce my certificate, as the act requires. My poor
wife is almost run distracted with being called Widow Partridge, when she knows its false; and
once a term she is cited into the court, to take out letters of administration. But the greatest
grievance is, a paultry quack, that takes up my calling just under my nose, and in his printed
directions with N.B. says, He lives in the house of the late ingenious Mr. John Partridge, an eminent
practitioner in leather, physick and astrology.

But to show how far the wicked spirit of envy, malice and resentment can hurry some men, my nameless
old persecutor had provided me a monument at the stone-cutter's and would have erected it
in the parish-church; and this piece of notorious and expensive villany had actually succeeded,
had I not used my utmost interest with the vestry, where it was carried
at last but by two voices, that I am still alive.

That stratagem failing, out comes a long sable elegy, bedeck'd with hour-glasses, mattocks,
sculls, spades, and skeletons, with an epitaph as confidently written to abuse me, and my profession,
as if I had been under ground these twenty years.

And, after such barbarous treatment as this, can the world blame me, when I ask, What is become of
the freedom of an Englishman? And where is the liberty and property that my old glorious friend
came over to assert? We have drove popery out of the nation, and sent slavery to foreign climes.
The arts only remain in bondage, when a man of science and character shall be openly insulted in the
midst of the many useful services he is daily paying to the publick. Was it ever heard, even in Turkey
or Algiers, that a state-astrologer was banter'd out of his life by an ignorant impostor,
or bawl'd out of the world by a pack of villanous, deep-mouth'd hawkers? Though I print almanacks,
and publish advertisements; though I produce certificates under the ministers and church-wardens
hands I am alive, and attest the same on oath at quarter-sessions, out comes a full and true
relation of the death and interment of John Partridge; Truth is bore down, attestations neglected,
the testimony of sober persons despised, and a man is looked upon by his neighbours as if he had
been seven years dead, and is buried alive in the midst of his friends and acquaintance.

Now can any man of common sense think it consistent with the honour of my profession, and not
much beneath the dignity of a philosopher, to stand bawling before his own door?---- Alive! Alive
ho! The famous Dr. Partridge! No counterfeit, but all alive!---- As if I had the twelve celestial
monsters of the zodiac to shew within, or was forced for a livelihood to turn retailer to
May and Bartholomew Fairs. Therefore, if Her Majesty would but graciously be pleased to think a hardship
of this nature worthy her royal consideration, and the next parliament, in their great wisdom
cast but an eye towards the deplorable case of their old philomath, that annually bestows his
poetical good wishes on them, I am sure there is one Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq; would soon be
truss'd up for his bloody predictions, and putting good subjects in terror of their lives:
And that henceforward to murder a man by way of prophecy, and bury him in a printed letter,
either to a lord or commoner, shall as legally entitle him to the present possession of Tyburn,
as if he robb'd on the highway, or cut your throat in bed.

I shall demonstrate to the judicious, that France and Rome are at
the bottom of this horrid conspiracy against me; and that culprit
aforesaid is a popish emissary, has paid his visits to St. Germains,
and is now in the measures of Lewis XIV. That in attempting my reputation,
there is a general massacre of learning designed in these realms;
and through my sides there is a wound given to all the Protestant
almanack-makers in the universe.

Vivat Regina.

Mr. Partridge hath
been lately pleased to treat me after a very rough manner, in that
which is called, his almanack for the present year: Such usage is
very undecent from one gentleman to another, and does not at all contribute
to the discovery of truth, which ought to be the great end in all
disputes of the learned. I appeal to the learned world, whether in
my last year's predictions I gave him the least provocation for such
unworthy treatment. Philosophers have differed in all ages; but the
discreetest among them have always differed as became philosophers.
Scurrility and passion, in a controversy among scholars, is just so
much of nothing to the purpose, and at best, a tacit confession of
a weak cause: My concern is not so much for my own reputation, as
that of the Republick of Letters, which Mr. Partridge hath endeavoured
to wound through my sides. If men of publick spirit must be superciliously
treated for their ingenious attempts, how will true useful knowledge
be ever advanced? I wish Mr. Partridge knew the thoughts which foreign
universities have conceived of his ungenerous proceedings with me;
but I am too tender of his reputation to publish them to the world.
That spirit of envy and pride, which blasts so many rising genius's
in our nation, is yet unknown among professors abroad: The necessity
of justifying myself will excuse my vanity, when I tell the reader
that I have near a hundred honorary letters from several parts of
Europe (some as far as Muscovy) in praise of my performance. Besides
several others, which, as I have been credibly informed, were open'd
in the post-office and never sent me. 'Tis true the Inquisition in
Portugal was pleased to burn my predictions, and condem the author
and readers of them; but I hope at the same time, it will be consider'd
in how deplorable a state learning lies at present in that kingdom:
And with the profoundest veneration for crown'd heads, I will presume
to add, that it a little concerned His Majesty of Portugal, to interpose
his authority in behalf of a scholar and a gentleman, the subject
of a nation with which he is now in so strict an alliance. But the
other kingdoms and states of Europe have treated me with more candor
and generosity.  It is not every possibility, every  seeming, every faint show or glimmering
appearance, which sufficeth  to ground bad opinion or reproachful discourse concerning our
brother:  the matter should be clear, notorious and palpable, before  we admit a disadvantageous
conceit into our head, a distasteful  resentment into our heart, a harsh word into our mouth
about him.   Men may fancy themselves sagacious and shrewd, persons of deep  judgment and fine
wit they may be taken for, when they can dive into  others' hearts, and sound their intentions;
when through thick mists  or at remote distances they can descry faults in them; when they
collect ill of them by long trains, and subtle fetches of discourse:   but in truth they do
thereby rather betray in themselves small love  of truth, care of justice, or sense of charity,
together with little  wisdom and discretion:  for truth is only seen in a clear light;  justice
requireth strict proof.  Charity "thinketh no evil," and  "believeth all things" for the best;
wisdom is not forward to  pronounce before full evidence.  ("He," saith the wise man, "that
answereth a matter before he heareth it, it is folly and shame unto  him.")  In fine, they
who proceed thus, as it is usual that they  speak falsely, as it is casual that they ever speak
truly, as they  affect to speak ill, true or false; so worthily they are to be  reckoned among
slanderers.

6.  Another like way of slandering is, impetuous or negligent  sputtering out of words, without
minding what truth or consequence  there is in them, how they may touch or hurt our neighbour.
To  avoid this sin, we must not only be free from intending mischief,  but wary of effecting
it; not only careful of not wronging one  distinct person, but of harming any promiscuously;
not only  abstinent from aiming directly, but provident not to hit casually  any person with
obloquy.  For as he that dischargeth shot into a  crowd, or so as not to look about regarding
who may stand in the  way, is no less guilty of doing mischief, and bound to make  satisfaction
to them he woundeth, than if he had aimed at some one  person:  so if we sling our bad words
at random, which may light  unluckily, and defame somebody, we become slanderers unawares,
and  before we think on it.  This practice hath not ever all the malice  of the worst slander,
but it worketh often the effects thereof; and  therefore doth incur its guilt, and its punishment;
especially it  being commonly derived from ill-temper, or from bad habit, which we  are bound
to watch over, to curb, and to correct.  The tongue is a  sharp and perilous weapon, which
we are bound to keep up in the  sheath, or never to draw forth but advisedly, and upon just
occasion; it must ever be wielded with caution and care:  to  brandish it wantonly, to lay
about with it blindly and furiously, to  slash and smite therewith any that happeneth to come
in our way,  doth argue malice or madness.

7.  It is an ordinary way of proceeding to calumniate, for men,  reflecting upon some bad disposition
in themselves (although  resulting from their own particular temper, from their bad  principles,
or from their ill custom), to charge it presently upon  others; presuming others to be like
themselves:  like the wicked  person in the psalm, "Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such
an  one as thyself."  This is to slander mankind first in the gross;  then in retail, as occasion
serveth, to asperse any man; this is the  way of half-witted Machiavellians, and of desperate
reprobates in  wickedness, who having prostituted their consciences to vice, for  their own
defence and solace, would shroud themselves from blame  under the shelter of common pravity
and infirmity; accusing all men  of that whereof they know themselves guilty.  But surely there
can  be no greater iniquity than this, that one man should undergo blame  for the ill conscience
of another.

These seem to be the chief kinds of slander, and most common ways of  practising it.  In which
description, the folly thereof doth, I  suppose, so clearly shine, that no man can look thereon
without  loathing and despising it, as not only a very ugly, but a most  foolish practice.
No man surely can be wise who will suffer himself  to be defiled therewith.  But to render
its folly more apparent, we  shall display it; declaring it to be extremely foolish upon several
accounts.  But the doing of this, in regard to your patience, we  shall forbear at present.

THE FOLLY OF SLANDER.

Part 2.

"He that uttereth slander is a fool."--Prov. x. 18.

I have formerly in this place, discoursing upon this text, explained  the nature of the sin
here condemned, with its several kinds and  ways of practising.

II.  I shall now proceed to declare the folly of it; and to make  good by divers reasons the
assertion of the wise man, that "He who  uttereth slander is a fool."

1.  Slandering is foolish, as sinful and wicked.

All sin is foolish upon many accounts; as proceeding from ignorance,  error, inconsiderateness,
vanity; as implying weak judgment, and  irrational choice; as thwarting the dictates of reason,
and best  rules of wisdom; as producing very mischievous effects to ourselves,  bereaving us
of the chief goods, and exposing us to the worst evils.   What can be more egregiously absurd
than to dissent in our opinion  and discord in our choice from infinite wisdom; to provoke
by our  actions sovereign justice, and immutable severity:  to oppose  almighty power, and
offend immense goodness; to render ourselves  unlike and contrary in our doings, our disposition,
our state, to  absolute perfection and felicity?  What can be more desperately wild  than to
disoblige our best Friend, to forfeit His love and favour,  to render Him our enemy, who is
our Lord and our Judge, upon whose  mere will and disposal all our subsistence, all our welfare
does  absolutely depend?  What greater madness can be conceived than to  deprive our minds
of all true content here, and to separate our  souls from eternal bliss hereafter; to gall
our consciences now with  sore remorse, and to engage ourselves for ever in remediless  miseries?
Such folly doth all sin include:  whence in Scripture  style worthily goodness and wisdom are
terms equivalent; sin and  folly do signify the same thing.

If thence this practice be proved extremely sinful, it will thence  sufficiently be demonstrated
no less foolish.  And that it is  extremely sinful may easily be shown.  Thou sittest and speakest
against thy  brother; thou slanderest thine own mother's son."  It is, indeed,  plainly the
blackest and most hellish sin that can be; that which  giveth the grand fiend his names, and
most expresseth his nature.   He is [Greek] (the slanderer); Satan, the spiteful adversary;
the  old snake or dragon, hissing out lies, and spitting forth venom of  calumnious accusation;
the accuser of the brethren, a murderous,  envious, malicious calumniator; the father of lies;
the grand  defamer of God to man, of man to God, of one man to another.  And  highly wicked
surely must that practice be, whereby we grow  namesakes to him, conspire in proceeding with
him, resemble his  disposition and nature.  It is a complication, a comprisal, a  collection
and sum of all wickedness; opposite to all the principal  virtues (to veracity and sincerity,
to charity and justice),  transgressing all the great commandments, violating immediately and
directly all the duties concerning our neighbour.

To lie simply is a great fault, being a deviation from that good  rule which prescribeth truth
in all our words; rendering us unlike  and disagreeable to God, who is the God of truth (who
loveth truth,  and practiseth it in all His doings, who abominateth all falsehood);  including
a treacherous breach of faith towards mankind; we being  all, in order to the maintenance of
society, by an implicit compact,  obliged by speech to declare our mind, to inform truly, and
not to  impose upon our neighbour; arguing pusillanimous timorousness and  impotency of mind,
a distrust in God's help, and diffidence in all  good means to compass our designs; begetting
deception and error, a  foul and ill-favoured brood:  lying, I say, is upon such accounts a
sinful and blamable thing; and of all lies those certainly are the  worst which proceed from
malice or from vanity, or from both, and  which work mischief, such as slanders are.

Again, to bear any hatred or ill-will, to exercise enmity towards  any man, to design or procure
any mischief to our neighbour, whom  even Jews were commanded to love as themselves, whose
good, by many  laws, and upon divers scores, we are obliged to tender as our own,  is a heinous
fault; and of this apparently the slanderer is most  guilty in the highest degree.  For evidently
true it is which the  wise man affirmeth, "A lying tongue hateth those that are afflicted 
with it;" there is no surer argument of extreme hatred; nothing but  the height of ill-will
can suggest this practice.  The slanderer is  an enemy, as the most fierce and outrageous,
so the most base and  unworthy that can be; he fighteth with the most perilous and most  unlawful
weapon, in the most furious and foul way that can be.  His  weapon is an envenomed arrow, full
of deadly poison, which he  shooteth suddenly, and feareth not:  a weapon which by no force
can  be resisted, by no art declined, whose impression is altogether  inevitable and unsustainable.
It is a most insidious, most  treacherous and cowardly way of fighting; wherein manifestly
the  weakest and basest spirits have extreme advantage, and may easily  prevail against the
bravest and worthiest; for no man of honour or  honesty can in way of resistance or requital
deign to use it, but  must infallibly without repugnance be borne down thereby.  By it the
vile practiser achieveth the greatest mischief that can be.  His  words are, as the psalmist
saith of Doeg, devouring words:  "Thou  lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue:"
and, "A man,"  saith the wise man, "that beareth false witness against his  neighbour is a
maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow;" that is, he is  a complicated instrument of all mischiefs;
he smiteth and bruiseth  like a maul, he cutteth and pierceth like a sword, he thus doth hurt
near at hand; and at a distance he woundeth like a sharp arrow; it  is hard anywhere to evade
him, or to get out of his reach.  "Many,"  saith another wise man, the imitator of Solomon,
"have fallen by the  edge of the sword, but not so many as have fallen by the tongue.   Well
is he that is defended from it, and hath not passed through the  venom thereof; who hath not
drawn the yoke thereof, nor hath been  bound in its bands.  For the yoke thereof is a yoke
of iron, and the  bands thereof are bands of brass.  The death thereof is an evil  death, the
grave were better than it."  Incurable are the wounds  which the slanderer inflicteth, irreparable
the damages which he  causeth, indelible the marks which he leaveth.  "No balsam can heal 
the biting of a sycophant;" no thread can stitch up a good name torn  by calumnious defamation;
no soap is able to cleanse from the stains  aspersed by a foul mouth.  Aliquid adhaerebit;
somewhat always of  suspicion and ill opinion will stick in the minds of those who have  given
ear to slander.  So extremely opposite is this practice unto  the queen of virtues, Charity.
Its property indeed is to "believe  all things," that is, all things for the best, and to the
advantage  of our neighbour; not so much as to suspect any evil of him without  unavoidably
manifest cause; how much more not to devise any  falsehood against him!  It "covereth" all
things, studiously  conniving at real defects, and concealing assured miscarriages:  how  much
more not divulging imaginary or false scandals!  It disposeth  to seek and further any the
least good concerning him:  how much  more will it hinder committing grievous outrage upon
his dearest  good name!

Again, all injustice is abominable; to do any sort of wrong is a  heinous crime; that crime
which of all most immediately tendeth to  the dissolution of society, and disturbance of human
life; which God  therefore doth most loathe, and men have reason especially to  detest.  And
of this the slanderer is most deeply guilty.  "A  witness of Belial scorneth judgment, and
the mouth of the wicked  devoureth iniquity," saith the wise man.  He is indeed, according
to  just estimation, guilty of all kinds whatever of injury, breaking  all the second Table
of Commands respecting our neighbour.  Most  formally and directly he "beareth false witness
against his  neighbour:" he doth "covet his neighbour's goods;" for 'tis  constantly out of
such an irregular desire, for his own presumed  advantage, to dispossess his neighbour of some
good, and transfer it  on himself, that the slanderer uttereth his tale:  he is ever a  thief
and robber of his good name, a deflowerer and defiler of his  reputation, an assassin and murderer
of his honour.  So doth he  violate all the rules of justice, and perpetrateth all sorts of
wrong against his neighbour.

He may, indeed, perhaps conceive it no great matter that he  committeth; because he doth not
act in so boisterous and bloody a  way, but only by words, which are subtle, slim, and transient
things:  upon his neighbour's credit only, which is no substantial  or visible matter.  He
draweth (thinks he), no blood, nor breaketh  any bones, nor impresseth any remarkable scar;
'tis only the soft  air he breaketh with his tongue, 'tis only a slight character that  he
stampeth on the fancy, 'tis only an imaginary stain that he  daubeth his neighbour with; therefore
he supposeth no great wrong  done, and seemeth to himself innocent, or very excusable.  But
these  conceits arise from great inconsiderateness, or mistake:  nor can  they excuse the slanderer
from grievous injustice.  For in dealing  with our neighbour, and meddling with his property,
we are not to  value things according to our fancy, but according to the price set  on them
by the owner; we must not reckon that a trifle, which he  prizeth as a jewel.  Since, then,
all men (especially men of honour  and honesty) do, from a necessary instinct of nature, estimate
their  good name beyond any of their goods--yea, do commonly hold it more  dear and precious
than their very lives--we, by violently or  fraudulently bereaving them of it, do them no less
wrong than if we  should rob or cozen them of their substance; yea, than if we should  maim
their body, or spill their blood, or even stop their breath.   If they as grievously feel it,
and resent it as deeply, as they do  any other outrage, the injury is really as great, to them.
Even the  slanderer's own judgment and conscience might tell him so much; for  they who most
slight another's fame, are usually very tender of  their own, and can with no patience endure
that others should touch  it; which demonstrates the inconsiderateness of their judgment, and
the iniquity of their practice.  It is an injustice not to be  corrected or cured.  Thefts
may be restored, wounds may be cured;  but there is no restitution or cure of a lost good name:
it is  therefore an irreparable injury.

Nor is the thing itself, in true judgment, contemptible; but in  itself really very considerable.
"A good name," saith Solomon  himself (no fool), "is rather to be chosen than great riches;
and  loving favour rather than silver and gold."  In its consequences it  is much more so;
the chief interests of a man, the success of his  affairs, his ability to do good (for himself,
his friends, his  neighbour), his safety, the best comforts and conveniences of his  life,
sometimes his life itself, depending thereon; so that whoever  doth snatch or filch it from
him, doth not only according to his  opinion, and in moral value, but in real effect commonly
rob,  sometimes murder, ever exceedingly wrong his neighbour.  It is often  the sole reward
of a man's virtue and all the fruit of his industry;  so that by depriving him of that, he
is robbed of all his estate,  and left stark naked of all, excepting a good conscience, which
is  beyond the reach of the world, and which no malice or misfortune can  divest him of.  Full
then of iniquity, full of uncharitableness,  full of all wickedness is this practice; and consequently
full it is  of folly.  No man, one would think, of any tolerable sense, should  dare or deign
to incur the guilt of a practice so vile and base, so  indeed diabolical and detestable.  But
further more particularly--

2.   He means by his calumnious stories either to vent some passion  boiling in him, or to
compass some design which he affects, or to  please some humour that he is possessed with:
but is any of these  things worth purchasing at so dear a rate? can there be any valuable 
exchange for our honesty?  Is it not more advisable to suppress our  passion, or to let it
evaporate otherwise, than to discharge it in  so foul a way?  Is it not better to let go a
petty interest, than to  further it by committing so notorious and heinous a sin; to let an
ambitious project sink, than to buoy it up by such base means?  Is  it not wisdom rather to
smother or curb our humour, than by  satisfying it thus to forfeit our innocence?  Can anything
in the  world be so considerable, that for its sake we should defile our  souls by so foul
a practice, making shipwreck of a good conscience,  abandoning honour and honesty, incurring
all the guilt and all the  punishment due to so enormous a crime?  Is it not far more wisdom,
contentedly to see our neighbour to enjoy credit and success, to  flourish and thrive in the
world, than by such base courses to sully  his reputation, to rifle him of his goods, to supplant
or cross him  in his affairs?  We do really, when we think thus to depress him,  and to climb
up to wealth or credit by the ruins of his honour, but  debase ourselves.  Whatever comes of
it, whether he succeeds or is  disappointed therein, assuredly he that useth such courses will
himself be the greatest loser, and deepest sufferer.  'Tis true  which the wise man saith,
"The getting of treasures by a lying  tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek
death."   And, "Woe unto them," saith the prophet, "that draw iniquity with  cords of vanity;"
that is, who by falsehood endeavour to compass  unjust designs.

But it is not, perhaps he will pretend, to assuage a private  passion, or to promote his particular
concernment, that he makes so  bold with his neighbour, or deals so harshly with him; but for
the  sake of orthodox doctrine, for advantage of the true Church, for the  advancement of public
good, he judgeth it expedient to asperse him.   This indeed is the covert of innumerable slanders:
zeal for some  opinion, or some party, beareth out men of sectarian and factious  spirits in
such practices; they may do, they may say anything for  those fine ends.  What is a little
truth, what is any man's  reputation in comparison to the carrying on such brave designs? 
But  (to omit that men do usually prevaricate in these cases; that it is  not commonly for
love of truth, but of themselves; not so much for  the benefit of their sect, but for their
own interest, that they  calumniate) this plea will nowise justify such practice.  For truth
and sincerity, equity and candour, meekness and charity are  inviolably to be observed, not
only towards dissenters in opinion,  but even towards declared enemies of truth itself; we
are to bless  them (that is, to speak well of them, and to wish well to them), not  to curse
them (that is, not to reproach them, or to wish them ill,  much less to belie them).  Truth
also, as it cannot ever need, so  doth it always loathe and scorn the patronage and the succour
of  lies; it is able to support and protect itself by fair means; it  will not be killed upon
a pretence of saving it, or thrive by its  own ruin.  Nor indeed can any party be so much strengthened
and  underpropped, as it will be weakened and undermined by such courses.   No cause can stand
firm upon a bottom so loose and slippery as  falsehood is.  All the good a slanderer can do
is, to disparage what  he would maintain.  In truth, no heresy can be worse than that would
be which should allow to play the devil in any case.  He that can  dispense with himself to
slander a Jew or a Turk, doth in so doing  render himself worse than either of them by profession
is:  for even  they, and even pagans themselves, disallow the practice of  inhumanity and iniquity.
All men by light of nature avow truth to  be honourable, and faith to be indispensably observed.
He doth not  understand what it is to be Christian, or careth not to practise  according thereto,
who can find in his heart in any case, upon any  pretence, to calumniate.  In fine, to prostitute
our conscience, or  sacrifice our honesty, for any cause, to any interest whatever, can  never
be warrantable or wise.  Further--

3.  The slanderer is a fool, because he useth improper means and  preposterous methods of effecting
his purposes.  As there is no  design worth the carrying on by ways of falsehood and iniquity,
so  is there scarce any, no good or lawful one at least, which may not  more surely, more safely,
more cleverly be achieved by means of  truth and justice.  Is not always the straight way more
short than  the oblique and crooked? is not the plain way more easy than the  rough and cragged?
is not the fair way more pleasant and passable  than the foul?  Is it not better to walk in
paths that are open and  allowed, than in those that are shut up and prohibited, than to  clamber
over walls, to break through fences, to trespass upon  enclosures?  Surely yes:  "He that walketh
uprightly, walketh  surely."  Using strict veracity and integrity, candour and equity,  is
the best method of accomplishing good designs.  Our own industry,  good use of the parts and
faculties God hath given us, embracing  fair opportunities, God's blessing and providence,
are sufficient  means to rely upon for procuring, in an honest way, whatever is  convenient
for us.  These are ways approved, and amiable to all men;  they procure the best friends, and
fewest enemies; they afford to  the practises a cheerful courage, and good hope; they meet
with less  disappointment, and have no regret or shame attending them.  He that  hath recourse
to the other base means, and "maketh lies his refuge,"  as he renounceth all just and honest
means, as he disclaimeth all  hope in God's assistance, and forfeiteth all pretence to His
blessing:  so he cannot reasonably expect good success, or be  satisfied in any undertaking.
The supplanting way indeed seems the  most curt and compendious way of bringing about dishonest
or  dishonourable designs:  but as good design is certainly dishonoured  thereby, so is it
apt thence to be defeated; it raises up enemies  and obstacles, yielding advantages to whoever
is disposed to cross  us.  As in trade it is notorious that the best course to thrive is  by
dealing squarely and truly; any fraud or cozenage appearing there  doth overthrow a man's credit,
and drive away custom from him:  so  in all other transactions, as he that dealeth justly and
fairly will  have his affairs proceed roundly, and shall find men ready to comply  with him,
so he that is observed to practise falsehood will be  declined by some, opposed by others,
disliked by all:  no man scarce  willingly will have to do with him; he is commonly forced
to stand  out in business, as one that plays foul play.

4.  Lastly, the slanderer is a very fool, as bringing many great  inconveniences, troubles,
and mischiefs on himself.

First, "A fool's mouth," saith the wise man, "is his destruction,  his lips are the snare of
his soul:" and if any kind of speech is  destructive and dangerous, then is this certainly
most of all; for  by no means can a man inflame so fierce anger, impress so stiff  hatred,
raise so deadly enmity against himself, and consequently so  endanger his safety, ease and
welfare, as by this practice.  Men can  more easily endure, and sooner will forgive, any sort
of abuse than  this; they will rather pardon a robber of their goods, than a  defamer of their
good name.

Secondly, such an one indeed is not only odious to the person  immediately concerned, but generally
to all men that observe his  practice; every man presently will be sensible how easily it may
be  his own case, how liable he may be to be thus abused, in a way  against which there is
no guard or defence.  The slanderer therefore  is apprehended a common enemy, dangerous to
all men; and thence  rendereth all men averse from him, and ready to cross him.

Thirdly, all wise, all noble, all ingenuous and honest persons have  an aversion from this
practice, and cannot entertain it with any  acceptance or complacence.  "A righteous man hateth
lying," saith  the wise man.  It is only ill-natured and ill-nurtured, unworthy and  naughty
people that are willing auditors or encouragers thereof.  All love of truth and  regard to
justice, and sense of humanity, all generosity and  ingenuity, all charity and good-will to
men, must be extinct in  those who can with delight, or indeed with patience, lend an ear or
give any countenance to a slanderer:  and is not he a very fool who  chooseth to displease
the best, only soothing the worst of men?

Fourthly, the slanderer indeed doth banish himself from all  conversation and company, or intruding
into it becomes very  disgustful thereto; for he worthily is not only looked upon as an  enemy
to those whom he slandereth, but to those also upon whom he  obtrudeth his calumnious discourse.
He not only wrongeth the former  by the injury, but he mocketh the latter by the falsehood
of his  stories; implicitly charging his hearers with weakness and  credulity, or with injustice
and pravity. 

House met shortly after twelve; when I say House, I mean the SPEAKER and me. "Dearly beloved
TOBY," said the SPEAKER, "it seems we're to have the place to ourselves." But presently HOWELL
arrived, and GEDGE, terribly afraid that he should miss prayers. "I suppose my opportunities
will not be extended. Stockport doesn't seem to care to have me in the new Parliament, and I'm
not aware of any competition for my hand among other constituencies.

So I mean to make the most of what time is left. I fancy they'll at least miss me at St. Margaret's.
Proudest moment in my life, TOBY, when the other Sunday, I overheard one of the Vergers saying
to another, 'Man and boy I've been in this 'ere church for forty year, but I never heard a
Amen carry so far as Muster GELGE pitches his.' It's something to
be appreciated, TOBY.  Of these passions the manner of his behaviour is a manifest  indication:  for men do seldom
vent their slanderous reports openly  and loudly, to the face or in the ear of those who are
concerned in  them; but do utter them in a low voice, in dark corners, out of  sight and hearing,
where they conceit themselves at present safe  from being called to an account.  "Swords,"
saith the psalmist of  such persons, "are in their lips:  Who (say they) doth hear?"  And,
"Whoso privily slandereth his neighbour, him will I cut off," saith  David again, intimating
the common manner of this practice.  Calumny  is like "the plague, that walketh in darkness."
Hence appositely  are the practisers thereof termed whisperers and backbiters:  their  heart
suffers them not openly to avow, their conscience tells them  they cannot fairly defend their
practice.  Again--

Seventhly, the consequence of this practice is commonly shameful  disgrace, with an obligation
to retract and render satisfaction:   for seldom doth calumny pass long without being detected
and  confuted.  "He that walketh uprightly, walketh surely:  but he that  perverteth his ways
shall be known:" and, "The lip of truth shall be  established for ever; but a lying lip is
but for a moment," saith  the great observer of things.  And when the slander is disclosed,
the slanderer is obliged to excuse (that is, to palliate one lie  with another, if he can do
it), or forced to recant, with much  disgrace and extreme displeasure to himself:  he is also
many times  constrained, with his loss and pain, to repair the mischief he hath  done.

Eighthly, to this in likelihood the concernments of men, and the  powers which guard justice,
will forcibly bring him; and certainly  his conscience will bind him thereto; God will indispensably
exact  it from him.  He can never have any sound quiet in his mind, he can  never expect pardon
from Heaven, without acknowledging his fault,  repairing the wrong he hath done, restoring
that good name of which  he dispossessed his neighbour:  for in this no less than in other
cases conscience cannot be satisfied, remission will not be granted,  except due restitution
be performed; and of all restitutions this  surely is the most difficult, most laborious, and
most troublesome.   'Tis nowise so hard to restore goods stolen or extorted, as to  recover
a good opinion lost, to wipe off aspersions cast on a man's  name, to cure a wounded reputation:
the most earnest and diligent  endeavour can hardly ever effect this, or spread the plaster
so far  as the sore hath reached. I see an express in mighty haste, with joy and wonder in his
looks, arriving by break of day on the 26th of this month, having
travell'd in three days a prodigious journey by land and sea.

In the evening I hear bells and guns, and see the blazing of a thousand bonfires.
  Who will regard his fame, who will be concerned to excuse  his faults,
who so outrageously abuseth the reputation of others?   He suffereth justly, he is paid in
his own coin, will any man think,  who doth hear him reproached.

Tenthly, in fine, the slanderer, if he doth not, by serious and sore  repentance retract his
practice, doth banish himself from heaven and  happiness, doth expose himself to endless miseries
and sorrows.   For, if none that "maketh a lie shall enter into the heavenly city;"  if without
those mansions of joy and bliss "every one" must  eternally abide "that loveth or maketh a
lie;" if [Greek], "to all  liars their portion" is assigned "in the lake which burneth with
fire and brimstone;" then assuredly the capital liar, the slanderer,  who lieth most injuriously
and mischievously, shall be far excluded  from felicity, and thrust down into the depth of
that miserable  place.  If, as St. Paul saith, no "railer," or evil-speaker, "shall  inherit
the kingdom of God," how far thence shall they be removed  who without any truth or justice
do speak ill of and reproach their  neighbour?  If for every [Greek], "idle," or vain, "word"
we must  "render a" strict "account," how much more shall we be severely  reckoned with for
this sort of words, so empty of truth and void of  equity:  words that are not only negatively
vain, or useless, but  positively vain, as false and spoken to bad purpose? Would he spoil it by going
too far, or would he shrink affrighted from the position audaciously assumed? He did just
the right thing, in tone, manner, and matter, affording the House the merriest moments ever enjoyed
on a deathbed.

It seemed so good that it was idle to expect anything better to follow. But something there was.
It was the Division, in which ELCHO, walking up to the Table by side of WILFRID LAWSON, acted
as co-teller whilst the figures were announced that abolished the
Derby Day holiday in the House of Commons.

ELCHO had had his jest, and the Opposition had his estate.

Business done.--Motion for Derby Day negatived by 158 Votes against 144.

Wednesday.--Spent quite cheerful Derby Day in Commons.

I shall only add, that since our faculty of speech (wherein we do  excel all other creatures)
was given us, as in the first place to  praise and glorify our Maker, so in the next to benefit
and help our  neighbour; as an instrument of mutual succour and delectation, of  friendly commerce
and pleasant converse together; for instructing  and advising, comforting and cheering one
another:  it is an  unnatural perverting, and an irrational abuse thereof, to employ it  to
the damage, disgrace, vexation, or wrong in any kind of our  brother.  Better indeed had we
been as brutes without its use, than  we are, if so worse than brutishly we abuse it.

Finally, all these things being considered, we may, I think,  reasonably conclude it most evidently
true that "He which uttereth  slander is a fool."

