The cabal made a great noise to cover this monstrous audacity, and endeavoured to renew the
attack against the Duc de Bourgogne.  We shall see what success attended their efforts.  The
army was at Soissons, near Tournai, in a profound tranquillity, the opium of which had gained
the Duc de Bourgogne when news of the approach of the enemy was brought. M. de Vendome advanced
in that direction, and sent word to the Duke, that he thought he ought to advance on the morrow
with all his army.  The Duke was going to bed when he received the letter; and although it
was too late to repulse the enemy, was much blamed for continuing to undress himself, and putting
off action till the morrow.

To this fault he added another.  He had eaten; it was very early; and it was no longer proper
to march.  It was necessary to wait fresh orders from M. de Vendome. Who never, save to human
pity, yield One step in wilderness or battlefield!"

Meanwhile, with troubled eyes and straining hands, Silent, attentive, thoughtful, Justice stands.
To her alone let the appeal be made.

Heroes, or merely tools of huckstering Trade, Men brave, though fallible, or sordid brutes,
Let all be heard. Since each to each imputes Unmeasured baseness, somewhere the black stain Must
surely rest. The dead speak not, the slain Have not a voice, save
such as that which spoke From ABEL's blood.  Annoyed that the King said nothing to him on the way in which his son had distinguished
himself, he took the opportunity, whilst he was serving the King, to talk of the passage of
the Escaut, and said that his son's regiment had much suffered.  "How, suffered?"  cried the
King; "nothing has happened." Whereupon the Duke related all to him.  The King listened with
the greatest attention, and questioned him, and admitted before everybody that he knew nothing
of all this.  His surprise, and the surprise it occasioned, may be imagined.  It happened that
when the King left table, Chamillart unexpectedly came into his cabinet.  He was soon asked
about the action of the Escaut, and why it had not been reported.  The minister, embarrassed,
said that it was a thing of no consequence.  The king continued to press him, mentioned details,
and talked of the regiment of the Prince of Tarento.  Chamillart then admitted that what happened
at the passage was so disagreeable, and the combat so disagreeable, but so little important,
that Madame de Maintenon, to whom he had reported all, had thought it best not to trouble the
King upon the matter, and it had accordingly been agreed not to trouble him.  Upon this singular
answer the King stopped short in his questions, and said not a word more.

The Escaut being forced, the citadel of Lille on the point of being taken, our army exhausted
with fatigue was at last dispersed, to the scandal of everybody; for it was known that Ghent
was about to be besieged.  The Princes received orders to return to Court, but they insisted
on the propriety of remaining with the army.  M. de Vendome, who began to fear the effect of
his rashness and insolence, tried to obtain permission to pass the winter with the army on
the frontier.

He was not listened to.  The Princes received orders most positively to return to Court, and
accordingly set out.

The Duchesse de Bourgogne was very anxious about the way in which the Duke was to be received,
and eager to talk to him and explain how matters stood, before he saw the King or anybody else.
I sent a message to him that he ought to contrive to arrive after midnight, in order to pass
two or three hours with the Duchess, and perhaps see Madame de Maintenon early in the morning.
My message was not received; at any rate not followed.  The Duc de Bourgogne arrived on the
11th of December, a little after seven o'clock in the evening, just as Monseigneur had gone
to the play, whither the Duchess had not gone, in order to wait for her husband. I know not
why he alighted in the Cour des Princes, instead of the Great Court.  I was put then in the
apartments of the Comtesse de Roncy, from which I could see all that passed.  I came down,
and saw the Prince ascending the steps between the Ducs de Beauvilliers and De la Rocheguyon,
who happened to be there.  He looked quite satisfied, was gay, and laughing, and spoke right
and left.  I bowed to him.  He did me the honour to embrace me in a way that showed me he knew
better what was going on than how to maintain his dignity.  He then talked only to me, and
whispered that he knew what I had said.  A troop of courtiers met him.  In their midst he passed
the Great Hall of the Guards, and instead of going to Madame de Maintenon's by the private
door, though the nearest way, went to the great public entrance.  There was no one there but
the King and Madame de Maintenon, with Pontchartrain; for I do not count the Duchesse de Bourgogne.
Pontchartrain noted well what passed at the interview, and related it all to me that very evening.

As soon as in Madame de Maintenon's apartment was heard the rumour which usually precedes such
an arrival, the King became sufficiently embarrassed to change countenance several times. 
The Duchesse de Bourgogne appeared somewhat tremulous, and fluttered about the room to hide
her trouble, pretending not to know exactly by which door the Prince would arrive.  Madame
de Maintenon was thoughtful.  Suddenly all the doors flew open: the young Prince advanced towards
the King, who, master of himself, more than any one ever was, lost at once all embarrassment,
took two or three steps towards his grandson, embraced him with some demonstration of tenderness,
spoke of his voyage, and then pointing to the Princess, said, with a smiling countenance: "Do
you say nothing to her?" The Prince turned a moment towards her, and answered respectfully,
as if he dared not turn away from the King, and did not move.  He then saluted Madame de Maintenon,
who received him well.  Talk of travel, beds, roads, and so forth, lasted, all standing, some
half-quarter of an hour; then the King said it would not be fair to deprive him any longer
of the pleasure of being alone with Madame la Duchesse de Bourgogne, and that they would have
time enough to see each other.  The Prince made a bow to the King, another to Madame de Maintenon,
passed before the few ladies of the palace who had taken courage to put their heads into the
room, entered the neighbouring cabinet, where he embraced the Duchess, saluted the ladies who
were there, that is, kissed them; remained a few moments, and then went into his apartment,
where he shut himself up with the Duchesse de Bourgogne.

Their tete-a-tete lasted two hours and more: just towards the end, Madame d'O was let in; soon
after the Marechal d'Estrees entered, and soon after that the Duchesse de Bourgogne came out
with them, and returned into the great cabinet of Madame de Maintenon.  Monseigneur came there
as usual, on returning from the comedy.  Madame la Duchesse de Bourgogne, troubled that the
Duke did not hurry himself to come and salute his father, went to fetch him, and came back
saying that he was putting on his powder; but observing that Monseigneur was little satisfied
with this want of eagerness, sent again to hurry him.  Just then the Marechale d'Estrees, hair-brained
and light, and free to say just what came into her head, began to attack Monseigneur for waiting
so tranquilly for his son, instead of going himself to embrace him.  This random expression
did not succeed.  Monseigneur replied stiffly that it was not for him to seek the Duc de Bourgogne;
but the duty of the Duc de Bourgogne to seek him.  He came at last.  The reception was pretty
good, but did not by any means equal that of the King.  Almost immediately the King rang, and
everybody went to the supper-room.

During the supper, M. le Duc de Berry arrived, and came to salute the King at table.  To greet
him all hearts opened.  The King embraced him very tenderly.  Monseigneur only looked at him
tenderly, not daring to embrace his (youngest) son in presence of the King.  All present courted
him.  He remained standing near the King all the rest of the supper, and there was no talk
save of post-horses, of roads, and such like trifles. The King spoke sufficiently at table
to Monseigneur le Duc de Bourgogne; but to the Duc de Berry, he assumed a very different air.
Afterwards, there was a supper for the Duc de Berry in the apartments of the Duchesse de Bourgogne;
but the conjugal impatience of the Duc de Bourgogne cut it rather too short. 

At half-past nine the great doors opened, and the procession began, in slow and stately moving
fashion, to enter. One saw a throng of ecclesiastics in robes and ermine; the white plumes of
the Guard Noble; the pages and chamberlains in scarlet; other pages, or what not, in black
short-clothes, short swords, gold chains, cloak hanging from the shoulder, and stiff white ruffs;
thirty-six cardinals in violet robes, with high miter-shaped white silk hats, that looked not
unlike the pasteboard "trainer-caps" that boys wear when they play soldier; crucifixes, and a
blazoned banner here and there; and, at last, the pope, in his red chair, borne on the shoulders of
red lackeys, heaving along in a sea-sicky motion, clad in scarlet and gold, with a silver miter
on his head, feebly making the papal benediction with two upraised fingers, and moving his lips
in blessing. As the pope came in, a supplementary choir of men and soprano hybrids, stationed
near the door, set up a high, welcoming song, or chant, which echoed rather finely through
the building. All the music of the day is vocal.

The procession having reached its destination, and disappeared behind the altar of the dome, the
pope dismounted, and took his seat on his throne. The blessing of the palms began, the cardinals
first approaching, and afterwards the members of the diplomatic corps,
the archbishops and bishops, the heads of the religious orders, and
such private persons as have had permission to do so.

I had previously seen the palms carried in by servants in great baskets. It is, perhaps, not necessary
to say that they are not the poetical green waving palms, but stiff sort of wands, woven out
of dry, yellow, split palm-leaves, sometimes four or five feet in length, braided into the
semblance of a crown on top,--a kind of rough basket-work. The palms having been blessed, a procession
was again formed down the nave and out the door, all in it "carrying palms in their hands," the
yellow color of which added a new element of picturesqueness to the splendid pageant. The pope
was carried as before, and bore in his hand a short braided palm, with gold woven in, flowers
added, and the monogram "I. H. S." worked in the top. It is the pope's custom to give this away
when the ceremony is over. Last year he presented it to an American lady, whose devotion attracted
him; this year I saw it go away in a gilded coach in the hands of an ecclesiastic. The procession
disappeared through the great portal into the vestibule, and the door closed. In a moment somebody
knocked three times on the door: it opened, and the procession returned, and moved again to the
rear of the altar, the singers marching with it and chanting.

The cardinals then changed their violet for scarlet robes; and high mass, for an hour, was celebrated
by a cardinal priest: and I was told that it was the pope's voice that we heard, high and clear,
singing the passion. The choir made the responses, and performed at intervals. The singing
was not without a certain power; indeed, it was marvelous how some of the voices really filled the
vast spaces of the edifice, and the choruses rolled in solemn waves
of sound through the arches.

The singing, with the male sopranos, is not to my taste; but it cannot be denied that it had
a wild and strange effect.
  He went to pay his respects to M. de Bourgogne, who received
him well in spite of all that had passed.  Then Vendome went to wait on Monseigneur at the
Princesse de Coriti's: here he thought himself in his stronghold.  He was received excellently,
and the conversation turned on nothings.  He wished to take advantage of this, and proposed
a visit to Anet.  His surprise and that of those present were great at the uncertain reply
of Monseigneur, who caused it to be understood, and rather stiffly too, that he would not go.
Vendome appeared embarrassed, and abridged his visit.  I met him at the end of the gallery
of the new wing, as I was coming from M. de Beauvilliers, turning towards the steps in the
middle of the gallery.  He was alone, without torches or valets, with Alberoni, followed by
a man I did not know.  I saw him by the light of my torches; we saluted each other politely,
though we had not much acquaintance one with the other. He seemed chagrined, and was going
to M. du Maine, his counsel and principal support.

Next day he passed an hour with the King at Madame de Maintenon's.  He remained eight or ten
days at Versailles or at Meudon, and never went to the Duchesse de Bourgogne's.  This was nothing
new for him.  The mixture of grandeur and irregularity which he had long affected seemed to
him to have freed him from the most indispensable duties.  His Abbe Alberoni showed himself
at the King's mass in the character of a courtier with unparalleled effrontery.  At last they
went to Anet.  Even before he went he perceived some diminution in his position, since he lowered
himself so far as to invite people to come and see him, he, who in former years made it a favour
to receive the most distinguished persons.  He soon perceived the falling-off in the number
of his visitors.  Some excused themselves from going; others promised to go and did not.  Every
one made a difficulty about a journey of fifteen leagues, which, the year before, was considered
as easy and as necessary as that of Marly.  Vendome remained at Anet until the first voyage
to Marly, when he came; and he always came to Marly and Meudon, never to Versailles, until
the change of which I shall soon have occasion to speak.

The Marechal de Boufflers returned to Court from his first but unsuccessful defence of Lille,
and was received in a triumphant manner, and overwhelmed with honours and rewards.  This contrast
with Vendome was remarkable: the one raised by force of trickery, heaping up mountains like
the giants, leaning on vice, lies, audacity, on a cabal inimical to the state and its heirs,
a factitious hero, made such by will in despite of truth;--the other, without cabal, with no
support but virtue and modesty, was inundated with favours, and the applause of enemies was
followed by the acclamations of the public, so that the nature of even courtiers changed, and
they were happy in the recompenses showered upon him!

Some days after the return of the Duc de Bourgogne Cheverny had an interview with him, on leaving
which he told me what I cannot refrain from relating here, though it is necessarily with confusion
that I write it.  He said that, speaking freely with him on what had been circulated during
the campaign, the Prince observed that he knew how and with what vivacity I had expressed myself,
and that he was informed of the manner in which the Prince de Conti had given his opinion,
and added that with the approval of two such men, that of others might be dispensed with. Cheverny,
a very truthful man, came full of this to tell it to me at once.  I was filled with confusion
at being placed beside a man as superior to me in knowledge of war as he was in rank and birth;
but I felt with gratitude how well M. de Beauvilliers had kept his word and spoken in my favour.

The last evening of this year (1708) was very remarkable, because there had not yet been an
example of any such thing.  The King having retired after supper to his cabinet with his family,
as usual, Chamillart came without being sent for.  He whispered in the King's ear that he had
a long despatch from the Marechal de Boufflers.  Immediately the King said good-night to Monseigneur
and the Princesses, who went out with every one else; and the King actually worked for an hour
with his minister before going to bed, so excited was he by the great project for retaking Lille!

Since the fall of Lille, in fact, Chamillart, impressed with the importance of the place being
in our possession, had laid out a plan by which he were to lay siege to it and recapture it.
One part of his plan was, that the King should conduct the siege in person.  Another was that,
as money was so difficult to obtain, the ladies of the Court should not accompany the King,
as their presence caused a large increase of expense for carriages, servants, and so on.  He
confided his project to the King, under a strict promise that it would be kept secret from
Madame de Maintenon. Who offered him the wig?

Casca. Why, the Sunderland Municipality, of course--stoopid!

Brutus. Tell us the manner of it, gentle CASCA.
Casca. I can as well be hanged, as tell you. It was mere foolery,
I did not mark it. I saw the people offer a cocked hat to him--yet
'twas not to him neither, because he's only an Alderman, 'twas to
the Mayor and Town Clerk--and, as I told you, he put the things by
thrice; yet, to my thinking, had he been Mayor, he would fain have
had them.  He followed his own counsels then, and made the King
acquainted with his project.

The King was at once delighted with it.  He entered into the details submitted to him by Chamillart
with the liveliest interest, and promised to carry out all that was proposed.  He sent for
Boufflers, who had returned from Lille, and having, as I have said, recompensed him for his
brave defence of that place with a peerage and other marks of favour, despatched him privately
into Flanders to make preparations for the siege.  The abandonment of Ghent by our troop, after
a short and miserable defence, made him more than ever anxious to carry out this scheme.

But the King had been so unused to keep a secret from Madame de Maintenon, that he felt himself
constrained in attempting to do so now. He confided to her, therefore, the admirable plan of
Chamillart.  She had the address to hide her surprise, and the strength to dissimulate perfectly
her vexation; she praised the project; she appeared charmed with it; she entered into the details;
she spoke of them to Chamillart; admired his zeal, his labour, his diligence, and, above all,
his ability, in having conceived and rendered possible so fine and grand a project.

