"We have studied to discharge our duty faithfully and loyally on all occasions, sir," answered
Lady Margaret, pleased with the compliment, "both to our monarchs and to their followers, particularly
to their faithful soldiers. It is not long ago, and it probably has not escaped the recollection
of his sacret majesty, now on the throne, since he himself honoured my poor house with his
presence and breakfasted in a room in this castle, Mr Sergeant, which my waiting-gentlewoman
shall show you; we still call it the King's room."

Bothwell had by this time dismounted his party, and committed the horses to the charge of one
file, and the prisoner to that of another; so that he himself was at liberty to continue the
conversation which the lady had so condescendingly opened.

"Since the King, my master, had the honour to experience your hospitality, I cannot wonder
that it is extended to those that serve him, and whose principal merit is doing it with fidelity.
And yet I have a nearer relation to his majesty than this coarse red coat would seem to indicate."

"Indeed, sir? Probably," said Lady Margaret, "you have belonged to his household?"

"Not exactly, madam, to his household, but rather to his house; a connexion through which I
may claim kindred with most of the best families in Scotland, not, I believe, exclusive of
that of Tillietudlem."

"Sir?" said the old lady, drawing herself up with dignity at hearing what she conceived an
impertinent jest, "I do not understand you."

"It's but a foolish subject for one in my situation to talk of, madam," answered the trooper;
"but you must have heard of the history and misfortunes of my grandfather Francis Stewart,
to whom James I., his cousin-german, gave the title of Bothwell, as my comrades give me the
nickname. It was not in the long run more advantageous to him than it is to me."

"Indeed?" said Lady Margaret, with much sympathy and surprise; "I have indeed always understood
that the grandson of the last Earl was in necessitous circumstances, but I should never have
expected to see him so low in the service. With such connexions, what ill fortune could have
reduced you"--

"Nothing much out of the ordinary course, I believe, madam," said Bothwell, interrupting and
anticipating the question. "I have had my moments of good luck like my neighbours--have drunk
my bottle with Rochester, thrown a merry main with Buckingham, and fought at Tangiers side
by side with Sheffield. But my luck never lasted; I could not make useful friends out of my
jolly companions--Perhaps I was not sufficiently aware," he continued, with some bitterness,
"how much the descendant of the Scottish Stewarts was honoured by being admitted into the convivialities
of Wilmot and Villiers."

"But your Scottish friends, Mr Stewart, your relations here, so numerous and so powerful?"

"Why, ay, my lady," replied the sergeant, "I believe some of them might have made me their
gamekeeper, for I am a tolerable shot--some of them would have entertained me as their bravo,
for I can use my sword well--and here and there was one, who, when better company was not to
be had, would have made me his companion, since I can drink my three bottles of wine.--But
I don't know how it is--between service and service among my kinsmen, I prefer that of my cousin
Charles as the most creditable of them all, although the pay is but poor, and the livery far
from splendid."

"It is a shame, it is a burning scandal!" said Lady Margaret. "Why do you not apply to his
most sacred majesty? he cannot but be surprised to hear that a scion of his august family"--

"I beg your pardon, madam," interrupted the sergeant, "I am but a blunt soldier, and I trust
you will excuse me when I say, his most sacred majesty is more busy in grafting scions of his
own, than with nourishing those which were planted by his grandfather's grandfather."

"Well, Mr Stewart," said Lady Margaret, "one thing you must promise me--remain at Tillietudlem
to-night; to-morrow I expect your commanding-officer, the gallant Claverhouse, to whom king
and country are so much obliged for his exertions against those who would turn the world upside
down. I will speak to him on the subject of your speedy promotion; and I am certain he feels
too much, both what is due to the blood which is in your veins, and to the request of a lady
so highly distinguished as myself by his most sacred majesty, not to make better provision
for you than you have yet received."

"I am much obliged to your ladyship, and I certainly will remain her with my prisoner, since
you request it, especially as it will be the earliest way of presenting him to Colonel Grahame,
and obtaining his ultimate orders about the young spark."

"Who is your prisoner, pray you?" said Lady Margaret. 

As a citizen he was distinguished for activity, public spirit and true patriotism. The many marks
of attention and respect which he received from his fellow-citizens
evinced the high estimation in which he was held by the community.

In 1811 he was elected to a seat in the Congress of the United States, a station which he filled
for four years with honor to himself, with satisfaction to his constituents, and with advantage
to his country.

While the cause of Foreign Missions received the largest share of his Christian sympathies and
the largest amount of his charitable donations, yet he was deeply interested in all the benevolent
operations of the day. His sound judgment was sought in the management
of various public institutions.

In 1826 he was elected a member of the Board of Visitors of the Theological Seminary at Andover,
and occupied that station until his death. He was for several years a Trustee of Dartmouth;
also of Amherst.

Dr. George Cheyne Shattuck was born in Templeton, Mass., in the year 1783, in the sixth generation
from William Shattuck, who was born in England in the year 1621, and died in Watertown, Mass.,
in the year 1672, Dr. Benjamin Shattuck graduated at Harvard College
in 1765, and having studied medicine, settled in Templeton.

His youngest son inherited thirteen hundred dollars, and this sufficed for his support, fitting
for college, and college and Medical education, commenced at Hanover
and continued in Philadelphia and Boston, with such addition as he
was able to make by school-keeping.

There were no public conveyances when he went from Templeton to Hanover, and he bought a horse
on which he rode to Hanover and then sold it, taking the pay in board. He received four degrees
from his Alma Mater; the first in the year 1803 and the last, of
Doctor of Laws, in 1853.

He settled in Boston in the year 1807, and for the space of forty-seven years devoted himself
to the practice of his profession. He secured the esteem, respect
and affection of his patients, and gathered a handsome estate.

He gave liberally to his Alma Mater for an Observatory, for books, and for portraits of distinguished
alumni. He founded a professorship in the Medical Department of Harvard University and endowed
scholarships in the Academical Department. He gave liberally to various charities during his
lifetime, as well as to public institutions, and the poor and needy
never appealed to him in vain.

He died in Boston in the year 1854, in the profession of the faith in which he had been educated
both at home and at college.

George H. Bissell was born at Hanover, N. H. He is descended from a family of Norman-French
origin, which came from Somersetshire, England. His mother came of Belgic and Holland descent.
One of his ancestors was the first settler at Windsor, Ct., in 1628.
The late Gov. Clark Bissell, of Connecticut, and Gov. William H. Bissell,
of Illinois, were relatives. He ran down to the
cellar at the risk of breaking his neck, to ransack some private catacomb, known, as he boasted,
only to himself, and which never either had, or should, during his superintendence, renden
forth a bottle of its contents to any one but a real king's friend.

"When the Duke dined here," said the butler, seating himself at a distance from the table,
being somewhat overawed by Bothwell's genealogy, but yet hitching his seat half a yard nearer
at every clause of his speech, "my leddy was importunate to have a bottle of that Burgundy,"--(here
he advanced his seat a little,)--"but I dinna ken how it was, Mr Stewart, I misdoubted him.
I jaloused him, sir, no to be the friend to government he pretends: the family are not to lippen
to. That auld Duke James lost his heart before he lost his head; and the Worcester man was
but wersh parritch, neither gude to fry, boil, nor sup cauld." (With this witty observation,
he completed his first parallel, and commenced a zigzag after the manner of an experienced
engineer, in order to continue his approaches to the table.) "Sae, sir, the faster my leddy
cried 'Burgundy to his Grace--the auld Burgundy--the choice Burgundy--the Burgundy that came
ower in the thirty-nine'--the mair did I say to mysell, Deil a drap gangs down his hause unless
I was mair sensible o' his principles; sack and claret may serve him. Na, na, gentlemen, as
lang as I hae the trust o'butler in this house o'Tillietudlem, I'll tak it upon me to see that
nae disloyal or doubtfu' person is the better o' our binns. But when I can find a true friend
to the king and his cause, and a moderate episcopacy; when I find a man, as I say, that will
stand by church and crown as I did mysell in my master's life, and all through Montrose's time,
I think there's naething in the cellar ower gude to be spared on him."

By this time he had completed a lodgment in the body of the place, or, in other words, advanced
his seat close to the table.

"And now, Mr Francis Stewart of Bothwell, I have the honour to drink your gude health, and
a commission t'ye, and much luck may ye have in raking this country clear o'whigs and roundheads,
fanatics and Covenanters."

Bothwell, who, it may well be believed, had long ceased to be very
scrupulous in point of society, which he regulated more by his
convenience and station in life than his ancestry, readily answered the
butler's pledge, acknowledging, at the same time, the excellence of the
wine; and Mr Gudyill, thus adopted a regular member of the company,
continued to furnish them with the means of mirth until an early hour in
the next morning.
                                                  Prior.

While Lady Margaret held, with the high-descended sergeant of dragoons, the conference which
we have detailed in the preceding pages, her grand-daughter, partaking in a less degree her
ladyship's enthusiasm for all who were sprung of the blood-royal, did not honour Sergeant Bothwell
with more attention than a single glance, which showed her a tall powerful person, and a set
of hardy weather-beaten features, to which pride and dissipation had given an air where discontent
mingled with the reckless gaiety of desperation. The other soldiers offered still less to detach
her consideration; but from the prisoner, muffled and disguised as he was, she found it impossible
to withdraw her eyes. Yet she blamed herself for indulging a curiosity which seemed obviously
to give pain to him who was its object.

"I wish," she said to Jenny Dennison, who was the immediate attendant on her person, "I wish
we knew who that poor fellow is."

"I was just thinking sae mysell, Miss Edith," said the waiting woman, "but it canna be Cuddie
Headrigg, because he's taller and no sae stout."

"Yet," continued Miss Bellenden, "it may be some poor neigbour, for whom we might have cause
to interest ourselves."

"I can sune learn wha he is," said the enterprising Jenny, "if the sodgers were anes settled
and at leisure, for I ken ane o' them very weel--the best-looking and the youngest o' them."

"I think you know all the idle young fellows about the country," answered her mistress.

"Na, Miss Edith, I am no sae free o' my acquaintance as that," answered the fille-de-chambre.
"To be sure, folk canna help kenning the folk by head-mark that they see aye glowring and looking
at them at kirk and market; but I ken few lads to speak to unless it be them o' the family,
and the three Steinsons, and Tam Rand, and the young miller, and the five Howisons in Nethersheils,
and lang Tam Gilry, and"--

"Pray cut short a list of exceptions which threatens to be a long one, and tell me how you
come to know this young soldier," said Miss Bellenden.

"Lord, Miss Edith, it's Tam Halliday, Trooper Tam, as they ca' him, that was wounded by the
hill-folk at the conventicle at Outer-side Muir, and lay here while he was under cure. I can
ask him ony thing, and Tam will no refuse to answer me, I'll be caution for him."

"Try, then," said Miss Edith, "if you can find an opportunity to ask him the name of his prisoner,
and come to my room and tell me what he says."

Jenny Dennison proceeded on her errand, but soon returned with such a face of surprise and
dismay as evinced a deep interest in the fate of the prisoner.

"What is the matter?" said Edith, anxiously; "does it prove to be Cuddie, after all, poor fellow?"

"Cuddie, Miss Edith? Na! na! it's nae Cuddie," blubbered out the faithful fille-de-chambre,
sensible of the pain which her news were about to inflict on her young mistress. "O dear, Miss
Edith, it's young Milnwood himsell!"

"Young Milnwood!" exclaimed Edith, aghast in her turn; "it is impossible--totally impossible!--His
uncle attends the clergyman indulged by law, and has no connexion whatever with the refractory
people; and he himself has never interfered in this unhappy dissension; he must be totally
innocent, unless he has been standing up for some invaded right."

"O, my dear Miss Edith," said her attendant, "these are not days to ask what's right or what's
wrang; if he were as innocent as the new-born infant, they would find some way of making him
guilty, if they liked; but Tam Halliday says it will touch his life, for he has been resetting
ane o' the Fife gentlemen that killed that auld carle of an Archbishop."

"His life!" exclaimed Edith, starting hastily up, and speaking with a hurried and tremulous
accent,--"they cannot--they shall not--I will speak for him--they shall not hurt him!"

"O, my dear young leddy, think on your grandmother; think on the danger and the difficulty,"
added Jenny; "for he's kept under close confinement till Claverhouse comes up in the morning,
and if he doesna gie him full satisfaction, Tam Halliday says there will be brief wark wi'
him--Kneel down--mak ready--present--fire--just as they did wi' auld deaf John Macbriar, that
never understood a single question they pat till him, and sae lost his life for lack o' hearing."

"Jenny," said the young lady, "if he should die, I will die with him; there is no time to talk
of danger or difficulty--I will put on a plaid, and slip down with you to the place where they
have kept him--I will throw myself at the feet of the sentinel, and entreat him, as he has
a soul to be saved"--

"Eh, guide us!" interrupted the maid, "our young leddy at the feet o' Trooper Tam, and speaking
to him about his soul, when the puir chield hardly kens whether he has ane or no, unless that
he whiles swears by it--that will never do; but what maun be maun be, and I'll never desert
a true-love cause--And sae, if ye maun see young Milnwood, though I ken nae gude it will do,
but to make baith your hearts the sairer, I'll e'en tak the risk o't, and try to manage Tam
Halliday; but ye maun let me hae my ain gate and no speak ae word--he's keeping guard o'er
Milnwood in the easter round of the tower."

"Go, go, fetch me a plaid," said Edith. "Let me but see him, and I will find some remedy for
his danger--Haste ye, Jenny, as ever ye hope to have good at my hands."

Jenny hastened, and soon returned with a plaid, in which Edith muffled herself so as completely
to screen her face, and in part to disguise her person. This was a mode of arranging the plaid
very common among the ladies of that century, and the earlier part of the succeeding one; so
much so, indeed, that the venerable sages of the Kirk, conceiving that the mode gave tempting
facilities for intrigue, directed more than one act of Assembly against this use of the mantle.
But fashion, as usual, proved too strong for authority, and while plaids continued to be worn,
women of all ranks occasionally employed them as a sort of muffler or veil. [Note: Concealment
of an individual, while in public or promiscuous society, was then very common. In England,
where no plaids were worn, the ladies used vizard masks for the same purpose, and the gallants
drew the skirts of their cloaks over the right shoulder, so as to cover part of the face. This
is repeatedly alluded to in Pepys's Diary.] Her face and figure thus concealed, Edith, holding
by her attendant's arm, hastened with trembling steps to the place of Morton's confinement.

This was a small study or closet, in one of the turrets, opening upon a gallery in which the
sentinel was pacing to and fro; for Sergeant Bothwell, scrupulous in observing his word, and
perhaps touched with some compassion for the prisoner's youth and genteel demeanour, had waved
the indignity of putting his guard into the same apartment with him. Halliday, therefore, with
his carabine on his arm, walked up and down the gallery, occasionally solacing himself with
a draught of ale, a huge flagon of which stood upoon the table at one end of the apartment,
and at other times humming the lively Scottish air,

"Between Saint Johnstone and Bonny Dundee, I'll gar ye be fain to follow me."

Jenny Dennison cautioned her mistress once more to let her take her own way.

"I can manage the trooper weel eneugh," she said, "for as rough as he is--I ken their nature
weel; but ye maunna say a single word."

She accordingly opened the door of the gallery just as the sentinel had turned his back from
it, and taking up the tune which he hummed, she sung in a coquettish tone of rustic raillery,

"If I were to follow a poor sodger lad, My friends wad be angry, my minnie be mad; A laird,
or a lord, they were fitter for me, Sae I'll never be fain to follow thee."--

"A fair challenge, by Jove," cried the sentinel, turning round, "and from two at once; but
it's not easy to bang the soldier with his bandoleers;" then taking up the song where the damsel
had stopt,

"To follow me ye weel may be glad, A share of my supper, a share of my bed, To the sound of
the drum to range fearless and free, I'll gar ye be fain to follow me."--

"Come, my pretty lass, and kiss me for my song."

"I should not have thought of that, Mr Halliday," answered Jenny, with a look and tone expressing
just the necessary degree of contempt at the proposal, "and, I'se assure ye, ye'll hae but
little o' my company unless ye show gentler havings--It wasna to hear that sort o'nonsense
that brought me here wi' my friend, and ye should think shame o' yoursell, 'at should ye."

"Umph! and what sort of nonsense did bring you here then, Mrs Dennison?"

"My kinswoman has some particular business with your prisoner, young Mr Harry Morton, and I
am come wi' her to speak till him."

"The devil you are!" answered the sentinel; "and pray, Mrs Dennison, how do your kinswoman
and you propose to get in? You are rather too plump to whisk through a keyhole, and opening
the door is a thing not to be spoke of."

"It's no a thing to be spoken o', but a thing to be dune," replied the persevering damsel.

"We'll see about that, my bonny Jenny;" and the soldier resumed his march, humming, as he walked
to and fro along the gallery,

"Keek into the draw-well, Janet, Janet, Then ye'll see your bonny sell, My joe Janet."

"So ye're no thinking to let us in, Mr Halliday? Weel, weel; gude e'en to you--ye hae seen
the last o' me, and o' this bonny die too," said Jenny, holding between her finger and thumb
a splendid silver dollar.

"Give him gold, give him gold," whispered the agitated young lady.

"Silver's e'en ower gude for the like o' him," replied Jenny, "that disna care for the blink
o' a bonny lassie's ee--and what's waur, he wad think there was something mair in't than a
kinswoman o' mine. My certy! siller's no sae plenty wi' us, let alane gowd." Having addressed
this advice aside to her mistress, she raised her voice, and said, "My cousin winna stay ony
langer, Mr Halliday; sae, if ye please, gude e'en t'ye."

"Halt a bit, halt a bit," said the trooper; "rein up and parley, Jenny. If I let your kinswoman
in to speak to my prisoner, you must stay here and keep me company till she come out again,
and then we'll all be well pleased you know."

"The fiend be in my feet then," said Jenny; "d'ye think my kinswoman and me are gaun to lose
our gude name wi' cracking clavers wi' the like o' you or your prisoner either, without somebody
by to see fair play? Hegh, hegh, sirs, to see sic a difference between folk's promises and
performance! Ye were aye willing to slight puir Cuddie; but an I had asked him to oblige me
in a thing, though it had been to cost his hanging, he wadna hae stude twice about it."

"D--n Cuddie!" retorted the dragoon, "he'll be hanged in good earnest, I hope. I saw him today
at Milnwood with his old puritanical b--of a mother, and if I had thought I was to have had
him cast in my dish, I would have brought him up at my horse's tail--we had law enough to bear
us out."

"Very weel, very weel--See if Cuddie winna hae a lang shot at you ane o' thae days, if ye gar
him tak the muir wi' sae mony honest folk. There should also be a small tube or hole covered with a
weighted valve to prevent the danger of bursting the digester.

Where the powers of digestion are weakened, broths made by boiling animal and vegetable substances
in water afford a nutriment; though I suppose not so great as the
flesh and vegetables would afford, if taken in their solid form, and
mixed with saliva in the act of mastication.

The aliment thus prepared should be boiled but a short time, nor
should be suffered to continue in our common kitchen-utensils afterwards,
as they are lined with a mixture of half lead and half tin, and are
therefore unwholesome, though the copper is completely covered.

And those soups, which have any acid or wine boiled in them, unless
they be made in silver, or in china, or in those pot-vessels, which
are not glazed by the addition of lead, are truly poisonous; as the
acid, as lemon-juice or vinegar, when made hot, erodes or dissolves
the lead and tin lining of the copper-vessels, and the leaden glaze
of the porcelain ones.

Hence, where silver cannot be had, iron vessels are preferable to
tinned copper ones; or those made of tinned iron-plates in the common
tin-shops, which are said to be covered with pure or block tin.

6. Another circumstance, which facilitates the nourishment of mankind, is the mechanic art of
grinding farinaceous seeds into powder between mill-stones; which may be called the artificial
teeth of society. It is probable, that some soft kinds of wood, especially when they have undergone
a kind of fermentation, and become of looser texture, might be thus
used as food in times of famine.

Nor is it improbable, that hay, which has been kept in stacks, so as to undergo the saccharine
process, may be so managed by grinding and by fermentation with yeast like bread, as to serve
in part for the sustenance of mankind in times of great scarcity. Dr. Priestley gave to a cow
for some time a strong infusion of hay in large quantity for her drink, and found that she produced
during this treatment above double the quantity of milk. Hence if bread cannot be made from
ground hay, there is great reason to suspect, that a nutritive beverage
may be thus prepared either in its saccharine state, or fermented
into a kind of beer.

In times of great scarcity there are other vegetables, which though
not in common use, would most probably afford wholesome nourishment,
either by boiling them, or drying and grinding them, or by both those
processes in succession.

 All the plans of aid, relief,
or comfort, which she had proposed to lay before her lover, seemed at once to have vanished
from her recollection, and left only a painful chaos of ideas, with which was mingled a fear
that she had degraded herself in the eyes of Morton by a step which might appear precipitate
and unfeminine. She hung motionless and almost powerless upon the arm of her attendant, who
in vain endeavoured to reassure and inspire her with courage, by whispering, "We are in now,
madam, and we maun mak the best o' our time; for, doubtless, the corporal or the sergeant will
gang the rounds, and it wad be a pity to hae the poor lad Halliday punished for his civility."

Morton, in the meantime, was timidly advancing, suspecting the truth; for what other female
in the house, excepting Edith herself, was likely to take an interest in his misfortunes? and
yet afraid, owing to the doubtful twilight and the muffled dress, of making some mistake which
might be prejudicial to the object of his affections. Jenny, whose ready wit and forward manners
well qualified her for such an office, hastened to break the ice.

"Mr Morton, Miss Edith's very sorry for your present situation, and"--

It was needless to say more; he was at her side, almost at her feet, pressing her unresisting
hands, and loading her with a profusion of thanks and gratitude which would be hardly intelligible
from the mere broken words, unless we could describe the tone, the gesture, the impassioned
and hurried indications of deep and tumultuous feeling, with which they were accompanied.

For two or three minutes, Edith stood as motionless as the statue of a saint which receives
the adoration of a worshipper; and when she recovered herself sufficiently to withdraw her
hands from Henry's grasp, she could at first only faintly articulate, "I have taken a strange
step, Mr Morton--a step," she continued with more coherence, as her ideas arranged themselves
in consequence of a strong effort, "that perhaps may expose me to censure in your eyes--But
I have long permitted you to use the language of friendship--perhaps I might say more--too
long to leave you when the world seems to have left you. How, or why, is this imprisonment?
what can be done? can my uncle, who thinks so highly of you--can your own kinsman, Milnwood,
be of no use? are there no means? and what is likely to be the event?"

"Be what it will," answered Henry, contriving to make himself master of the hand that had escaped
from him, but which was now again abandoned to his clasp, "be what it will, it is to me from
this moment the most welcome incident of a weary life. To you, dearest Edith--forgive me, I
should have said Miss Bellenden, but misfortune claims strange privileges--to you I have owed
the few happy moments which have gilded a gloomy existence; and if I am now to lay it down,
the recollection of this honour will be my happiness in the last hour of suffering."

"But is it even thus, Mr Morton?" said Miss Bellenden. "Have you, who used to mix so little
in these unhappy feuds, become so suddenly and deeply implicated, that nothing short of"--

She paused, unable to bring out the word which should have come next.

"Nothing short of my life, you would say?" replied Morton, in a calm, but melancholy tone;
"I believe that will be entirely in the bosoms of my judges. My guards spoke of a possibility
of exchanging the penalty for entry into foreign service. I thought I could have embraced the
alternative; and yet, Miss Bellenden, since I have seen you once more, I feel that exile would
be more galling than death."

"And is it then true," said Edith, "that you have been so desperately rash as to entertain
communication with any of those cruel wretches who assassinated the primate?"

"I knew not even that such a crime had been committed," replied Morton, "when I gave unhappily
a night's lodging and concealment to one of those rash and cruel men, the ancient friend and
comrade of my father. But my ignorance will avail me little; for who, Miss Bellenden, save
you, will believe it? And, what is worse, I am at least uncertain whether, even if I had known
the crime, I could have brought my mind, under all the circumstances, to refuse a temporary
refuge to the fugitive."

"And by whom," said Edith, anxiously, "or under what authority, will the investigation of your
conduct take place?"

"Under that of Colonel Grahame of Claverhouse, I am given to understand," said Morton; "one
of the military commission, to whom it has pleased our king, our privy council, and our parliament,
that used to be more tenacious of our liberties, to commit the sole charge of our goods and
of our lives."

"To Claverhouse?" said Edith, faintly; "merciful Heaven, you are lost ere you are tried! He
wrote to my grandmother that he was to be here to-morrow morning, on his road to the head of
the county, where some desperate men, animated by the presence of two or three of the actors
in the primate's murder, are said to have assembled for the purpose of making a stand against
the government. His expressions made me shudder, even when I could not guess that--that--a
friend"--

"Do not be too much alarmed on my account, my dearest Edith," said Henry, as he supported her
in his arms; "Claverhouse, though stern and relentless, is, by all accounts, brave, fair, and
honourable. I am a soldier's son, and will plead my cause like a soldier. He will perhaps listen
more favourably to a blunt and unvarnished defence than a truckling and time-serving judge
might do. And, indeed, in a time when justice is, in all its branches, so completely corrupted,
I would rather lose my life by open military violence, than be conjured out of it by the hocus-pocus
of some arbitrary lawyer, who lends the knowledge he has of the statutes made for our protection,
to wrest them to our destruction."

"You are lost--you are lost, if you are to plead your cause with Claverhouse!" sighed Edith;
"root and branchwork is the mildest of his expressions. The unhappy primate was his intimate
friend and early patron. 'No excuse, no subterfuge,' said his letter, 'shall save either those
connected with the deed, or such as have given them countenance and shelter, from the ample
and bitter penalty of the law, until I shall have taken as many lives in vengeance of this
atrocious murder, as the old man had grey hairs upon his venerable head.' There is neither
ruth nor favour to be found with him."

Jenny Dennison, who had hitherto remained silent, now ventured, in the extremity of distress
which the lovers felt, but for which they were unable to devise a remedy, to offer her own advice.

"Wi' your leddyship's pardon, Miss Edith, and young Mr Morton's, we maunna waste time. Let
Milnwood take my plaid and gown; I'll slip them aff in the dark corner, if he'll promise no
to look about, and he may walk past Tam Halliday, who is half blind with his ale, and I can
tell him a canny way to get out o' the Tower, and your leddyship will gang quietly to your
ain room, and I'll row mysell in his grey cloak, and pit on his hat, and play the prisoner
till the coast's clear, and then I'll cry in Tam Halliday, and gar him let me out."

"Let you out?" said Morton; "they'll make your life answer it."

"Ne'er a bit," replied Jenny; "Tam daurna tell he let ony body in, for his ain sake; and I'll
gar him find some other gate to account for the escape."

"Will you, by G--?" said the sentinel, suddenly opening the door of the apartment; "if I am
half blind, I am not deaf, and you should not plan an escape quite so loud, if you expect to
go through with it. Come, come, Mrs Janet--march, troop--quick time--trot, d--n me!--And you,
madam kinswoman,--I won't ask your real name, though you were going to play me so rascally
a trick,--but I must make a clear garrison; so beat a retreat, unless you would have me turn
out the guard."

"I hope," said Morton, very anxiously, "you will not mention this circumstance, my good friend,
and trust to my honour to acknowledge your civility in keeping the secret. If you overheard
our conversation, you must have observed that we did not accept of, or enter into, the hasty
proposal made by this good-natured girl."

"Oh, devilish good-natured, to be sure," said Halliday. "As for the rest, I guess how it is,
and I scorn to bear malice, or tell tales, as much as another; but no thanks to that little
jilting devil, Jenny Dennison, who deserves a tight skelping for trying to lead an honest lad
into a scrape, just because he was so silly as to like her good-for-little chit face."

Jenny had no better means of justification than the last apology to which her sex trust, and
usually not in vain; she pressed her handkerchief to her face, sobbed with great vehemence,
and either wept, or managed, as Halliday might have said, to go through the motions wonderfully
well.

"And now," continued the soldier, somewhat mollified, "if you have any thing to say, say it
in two minutes, and let me see your backs turned; for if Bothwell take it into his drunken
head to make the rounds half an hour too soon, it will be a black business to us all."

"Farewell, Edith," whispered Morton, assuming a firmness he was far from possessing; "do not
remain here--leave me to my fate--it cannot be beyond endurance since you are interested in
it.--Good night, good night!--Do not remain here till you are discovered."

Thus saying, he resigned her to her attendant, by whom she was quietly led and partly supported
out of the apartment.

"Every one has his taste, to be sure," said Halliday; "but d--n me if I would have vexed so
sweet a girl as that is, for all the whigs that ever swore the Covenant."

When Edith had regained her apartment, she gave way to a burst of grief which alarmed Jenny
Dennison, who hastened to administer such scraps of consolation as occurred to her.

"Dinna vex yoursell sae muckle, Miss Edith," said that faithful attendant; "wha kens what may
happen to help young Milnwood? He's a brave lad, and a bonny, and a gentleman of a good fortune,
and they winna string the like o' him up as they do the puir whig bodies that they catch in
the muirs, like straps o' onions; maybe his uncle will bring him aff, or maybe your ain grand-uncle
will speak a gude word for him--he's weel acquent wi' a' the red-coat gentlemen."

"You are right, Jenny! you are right," said Edith, recovering herself from the stupor into
which she had sunk; "this is no time for despair, but for exertion. You must find some one
to ride this very night to my uncle's with a letter."

