"Valiant Saracen," answered the Christian, looking up with some surprise at the accusation
thus unexpectedly brought, "know thou that I exercise my Christian freedom in using that which
is forbidden to the Jews, being, as they esteem themselves, under the bondage of the old law
of Moses. We, Saracen, be it known to thee, have a better warrant for what we do--Ave Maria!--be
we thankful." And, as if in defiance of his companion's scruples, he concluded a short Latin
grace with a long draught from the leathern bottle.

"That, too, you call a part of your liberty," said the Saracen; "and as you feed like the brutes,
so you degrade yourself to the bestial condition by drinking a poisonous liquor which even
they refuse!"

"Know, foolish Saracen," replied the Christian, without hesitation, "that thou blasphemest
the gifts of God, even with the blasphemy of thy father Ishmael. The juice of the grape is
given to him that will use it wisely, as that which cheers the heart of man after toil, refreshes
him in sickness, and comforts him in sorrow. He who so enjoyeth it may thank God for his winecup
as for his daily bread; and he who abuseth the gift of Heaven is not a greater fool in his
intoxication than thou in thine abstinence."

The keen eye of the Saracen kindled at this sarcasm, and his hand sought the hilt of his poniard.
It was but a momentary thought, however, and died away in the recollection of the powerful
champion with whom he had to deal, and the desperate grapple, the impression of which still
throbbed in his limbs and veins; and he contented himself with pursuing the contest in colloquy,
as more convenient for the time.

"Thy words" he said, "O Nazarene, might create anger, did not thy ignorance raise compassion.
Seest thou not, O thou more blind than any who asks alms at the door of the Mosque, that the
liberty thou dost boast of is restrained even in that which is dearest to man's happiness and
to his household; and that thy law, if thou dost practise it, binds thee in marriage to one
single mate, be she sick or healthy, be she fruitful or barren, bring she comfort and joy,
or clamour and strife, to thy table and to thy bed? This, Nazarene, I do indeed call slavery;
whereas, to the faithful, hath the Prophet assigned upon earth the patriarchal privileges of
Abraham our father, and of Solomon, the wisest of mankind, having given us here a succession
of beauty at our pleasure, and beyond the grave the black-eyed houris of Paradise."

"Now, by His name that I most reverence in heaven," said the Christian, "and by hers whom I
most worship on earth, thou art but a blinded and a bewildered infidel!--That diamond signet
which thou wearest on thy finger, thou holdest it, doubtless, as of inestimable value?"

"Balsora and Bagdad cannot show the like," replied the Saracen; "but what avails it to our
purpose?"

"Much," replied the Frank, "as thou shalt thyself confess. Take my war-axe and dash the stone
into twenty shivers: would each fragment be as valuable as the original gem, or would they,
all collected, bear the tenth part of its estimation?"

"That is a child's question," answered the Saracen; "the fragments of such a stone would not
equal the entire jewel in the degree of hundreds to one."

"Saracen," replied the Christian warrior, "the love which a true knight binds on one only,
fair and faithful, is the gem entire; the affection thou flingest among thy enslaved wives
and half-wedded slaves is worthless, comparatively, as the sparkling shivers of the broken
diamond."

"Now, by the Holy Caaba," said the Emir, "thou art a madman who hugs his chain of iron as if
it were of gold! Look more closely. This ring of mine would lose half its beauty were not the
signet encircled and enchased with these lesser brilliants, which grace it and set it off.
The central diamond is man, firm and entire, his value depending on himself alone; and this
circle of lesser jewels are women, borrowing his lustre, which he deals out to them as best
suits his pleasure or his convenience. Take the central stone from the signet, and the diamond
itself remains as valuable as ever, while the lesser gems are comparatively of little value.
And this is the true reading of thy parable; for what sayeth the poet Mansour: 'It is the favour
of man which giveth beauty and comeliness to woman, as the stream glitters no longer when the
sun ceaseth to shine.'"

"Saracen," replied the Crusader, "thou speakest like one who never saw a woman worthy the affection
of a soldier. Believe me, couldst thou look upon those of Europe, to whom, after Heaven, we
of the order of knighthood vow fealty and devotion, thou wouldst loathe for ever the poor sensual
slaves who form thy haram. The beauty of our fair ones gives point to our spears and edge to
our swords; their words are our law; and as soon will a lamp shed lustre when unkindled, as
a knight distinguish himself by feats of arms, having no mistress of his affection."

"I have heard of this frenzy among the warriors of the West," said the Emir, "and have ever
accounted it one of the accompanying symptoms of that insanity which brings you hither to obtain
possession of an empty sepulchre. But yet, methinks, so highly have the Franks whom I have
met with extolled the beauty of their women, I could be well contented to behold with mine
own eyes those charms which can transform such brave warriors into the tools of their pleasure."

"Brave Saracen," said the Knight, "if I were not on a pilgrimage to the Holy Sepulchre, it
should be my pride to conduct you, on assurance of safety, to the camp of Richard of England,
than whom none knows better how to do honour to a noble foe; and though I be poor and unattended
yet have I interest to secure for thee, or any such as thou seemest, not safety only, but respect
and esteem. There shouldst thou see several of the fairest beauties of France and Britain form
a small circle, the brilliancy of which exceeds ten-thousandfold the lustre of mines of diamonds
such as thine."

"Now, by the corner-stone of the Caaba!" said the Saracen, "I will accept thy invitation as
freely as it is given, if thou wilt postpone thy present intent; and, credit me, brave Nazarene,
it were better for thyself to turn back thy horse's head towards the camp of thy people, for
to travel towards Jerusalem without a passport is but a wilful casting-away of thy life."

"I have a pass," answered the Knight, producing a parchment, "Under Saladin's hand and signet."

The Saracen bent his head to the dust as he recognized the seal and handwriting of the renowned
Soldan of Egypt and Syria; and having kissed the paper with profound respect, he pressed it
to his forehead, then returned it to the Christian, saying, "Rash Frank, thou hast sinned against
thine own blood and mine, for not showing this to me when we met."

"You came with levelled spear," said the Knight. "Had a troop of Saracens so assailed me, it
might have stood with my honour to have shown the Soldan's pass, but never to one man."

"And yet one man," said the Saracen haughtily, "was enough to interrupt your journey."

"True, brave Moslem," replied the Christian; "but there are few such as thou art. Such falcons
fly not in flocks; or, if they do, they pounce not in numbers upon one."

"Thou dost us but justice," said the Saracen, evidently gratified by the compliment, as he
had been touched by the implied scorn of the European's previous boast; "from us thou shouldst
have had no wrong. But well was it for me that I failed to slay thee, with the safeguard of
the king of kings upon thy person. Certain it were, that the cord or the sabre had justly avenged
such guilt."

"I am glad to hear that its influence shall be availing to me," said the Knight; "for I have
heard that the road is infested with robber-tribes, who regard nothing in comparison of an
opportunity of plunder."

"The truth has been told to thee, brave Christian," said the Saracen; "but I swear to thee,
by the turban of the Prophet, that shouldst thou miscarry in any haunt of such villains, I
will myself undertake thy revenge with five thousand horse. I will slay every male of them,
and send their women into such distant captivity that the name of their tribe shall never again
be heard within five hundred miles of Damascus. I will sow with salt the foundations of their
village, and there shall never live thing dwell there, even from that time forward."

"I had rather the trouble which you design for yourself were in revenge of some other more
important person than of me, noble Emir," replied the Knight; "but my vow is recorded in heaven,
for good or for evil, and I must be indebted to you for pointing me out the way to my resting-place
for this evening."

"That," said the Saracen, "must be under the black covering of my father's tent."

"This night," answered the Christian, "I must pass in prayer and penitence with a holy man,
Theodorick of Engaddi, who dwells amongst these wilds, and spends his life in the service of God."

"I will at least see you safe thither," said the Saracen.

"That would be pleasant convoy for me," said the Christian; "yet might endanger the future
security of the good father; for the cruel hand of your people has been red with the blood
of the servants of the Lord, and therefore do we come hither in plate and mail, with sword
and lance, to open the road to the Holy Sepulchre, and protect the chosen saints and anchorites
who yet dwell in this land of promise and of miracle."

"Nazarene," said the Moslem, "in this the Greeks and Syrians have much belied us, seeing we
do but after the word of Abubeker Alwakel, the successor of the Prophet, and, after him, the
first commander of true believers. 'Go forth,' he said, 'Yezed Ben Sophian,' when he sent that
renowned general to take Syria from the infidels; 'quit yourselves like men in battle, but
slay neither the aged, the infirm, the women, nor the children. Waste not the land, neither
destroy corn and fruit-trees; they are the gifts of Allah. Keep faith when you have made any
covenant, even if it be to your own harm. If ye find holy men labouring with their hands, and
serving God in the desert, hurt them not, neither destroy their dwellings. But when you find
them with shaven crowns, they are of the synagogue of Satan! Smite with the sabre, slay, cease
not till they become believers or tributaries.' As the Caliph, companion of the Prophet, hath
told us, so have we done, and those whom our justice has smitten are but the priests of Satan.
But unto the good men who, without stirring up nation against nation, worship sincerely in
the faith of Issa Ben Mariam, we are a shadow and a shield; and such being he whom you seek,
even though the light of the Prophet hath not reached him, from me he will only have love,
favour, and regard."

"The anchorite whom I would now visit," said the warlike pilgrim, "is, I have heard, no priest;
but were he of that anointed and sacred order, I would prove with my good lance, against paynim
and infidel--"

"Let us not defy each other, brother," interrupted the Saracen; "we shall find, either of us,
enough of Franks or of Moslemah on whom to exercise both sword and lance. This Theodorick is
protected both by Turk and Arab; and, though one of strange conditions at intervals, yet, on
the whole, he bears himself so well as the follower of his own prophet, that he merits the
protection of him who was sent--"

"Now, by Our Lady, Saracen," exclaimed the Christian, "if thou darest name in the same breath
the camel-driver of Mecca with--"

An electrical shock of passion thrilled through the form of the Emir; but it was only momentary,
and the calmness of his reply had both dignity and reason in it, when he said, "Slander not
him whom thou knowest not--the rather that we venerate the founder of thy religion, while we
condemn the doctrine which your priests have spun from it. I will myself guide thee to the
cavern of the hermit, which, methinks, without my help, thou wouldst find it a hard matter
to reach. And, on the way, let us leave to mollahs and to monks to dispute about the divinity
of our faith, and speak on themes which belong to youthful warriors--upon battles, upon beautiful
women, upon sharp swords, and upon bright armour."

CHAPTER III.

The warriors arose from their place of brief rest and simple refreshment, and courteously aided
each other while they carefully replaced and adjusted the harness from which they had relieved
for the time their trusty steeds. Each seemed familiar with an employment which at that time
was a part of necessary and, indeed, of indispensable duty. Each also seemed to possess, as
far as the difference betwixt the animal and rational species admitted, the confidence and
affection of the horse which was the constant companion of his travels and his warfare. With
the Saracen this familiar intimacy was a part of his early habits; for, in the tents of the
Eastern military tribes, the horse of the soldier ranks next to, and almost equal in importance
with, his wife and his family; and with the European warrior, circumstances, and indeed necessity,
rendered his war-horse scarcely less than his brother in arms. The steeds, therefore, suffered
themselves quietly to be taken from their food and liberty, and neighed and snuffled fondly
around their masters, while they were adjusting their accoutrements for further travel and
additional toil. And each warrior, as he prosecuted his own task, or assisted with courtesy
his companion, looked with observant curiosity at the equipments of his fellow-traveller, and
noted particularly what struck him as peculiar in the fashion in which he arranged his riding
accoutrements.

Ere they remounted to resume their journey, the Christian Knight again moistened his lips and
dipped his hands in the living fountain, and said to his pagan associate of the journey, "I
would I knew the name of this delicious fountain, that I might hold it in my grateful remembrance;
for never did water slake more deliciously a more oppressive thirst than I have this day experienced."

"It is called in the Arabic language," answered the Saracen, "by a name which signifies the
Diamond of the Desert."

"And well is it so named," replied the Christian. "My native valley hath a thousand springs,
but not to one of them shall I attach hereafter such precious recollection as to this solitary
fount, which bestows its liquid treasures where they are not only delightful, but nearly indispensable."

"You say truth," said the Saracen; "for the curse is still on yonder sea of death, and neither
man nor beast drinks of its waves, nor of the river which feeds without filling it, until this
inhospitable desert be passed."

They mounted, and pursued their journey across the sandy waste. The ardour of noon was now
past, and a light breeze somewhat alleviated the terrors of the desert, though not without
bearing on its wings an impalpable dust, which the Saracen little heeded, though his heavily-armed
companion felt it as such an annoyance that he hung his iron casque at his saddle-bow, and
substituted the light riding-cap, termed in the language of the time a MORTIER, from its resemblance
in shape to an ordinary mortar. They rode together for some time in silence, the Saracen performing
the part of director and guide of the journey, which he did by observing minute marks and bearings
of the distant rocks, to a ridge of which they were gradually approaching. For a little time
he seemed absorbed in the task, as a pilot when navigating a vessel through a difficult channel;
but they had not proceeded half a league when he seemed secure of his route, and disposed,
with more frankness than was usual to his nation, to enter into conversation.

"You have asked the name," he said, "of a mute fountain, which hath the semblance, but not
the reality, of a living thing. Let me be pardoned to ask the name of the companion with whom
I have this day encountered, both in danger and in repose, and which I cannot fancy unknown
even here among the deserts of Palestine?"

"It is not yet worth publishing," said the Christian. "Know, however, that among the soldiers
of the Cross I am called Kenneth--Kenneth of the Couching Leopard; at home I have other titles,
but they would sound harsh in an Eastern ear. Brave Saracen, let me ask which of the tribes
of Arabia claims your descent, and by what name you are known?"

"Sir Kenneth," said the Moslem, "I joy that your name is such as my lips can easily utter.
For me, I am no Arab, yet derive my descent from a line neither less wild nor less warlike.
Know, Sir Knight of the Leopard, that I am Sheerkohf, the Lion of the Mountain, and that Kurdistan,
from which I derive my descent, holds no family more noble than that of Seljook."

"I have heard," answered the Christian, "that your great Soldan claims his blood from the same
source?"

"Thanks to the Prophet that hath so far honoured our mountains as to send from their bosom
him whose word is victory," answered the paynim. "I am but as a worm before the King of Egypt
and Syria, and yet in my own land something my name may avail. Stranger, with how many men
didst thou come on this warfare?"

"By my faith," said Sir Kenneth, "with aid of friends and kinsmen, I was hardly pinched to
furnish forth ten well-appointed lances, with maybe some fifty more men, archers and varlets
included. Some have deserted my unlucky pennon--some have fallen in battle--several have died
of disease--and one trusty armour-bearer, for whose life I am now doing my pilgrimage, lies
on the bed of sickness."

"Christian," said Sheerkohf, "here I have five arrows in my quiver, each feathered from the
wing of an eagle. When I send one of them to my tents, a thousand warriors mount on horseback--when
I send another, an equal force will arise--for the five, I can command five thousand men; and
if I send my bow, ten thousand mounted riders will shake the desert. And with thy fifty followers
thou hast come to invade a land in which I am one of the meanest!"

"Now, by the rood, Saracen," retorted the Western warrior, "thou shouldst know, ere thou vauntest
thyself, that one steel glove can crush a whole handful of hornets."

"Ay, but it must first enclose them within its grasp," said the Saracen, with a smile which
might have endangered their new alliance, had he not changed the subject by adding, "And is
bravery so much esteemed amongst the Christian princes that thou, thus void of means and of
men, canst offer, as thou didst of late, to be my protector and security in the camp of thy
brethren?"

"Know, Saracen," said the Christian, "since such is thy style, that the name of a knight, and
the blood of a gentleman, entitle him to place himself on the same rank with sovereigns even
of the first degree, in so far as regards all but regal authority and dominion. Were Richard
of England himself to wound the honour of a knight as poor as I am, he could not, by the law
of chivalry, deny him the combat."

"Methinks I should like to look upon so strange a scene," said the Emir, "in which a leathern
belt and a pair of spurs put the poorest on a level with the most powerful."

"You must add free blood and a fearless heart," said the Christian; "then, perhaps, you will
not have spoken untruly of the dignity of knighthood."

"And mix you as boldly amongst the females of your chiefs and leaders?" asked the Saracen.

"God forbid," said the Knight of the Leopard, "that the poorest knight in Christendom should
not be free, in all honourable service, to devote his hand and sword, the fame of his actions,
and the fixed devotion of his heart, to the fairest princess who ever wore coronet on her brow!"

"But a little while since," said the Saracen, "and you described love as the highest treasure
of the heart--thine hath undoubtedly been high and nobly bestowed?"

"Stranger," answered the Christian, blushing deeply as he spoke, "we tell not rashly where
it is we have bestowed our choicest treasures. It is enough for thee to know that, as thou
sayest, my love is highly and nobly bestowed--most highly--most nobly; but if thou wouldst
hear of love and broken lances, venture thyself, as thou sayest, to the camp of the Crusaders,
and thou wilt find exercise for thine ears, and, if thou wilt, for thy hands too."

The Eastern warrior, raising himself in his stirrups, and shaking aloft his lance, replied,
"Hardly, I fear, shall I find one with a crossed shoulder who will exchange with me the cast
of the jerrid."

"I will not promise for that," replied the Knight; "though there be in the camp certain Spaniards,
who have right good skill in your Eastern game of hurling the javelin."

"Dogs, and sons of dogs!" ejaculated the Saracen; "what have these Spaniards to do to come
hither to combat the true believers, who, in their own land, are their lords and taskmasters?
with them I would mix in no warlike pastime."

"Let not the knights of Leon or Asturias hear you speak thus of them," said the Knight of the
Leopard. "But," added he, smiling at the recollection of the morning's combat, "if, instead
of a reed, you were inclined to stand the cast of a battle-axe, there are enough of Western
warriors who would gratify your longing."

"By the beard of my father, sir," said the Saracen, with an approach to laughter, "the game
is too rough for mere sport. I will never shun them in battle, but my head" (pressing his hand
to his brow) "will not, for a while, permit me to seek them in sport."

"I would you saw the axe of King Richard," answered the Western warrior, "to which that which
hangs at my saddle-bow weighs but as a feather."

"We hear much of that island sovereign," said the Saracen. "Art thou one of his subjects?"

"One of his followers I am, for this expedition," answered the Knight, "and honoured in the
service; but not born his subject, although a native of the island in which he reigns."

"How mean you? " said the Eastern soldier; "have you then two kings in one poor island?"

"As thou sayest," said the Scot, for such was Sir Kenneth by birth. "It is even so; and yet,
although the inhabitants of the two extremities of that island are engaged in frequent war,
the country can, as thou seest, furnish forth such a body of men-at-arms as may go far to shake
the unholy hold which your master hath laid on the cities of Zion."

"By the beard of Saladin, Nazarene, but that it is a thoughtless and boyish folly, I could
laugh at the simplicity of your great Sultan, who comes hither to make conquests of deserts
and rocks, and dispute the possession of them with those who have tenfold numbers at command,
while he leaves a part of his narrow islet, in which he was born a sovereign, to the dominion
of another sceptre than his. Surely, Sir Kenneth, you and the other good men of your country
should have submitted yourselves to the dominion of this King Richard ere you left your native
land, divided against itself, to set forth on this expedition?"

Hasty and fierce was Kenneth's answer. "No, by the bright light of Heaven! If the King of England
had not set forth to the Crusade till he was sovereign of Scotland, the Crescent might, for
me, and all true-hearted Scots, glimmer for ever on the walls of Zion."

Thus far he had proceeded, when, suddenly recollecting himself, he muttered, "MEA CULPA! MEA
CULPA! what have I, a soldier of the Cross, to do with recollection of war betwixt Christian
nations!"

The rapid expression of feeling corrected by the dictates of duty did not escape the Moslem,
who, if he did not entirely understand all which it conveyed, saw enough to convince him with
the assurance that Christians, as well as Moslemah, had private feelings of personal pique,
and national quarrels, which were not entirely reconcilable. But the Saracens were a race,
polished, perhaps, to the utmost extent which their religion permitted, and particularly capable
of entertaining high ideas of courtesy and politeness; and such sentiments prevented his taking
any notice of the inconsistency of Sir Kenneth's feelings in the opposite characters of a Scot
and a Crusader.

Meanwhile, as they advanced, the scene began to change around them. They were now turning to
the eastward, and had reached the range of steep and barren hills which binds in that quarter
the naked plain, and varies the surface of the country, without changing its sterile character.
Sharp, rocky eminences began to rise around them, and, in a short time, deep declivities and
ascents, both formidable in height and difficult from the narrowness of the path, offered to
the travellers obstacles of a different kind from those with which they had recently contended.

Dark caverns and chasms amongst the rocks--those grottoes so often alluded to in Scripture--yawned
fearfully on either side as they proceeded, and the Scottish knight was informed by the Emir
that these were often the refuge of beasts of prey, or of men still more ferocious, who, driven
to desperation by the constant war, and the oppression exercised by the soldiery, as well of
the Cross as of the Crescent, had become robbers, and spared neither rank nor religion, neither
sex nor age, in their depredations.

The Scottish knight listened with indifference to the accounts of ravages committed by wild
beasts or wicked men, secure as he felt himself in his own valour and personal strength; but
he was struck with mysterious dread when he recollected that he was now in the awful wilderness
of the forty days' fast, and the scene of the actual personal temptation, wherewith the Evil
Principle was permitted to assail the Son of Man. He withdrew his attention gradually from
the light and worldly conversation of the infidel warrior beside him, and, however acceptable
his gay and gallant bravery would have rendered him as a companion elsewhere, Sir Kenneth felt
as if, in those wildernesses the waste and dry places in which the foul spirits were wont to
wander when expelled the mortals whose forms they possessed, a bare-footed friar would have
been a better associate than the gay but unbelieving paynim.

These feelings embarrassed him the rather that the Saracen's spirits appeared to rise with
the journey, and because the farther he penetrated into the gloomy recesses of the mountains,
the lighter became his conversation, and when he found that unanswered, the louder grew his
song. Sir Kenneth knew enough of the Eastern languages to be assured that he chanted sonnets
of love, containing all the glowing praises of beauty in which the Oriental poets are so fond
of luxuriating, and which, therefore, were peculiarly unfitted for a serious or devotional
strain of thought, the feeling best becoming the Wilderness of the Temptation. With inconsistency
enough, the Saracen also sung lays in praise of wine, the liquid ruby of the Persian poets;
and his gaiety at length became so unsuitable to the Christian knight's contrary train of sentiments,
as, but for the promise of amity which they had exchanged, would most likely have made Sir
Kenneth take measures to change his note. As it was, the Crusader felt as if he had by his
side some gay, licentious fiend, who endeavoured to ensnare his soul, and endanger his immortal
salvation, by inspiring loose thoughts of earthly pleasure, and thus polluting his devotion,
at a time when his faith as a Christian and his vow as a pilgrim called on him for a serious
and penitential state of mind. He was thus greatly perplexed, and undecided how to act; and
it was in a tone of hasty displeasure that, at length breaking silence, he interrupted the
lay of the celebrated Rudpiki, in which he prefers the mole on his mistress's bosom to all
the wealth of Bokhara and Samarcand.

"Saracen," said the Crusader sternly, "blinded as thou art, and plunged amidst the errors of
a false law, thou shouldst yet comprehend that there are some places more holy than others,
and that there are some scenes also in which the Evil One hath more than ordinary power over
sinful mortals. I will not tell thee for what awful reason this place--these rocks--these caverns
with their gloomy arches, leading as it were to the central abyss--are held an especial haunt
of Satan and his angels. It is enough that I have been long warned to beware of this place
by wise and holy men, to whom the qualities of the unholy region are well known. Wherefore,
Saracen, forbear thy foolish and ill-timed levity, and turn thy thoughts to things more suited
to the spot--although, alas for thee! thy best prayers are but as blasphemy and sin."

The Saracen listened with some surprise, and then replied, with good-humour and gaiety, only
so far repressed as courtesy required, "Good Sir Kenneth, methinks you deal unequally by your
companion, or else ceremony is but indifferently taught amongst your Western tribes. I took
no offence when I saw you gorge hog's flesh and drink wine, and permitted you to enjoy a treat
which you called your Christian liberty, only pitying in my heart your foul pastimes. Wherefore,
then, shouldst thou take scandal, because I cheer, to the best of my power, a gloomy road with
a cheerful verse? What saith the poet, 'Song is like the dews of heaven on the bosom of the
desert; it cools the path of the traveller.'"

"Friend Saracen," said the Christian, "I blame not the love of minstrelsy and of the GAI SCIENCE;
albeit, we yield unto it even too much room in our thoughts when they should be bent on better
things. But prayers and holy psalms are better fitting than LAIS of love, or of wine-cups,
when men walk in this Valley of the Shadow of Death, full of fiends and demons, whom the prayers
of holy men have driven forth from the haunts of humanity to wander amidst scenes as accursed
as themselves."

"Speak not thus of the Genii, Christian," answered the Saracen, "for know thou speakest to
one whose line and nation drew their origin from the immortal race which your sect fear and
blaspheme."

"I well thought," answered the Crusader, "that your blinded race had their descent from the
foul fiend, without whose aid you would never have been able to maintain this blessed land
of Palestine against so many valiant soldiers of God. I speak not thus of thee in particular,
Saracen, but generally of thy people and religion. Strange is it to me, however, not that you
should have the descent from the Evil One, but that you should boast of it."

"From whom should the bravest boast of descending, saving from him that is bravest?" said the
Saracen; "from whom should the proudest trace their line so well as from the Dark Spirit, which
would rather fall headlong by force than bend the knee by his will? Eblis may be hated, stranger,
but he must be feared; and such as Eblis are his descendants of Kurdistan."

Tales of magic and of necromancy were the learning of the period, and Sir Kenneth heard his
companion's confession of diabolical descent without any disbelief, and without much wonder;
yet not without a secret shudder at finding himself in this fearful place, in the company of
one who avouched himself to belong to such a lineage. Naturally insusceptible, however, of
fear, he crossed himself, and stoutly demanded of the Saracen an account of the pedigree which
he had boasted. The latter readily complied.

"Know, brave stranger," he said, "that when the cruel Zohauk, one of the descendants of Giamschid,
held the throne of Persia, he formed a league with the Powers of Darkness, amidst the secret
vaults of Istakhar, vaults which the hands of the elementary spirits had hewn out of the living
rock long before Adam himself had an existence. Here he fed, with daily oblations of human
blood, two devouring serpents, which had become, according to the poets, a part of himself,
and to sustain whom he levied a tax of daily human sacrifices, till the exhausted patience
of his subjects caused some to raise up the scimitar of resistance, like the valiant Blacksmith
and the victorious Feridoun, by whom the tyrant was at length dethroned, and imprisoned for
ever in the dismal caverns of the mountain Damavend. But ere that deliverance had taken place,
and whilst the power of the bloodthirsty tyrant was at its height, the band of ravening slaves
whom he had sent forth to purvey victims for his daily sacrifice brought to the vaults of the
palace of Istakhar seven sisters so beautiful that they seemed seven houris. These seven maidens
were the daughters of a sage, who had no treasures save those beauties and his own wisdom.
The last was not sufficient to foresee this misfortune, the former seemed ineffectual to prevent
it. The eldest exceeded not her twentieth year, the youngest had scarce attained her thirteenth;
and so like were they to each other that they could not have been distinguished but for the
difference of height, in which they gradually rose in easy gradation above each other, like
the ascent which leads to the gates of Paradise. So lovely were these seven sisters when they
stood in the darksome vault, disrobed of all clothing saving a cymar of white silk, that their
charms moved the hearts of those who were not mortal. Thunder muttered, the earth shook, the
wall of the vault was rent, and at the chasm entered one dressed like a hunter, with bow and
shafts, and followed by six others, his brethren. They were tall men, and, though dark, yet
comely to behold; but their eyes had more the glare of those of the dead than the light which
lives under the eyelids of the living. 'Zeineb,' said the leader of the band--and as he spoke
he took the eldest sister by the hand, and his voice was soft, low, and melancholy--'I am Cothrob,
king of the subterranean world, and supreme chief of Ginnistan. I and my brethren are of those
who, created out of the pure elementary fire, disdained, even at the command of Omnipotence,
to do homage to a clod of earth, because it was called Man. Thou mayest have heard of us as
cruel, unrelenting, and persecuting. It is false. We are by nature kind and generous; only
vengeful when insulted, only cruel when affronted. We are true to those who trust us; and we
have heard the invocations of thy father, the sage Mithrasp, who wisely worships not alone
the Origin of Good, but that which is called the Source of Evil. You and your sisters are on
the eve of death; but let each give to us one hair from your fair tresses, in token of fealty,
and we will carry you many miles from hence to a place of safety, where you may bid defiance
to Zohauk and his ministers.' The fear of instant death, saith the poet, is like the rod of
the prophet Haroun, which devoured all other rods when transformed into snakes before the King
of Pharaoh; and the daughters of the Persian sage were less apt than others to be afraid of
the addresses of a spirit. They gave the tribute which Cothrob demanded, and in an instant
the sisters were transported to an enchanted castle on the mountains of Tugrut, in Kurdistan,
and were never again seen by mortal eye. But in process of time seven youths, distinguished
in the war and in the chase, appeared in the environs of the castle of the demons. They were
darker, taller, fiercer, and more resolute than any of the scattered inhabitants of the valleys
of Kurdistan; and they took to themselves wives, and became fathers of the seven tribes of
the Kurdmans, whose valour is known throughout the universe."

The Christian knight heard with wonder the wild tale, of which Kurdistan still possesses the
traces, and, after a moment's thought, replied, "Verily, Sir Knight, you have spoken well--your
genealogy may be dreaded and hated, but it cannot be contemned. Neither do I any longer wonder
at your obstinacy in a false faith, since, doubtless, it is part of the fiendish disposition
which hath descended from your ancestors, those infernal huntsmen, as you have described them,
to love falsehood rather than truth; and I no longer marvel that your spirits become high and
exalted, and vent themselves in verse and in tunes, when you approach to the places encumbered
by the haunting of evil spirits, which must excite in you that joyous feeling which others
experience when approaching the land of their human ancestry."

"By my father's beard, I think thou hast the right," said the Saracen, rather amused than offended
by the freedom with which the Christian had uttered his reflections; "for, though the Prophet
(blessed be his name!) hath sown amongst us the seed of a better faith than our ancestors learned
in the ghostly halls of Tugrut, yet we are not willing, like other Moslemah, to pass hasty
doom on the lofty and powerful elementary spirits from whom we claim our origin. These Genii,
according to our belief and hope, are not altogether reprobate, but are still in the way of
probation, and may hereafter be punished or rewarded. Leave we this to the mollahs and the
imauns. Enough that with us the reverence for these spirits is not altogether effaced by what
we have learned from the Koran, and that many of us still sing, in memorial of our fathers'
more ancient faith, such verses as these."

So saying, he proceeded to chant verses, very ancient in the language and structure, which
some have thought derive their source from the worshippers of Arimanes, the Evil Principle.

                AHRIMAN.

     Dark Ahriman, whom Irak still
     Holds origin of woe and ill!
     When, bending at thy shrine,
     We view the world with troubled eye,
     Where see we 'neath the extended sky,
     An empire matching thine!

     If the Benigner Power can yield
     A fountain in the desert field,
     Where weary pilgrims drink;
     Thine are the waves that lash the rock,
     Thine the tornado's deadly shock,
     Where countless navies sink!

     Or if he bid the soil dispense
     Balsams to cheer the sinking sense,
     How few can they deliver
     From lingering pains, or pang intense,
     Red Fever, spotted Pestilence,
     The arrows of thy quiver!

     Chief in Man's bosom sits thy sway,
     And frequent, while in words we pray
     Before another throne,
     Whate'er of specious form be there,
     The secret meaning of the prayer
     Is, Ahriman, thine own.

     Say, hast thou feeling, sense, and form,
     Thunder thy voice, thy garments storm,
     As Eastern Magi say;
     With sentient soul of hate and wrath,
     And wings to sweep thy deadly path,
     And fangs to tear thy prey?

     Or art thou mix'd in Nature's source,
     An ever-operating force,
     Converting good to ill;
     An evil principle innate,
     Contending with our better fate,
     And, oh!  victorious still?

     Howe'er it be, dispute is vain.
     On all without thou hold'st thy reign,
     Nor less on all within;
     Each mortal passion's fierce career,
     Love, hate, ambition, joy, and fear,
     Thou goadest into sin.

     Whene'er a sunny gleam appears,
     To brighten up our vale of tears,
     Thou art not distant far;
     'Mid such brief solace of our lives,
     Thou whett'st our very banquet-knives
     To tools of death and war.

     Thus, from the moment of our birth,
     Long as we linger on the earth,
     Thou rulest the fate of men;
     Thine are the pangs of life's last hour,
     And--who dare answer?--is thy power,
     Dark Spirit!  ended THEN?

     [The worthy and learned clergyman by whom this species of
     hymn has been translated desires, that, for fear of
     misconception, we should warn the reader to recollect that
     it is composed by a heathen, to whom the real causes of
     moral and physical evil are unknown, and who views their
     predominance in the system of the universe as all must view
     that appalling fact who have not the benefit of the
     Christian revelation.  On our own part, we beg to add, that
     we understand the style of the translator is more
     paraphrastic than can be approved by those who are
     acquainted with the singularly curious original.  The
     translator seems to have despaired of rendering into English
     verse the flights of Oriental poetry; and, possibly, like
     many learned and ingenious men, finding it impossible to
     discover the sense of the original, he may have tacitly
     substituted his own.]

These verses may perhaps have been the not unnatural effusion of some half-enlightened philosopher,
who, in the fabled deity, Arimanes, saw but the prevalence of moral and physical evil; but
in the ears of Sir Kenneth of the Leopard they had a different effect, and, sung as they were
by one who had just boasted himself a descendant of demons, sounded very like an address of
worship to the arch-fiend himself. He weighed within himself whether, on hearing such blasphemy
in the very desert where Satan had stood rebuked for demanding homage, taking an abrupt leave
of the Saracen was sufficient to testify his abhorrence; or whether he was not rather constrained
by his vow as a Crusader to defy the infidel to combat on the spot, and leave him food for
the beasts of the wilderness, when his attention was suddenly caught by an unexpected apparition.

The light was now verging low, yet served the knight still to discern that they two were no
longer alone in the desert, but were closely watched by a figure of great height and very thin,
which skipped over rocks and bushes with so much agility as, added to the wild and hirsute
appearance of the individual, reminded him of the fauns and silvans, whose images he had seen
in the ancient temples of Rome. As the single-hearted Scottishman had never for a moment doubted
these gods of the ancient Gentiles to be actually devils, so he now hesitated not to believe
that the blasphemous hymn of the Saracen had raised up an infernal spirit.

"But what recks it?" said stout Sir Kenneth to himself; "down with the fiend and his worshippers!"

He did not, however, think it necessary to give the same warning of defiance to two enemies
as he would unquestionably have afforded to one. His hand was upon his mace, and perhaps the
unwary Saracen would have been paid for his Persian poetry by having his brains dashed out
on the spot, without any reason assigned for it; but the Scottish Knight was spared from committing
what would have been a sore blot in his shield of arms. The apparition, on which his eyes had
been fixed for some time, had at first appeared to dog their path by concealing itself behind
rocks and shrubs, using those advantages of the ground with great address, and surmounting
its irregularities with surprising agility. At length, just as the Saracen paused in his song,
the figure, which was that of a tall man clothed in goat-skins, sprung into the midst of the
path, and seized a rein of the Saracen's bridle in either hand, confronting thus and bearing
back the noble horse, which, unable to endure the manner in which this sudden assailant pressed
the long-armed bit, and the severe curb, which, according to the Eastern fashion, was a solid
ring of iron, reared upright, and finally fell backwards on his master, who, however, avoided
the peril of the fall by lightly throwing himself to one side.

The assailant then shifted his grasp from the bridle of the horse to the throat of the rider,
flung himself above the struggling Saracen, and, despite of his youth and activity kept him
undermost, wreathing his long arms above those of his prisoner, who called out angrily, and
yet half-laughing at the same time--"Hamako--fool--unloose me--this passes thy privilege--unloose
me, or I will use my dagger."

"Thy dagger!--infidel dog!" said the figure in the goat-skins, "hold it in thy gripe if thou
canst!" and in an instant he wrenched the Saracen's weapon out of its owner's hand, and brandished
it over his head.

"Help, Nazarene!" cried Sheerkohf, now seriously alarmed; "help, or the Hamako will slay me."

"Slay thee!" replied the dweller of the desert; "and well hast thou merited death, for singing
thy blasphemous hymns, not only to the praise of thy false prophet, who is the foul fiend's
harbinger, but to that of the Author of Evil himself."

The Christian Knight had hitherto looked on as one stupefied, so strangely had this rencontre
contradicted, in its progress and event, all that he had previously conjectured. He felt, however,
at length, that it touched his honour to interfere in behalf of his discomfited companion,
and therefore addressed himself to the victorious figure in the goat-skins.

"Whosoe'er thou art," he said, "and whether of good or of evil, know that I am sworn for the
time to be true companion to the Saracen whom thou holdest under thee; therefore, I pray thee
to let him arise, else I will do battle with thee in his behalf."

"And a proper quarrel it were," answered the Hamako, "for a Crusader to do battle in--for the
sake of an unbaptized dog, to combat one of his own holy faith! Art thou come forth to the
wilderness to fight for the Crescent against the Cross? A goodly soldier of God art thou to
listen to those who sing the praises of Satan!"

Yet, while he spoke thus, he arose himself, and, suffering the Saracen to rise also, returned
him his cangiar, or poniard.

"Thou seest to what a point of peril thy presumption hath brought thee," continued he of the
goat-skins, now addressing Sheerkohf, "and by what weak means thy practised skill and boasted
agility can be foiled, when such is Heaven's pleasure. Wherefore, beware, O Ilderim! for know
that, were there not a twinkle in the star of thy nativity which promises for thee something
that is good and gracious in Heaven's good time, we two had not parted till I had torn asunder
the throat which so lately trilled forth blasphemies."

"Hamako," said the Saracen, without any appearance of resenting the violent language and yet
more violent assault to which he had been subjected, "I pray thee, good Hamako, to beware how
thou dost again urge thy privilege over far; for though, as a good Moslem, I respect those
whom Heaven hath deprived of ordinary reason, in order to endow them with the spirit of prophecy,
yet I like not other men's hands on the bridle of my horse, neither upon my own person. Speak,
therefore, what thou wilt, secure of any resentment from me; but gather so much sense as to
apprehend that if thou shalt again proffer me any violence, I will strike thy shagged head
from thy meagre shoulders.--and to thee, friend Kenneth," he added, as he remounted his steed,
"I must needs say, that in a companion through the desert, I love friendly deeds better than
fair words. Of the last thou hast given me enough; but it had been better to have aided me
more speedily in my struggle with this Hamako, who had well-nigh taken my life in his frenzy."

"By my faith," said the Knight, "I did somewhat fail--was somewhat tardy in rendering thee
instant help; but the strangeness of the assailant, the suddenness of the scene--it was as
if thy wild and wicked lay had raised the devil among us--and such was my confusion, that two
or three minutes elapsed ere I could take to my weapon."

"Thou art but a cold and considerate friend," said the Saracen; "and, had the Hamako been one
grain more frantic, thy companion had been slain by thy side, to thy eternal dishonour, without
thy stirring a finger in his aid, although thou satest by, mounted, and in arms."

"By my word, Saracen," said the Christian, "if thou wilt have it in plain terms, I thought
that strange figure was the devil; and being of thy lineage, I knew not what family secret
you might be communicating to each other, as you lay lovingly rolling together on the sand."

"Thy gibe is no answer, brother Kenneth," said the Saracen; "for know, that had my assailant
been in very deed the Prince of Darkness, thou wert bound not the less to enter into combat
with him in thy comrade's behalf. Know, also, that whatever there may be of foul or of fiendish
about the Hamako belongs more to your lineage than to mine--this Hamako being, in truth, the
anchorite whom thou art come hither to visit."

"This!" said Sir Kenneth, looking at the athletic yet wasted figure before him--"this! Thou
mockest, Saracen--this cannot be the venerable Theodorick!"

"Ask himself, if thou wilt not believe me," answered Sheerkohf; and ere the words had left
his mouth, the hermit gave evidence in his own behalf.

"I am Theodorick of Engaddi," he said--"I am the walker of the desert--I am friend of the Cross,
and flail of all infidels, heretics, and devil-worshippers. Avoid ye, avoid ye! Down with Mahound,
Termagaunt, and all their adherents!"--So saying, he pulled from under his shaggy garment a
sort of flail or jointed club, bound with iron, which he brandished round his head with singular
dexterity.

"Thou seest thy saint," said the Saracen, laughing, for the first time, at the unmitigated
astonishment with which Sir Kenneth looked on the wild gestures and heard the wayward muttering
of Theodorick, who, after swinging his flail in every direction, apparently quite reckless
whether it encountered the head of either of his companions, finally showed his own strength,
and the soundness of the weapon, by striking into fragments a large stone which lay near him.

"This is a madman," said Sir Kenneth.

"Not the worse saint," returned the Moslem, speaking according to the well-known Eastern belief,
that madmen are under the influence of immediate inspiration. "Know, Christian, that when one
eye is extinguished, the other becomes more keen; when one hand is cut off, the other becomes
more powerful; so, when our reason in human things is disturbed or destroyed, our view heavenward
becomes more acute and perfect."

Here the voice of the Saracen was drowned in that of the hermit, who began to hollo aloud in
a wild, chanting tone, "I am Theodorick of Engaddi--I am the torch-brand of the desert--I am
the flail of the infidels! The lion and the leopard shall be my comrades, and draw nigh to
my cell for shelter; neither shall the goat be afraid of their fangs. I am the torch and the
lantern--Kyrie Eleison!"

He closed his song by a short race, and ended that again by three forward bounds, which would
have done him great credit in a gymnastic academy, but became his character of hermit so indifferently
that the Scottish Knight was altogether confounded and bewildered.

The Saracen seemed to understand him better. "You see," he said, "that he expects us to follow
him to his cell, which, indeed, is our only place of refuge for the night. You are the leopard,
from the portrait on your shield; I am the lion, as my name imports; and by the goat, alluding
to his garb of goat-skins, he means himself. We must keep him in sight, however, for he is
as fleet as a dromedary."

In fact, the task was a difficult one, for though the reverend guide stopped from time to time,
and waved his hand, as if to encourage them to come on, yet, well acquainted with all the winding
dells and passes of the desert, and gifted with uncommon activity, which, perhaps, an unsettled
state of mind kept in constant exercise, he led the knights through chasms and along footpaths
where even the light-armed Saracen, with his well-trained barb, was in considerable risk, and
where the iron-sheathed European and his over-burdened steed found themselves in such imminent
peril as the rider would gladly have exchanged for the dangers of a general action. Glad he
was when, at length, after this wild race, he beheld the holy man who had led it standing in
front of a cavern, with a large torch in his hand, composed of a piece of wood dipped in bitumen,
which cast a broad and flickering light, and emitted a strong sulphureous smell.

Undeterred by the stifling vapour, the knight threw himself from his horse and entered the
cavern, which afforded small appearance of accommodation. The cell was divided into two parts,
in the outward of which were an altar of stone and a crucifix made of reeds: this served the
anchorite for his chapel. On one side of this outward cave the Christian knight, though not
without scruple, arising from religious reverence to the objects around, fastened up his horse,
and arranged him for the night, in imitation of the Saracen, who gave him to understand that
such was the custom of the place. The hermit, meanwhile, was busied putting his inner apartment
in order to receive his guests, and there they soon joined him. At the bottom of the outer
cave, a small aperture, closed with a door of rough plank, led into the sleeping apartment
of the hermit, which was more commodious. The floor had been brought to a rough level by the
labour of the inhabitant, and then strewed with white sand, which he daily sprinkled with water
from a small fountain which bubbled out of the rock in one corner, affording in that stifling
climate, refreshment alike to the ear and the taste. Mattresses, wrought of twisted flags,
lay by the side of the cell; the sides, like the floor, had been roughly brought to shape,
and several herbs and flowers were hung around them. Two waxen torches, which the hermit lighted,
gave a cheerful air to the place, which was rendered agreeable by its fragrance and coolness.

There were implements of labour in one corner of the apartment, in another was a niche for
a rude statue of the Virgin. A table and two chairs showed that they must be the handiwork
of the anchorite, being different in their form from Oriental accommodations. The former was
covered, not only with reeds and pulse, but also with dried flesh, which Theodorick assiduously
placed in such arrangement as should invite the appetite of his guests. This appearance of
courtesy, though mute, and expressed by gestures only, seemed to Sir Kenneth something entirely
irreconcilable with his former wild and violent demeanour. The movements of the hermit were
now become composed, and apparently it was only a sense of religious humiliation which prevented
his features, emaciated as they were by his austere mode of life, from being majestic and noble.
He trod his cell as one who seemed born to rule over men, but who had abdicated his empire
to become the servant of Heaven. Still, it must be allowed that his gigantic size, the length
of his unshaven locks and beard, and the fire of a deep-set and wild eye were rather attributes
of a soldier than of a recluse.

Even the Saracen seemed to regard the anchorite with some veneration, while he was thus employed,
and he whispered in a low tone to Sir Kenneth, "The Hamako is now in his better mind, but he
will not speak until we have eaten--such is his vow."

It was in silence, accordingly, that Theodorick motioned to the Scot to take his place on one
of the low chairs, while Sheerkohf placed himself, after the custom of his nation, upon a cushion
of mats. The hermit then held up both hands, as if blessing the refreshment which he had placed
before his guests, and they proceeded to eat in silence as profound as his own. To the Saracen
this gravity was natural; and the Christian imitated his taciturnity, while he employed his
thoughts on the singularity of his own situation, and the contrast betwixt the wild, furious
gesticulations, loud cries, and fierce actions of Theodorick, when they first met him, and
the demure, solemn, decorous assiduity with which he now performed the duties of hospitality.

When their meal was ended, the hermit, who had not himself eaten a morsel, removed the fragments
from the table, and placing before the Saracen a pitcher of sherbet, assigned to the Scot a
flask of wine.

"Drink," he said, "my children"--they were the first words he had spoken--"the gifts of God
are to be enjoyed, when the Giver is remembered."

Having said this, he retired to the outward cell, probably for performance of his devotions,
and left his guests together in the inner apartment; when Sir Kenneth endeavoured, by various
questions, to draw from Sheerkohf what that Emir knew concerning his host. He was interested
by more than mere curiosity in these inquiries. Difficult as it was to reconcile the outrageous
demeanour of the recluse at his first appearance with his present humble and placid behaviour,
it seemed yet more impossible to think it consistent with the high consideration in which,
according to what Sir Kenneth had learned, this hermit was held by the most enlightened divines
of the Christian world. Theodorick, the hermit of Engaddi, had, in that character, been the
correspondent of popes and councils; to whom his letters, full of eloquent fervour, had described
the miseries imposed by the unbelievers upon the Latin Christians in the Holy Land, in colours
scarce inferior to those employed at the Council of Clermont by the Hermit Peter, when he preached
the first Crusade. To find, in a person so reverend and so much revered, the frantic gestures
of a mad fakir, induced the Christian knight to pause ere he could resolve to communicate to
him certain important matters, which he had in charge from some of the leaders of the Crusade.

It had been a main object of Sir Kenneth's pilgrimage, attempted by a route so unusual, to
make such communications; but what he had that night seen induced him to pause and reflect
ere he proceeded to the execution of his commission. From the Emir he could not extract much
information, but the general tenor was as follows:--That, as he had heard, the hermit had been
once a brave and valiant soldier, wise in council and fortunate in battle, which last he could
easily believe from the great strength and agility which he had often seen him display; that
he had appeared at Jerusalem in the character not of a pilgrim, but in that of one who had
devoted himself to dwell for the remainder of his life in the Holy Land. Shortly afterwards,
he fixed his residence amid the scenes of desolation where they now found him, respected by
the Latins for his austere devotion, and by the Turks and Arabs on account of the symptoms
of insanity which he displayed, and which they ascribed to inspiration. It was from them he
had the name of Hamako, which expresses such a character in the Turkish language. Sheerkohf
himself seemed at a loss how to rank their host. He had been, he said, a wise man, and could
often for many hours together speak lessons of virtue or wisdom, without the slightest appearance
of inaccuracy. At other times he was wild and violent, but never before had he seen him so
mischievously disposed as he had that day appeared to be. His rage was chiefly provoked by
any affront to his religion; and there was a story of some wandering Arabs, who had insulted
his worship and defaced his altar, and whom he had on that account attacked and slain with
the short flail which he carried with him in lieu of all other weapons. This incident had made
a great noise, and it was as much the fear of the hermit's iron flail as regard for his character
as a Hamako which caused the roving tribes to respect his dwelling and his chapel. His fame
had spread so far that Saladin had issued particular orders that he should be spared and protected.
He himself, and other Moslem lords of rank, had visited the cell more than once, partly from
curiosity, partly that they expected from a man so learned as the Christian Hamako some insight
into the secrets of futurity. "He had," continued the Saracen, "a rashid, or observatory, of
great height, contrived to view the heavenly bodies, and particularly the planetary system--by
whose movements and influences, as both Christian and Moslem believed, the course of human
events was regulated, and might be predicted."

This was the substance of the Emir Sheerkohf's information, and it left Sir Kenneth in doubt
whether the character of insanity arose from the occasional excessive fervour of the hermit's
zeal, or whether it was not altogether fictitious, and assumed for the sake of the immunities
which it afforded. Yet it seemed that the infidels had carried their complaisance towards him
to an uncommon length, considering the fanaticism of the followers of Mohammed, in the midst
of whom he was living, though the professed enemy of their faith. He thought also there was
more intimacy of acquaintance betwixt the hermit and the Saracen than the words of the latter
had induced him to anticipate; and it had not escaped him that the former had called the latter
by a name different from that which he himself had assumed. All these considerations authorized
caution, if not suspicion. He determined to observe his host closely, and not to be over-hasty
in communicating with him on the important charge entrusted to him.

"Beware, Saracen," he said; "methinks our host's imagination wanders as well on the subject
of names as upon other matters. Thy name is Sheerkohf, and he called thee but now by another."

"My name, when in the tent of my father," replied the Kurdman, "was Ilderim, and by this I
am still distinguished by many. In the field, and to soldiers, I am known as the Lion of the
Mountain, being the name my good sword hath won for me. But hush, the Hamako comes--it is to
warn us to rest. I know his custom; none must watch him at his vigils."

The anchorite accordingly entered, and folding his arms on his bosom as he stood before them,
said with a solemn voice, "Blessed be His name, who hath appointed the quiet night to follow
the busy day, and the calm sleep to refresh the wearied limbs and to compose the troubled spirit!"

Both warriors replied "Amen!" and, arising from the table, prepared to betake themselves to
the couches, which their host indicated by waving his hand, as, making a reverence to each,
he again withdrew from the apartment.

The Knight of the Leopard then disarmed himself of his heavy panoply, his Saracen companion
kindly assisting him to undo his buckler and clasps, until he remained in the close dress of
chamois leather, which knights and men-at-arms used to wear under their harness. The Saracen,
if he had admired the strength of his adversary when sheathed in steel, was now no less struck
with the accuracy of proportion displayed in his nervous and well-compacted figure. The knight,
on the other hand, as, in exchange of courtesy, he assisted the Saracen to disrobe himself
of his upper garments, that he might sleep with more convenience, was, on his side, at a loss
to conceive how such slender proportions and slimness of figure could be reconciled with the
vigour he had displayed in personal contest.

Each warrior prayed ere he addressed himself to his place of rest. The Moslem turned towards
his KEBLAH, the point to which the prayer of each follower of the Prophet was to be addressed,
and murmured his heathen orisons; while the Christian, withdrawing from the contamination of
the infidel's neighbourhood, placed his huge cross-handled sword upright, and kneeling before
it as the sign of salvation, told his rosary with a devotion which was enhanced by the recollection
of the scenes through which he had passed, and the dangers from which he had been rescued,
in the course of the day. Both warriors, worn by toil and travel, were soon fast asleep, each
on his separate pallet.

CHAPTER IV.

Kenneth the Scot was uncertain how long his senses had been lost in profound repose, when he
was roused to recollection by a sense of oppression on his chest, which at first suggested
a flirting dream of struggling with a powerful opponent, and at length recalled him fully to
his senses. He was about to demand who was there, when, opening his eyes, he beheld the figure
of the anchorite, wild and savage-looking as we have described him, standing by his bedside,
and pressing his right hand upon his breast, while he held a small silver lamp in the other.

"Be silent," said the hermit, as the prostrate knight looked up in surprise; "I have that to
say to you which yonder infidel must not hear."

These words he spoke in the French language, and not in the lingua franca, or compound of Eastern
and European dialects, which had hitherto been used amongst them.

"Arise," he continued, "put on thy mantle; speak not, but tread lightly, and follow me."

Sir Kenneth arose, and took his sword.

"It needs not," answered the anchorite, in a whisper; "we are going where spiritual arms avail
much, and fleshly weapons are but as the reed and the decayed gourd."

The knight deposited his sword by the bedside as before, and, armed only with his dagger, from
which in this perilous country he never parted, prepared to attend his mysterious host.

The hermit then moved slowly forwards, and was followed by the knight, still under some uncertainty
whether the dark form which glided on before to show him the path was not, in fact, the creation
of a disturbed dream. They passed, like shadows, into the outer apartment, without disturbing
the paynim Emir, who lay still buried in repose. Before the cross and altar, in the outward
room, a lamp was still burning, a missal was displayed, and on the floor lay a discipline,
or penitential scourge of small cord and wire, the lashes of which were recently stained with
blood--a token, no doubt, of the severe penance of the recluse. Here Theodorick kneeled down,
and pointed to the knight to take his place beside him upon the sharp flints, which seemed
placed for the purpose of rendering the posture of reverential devotion as uneasy as possible.
He read many prayers of the Catholic Church, and chanted, in a low but earnest voice, three
of the penitential psalms. These last he intermixed with sighs, and tears, and convulsive throbs,
which bore witness how deeply he felt the divine poetry which he recited. The Scottish knight
assisted with profound sincerity at these acts of devotion, his opinion of his host beginning,
in the meantime, to be so much changed, that he doubted whether, from the severity of his penance
and the ardour of his prayers, he ought not to regard him as a saint; and when they arose from
the ground, he stood with reverence before him, as a pupil before an honoured master. The hermit
was, on his side, silent and abstracted for the space of a few minutes.

"Look into yonder recess, my son," he said, pointing to the farther corner of the cell; "there
thou wilt find a veil--bring it hither."

The knight obeyed, and in a small aperture cut out of the wall, and secured with a door of
wicker, he found the veil inquired for. When he brought it to the light, he discovered that
it was torn, and soiled in some places with some dark substance. The anchorite looked at it
with a deep but smothered emotion, and ere he could speak to the Scottish knight, was compelled
to vent his feelings in a convulsive groan.

"Thou art now about to look upon the richest treasure that the earth possesses," he at length
said; "woe is me, that my eyes are unworthy to be lifted towards it! Alas! I am but the vile
and despised sign, which points out to the wearied traveller a harbour of rest and security,
but must itself remain for ever without doors. In vain have I fled to the very depths of the
rocks, and the very bosom of the thirsty desert. Mine enemy hath found me--even he whom I have
denied has pursued me to my fortresses."

He paused again for a moment, and turning to the Scottish knight, said, in a firmer tone of
voice, "You bring me a greeting from Richard of England?"

"I come from the Council of Christian Princes," said the knight; "but the King of England being
indisposed, I am not honoured with his Majesty's commands."

"Your token?" demanded the recluse.

Sir Kenneth hesitated. Former suspicions, and the marks of insanity which the hermit had formerly
exhibited, rushed suddenly on his thoughts; but how suspect a man whose manners were so saintly?
"My password," he said at length, "is this--Kings begged of a beggar."

"It is right," said the hermit, while he paused. "I know you well; but the sentinel upon his
post--and mine is an important one--challenges friend as well as foe."

He then moved forward with the lamp, leading the way into the room which they had left. The
Saracen lay on his couch, still fast asleep. The hermit paused by his side, and looked down on him.

"He sleeps," he said, "in darkness, and must not be awakened."

The attitude of the Emir did indeed convey the idea of profound repose. One arm, flung across
his body, as he lay with his face half turned to the wall, concealed, with its loose and long
sleeve, the greater part of his face; but the high forehead was yet visible. Its nerves, which
during his waking hours were so uncommonly active, were now motionless, as if the face had
been composed of dark marble, and his long silken eyelashes closed over his piercing and hawklike
eyes. The open and relaxed hand, and the deep, regular, and soft breathing, all gave tokens
of the most profound repose. The slumberer formed a singular group along with the tall forms
of the hermit in his shaggy dress of goat-skins, bearing the lamp, and the knight in his close
leathern coat--the former with an austere expression of ascetic gloom, the latter with anxious
curiosity deeply impressed on his manly features.

"He sleeps soundly," said the hermit, in the same low tone as before; and repeating the words,
though he had changed the meaning from that which is literal to a metaphorical sense--"he sleeps
in darkness, but there shall be for him a dayspring.--O Ilderim, thy waking thoughts are yet
as vain and wild as those which are wheeling their giddy dance through thy sleeping brain;
but the trumpet shall be heard, and the dream shall be dissolved."

So saying, and making the knight a sign to follow him, the hermit went towards the altar, and
passing behind it, pressed a spring, which, opening without noise, showed a small iron door
wrought in the side of the cavern, so as to be almost imperceptible, unless upon the most severe
scrutiny. The hermit, ere he ventured fully to open the door, dropped some oil on the hinges,
which the lamp supplied. A small staircase, hewn in the rock, was discovered, when the iron
door was at length completely opened.

"Take the veil which I hold," said the hermit, in a melancholy tone, "and blind mine eyes;
For I may not look on the treasure which thou art presently to behold, without sin and presumption."

Without reply, the knight hastily muffled the recluse's head in the veil, and the latter began
to ascend the staircase as one too much accustomed to the way to require the use of light,
while at the same time he held the lamp to the Scot, who followed him for many steps up the
narrow ascent. At length they rested in a small vault of irregular form, in one nook of which
the staircase terminated, while in another corner a corresponding stair was seen to continue
the ascent. In a third angle was a Gothic door, very rudely ornamented with the usual attributes
of clustered columns and carving, and defended by a wicket, strongly guarded with iron, and
studded with large nails. To this last point the hermit directed his steps, which seemed to
falter as he approached it.

"Put off thy shoes," he said to his attendant; "the ground on which thou standest is holy.
Banish from thy innermost heart each profane and carnal thought, for to harbour such while
in this place were a deadly impiety."

The knight laid aside his shoes as he was commanded, and the hermit stood in the meanwhile
as if communing with his soul in secret prayer, and when he again moved, commanded the knight
to knock at the wicket three times. He did so. The door opened spontaneously--at least Sir
Kenneth beheld no one--and his senses were at once assailed by a stream of the purest light,
and by a strong and almost oppressive sense of the richest perfumes. He stepped two or three
paces back, and it was the space of a minute ere he recovered the dazzling and overpowering
effects of the sudden change from darkness to light.

When he entered the apartment in which this brilliant lustre was displayed, he perceived that
the light proceeded from a combination of silver lamps, fed with purest oil, and sending forth
the richest odours, hanging by silver chains from the roof of a small Gothic chapel, hewn,
like most part of the hermit's singular mansion, out of the sound and solid rock. But whereas,
in every other place which Sir Kenneth had seen, the labour employed upon the rock had been
of the simplest and coarsest description, it had in this chapel employed the invention and
the chisels of the most able architects. The groined roofs rose from six columns on each side,
carved with the rarest skill; and the manner in which the crossings of the concave arches were
bound together, as it were, with appropriate ornaments, were all in the finest tone of the
architecture of the age. Corresponding to the line of pillars, there were on each side six
richly-wrought niches, each of which contained the image of one of the twelve apostles.

At the upper and eastern end of the chapel stood the altar, behind which a very rich curtain
of Persian silk, embroidered deeply with gold, covered a recess, containing, unquestionably,
some image or relic of no ordinary sanctity, in honour of which this singular place of worship
had been erected, Under the persuasion that this must be the case, the knight advanced to the
shrine, and kneeling down before it, repeated his devotions with fervency, during which his
attention was disturbed by the curtain being suddenly raised, or rather pulled aside, how or
by whom he saw not; but in the niche which was thus disclosed he beheld a cabinet of silver
and ebony, with a double folding-door, the whole formed into the miniature resemblance of a
Gothic church.

As he gazed with anxious curiosity on the shrine, the two folding-doors also flew open, discovering
a large piece of wood, on which were blazoned the words, VERA CRUX; at the same time a choir
of female voices sung GLORIA PATRI. The instant the strain had ceased, the shrine was closed,
and the curtain again drawn, and the knight who knelt at the altar might now continue his devotions
undisturbed, in honour of the holy relic which had been just disclosed to his view. He did
this under the profound impression of one who had witnessed, with his own eyes, an awful evidence
of the truth of his religion; and it was some time ere, concluding his orisons, he arose, and
ventured to look around him for the hermit, who had guided him to this sacred and mysterious
spot. He beheld him, his head still muffled in the veil which he had himself wrapped around
it, crouching, like a rated hound, upon the threshold of the chapel; but, apparently, without
venturing to cross it--the holiest reverence, the most penitential remorse, was expressed by
his posture, which seemed that of a man borne down and crushed to the earth by the burden of
his inward feelings. It seemed to the Scot that only the sense of the deepest penitence, remorse,
and humiliation could have thus prostrated a frame so strong and a spirit so fiery.

He approached him as if to speak; but the recluse anticipated his purpose, murmuring in stifled
tones, from beneath the fold in which his head was muffled, and which sounded like a voice
proceeding from the cerements of a corpse,--"Abide, abide--happy thou that mayest--the vision
is not yet ended." So saying, he reared himself from the ground, drew back from the threshold
on which he had hitherto lain prostrate, and closed the door of the chapel, which, secured
by a spring bolt within, the snap of which resounded through the place, appeared so much like
a part of the living rock from which the cavern was hewn, that Kenneth could hardly discern
where the aperture had been. He was now alone in the lighted chapel which contained the relic
to which he had lately rendered his homage, without other arms than his dagger, or other companion
than his pious thoughts and dauntless courage.

Uncertain what was next to happen, but resolved to abide the course of events, Sir Kenneth
paced the solitary chapel till about the time of the earliest cock-crowing. At this dead season,
when night and morning met together, he heard, but from what quarter he could not discover,
the sound of such a small silver bell as is rung at the elevation of the host in the ceremony,
or sacrifice, as it has been called, of the mass. The hour and the place rendered the sound
fearfully solemn, and, bold as he was, the knight withdrew himself into the farther nook of
the chapel, at the end opposite to the altar, in order to observe, without interruption, the
consequences of this unexpected signal.

He did not wait long ere the silken curtain was again withdrawn, and the relic again presented
to his view. As he sunk reverentially on his knee, he heard the sound of the lauds, or earliest
office of the Catholic Church, sung by female voices, which united together in the performance
as they had done in the former service. The knight was soon aware that the voices were no longer
stationary in the distance, but approached the chapel and became louder, when a door, imperceptible
when closed, like that by which he had himself entered, opened on the other side of the vault,
and gave the tones of the choir more room to swell along the ribbed arches of the roof.

The knight fixed his eyes on the opening with breathless anxiety, and, continuing to kneel
in the attitude of devotion which the place and scene required, expected the consequence of
these preparations. A procession appeared about to issue from the door. First, four beautiful
boys, whose arms, necks, and legs were bare, showing the bronze complexion of the East, and
contrasting with the snow-white tunics which they wore, entered the chapel by two and two.
The first pair bore censers, which they swung from side to side, adding double fragrance to
the odours with which the chapel already was impregnated. The second pair scattered flowers.

After these followed, in due and majestic order, the females who composed the choir--six, who
from their black scapularies, and black veils over their white garments, appeared to be professed
nuns of the order of Mount Carmel; and as many whose veils, being white, argued them to be
novices, or occasional inhabitants in the cloister, who were not as yet bound to it by vows.
The former held in their hands large rosaries, while the younger and lighter figures who followed
carried each a chaplet of red and white roses. They moved in procession around the chapel,
without appearing to take the slightest notice of Kenneth, although passing so near him that
their robes almost touched him, while they continued to sing. The knight doubted not that he
was in one of those cloisters where the noble Christian maidens had formerly openly devoted
themselves to the services of the church. Most of them had been suppressed since the Mohammedans
had reconquered Palestine, but many, purchasing connivance by presents, or receiving it from
the clemency or contempt of the victors, still continued to observe in private the ritual to
which their vows had consecrated them. Yet, though Kenneth knew this to be the case, the solemnity
of the place and hour, the surprise at the sudden appearance of these votaresses, and the visionary
manner in which they moved past him, had such influence on his imagination that he could scarce
conceive that the fair procession which he beheld was formed of creatures of this world, so
much did they resemble a choir of supernatural beings, rendering homage to the universal object
of adoration.

Such was the knight's first idea, as the procession passed him, scarce moving, save just sufficiently
to continue their progress; so that, seen by the shadowy and religious light which the lamps
shed through the clouds of incense which darkened the apartment, they appeared rather to glide
than to walk.

But as a second time, in surrounding the chapel, they passed the spot on which he kneeled,
one of the white-stoled maidens, as she glided by him, detached from the chaplet which she
carried a rosebud, which dropped from her fingers, perhaps unconsciously, on the foot of Sir
Kenneth. The knight started as if a dart had suddenly struck his person; for, when the mind
is wound up to a high pitch of feeling and expectation, the slightest incident, if unexpected,
gives fire to the train which imagination has already laid. But he suppressed his emotion,
recollecting how easily an incident so indifferent might have happened, and that it was only
the uniform monotony of the movement of the choristers which made the incident in the slightest
degree remarkable.

Still, while the procession, for the third time, surrounded the chapel, the thoughts and the
eyes of Kenneth followed exclusively the one among the novices who had dropped the rosebud.
Her step, her face, her form were so completely assimilated to the rest of the choristers that
it was impossible to perceive the least marks of individuality; and yet Kenneth's heart throbbed
like a bird that would burst from its cage, as if to assure him, by its sympathetic suggestions,
that the female who held the right file on the second rank of the novices was dearer to him,
not only than all the rest that were present, but than the whole sex besides. The romantic
passion of love, as it was cherished, and indeed enjoined, by the rules of chivalry, associated
well with the no less romantic feelings of devotion; and they might be said much more to enhance
than to counteract each other. It was, therefore, with a glow of expectation that had something
even of a religious character that Sir Kenneth, his sensations thrilling from his heart to
the ends of his fingers, expected some second sign of the presence of one who, he strongly
fancied, had already bestowed on him the first. Short as the space was during which the procession
again completed a third perambulation of the chapel, it seemed an eternity to Kenneth. At length
the form which he had watched with such devoted attention drew nigh. There was no difference
betwixt that shrouded figure and the others, with whom it moved in concert and in unison, until,
just as she passed for the third time the kneeling Crusader, a part of a little and well-proportioned
hand, so beautifully formed as to give the highest idea of the perfect proportions of the form
to which it belonged, stole through the folds of the gauze, like a moonbeam through the fleecy
cloud of a summer night, and again a rosebud lay at the feet of the Knight of the Leopard.

This second intimation could not be accidental---it could not be fortuitous, the resemblance
of that half-seen but beautiful female hand with one which his lips had once touched, and,
while they touched it, had internally sworn allegiance to the lovely owner. Had further proof
been wanting, there was the glimmer of that matchless ruby ring on that snow-white finger,
whose invaluable worth Kenneth would yet have prized less than the slightest sign which that
finger could have made; and, veiled too, as she was, he might see, by chance or by favour,
a stray curl of the dark tresses, each hair of which was dearer to him a hundred times than
a chain of massive gold. It was the lady of his love! But that she should be here--in the savage
and sequestered desert--among vestals, who rendered themselves habitants of wilds and of caverns,
that they might perform in secret those Christian rites which they dared not assist in openly;
that this should be so, in truth and in reality, seemed too incredible--it must be a dream--a
delusive trance of the imagination. While these thoughts passed through the mind of Kenneth,
the same passage, by which the procession had entered the chapel, received them on their return.
The young sacristans, the sable nuns, vanished successively through the open door. At length
she from whom he had received this double intimation passed also; yet, in passing, turned her
head, slightly indeed, but perceptibly, towards the place where he remained fixed as an image.
He marked the last wave of her veil--it was gone--and a darkness sunk upon his soul, scarce
less palpable than that which almost immediately enveloped his external sense; for the last
chorister had no sooner crossed the threshold of the door than it shut with a loud sound, and
at the same instant the voices of the choir were silent, the lights of the chapel were at once
extinguished, and Sir Kenneth remained solitary and in total darkness. But to Kenneth, solitude,
and darkness, and the uncertainty of his mysterious situation were as nothing--he thought not
of them--cared not for them--cared for nought in the world save the flitting vision which had
just glided past him, and the tokens of her favour which she had bestowed. To grope on the
floor for the buds which she had dropped--to press them to his lips, to his bosom, now alternately,
now together--to rivet his lips to the cold stones on which, as near as he could judge, she
had so lately stepped--to play all the extravagances which strong affection suggests and vindicates
to those who yield themselves up to it, were but the tokens of passionate love common to all
ages. But it was peculiar to the times of chivalry that, in his wildest rapture, the knight
imagined of no attempt to follow or to trace the object of such romantic attachment; that he
thought of her as of a deity, who, having deigned to show herself for an instant to her devoted
worshipper, had again returned to the darkness of her sanctuary--or as an influential planet,
which, having darted in some auspicious minute one favourable ray, wrapped itself again in
its veil of mist. The motions of the lady of his love were to him those of a superior being,
who was to move without watch or control, rejoice him by her appearance, or depress him by
her absence, animate him by her kindness, or drive him to despair by her cruelty--all at her
own free will, and without other importunity or remonstrance than that expressed by the most
devoted services of the heart and sword of the champion, whose sole object in life was to fulfil
her commands, and, by the splendour of his own achievements, to exalt her fame.

Such were the rules of chivalry, and of the love which was its ruling principle. But Sir Kenneth's
attachment was rendered romantic by other and still more peculiar circumstances. He had never
even heard the sound of his lady's voice, though he had often beheld her beauty with rapture.
She moved in a circle which his rank of knighthood permitted him indeed to approach, but not
to mingle with; and highly as he stood distinguished for warlike skill and enterprise, still
the poor Scottish soldier was compelled to worship his divinity at a distance almost as great
as divides the Persian from the sun which he adores. But when was the pride of woman too lofty
to overlook the passionate devotion of a lover, however inferior in degree? Her eye had been
on him in the tournament, her ear had heard his praises in the report of the battles which
were daily fought; and while count, duke, and lord contended for her grace, it flowed, unwillingly
perhaps at first, or even unconsciously, towards the poor Knight of the Leopard, who, to support
his rank, had little besides his sword. When she looked, and when she listened, the lady saw
and heard enough to encourage her in a partiality which had at first crept on her unawares.
If a knight's personal beauty was praised, even the most prudish dames of the military court
of England would make an exception in favour of the Scottish Kenneth; and it oftentimes happened
that, notwithstanding the very considerable largesses which princes and peers bestowed on the
minstrels, an impartial spirit of independence would seize the poet, and the harp was swept
to the heroism of one who had neither palfreys nor garments to bestow in guerdon of his applause.

The moments when she listened to the praises of her lover became gradually more and more dear
to the high-born Edith, relieving the flattery with which her ear was weary, and presenting
to her a subject of secret contemplation, more worthy, as he seemed by general report, than
those who surpassed him in rank and in the gifts of fortune. As her attention became constantly,
though cautiously, fixed on Sir Kenneth, she grew more and more convinced of his personal devotion
to herself and more and more certain in her mind that in Kenneth of Scotland she beheld the
fated knight doomed to share with her through weal and woe--and the prospect looked gloomy
and dangerous--the passionate attachment to which the poets of the age ascribed such universal
dominion, and which its manners and morals placed nearly on the same rank with devotion itself.

Let us not disguise the truth from our readers. When Edith became aware of the state of her
own sentiments, chivalrous as were her sentiments, becoming a maiden not distant from the throne
of England--gratified as her pride must have been with the mute though unceasing homage rendered
to her by the knight whom she had distinguished, there were moments when the feelings of the
woman, loving and beloved, murmured against the restraints of state and form by which she was
surrounded, and when she almost blamed the timidity of her lover, who seemed resolved not to
infringe them. The etiquette, to use a modern phrase, of birth and rank, had drawn around her
a magical circle, beyond which Sir Kenneth might indeed bow and gaze, but within which he could
no more pass than an evoked spirit can transgress the boundaries prescribed by the rod of a
powerful enchanter. The thought involuntarily pressed on her that she herself must venture,
were it but the point of her fairy foot, beyond the prescribed boundary, if she ever hoped
to give a lover so reserved and bashful an opportunity of so slight a favour as but to salute
her shoe-tie. There was an example--the noted precedent of the "King's daughter of Hungary,"
who thus generously encouraged the "squire of low degree;" and Edith, though of kingly blood,
was no king's daughter, any more than her lover was of low degree--fortune had put no such
extreme barrier in obstacle to their affections. Something, however, within the maiden's bosom--that
modest pride which throws fetters even on love itself forbade her, notwithstanding the superiority
of her condition, to make those advances, which, in every case, delicacy assigns to the other
sex; above all, Sir Kenneth was a knight so gentle and honourable, so highly accomplished,
as her imagination at least suggested, together with the strictest feelings of what was due
to himself and to her, that however constrained her attitude might be while receiving his adorations,
like the image of some deity, who is neither supposed to feel nor to reply to the homage of
its votaries, still the idol feared that to step prematurely from her pedestal would be to
degrade herself in the eyes of her devoted worshipper.

Yet the devout adorer of an actual idol can even discover signs of approbation in the rigid
and immovable features of a marble image; and it is no wonder that something, which could be
as favourably interpreted, glanced from the bright eye of the lovely Edith, whose beauty, indeed,
consisted rather more in that very power of expression, than an absolute regularity of contour
or brilliancy of complexion. Some slight marks of distinction had escaped from her, notwithstanding
her own jealous vigilance, else how could Sir Kenneth have so readily and so undoubtingly recognized
the lovely hand, of which scarce two fingers were visible from under the veil, or how could
he have rested so thoroughly assured that two flowers, successively dropped on the spot, were
intended as a recognition on the part of his lady-love? By what train of observation--by what
secret signs, looks, or gestures--by what instinctive freemasonry of love, this degree of intelligence
came to subsist between Edith and her lover, we cannot attempt to trace; for we are old, and
such slight vestiges of affection, quickly discovered by younger eyes, defy the power of ours.
Enough that such affection did subsist between parties who had never even spoken to one another--though,
on the side of Edith, it was checked by a deep sense of the difficulties and dangers which
must necessarily attend the further progress of their attachment; and upon that of the knight
by a thousand doubts and fears lest he had overestimated the slight tokens of the lady's notice,
varied, as they necessarily were, by long intervals of apparent coldness, during which either
the fear of exciting the observation of others, and thus drawing danger upon her lover, or
that of sinking in his esteem by seeming too willing to be won, made her behave with indifference,
and as if unobservant of his presence.

This narrative, tedious perhaps, but which the story renders necessary, may serve to explain
the state of intelligence, if it deserves so strong a name, betwixt the lovers, when Edith's
unexpected appearance in the chapel produced so powerful an effect on the feelings of her knight.

CHAPTER V.

     Their necromantic forms in vain
     Haunt us on the tented plain;
     We bid these spectre shapes avaunt,
     Ashtaroth and Termagaunt.     WARTON.

The most profound silence, the deepest darkness, continued to brood for more than an hour over
the chapel in which we left the Knight of the Leopard still kneeling, alternately expressing
thanks to Heaven and gratitude to his lady for the boon which had been vouchsafed to him. His
own safety, his own destiny, for which he was at all times little anxious, had not now the
weight of a grain of dust in his reflections. He was in the neighbourhood of Lady Edith; he
had received tokens of her grace; he was in a place hallowed by relics of the most awful sanctity.
A Christian soldier, a devoted lover, could fear nothing, think of nothing, but his duty to
Heaven and his devoir to his lady.

At the lapse of the space of time which we have noticed, a shrill whistle, like that with which
a falconer calls his hawk, was heard to ring sharply through the vaulted chapel. It was a sound
ill suited to the place, and reminded Sir Kenneth how necessary it was he should be upon his
guard. He started from his knee, and laid his hand upon his poniard. A creaking sound, as of
a screw or pulleys, succeeded, and a light streaming upwards, as from an opening in the floor,
showed that a trap-door had been raised or depressed. In less than a minute a long, skinny
arm, partly naked, partly clothed in a sleeve of red samite, arose out of the aperture, holding
a lamp as high as it could stretch upwards, and the figure to which the arm belonged ascended
step by step to the level of the chapel floor. The form and face of the being who thus presented
himself were those of a frightful dwarf, with a large head, a cap fantastically adorned with
three peacock feathers, a dress of red samite, the richness of which rendered his ugliness
more conspicuous, distinguished by gold bracelets and armlets, and a white silk sash, in which
he wore a gold-hilted dagger. This singular figure had in his left hand a kind of broom. So
soon as he had stepped from the aperture through which he arose, he stood still, and, as if
to show himself more distinctly, moved the lamp which he held slowly over his face and person,
successively illuminating his wild and fantastic features, and his misshapen but nervous limbs.
Though disproportioned in person, the dwarf was not so distorted as to argue any want of strength
or activity. While Sir Kenneth gazed on this disagreeable object, the popular creed occurred
to his remembrance concerning the gnomes or earthly spirits which make their abode in the caverns
of the earth; and so much did this figure correspond with ideas he had formed of their appearance,
that he looked on it with disgust, mingled not indeed with fear, but that sort of awe which
the presence of a supernatural creature may infuse into the most steady bosom.

The dwarf again whistled, and summoned from beneath a companion. This second figure ascended
in the same manner as the first; but it was a female arm in this second instance which upheld
the lamp from the subterranean vault out of which these presentments arose, and it was a female
form, much resembling the first in shape and proportions, which slowly emerged from the floor.
Her dress was also of red samite, fantastically cut and flounced, as if she had been dressed
for some exhibition of mimes or jugglers; and with the same minuteness which her predecessor
had exhibited, she passed the lamp over her face and person, which seemed to rival the male's
in ugliness. But with all this most unfavourable exterior, there was one trait in the features
of both which argued alertness and intelligence in the most uncommon degree. This arose from
the brilliancy of their eyes, which, deep-set beneath black and shaggy brows, gleamed with
a lustre which, like that in the eye of the toad, seemed to make some amends for the extreme
ugliness of countenance and person.

Sir Kenneth remained as if spellbound, while this unlovely pair, moving round the chapel close
to each other, appeared to perform the duty of sweeping it, like menials; but as they used
only one hand, the floor was not much benefited by the exercise, which they plied with such
oddity of gestures and manner as befitted their bizarre and fantastic appearance. When they
approached near to the knight in the course of their occupation, they ceased to use their brooms;
and placing themselves side by side, directly opposite to Sir Kenneth, they again slowly shifted
the lights which they held, so as to allow him distinctly to survey features which were not
rendered more agreeable by being brought nearer, and to observe the extreme quickness and keenness
with which their black and glittering eyes flashed back the light of the lamps. They then turned
the gleam of both lights upon the knight, and having accurately surveyed him, turned their
faces to each other, and set up a loud, yelling laugh, which resounded in his ears. The sound
was so ghastly that Sir Kenneth started at hearing it, and hastily demanded, in the name of
God, who they were who profaned that holy place with such antic gestures and elritch exclamations.

"I am the dwarf Nectabanus," said the abortion-seeming male, in a voice corresponding to his
figure, and resembling the voice of the night-crow more than any sound which is heard by daylight.

"And I am Guenevra, his lady and his love," replied the female, in tones which, being shriller,
were yet wilder than those of her companion.

"Wherefore are you here?" again demanded the knight, scarcely yet assured that they were human
beings which he saw before him.

"I am," replied the male dwarf, with much assumed gravity and dignity, "the twelfth Imaum.
I am Mohammed Mohadi, the guide and the conductor of the faithful. A hundred horses stand ready
saddled for me and my train at the Holy City, and as many at the City of Refuge. I am he who
shall bear witness, and this is one of my houris."

"Thou liest!" answered the female, interrupting her companion, in tones yet shriller than his
own; "I am none of thy houris, and thou art no such infidel trash as the Mohammed of whom thou
speakest. May my curse rest upon his coffin! I tell thee, thou ass of Issachar, thou art King
Arthur of Britain, whom the fairies stole away from the field of Avalon; and I am Dame Guenevra,
famed for her beauty."

"But in truth, noble sir," said the male, "we are distressed princes, dwelling under the wing
of King Guy of Jerusalem, until he was driven out from his own nest by the foul infidels--Heaven's
bolts consume them!"

"Hush," said a voice from the side upon which the knight had entered--"hush, fools, and begone;
your ministry is ended."

The dwarfs had no sooner heard the command than, gibbering in discordant whispers to each other,
they blew out their lights at once, and left the knight in utter darkness, which, when the
pattering of their retiring feet had died away, was soon accompanied by its fittest companion,
total silence.

The knight felt the departure of these unfortunate creatures a relief. He could not, from their
language, manners, and appearance, doubt that they belonged to the degraded class of beings
whom deformity of person and weakness of intellect recommended to the painful situation of
appendages to great families, where their personal appearance and imbecility were food for
merriment to the household. Superior in no respect to the ideas and manners of his time, the
Scottish knight might, at another period, have been much amused by the mummery of these poor
effigies of humanity; but now their appearance, gesticulations, and language broke the train
of deep and solemn feeling with which he was impressed, and he rejoiced in the disappearance
of the unhappy objects.

A few minutes after they had retired, the door at which he had entered opened slowly, and remaining
ajar, discovered a faint light arising from a lantern placed upon the threshold. Its doubtful
and wavering gleam showed a dark form reclined beside the entrance, but without its precincts,
which, on approaching it more nearly, he recognized to be the hermit, crouching in the same
humble posture in which he had at first laid himself down, and which, doubtless, he had retained
during the whole time of his guest's continuing in the chapel.

"All is over," said the hermit, as he heard the knight approaching, "and the most wretched
of earthly sinners, with him who should think himself most honoured and most happy among the
race of humanity, must retire from this place. Take the light, and guide me down the descent,
for I must not uncover my eyes until I am far from this hallowed spot."

The Scottish knight obeyed in silence, for a solemn and yet ecstatic sense of what he had seen
had silenced even the eager workings of curiosity. He led the way, with considerable accuracy,
through the various secret passages and stairs by which they had ascended, until at length
they found themselves in the outward cell of the hermit's cavern.

"The condemned criminal is restored to his dungeon, reprieved from one miserable day to another,
until his awful Judge shall at length appoint the well-deserved sentence to be carried into
execution."

As the hermit spoke these words, he laid aside the veil with which his eyes had been bound,
and looked at it with a suppressed and hollow sigh. No sooner had he restored it to the crypt
from which he had caused the Scot to bring it, than he said hastily and sternly to his companion;
"Begone, begone--to rest, to rest. You may sleep--you can sleep--I neither can nor may."

Respecting the profound agitation with which this was spoken, the knight retired into the inner
cell; but casting back his eye as he left the exterior grotto, he beheld the anchorite stripping
his shoulders with frantic haste of their shaggy mantle, and ere he could shut the frail door
which separated the two compartments of the cavern, he heard the clang of the scourge and the
groans of the penitent under his self-inflicted penance. A cold shudder came over the knight
as he reflected what could be the foulness of the sin, what the depth of the remorse, which,
apparently, such severe penance could neither cleanse nor assuage. He told his beads devoutly,
and flung himself on his rude couch, after a glance at the still sleeping Moslem, and, wearied
by the various scenes of the day and the night, soon slept as sound as infancy. Upon his awaking
in the morning, he held certain conferences with the hermit upon matters of importance, and
the result of their intercourse induced him to remain for two days longer in the grotto. He
was regular, as became a pilgrim, in his devotional exercises, but was not again admitted to
the chapel in which he had seen such wonders.

CHAPTER VI.

     Now change the scene--and let the trumpets sound,
     For we must rouse the lion from his lair.  OLD PLAY.

The scene must change, as our programme has announced, from the mountain wilderness of Jordan
to the camp of King Richard of England, then stationed betwixt Jean d'Acre and Ascalon, and
containing that army with which he of the lion heart had promised himself a triumphant march
to Jerusalem, and in which he would probably have succeeded, if not hindered by the jealousies
of the Christian princes engaged in the same enterprise, and the offence taken by them at the
uncurbed haughtiness of the English monarch, and Richard's unveiled contempt for his brother
sovereigns, who, his equals in rank, were yet far his inferiors in courage, hardihood, and
military talents. Such discords, and particularly those betwixt Richard and Philip of France,
created disputes and obstacles which impeded every active measure proposed by the heroic though
impetuous Richard, while the ranks of the Crusaders were daily thinned, not only by the desertion
of individuals, but of entire bands, headed by their respective feudal leaders, who withdrew
from a contest in which they had ceased to hope for success.

The effects of the climate became, as usual, fatal to soldiers from the north, and the more
so that the dissolute license of the Crusaders, forming a singular contrast to the principles
and purpose of their taking up arms, rendered them more easy victims to the insalubrious influence
of burning heat and chilling dews. To these discouraging causes of loss was to be added the
sword of the enemy. Saladin, than whom no greater name is recorded in Eastern history, had
learned, to his fatal experience, that his light-armed followers were little able to meet in
close encounter with the iron-clad Franks, and had been taught, at the same time, to apprehend
and dread the adventurous character of his antagonist Richard. But if his armies were more
than once routed with great slaughter, his numbers gave the Saracen the advantage in those
lighter skirmishes, of which many were inevitable.

As the army of his assailants decreased, the enterprises of the Sultan became more numerous
and more bold in this species of petty warfare. The camp of the Crusaders was surrounded, and
almost besieged, by clouds of light cavalry, resembling swarms of wasps, easily crushed when
they are once grasped, but furnished with wings to elude superior strength, and stings to inflict
harm and mischief. There was perpetual warfare of posts and foragers, in which many valuable
lives were lost, without any corresponding object being gained; convoys were intercepted, and
communications were cut off. The Crusaders had to purchase the means of sustaining life, by
life itself; and water, like that of the well of Bethlehem, longed for by King David, one of
its ancient monarchs, was then, as before, only obtained by the expenditure of blood.

These evils were in a great measure counterbalanced by the stern resolution and restless activity
of King Richard, who, with some of his best knights, was ever on horseback, ready to repair
to any point where danger occurred, and often not only bringing unexpected succour to the Christians,
but discomfiting the infidels when they seemed most secure of victory. But even the iron frame
of Coeur de Lion could not support without injury the alternations of the unwholesome climate,
joined to ceaseless exertions of body and mind. He became afflicted with one of those slow
and wasting fevers peculiar to Asia, and in despite of his great strength and still greater
courage, grew first unfit to mount on horseback, and then unable to attend the councils of
war which were from time to time held by the Crusaders. It was difficult to say whether this
state of personal inactivity was rendered more galling or more endurable to the English monarch
by the resolution of the council to engage in a truce of thirty days with the Sultan Saladin;
for on the one hand, if he was incensed at the delay which this interposed to the progress
of the great enterprise, he was, on the other, somewhat consoled by knowing that others were
not acquiring laurels while he remained inactive upon a sick-bed.

That, however, which Coeur de Lion could least excuse was the general inactivity which prevailed
in the camp of the Crusaders so soon as his illness assumed a serious aspect; and the reports
which he extracted from his unwilling attendants gave him to understand that the hopes of the
host had abated in proportion to his illness, and that the interval of truce was employed,
not in recruiting their numbers, reanimating their courage, fostering their spirit of conquest,
and preparing for a speedy and determined advance upon the Holy City, which was the object
of their expedition, but in securing the camp occupied by their diminished followers with trenches,
palisades, and other fortifications, as if preparing rather to repel an attack from a powerful
enemy so soon as hostilities should recommence, than to assume the proud character of conquerors
and assailants.

The English king chafed under these reports, like the imprisoned lion viewing his prey from
the iron barriers of his cage. Naturally rash and impetuous, the irritability of his temper
preyed on itself. He was dreaded by his attendants and even the medical assistants feared to
assume the necessary authority which a physician, to do justice to his patient, must needs
exercise over him. One faithful baron, who, perhaps, from the congenial nature of his disposition,
was devoutly attached to the King's person, dared alone to come between the dragon and his
wrath, and quietly, but firmly, maintained a control which no other dared assume over the dangerous
invalid, and which Thomas de Multon only exercised because he esteemed his sovereign's life
and honour more than he did the degree of favour which he might lose, or even the risk which
he might incur, in nursing a patient so intractable, and whose displeasure was so perilous.

Sir Thomas was the Lord of Gilsland, in Cumberland, and in an age when surnames and titles
were not distinctly attached, as now, to the individuals who bore them, he was called by the
Normans the Lord de Vaux; and in English by the Saxons, who clung to their native language,
and were proud of the share of Saxon blood in this renowned warrior's veins, he was termed
Thomas, or, more familiarly, Thom of the Gills, or Narrow Valleys, from which his extensive
domains derived their well-known appellation.

This chief had been exercised in almost all the wars, whether waged betwixt England and Scotland,
or amongst the various domestic factions which then tore the former country asunder, and in
all had been distinguished, as well from his military conduct as his personal prowess. He was,
in other respects, a rude soldier, blunt and careless in his bearing, and taciturn--nay, almost
sullen--in his habits of society, and seeming, at least, to disclaim all knowledge of policy
and of courtly art. There were men, however, who pretended to look deeply into character, who
asserted that the Lord de Vaux was not less shrewd and aspiring than he was blunt and bold,
and who thought that, while he assimilated himself to the king's own character of blunt hardihood,
it was, in some degree at least, with an eye to establish his favour, and to gratify his own
hopes of deep-laid ambition. But no one cared to thwart his schemes, if such he had, by rivalling
him in the dangerous occupation of daily attendance on the sick-bed of a patient whose disease
was pronounced infectious, and more especially when it was remembered that the patient was
Coeur de Lion, suffering under all the furious impatience of a soldier withheld from battle,
and a sovereign sequestered from authority; and the common soldiers, at least in the English
army, were generally of opinion that De Vaux attended on the King like comrade upon comrade,
in the honest and disinterested frankness of military friendship contracted between the partakers
of daily dangers.

It was on the decline of a Syrian day that Richard lay on his couch of sickness, loathing it
as much in mind as his illness made it irksome to his body. His bright blue eye, which at all
times shone with uncommon keenness and splendour, had its vivacity augmented by fever and mental
impatience, and glanced from among his curled and unshorn locks of yellow hair as fitfully
and as vividly as the last gleams of the sun shoot through the clouds of an approaching thunderstorm,
which still, however, are gilded by its beams. His manly features showed the progress of wasting
illness, and his beard, neglected and untrimmed, had overgrown both lips and chin. Casting
himself from side to side, now clutching towards him the coverings, which at the next moment
he flung as impatiently from him, his tossed couch and impatient gestures showed at once the
energy and the reckless impatience of a disposition whose natural sphere was that of the most
active exertion.

Beside his couch stood Thomas de Vaux, in face, attitude, and manner the strongest possible
contrast to the suffering monarch. His stature approached the gigantic, and his hair in thickness
might have resembled that of Samson, though only after the Israelitish champion's locks had
passed under the shears of the Philistines, for those of De Vaux were cut short, that they
might be enclosed under his helmet. The light of his broad, large hazel eye resembled that
of the autumn morn; and it was only perturbed for a moment, when from time to time it was attracted
by Richard's vehement marks of agitation and restlessness. His features, though massive like
his person, might have been handsome before they were defaced with scars; his upper lip, after
the fashion of the Normans, was covered with thick moustaches, which grew so long and luxuriantly
as to mingle with his hair, and, like his hair, were dark brown, slightly brindled with grey.
His frame seemed of that kind which most readily defies both toil and climate, for he was thin-flanked,
broad-chested, long-armed, deep-breathed, and strong-limbed. He had not laid aside his buff-coat,
which displayed the cross cut on the shoulder, for more than three nights, enjoying but such
momentary repose as the warder of a sick monarch's couch might by snatches indulge. This Baron
rarely changed his posture, except to administer to Richard the medicine or refreshments which
none of his less favoured attendants could persuade the impatient monarch to take; and there
was something affecting in the kindly yet awkward manner in which he discharged offices so
strangely contrasted with his blunt and soldierly habits and manners.

The pavilion in which these personages were, had, as became the time, as well as the personal
character of Richard, more of a warlike than a sumptuous or royal character. Weapons offensive
and defensive, several of them of strange and newly-invented construction, were scattered about
the tented apartment, or disposed upon the pillars which supported it. Skins of animals slain
in the chase were stretched on the ground, or extended along the sides of the pavilion; and
upon a heap of these silvan spoils lay three ALANS, as they were then called (wolf-greyhounds,
that is), of the largest size, and as white as snow. Their faces, marked with many a scar from
clutch and fang, showed their share in collecting the trophies upon which they reposed; and
their eyes, fixed from time to time with an expressive stretch and yawn upon the bed of Richard,
evinced how much they marvelled at and regretted the unwonted inactivity which they were compelled
to share. These were but the accompaniments of the soldier and huntsman; but on a small table
close by the bed was placed a shield of wrought steel, of triangular form, bearing the three
lions passant first assumed by the chivalrous monarch, and before it the golden circlet, resembling
much a ducal coronet, only that it was higher in front than behind, which, with the purple
velvet and embroidered tiara that lined it, formed then the emblem of England's sovereignty.
Beside it, as if prompt for defending the regal symbol, lay a mighty curtal-axe, which would
have wearied the arm of any other than Coeur de Lion.

In an outer partition of the pavilion waited two or three officers of the royal household,
depressed, anxious for their master's health, and not less so for their own safety, in case
of his decease. Their gloomy apprehensions spread themselves to the warders without, who paced
about in downcast and silent contemplation, or, resting on their halberds, stood motionless
on their post, rather like armed trophies than living warriors.

"So thou hast no better news to bring me from without, Sir Thomas!" said the King, after a
long and perturbed silence, spent in the feverish agitation which we have endeavoured to describe.
"All our knights turned women, and our ladies become devotees, and neither a spark of valour
nor of gallantry to enlighten a camp which contains the choicest of Europe's chivalry--ha!"

"The truce, my lord," said De Vaux, with the same patience with which he had twenty times repeated
the explanation--"the truce prevents us bearing ourselves as men of action; and for the ladies,
I am no great reveller, as is well known to your Majesty, and seldom exchange steel and buff
for velvet and gold--but thus far I know, that our choicest beauties are waiting upon the Queen's
Majesty and the Princess, to a pilgrimage to the convent of Engaddi, to accomplish their vows
for your Highness's deliverance from this trouble."

"And is it thus," said Richard, with the impatience of indisposition, "that royal matrons and
maidens should risk themselves, where the dogs who defile the land have as little truth to
man as they have faith towards God?"

"Nay, my lord," said De Vaux, "they have Saladin's word for their safety."

"True, true!" replied Richard; "and I did the heathen Soldan injustice--I owe him reparation
for it. Would God I were but fit to offer it him upon my body between the two hosts--Christendom
and heathenesse both looking on!"

As Richard spoke, he thrust his right arm out of bed naked to the shoulder, and painfully raising
himself in his couch, shook his clenched hand, as if it grasped sword or battle-axe, and was
then brandished over the jewelled turban of the Soldan. It was not without a gentle degree
of violence, which the King would scarce have endured from another, that De Vaux, in his character
of sick-nurse, compelled his royal master to replace himself in the couch, and covered his
sinewy arm, neck, and shoulders with the care which a mother bestows upon an impatient child.

"Thou art a rough nurse, though a willing one, De Vaux," said the King, laughing with a bitter
expression, while he submitted to the strength which he was unable to resist; "methinks a coif
would become thy lowering features as well as a child's biggin would beseem mine. We should
be a babe and nurse to frighten girls with."

"We have frightened men in our time, my liege," said De Vaux; "and, I trust, may live to frighten
them again. What is a fever-fit, that we should not endure it patiently, in order to get rid
of it easily?"

"Fever-fit!" exclaimed Richard impetuously; "thou mayest think, and justly, that it is a fever-fit
with me; but what is it with all the other Christian princes--with Philip of France, with that
dull Austrian, with him of Montserrat, with the Hospitallers, with the Templars--what is it
with all them? I will tell thee. It is a cold palsy, a dead lethargy, a disease that deprives
them of speech and action, a canker that has eaten into the heart of all that is noble, and
chivalrous, and virtuous among them--that has made them false to the noblest vow ever knights
were sworn to--has made them indifferent to their fame, and forgetful of their God!"

"For the love of Heaven, my liege," said De Vaux, "take it less violently--you will be heard
without doors, where such speeches are but too current already among the common soldiery, and
engender discord and contention in the Christian host. Bethink you that your illness mars the
mainspring of their enterprise; a mangonel will work without screw and lever better than the
Christian host without King Richard."

"Thou flatterest me, De Vaux," said Richard, and not insensible to the power of praise, he
reclined his head on the pillow with a more deliberate attempt to repose than he had yet exhibited.
But Thomas de Vaux was no courtier; the phrase which had offered had risen spontaneously to
his lips, and he knew not how to pursue the pleasing theme so as to soothe and prolong the
vein which he had excited. He was silent, therefore, until, relapsing into his moody contemplations,
the King demanded of him sharply, "Despardieux! This is smoothly said to soothe a sick man;
but does a league of monarchs, an assemblage or nobles, a convocation of all the chivalry of
Europe, droop with the sickness of one man, though he chances to be King of England? Why should
Richard's illness, or Richard's death, check the march of thirty thousand men as brave as himself?
When the master stag is struck down, the herd do not disperse upon his fall; when the falcon
strikes the leading crane, another takes the guidance of the phalanx. Why do not the powers
assemble and choose some one to whom they may entrust the guidance of the host?"

"Forsooth, and if it please your Majesty," said De Vaux, "I hear consultations have been held
among the royal leaders for some such purpose."

"Ha!" exclaimed Richard, his jealousy awakened, giving his mental irritation another direction,
"am I forgot by my allies ere I have taken the last sacrament? Do they hold me dead already?
But no, no, they are right. And whom do they select as leader of the Christian host?"

"Rank and dignity," said De Vaux, "point to the King of France."

"Oh, ay," answered the English monarch, "Philip of France and Navarre--Denis Mountjoie--his
most Christian Majesty! Mouth-filling words these! There is but one risk--that he might mistake
the words EN ARRIERE for EN AVANT, and lead us back to Paris, instead of marching to Jerusalem.
His politic head has learned by this time that there is more to be gotten by oppressing his
feudatories, and pillaging his allies, than fighting with the Turks for the Holy Sepulchre."

"They might choose the Archduke of Austria," said De Vaux.

"What! because he is big and burly like thyself, Thomas--nearly as thick-headed, but without
thy indifference to danger and carelessness of offence? I tell thee that Austria has in all
that mass of flesh no bolder animation than is afforded by the peevishness of a wasp and the
courage of a wren. Out upon him! He a leader of chivalry to deeds of glory! Give him a flagon
of Rhenish to drink with his besmirched baaren-hauters and lance-knechts."

"There is the Grand Master of the Templars," continued the baron, not sorry to keep his master's
attention engaged on other topics than his own illness, though at the expense of the characters
of prince and potentate. "There is the Grand Master of the Templars," he continued, "undaunted,
skilful, brave in battle, and sage in council, having no separate kingdoms of his own to divert
his exertions from the recovery of the Holy Land--what thinks your Majesty of the Master as
a general leader of the Christian host?"

"Ha, Beau-Seant?" answered the King. "Oh, no exception can be taken to Brother Giles Amaury;
he understands the ordering of a battle, and the fighting in front when it begins. But, Sir
Thomas, were it fair to take the Holy Land from the heathen Saladin, so full of all the virtues
which may distinguish unchristened man, and give it to Giles Amaury, a worse pagan than himself,
an idolater, a devil-worshipper, a necromancer, who practises crimes the most dark and unnatural
in the vaults and secret places of abomination and darkness?"

"The Grand Master of the Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem is not tainted by fame, either
with heresy or magic," said Thomas de Vaux.

"But is he not a sordid miser?" said Richard hastily; "has he not been suspected--ay, more
than suspected--of selling to the infidels those advantages which they would never have won
by fair force? Tush, man, better give the army to be made merchandise of by Venetian skippers
and Lombardy pedlars, than trust it to the Grand Master of St. John."

"Well, then, I will venture but another guess," said the Baron de Vaux. "What say you to the
gallant Marquis of Montserrat, so wise, so elegant, such a good man-at-arms?"

"Wise?--cunning, you would say," replied Richard; "elegant in a lady's chamber, if you will.
Oh, ay, Conrade of Montserrat--who knows not the popinjay? Politic and versatile, he will change
you his purposes as often as the trimmings of his doublet, and you shall never be able to guess
the hue of his inmost vestments from their outward colours. A man-at-arms? Ay, a fine figure
on horseback, and can bear him well in the tilt-yard, and at the barriers, when swords are
blunted at point and edge, and spears are tipped with trenchers of wood instead of steel pikes.
Wert thou not with me when I said to that same gay Marquis, 'Here we be, three good Christians,
and on yonder plain there pricks a band of some threescore Saracens--what say you to charge
them briskly? There are but twenty unbelieving miscreants to each true knight."

"I recollect the Marquis replied," said De Vaux, "that his limbs were of flesh, not of iron,
and that he would rather bear the heart of a man than of a beast, though that beast were the
lion, But I see how it is--we shall end where we began, without hope of praying at the Sepulchre
until Heaven shall restore King Richard to health."

At this grave remark Richard burst out into a hearty fit of laughter, the first which he had
for some time indulged in. "Why what a thing is conscience," he said, "that through its means
even such a thick-witted northern lord as thou canst bring thy sovereign to confess his folly!
It is true that, did they not propose themselves as fit to hold my leading-staff, little should
I care for plucking the silken trappings off the puppets thou hast shown me in succession.
What concerns it me what fine tinsel robes they swagger in, unless when they are named as rivals
in the glorious enterprise to which I have vowed myself? Yes, De Vaux, I confess my weakness,
and the wilfulness of my ambition. The Christian camp contains, doubtless, many a better knight
than Richard of England, and it would be wise and worthy to assign to the best of them the
leading of the host. But," continued the warlike monarch, raising himself in his bed, and shaking
the cover from his head, while his eyes sparkled as they were wont to do on the eve of battle,
"were such a knight to plant the banner of the Cross on the Temple of Jerusalem while I was
unable to bear my share in the noble task, he should, so soon as I was fit to lay lance in
rest, undergo my challenge to mortal combat, for having diminished my fame, and pressed in
before to the object of my enterprise. But hark, what trumpets are those at a distance?"

"Those of King Philip, as I guess, my liege," said the stout Englishman.

"Thou art dull of ear, Thomas," said the King, endeavouring to start up; "hearest thou not
that clash and clang? By Heaven, the Turks are in the camp--I hear their LELIES." [The war-cries
of the Moslemah.]

He again endeavoured to get out of bed, and De Vaux was obliged to exercise his own great strength,
and also to summon the assistance of the chamberlains from the inner tent, to restrain him.

"Thou art a false traitor, De Vaux," said the incensed monarch, when, breathless and exhausted
with struggling, he was compelled to submit to superior strength, and to repose in quiet on
his couch. "I would I were--I would I were but strong enough to dash thy brains out with my
battle-axe!"

"I would you had the strength, my liege," said De Vaux, "and would even take the risk of its
being so employed. The odds would be great in favour of Christendom were Thomas Multon dead
and Coeur de Lion himself again."

"Mine honest faithful servant," said Richard, extending his hand, which the baron reverentially
saluted, "forgive thy master's impatience of mood. It is this burning fever which chides thee,
and not thy kind master, Richard of England. But go, I prithee, and bring me word what strangers
are in the camp, for these sounds are not of Christendom."

De Vaux left the pavilion on the errand assigned, and in his absence, which he had resolved
should be brief, he charged the chamberlains, pages, and attendants to redouble their attention
on their sovereign, with threats of holding them to responsibility, which rather added to than
diminished their timid anxiety in the discharge of their duty; for next, perhaps, to the ire
of the monarch himself, they dreaded that of the stern and inexorable Lord of Gilsland. [Sir
Thomas Multon of Gilsland.]

CHAPTER VII.

     There never was a time on the march parts yet,
     When Scottish with English met,
     But it was marvel if the red blood ran not
     As the rain does in the street.
     --BATTLE OF OTTERBOURNE.

A considerable band of Scottish warriors had joined the Crusaders, and had naturally placed
themselves under the command of the English monarch, being, like his native troops, most of
them of Saxon and Norman descent, speaking the same languages, possessed, some of them, of
English as well as Scottish demesnes, and allied in some cases by blood and intermarriage.
The period also preceded that when the grasping ambition of Edward I. gave a deadly and envenomed
character to the wars betwixt the two nations--the English fighting for the subjugation of
Scotland, and the Scottish, with all the stern determination and obstinacy which has ever characterized
their nation, for the defence of their independence, by the most violent means, under the most
disadvantageous circumstances, and at the most extreme hazard. As yet, wars betwixt the two
nations, though fierce and frequent, had been conducted on principles of fair hostility, and
admitted of those softening shades by which courtesy and the respect for open and generous
foemen qualify and mitigate the horrors of war. In time of peace, therefore, and especially
when both, as at present, were engaged in war, waged in behalf of a common cause, and rendered
dear to them by their ideas of religion, the adventurers of both countries frequently fought
side by side, their national emulation serving only to stimulate them to excel each other in
their efforts against the common enemy.

The frank and martial character of Richard, who made no distinction betwixt his own subjects
and those of William of Scotland, excepting as they bore themselves in the field of battle,
tended much to conciliate the troops of both nations. But upon his illness, and the disadvantageous
circumstances in which the Crusaders were placed, the national disunion between the various
bands united in the Crusade, began to display itself, just as old wounds break out afresh in
the human body when under the influence of disease or debility.

The Scottish and English, equally jealous and high-spirited, and apt to take offence--the former
the more so, because the poorer and the weaker nation--began to fill up by internal dissension
the period when the truce forbade them to wreak their united vengeance on the Saracens. Like
the contending Roman chiefs of old, the Scottish would admit no superiority, and their southern
neighbours would brook no equality. There were charges and recriminations, and both the common
soldiery and their leaders and commanders, who had been good comrades in time of victory, lowered
on each other in the period of adversity, as if their union had not been then more essential
than ever, not only to the success of their common cause, but to their joint safety. The same
disunion had begun to show itself betwixt the French and English, the Italians and the Germans,
and even between the Danes and Swedes; but it is only that which divided the two nations whom
one island bred, and who seemed more animated against each other for the very reason, that
our narrative is principally concerned with.

Of all the English nobles who had followed their King to Palestine, De Vaux was most prejudiced
against the Scottish. They were his near neighbours, with whom he had been engaged during his
whole life in private or public warfare, and on whom he had inflicted many calamities, while
he had sustained at their hands not a few. His love and devotion to the King was like the vivid
affection of the old English mastiff to his master, leaving him churlish and inaccessible to
all others even towards those to whom he was indifferent--and rough and dangerous to any against
whom he entertained a prejudice. De Vaux had never observed without jealousy and displeasure
his King exhibit any mark of courtesy or favour to the wicked, deceitful, and ferocious race
born on the other side of a river, or an imaginary line drawn through waste and wilderness;
and he even doubted the success of a Crusade in which they were suffered to bear arms, holding
them in his secret soul little better than the Saracens whom he came to combat. It may be added
that, as being himself a blunt and downright Englishman, unaccustomed to conceal the slightest
movement either of love or of dislike, he accounted the fair-spoken courtesy which the Scots
had learned, either from imitation of their frequent allies, the French, or which might have
arisen from their own proud and reserved character, as a false and astucious mark of the most
dangerous designs against their neighbours, over whom he believed, with genuine English confidence,
they could, by fair manhood, never obtain any advantage.

Yet, though De Vaux entertained these sentiments concerning his Northern neighbours, and extended
them, with little mitigation, even to such as had assumed the Cross, his respect for the King,
and a sense of the duty imposed by his vow as a Crusader, prevented him from displaying them
otherwise than by regularly shunning all intercourse with his Scottish brethren-at-arms as
far as possible, by observing a sullen taciturnity when compelled to meet them occasionally,
and by looking scornfully upon them when they encountered on the march and in camp. The Scottish
barons and knights were not men to bear his scorn unobserved or unreplied to; and it came to
that pass that he was regarded as the determined and active enemy of a nation, whom, after
all, he only disliked, and in some sort despised. Nay, it was remarked by close observers that,
if he had not towards them the charity of Scripture, which suffereth long, and judges kindly,
he was by no means deficient in the subordinate and limited virtue, which alleviates and relieves
the wants of others. The wealth of Thomas of Gilsland procured supplies of provisions and medicines,
and some of these usually flowed by secret channels into the quarters of the Scottish--his
surly benevolence proceeding on the principle that, next to a man's friend, his foe was of
most importance to him, passing over all the intermediate relations as too indifferent to merit
even a thought. This explanation is necessary, in order that the reader may fully understand
what we are now to detail.

Thomas de Vaux had not made many steps beyond the entrance of the royal pavilion when he was
aware of what the far more acute ear of the English monarch--no mean proficient in the art
of minstrelsy--had instantly discovered, that the musical strains, namely, which had reached
their ears, were produced by the pipes, shalms, and kettle-drums of the Saracens; and at the
bottom of an avenue of tents, which formed a broad access to the pavilion of Richard, he could
see a crowd of idle soldiers assembled around the spot from which the music was heard, almost
in the centre of the camp; and he saw, with great surprise, mingled amid the helmets of various
forms worn by the Crusaders of different nations, white turbans and long pikes, announcing
the presence of armed Saracens, and the huge deformed heads of several camels or dromedaries,
overlooking the multitude by aid of their long, disproportioned necks.

Wondering, and displeased at a sight so unexpected and singular--for it was customary to leave
all flags of truce and other communications from the enemy at an appointed place without the
barriers--the baron looked eagerly round for some one of whom he might inquire the cause of
this alarming novelty.

The first person whom he met advancing to him he set down at once, by his grave and haughty
step, as a Spaniard or a Scot; and presently after muttered to himself, "And a Scot it is--he
of the Leopard. I have seen him fight indifferently well, for one of his country."

Loath to ask even a passing question, he was about to pass Sir Kenneth, with that sullen and
lowering port which seems to say, "I know thee, but I will hold no communication with thee."
But his purpose was defeated by the Northern Knight, who moved forward directly to him, and
accosting him with formal courtesy, said, "My Lord de Vaux of Gilsland, I have in charge to
speak with you."

"Ha!" returned the English baron, "with me? But say your pleasure, so it be shortly spoken--I
am on the King's errand."

"Mine touches King Richard yet more nearly," answered Sir Kenneth; "I bring him, I trust, health."

The Lord of Gilsland measured the Scot with incredulous eyes, and replied, "Thou art no leech,
I think, Sir Scot; I had as soon thought of your bringing the King of England wealth."

Sir Kenneth, though displeased with the manner of the baron's reply, answered calmly, "Health
to Richard is glory and wealth to Christendom.--But my time presses; I pray you, may I see
the King?"

"Surely not, fair sir," said the baron, "until your errand be told more distinctly. The sick
chambers of princes open not to all who inquire, like a northern hostelry."

"My lord," said Kenneth, "the cross which I wear in common with yourself, and the importance
of what I have to tell, must, for the present, cause me to pass over a bearing which else I
were unapt to endure. In plain language, then, I bring with me a Moorish physician, who undertakes
to work a cure on King Richard."

"A Moorish physician!" said De Vaux; "and who will warrant that he brings not poisons instead
of remedies?"

"His own life, my lord--his head, which he offers as a guarantee."

"I have known many a resolute ruffian," said De Vaux, "who valued his own life as little as
it deserved, and would troop to the gallows as merrily as if the hangman were his partner in
a dance."

"But thus it is, my lord," replied the Scot. "Saladin, to whom none will deny the credit of
a generous and valiant enemy, hath sent this leech hither with an honourable retinue and guard,
befitting the high estimation in which El Hakim [The Physician] is held by the Soldan, and
with fruits and refreshments for the King's private chamber, and such message as may pass betwixt
honourable enemies, praying him to be recovered of his fever, that he may be the fitter to
receive a visit from the Soldan, with his naked scimitar in his hand, and a hundred thousand
cavaliers at his back. Will it please you, who are of the King's secret council, to cause these
camels to be discharged of their burdens, and some order taken as to the reception of the learned
physician?"

"Wonderful!" said De Vaux, as speaking to himself.--"And who will vouch for the honour of Saladin,
in a case when bad faith would rid him at once of his most powerful adversary?"

"I myself," replied Sir Kenneth, "will be his guarantee, with honour, life, and fortune."

"Strange!" again ejaculated De Vaux; "the North vouches for the South--the Scot for the Turk!
May I crave of you, Sir Knight, how you became concerned in this affair?"

"I have been absent on a pilgrimage, in the course of which," replied Sir Kenneth "I had a
message to discharge towards the holy hermit of Engaddi."

"May I not be entrusted with it, Sir Kenneth, and with the answer of the holy man?"

"It may not be, my lord," answered the Scot.

"I am of the secret council of England," said the Englishman haughtily.

"To which land I owe no allegiance," said Kenneth. "Though I have voluntarily followed in this
war the personal fortunes of England's sovereign, I was dispatched by the General Council of
the kings, princes, and supreme leaders of the army of the Blessed Cross, and to them only
I render my errand."

"Ha! sayest thou?" said the proud Baron de Vaux. "But know, messenger of the kings and princes
as thou mayest be, no leech shall approach the sick-bed of Richard of England without the consent
of him of Gilsland; and they will come on evil errand who dare to intrude themselves against it."

He was turning loftily away, when the Scot, placing himself closer, and more opposite to him,
asked, in a calm voice, yet not without expressing his share of pride, whether the Lord of
Gilsland esteemed him a gentleman and a good knight.

"All Scots are ennobled by their birthright," answered Thomas de Vaux, something ironically;
but sensible of his own injustice, and perceiving that Kenneth's colour rose, he added, "For
a good knight it were sin to doubt you, in one at least who has seen you well and bravely discharge
your devoir."

"Well, then," said the Scottish knight, satisfied with the frankness of the last admission,
"and let me swear to you, Thomas of Gilsland, that, as I am true Scottish man, which I hold
a privilege equal to my ancient gentry, and as sure as I am a belted knight, and come hither
to acquire LOS [Los--laus, praise, or renown] and fame in this mortal life, and forgiveness
of my sins in that which is to come--so truly, and by the blessed Cross which I wear, do I
protest unto you that I desire but the safety of Richard Coeur de Lion, in recommending the
ministry of this Moslem physician."

The Englishman was struck with the solemnity of the obtestation, and answered with more cordiality
than he had yet exhibited, "Tell me, Sir Knight of the Leopard, granting (which I do not doubt)
that thou art thyself satisfied in this matter, shall I do well, in a land where the art of
poisoning is as general as that of cooking, to bring this unknown physician to practise with
his drugs on a health so valuable to Christendom?"

"My lord," replied the Scot, "thus only can I reply--that my squire, the only one of my retinue
whom war and disease had left in attendance on me, has been of late suffering dangerously under
this same fever, which, in valiant King Richard, has disabled the principal limb of our holy
enterprise. This leech, this El Hakim, hath ministered remedies to him not two hours since,
and already he hath fallen into a refreshing sleep. That he can cure the disorder, which has
proved so fatal, I nothing doubt; that he hath the purpose to do it is, I think, warranted
by his mission from the royal Soldan, who is true-hearted and loyal, so far as a blinded infidel
may be called so; and for his eventual success, the certainty of reward in case of succeeding,
and punishment in case of voluntary failure, may be a sufficient guarantee."

The Englishman listened with downcast looks, as one who doubted, yet was not unwilling to receive
conviction. At length he looked up and said, "May I see your sick squire, fair sir?"

The Scottish knight hesitated and coloured, yet answered at last, "Willingly, my Lord of Gilsland.
But you must remember, when you see my poor quarter, that the nobles and knights of Scotland
feed not so high, sleep not so soft, and care not for the magnificence of lodgment which is
Proper to their southern neighbours. I am POORLY lodged, my Lord of Gilsland," he added, with
a haughty emphasis on the word, while, with some unwillingness, he led the way to his temporary
place of abode.

Whatever were the prejudices of De Vaux against the nation of his new acquaintance, and though
we undertake not to deny that some of these were excited by its proverbial poverty, he had
too much nobleness of disposition to enjoy the mortification of a brave individual thus compelled
to make known wants which his pride would gladly have concealed.

"Shame to the soldier of the Cross," he said, "who thinks of worldly splendour, or of luxurious
accommodation, when pressing forward to the conquest of the Holy City. Fare as hard as we may,
we shall yet be better than the host of martyrs and of saints, who, having trod these scenes
before us, now hold golden lamps and evergreen palms."

This was the most metaphorical speech which Thomas of Gilsland was ever known to utter, the
rather, perhaps (as will sometimes happen), that it did not entirely express his own sentiments,
being somewhat a lover of good cheer and splendid accommodation. By this time they reached
the place of the camp where the Knight of the Leopard had assumed his abode.

Appearances here did indeed promise no breach of the laws of mortification, to which the Crusaders,
according to the opinion expressed by him of Gilsland, ought to subject themselves. A space
of ground, large enough to accommodate perhaps thirty tents, according to the Crusaders' rules
of castrametation, was partly vacant--because, in ostentation, the knight had demanded ground
to the extent of his original retinue--partly occupied by a few miserable huts, hastily constructed
of boughs, and covered with palm-leaves. These habitations seemed entirely deserted, and several
of them were ruinous. The central hut, which represented the pavilion of the leader, was distinguished
by his swallow-tailed pennon, placed on the point of a spear, from which its long folds dropped
motionless to the ground, as if sickening under the scorching rays of the Asiatic sun. But
no pages or squires--not even a solitary warder--was placed by the emblem of feudal power and
knightly degree. If its reputation defended it not from insult, it had no other guard.

Sir Kenneth cast a melancholy look around him, but suppressing his feelings, entered the hut,
making a sign to the Baron of Gilsland to follow. He also cast around a glance of examination,
which implied pity not altogether unmingled with contempt, to which, perhaps, it is as nearly
akin as it is said to be to love. He then stooped his lofty crest, and entered a lowly hut,
which his bulky form seemed almost entirely to fill.

The interior of the hut was chiefly occupied by two beds. One was empty, but composed of collected
leaves, and spread with an antelope's hide. It seemed, from the articles of armour laid beside
it, and from a crucifix of silver, carefully and reverentially disposed at the head, to be
the couch of the knight himself. The other contained the invalid, of whom Sir Kenneth had spoken,
a strong-built and harsh-featured man, past, as his looks betokened, the middle age of life.
His couch was trimmed more softly than his master's, and it was plain that the more courtly
garments of the latter, the loose robe in which the knights showed themselves on pacific occasions,
and the other little spare articles of dress and adornment, had been applied by Sir Kenneth
to the accommodation of his sick domestic. In an outward part of the hut, which yet was within
the range of the English baron's eye, a boy, rudely attired with buskins of deer's hide, a
blue cap or bonnet, and a doublet, whose original finery was much tarnished, sat on his knees
by a chafing-dish filled with charcoal, cooking upon a plate of iron the cakes of barley-bread,
which were then, and still are, a favourite food with the Scottish people. Part of an antelope
was suspended against one of the main props of the hut. Nor was it difficult to know how it
had been procured; for a large stag greyhound, nobler in size and appearance than those even
which guarded King Richard's sick-bed, lay eyeing the process of baking the cake. The sagacious
animal, on their first entrance, uttered a stifled growl, which sounded from his deep chest
like distant thunder. But he saw his master, and acknowledged his presence by wagging his tail
and couching his head, abstaining from more tumultuous or noisy greeting, as if his noble instinct
had taught him the propriety of silence in a sick man's chamber.

Beside the couch sat on a cushion, also composed of skins, the Moorish physician of whom Sir
Kenneth had spoken, cross-legged, after the Eastern fashion. The imperfect light showed little
of him, save that the lower part of his face was covered with a long, black beard, which descended
over his breast; that he wore a high TOLPACH, a Tartar cap of the lamb's wool manufactured
at Astracan, bearing the same dusky colour; and that his ample caftan, or Turkish robe, was
also of a dark hue. Two piercing eyes, which gleamed with unusual lustre, were the only lineaments
of his visage that could be discerned amid the darkness in which he was enveloped.

The English lord stood silent with a sort of reverential awe; for notwithstanding the roughness
of his general bearing, a scene of distress and poverty, firmly endured without complaint or
murmur, would at any time have claimed more reverence from Thomas de Vaux than would all the
splendid formalities of a royal presence-chamber, unless that presence-chamber were King Richard's
own. Nothing was for a time heard but the heavy and regular breathings of the invalid, who
seemed in profound repose.

"He hath not slept for six nights before," said Sir Kenneth, "as I am assured by the youth,
his attendant."

"Noble Scot," said Thomas de Vaux, grasping the Scottish knight's hand, with a pressure which
had more of cordiality than he permitted his words to utter, "this gear must be amended. Your
esquire is but too evil fed and looked to."

In the latter part of this speech he naturally raised his voice to its usual decided tone,
The sick man was disturbed in his slumbers.

"My master," he said, murmuring as in a dream, "noble Sir Kenneth, taste not, to you as to
me, the waters of the Clyde cold and refreshing after the brackish springs of Palestine?"

"He dreams of his native land, and is happy in his slumbers," whispered Sir Kenneth to De Vaux;
but had scarce uttered the words, when the physician, arising from the place which he had taken
near the couch of the sick, and laying the hand of the patient, whose pulse he had been carefully
watching, quietly upon the couch, came to the two knights, and taking them each by the arm,
while he intimated to them to remain silent, led them to the front of the hut.

"In the name of Issa Ben Mariam," he said, "whom we honour as you, though not with the same
blinded superstition, disturb not the effect of the blessed medicine of which he hath partaken.
To awaken him now is death or deprivation of reason; but return at the hour when the muezzin
calls from the minaret to evening prayer in the mosque, and if left undisturbed until then,
I promise you this same Frankish soldier shall be able, without prejudice to his health, to
hold some brief converse with you on any matters on which either, and especially his master,
may have to question him."

The knights retreated before the authoritative commands of the leech, who seemed fully to comprehend
the importance of the Eastern proverb that the sick chamber of the patient is the kingdom of
the physician.

They paused, and remained standing together at the door of the hut--Sir Kenneth with the air
of one who expected his visitor to say farewell, and De Vaux as if he had something on his
mind which prevented him from doing so. The hound, however, had pressed out of the tent after
them, and now thrust his long, rough countenance into the hand of his master, as if modestly
soliciting some mark of his kindness. He had no sooner received the notice which he desired,
in the shape of a kind word and slight caress, than, eager to acknowledge his gratitude and
joy for his master's return, he flew off at full speed, galloping in full career, and with
outstretched tail, here and there, about and around, cross-ways and endlong, through the decayed
huts and the esplanade we have described, but never transgressing those precincts which his
sagacity knew were protected by his master's pennon. After a few gambols of this kind, the
dog, coming close up to his master, laid at once aside his frolicsome mood, relapsed into his
usual gravity and slowness of gesture and deportment, and looked as if he were ashamed that
anything should have moved him to depart so far out of his sober self-control.

Both knights looked on with pleasure; for Sir Kenneth was justly proud of his noble hound,
and the northern English baron was, of course, an admirer of the chase, and a judge of the
animal's merits.

"A right able dog," he said. "I think, fair sir, King Richard hath not an ALAN which may match
him, if he be as stanch as he is swift. But let me pray you--speaking in all honour and kindness--have
you not heard the proclamation that no one under the rank of earl shall keep hunting dogs within
King Richard's camp without the royal license, which, I think, Sir Kenneth, hath not been issued
to you? I speak as Master of the Horse."

"And I answer as a free Scottish knight," said Kenneth sternly. "For the present I follow the
banner of England, but I cannot remember that I have ever subjected myself to the forest-laws
of that kingdom, nor have I such respect for them as would incline me to do so. When the trumpet
sounds to arms, my foot is in the stirrup as soon as any--when it clangs for the charge, my
lance has not yet been the last laid in the rest. But for my hours of liberty or of idleness
King Richard has no title to bar my recreation."

"Nevertheless," said De Vaux, "it is a folly to disobey the King's ordinance; so, with your
good leave, I, as having authority in that matter, will send you a protection for my friend here."

"I thank you," said the Scot coldly; "but he knows my allotted quarters, and within these I
can protect him myself.--And yet," he said, suddenly changing his manner, "this is but a cold
return for a well-meant kindness. I thank you, my lord, most heartily. The King's equerries
or prickers might find Roswal at disadvantage, and do him some injury, which I should not,
perhaps, be slow in returning, and so ill might come of it. You have seen so much of my house-keeping,
my lord," he added, with a smile, "that I need not shame to say that Roswal is our principal
purveyor, and well I hope our Lion Richard will not be like the lion in the minstrel fable,
that went a-hunting, and kept the whole booty to himself. I cannot think he would grudge a
poor gentleman, who follows him faithfully, his hour of sport and his morsel of game, more
especially when other food is hard enough to come by."

"By my faith, you do the King no more than justice; and yet," said the baron, "there is something
in these words, vert and venison, that turns the very brains of our Norman princes."

"We have heard of late," said the Scot, "by minstrels and pilgrims, that your outlawed yeomen
have formed great bands in the shires of York and Nottingham, having at their head a most stout
archer, called Robin Hood, with his lieutenant, Little John. Methinks it were better that Richard
relaxed his forest-code in England, than endeavour to enforce it in the Holy Land."

"Wild work, Sir Kenneth," replied De Vaux, shrugging his shoulders, as one who would avoid
a perilous or unpleasing topic--"a mad world, sir. I must now bid you adieu, having presently
to return to the King's pavilion. At vespers I will again, with your leave, visit your quarters,
and speak with this same infidel physician. I would, in the meantime, were it no offence, willingly
send you what would somewhat mend your cheer."

"I thank you, sir," said Sir Kenneth, "but it needs not. Roswal hath already stocked my larder
for two weeks, since the sun of Palestine, if it brings diseases, serves also to dry venison."

The two warriors parted much better friends than they had met; but ere they separated, Thomas
de Vaux informed himself at more length of the circumstances attending the mission of the Eastern
physician, and received from the Scottish knight the credentials which he had brought to King
Richard on the part of Saladin.

CHAPTER VIII.

     A wise physician, skilled our wounds to heal,
     Is more than armies to the common weal.
       POPE'S ILLIAD.

"This is a strange tale, Sir Thomas," said the sick monarch, when he had heard the report of
the trusty Baron of Gilsland. "Art thou sure this Scottish man is a tall man and true?"

"I cannot say, my lord," replied the jealous Borderer. "I live a little too near the Scots
to gather much truth among them, having found them ever fair and false. But this man's bearing
is that of a true man, were he a devil as well as a Scot; that I must needs say for him in
conscience."

"And for his carriage as a knight, how sayest thou, De Vaux?" demanded the King.

"It is your Majesty's business more than mine to note men's bearings; and I warrant you have
noted the manner in which this man of the Leopard hath borne himself. He hath been full well
spoken of."

"And justly, Thomas," said the King. "We have ourselves witnessed him. It is indeed our purpose
in placing ourselves ever in the front of battle, to see how our liegemen and followers acquit
themselves, and not from a desire to accumulate vainglory to ourselves, as some have supposed.
We know the vanity of the praise of man, which is but a vapour, and buckle on our armour for
other purposes than to win it."

De Vaux was alarmed when he heard the King make a declaration so inconsistent with his nature,
and believed at first that nothing short of the approach of death could have brought him to
speak in depreciating terms of military renown, which was the very breath of his nostrils.
But recollecting he had met the royal confessor in the outer pavilion, he was shrewd enough
to place this temporary self-abasement to the effect of the reverend man's lesson, and suffered
the King to proceed without reply.

"Yes," continued Richard, "I have indeed marked the manner in which this knight does his devoir.
My leading-staff were not worth a fool's bauble had he escaped my notice; and he had ere now
tasted of our bounty, but that I have also marked his overweening and audacious presumption."

"My liege," said the Baron of Gilsland, observing the King's countenance change, "I fear I
have transgressed your pleasure in lending some countenance to his transgression."

"How, De Multon, thou?" said the King, contracting his brows, and speaking in a tone of angry
surprise. "Thou countenance his insolence? It cannot be."

"Nay, your Majesty will pardon me to remind you that I have by mine office right to grant liberty
to men of gentle blood to keep them a hound or two within camp, just to cherish the noble art
of venerie; and besides, it were a sin to have maimed or harmed a thing so noble as this gentleman's
dog."

"Has he, then, a dog so handsome?" said the King.

"A most perfect creature of Heaven," said the baron, who was an enthusiast in field-sports--"of
the noblest Northern breed--deep in the chest, strong in the stern--black colour, and brindled
on the breast and legs, not spotted with white, but just shaded into grey--strength to pull
down a bull, swiftness to cote an antelope."

The King laughed at his enthusiasm. "Well, thou hast given him leave to keep the hound, so
there is an end of it. Be not, however, liberal of your licenses among those knights adventurers
who have no prince or leader to depend upon; they are ungovernable, and leave no game in Palestine.--But
to this piece of learned heathenesse--sayest thou the Scot met him in the desert?"

"No, my liege; the Scot's tale runs thus. He was dispatched to the old hermit of Engaddi, of
whom men talk so much--"

"'Sdeath and hell!" said Richard, starting up. "By whom dispatched, and for what? Who dared
send any one thither, when our Queen was in the Convent of Engaddi, upon her pilgrimage for
our recovery?"

"The Council of the Crusade sent him, my lord," answered the Baron de Vaux; "for what purpose,
he declined to account to me. I think it is scarce known in the camp that your royal consort
is on a pilgrimage; and even the princes may not have been aware, as the Queen has been sequestered
from company since your love prohibited her attendance in case of infection."

"Well, it shall be looked into," said Richard. "So this Scottish man, this envoy, met with
a wandering physician at the grotto of Engaddi--ha?"

"Not so my liege," replied De Vaux? "but he met, I think, near that place, with a Saracen Emir
with whom he had some MELEE in the way of proof of valour, and finding him worthy to bear brave
men company, they went together, as errant knights are wont, to the grotto of Engaddi."

Here De Vaux stopped, for he was not one of those who can tell a long story in a sentence.

"And did they there meet the physician?" demanded the King impatiently.

"No, my liege," replied De Vaux; "but the Saracen, learning your Majesty's grievous illness,
undertook that Saladin should send his own physician to you, and with many assurances of his
eminent skill; and he came to the grotto accordingly, after the Scottish knight had tarried
a day for him and more. He is attended as if he were a prince, with drums and atabals, and
servants on horse and foot, and brings with him letters of credence from Saladin."

"Have they been examined by Giacomo Loredani?"

"I showed them to the interpreter ere bringing them hither, and behold their contents in English."

Richard took a scroll, in which were inscribed these words: The blessing of Allah and his Prophet
Mohammed ["Out upon the hound!" said Richard, spitting in contempt, by way of interjection],
Saladin, king of kings, Saldan of Egypt and of Syria, the light and refuge of the earth, to
the great Melech Ric, Richard of England, greeting. Whereas, we have been informed that the
hand of sickness hath been heavy upon thee, our royal brother, and that thou hast with thee
only such Nazarene and Jewish mediciners as work without the blessing of Allah and our holy
Prophet ["Confusion on his head!" again muttered the English monarch], we have therefore sent
to tend and wait upon thee at this time the physician to our own person, Adonbec el Hakim,
before whose face the angel Azrael [The Angel of Death.] spreads his wings and departs from
the sick chamber; who knows the virtues of herbs and stones, the path of the sun, moon, and
stars, and can save man from all that is not written on his forehead. And this we do, praying
you heartily to honour and make use of his skill; not only that we may do service to thy worth
and valour, which is the glory of all the nations of Frangistan, but that we may bring the
controversy which is at present between us to an end, either by honourable agreement, or by
open trial thereof with our weapons, in a fair field--seeing that it neither becomes thy place
and courage to die the death of a slave who hath been overwrought by his taskmaster, nor befits
it our fame that a brave adversary be snatched from our weapon by such a disease. And, therefore,
may the holy--"

"Hold, hold," said Richard, "I will have no more of his dog of a prophet! It makes me sick
to think the valiant and worthy Soldan should believe in a dead dog. Yes, I will see his physician.
I will put myself into the charge of this Hakim--I will repay the noble Soldan his generosity--I
will meet Saladin in the field, as he so worthily proposes, and he shall have no cause to term
Richard of England ungrateful. I will strike him to the earth with my battle-axe--I will convert
him to Holy Church with such blows as he has rarely endured. He shall recant his errors before
my good cross-handled sword, and I will have him baptized on the battle-field, from my own
helmet, though the cleansing waters were mixed with the blood of us both.--Haste, De Vaux,
why dost thou delay a conclusion so pleasing? Fetch the Hakim hither."

"My lord," said the baron, who perhaps saw some accession of fever in this overflow of confidence,
"bethink you, the Soldan is a pagan, and that you are his most formidable enemy--"

"For which reason he is the more bound to do me service in this matter, lest a paltry fever
end the quarrel betwixt two such kings. I tell thee he loves me as I love him--as noble adversaries
ever love each other. By my honour, it were sin to doubt his good faith!"

"Nevertheless, my lord, it were well to wait the issue of these medicines upon the Scottish
squire," said the Lord of Gilsland. "My own life depends upon it, for worthy were I to die
like a dog did I proceed rashly in this matter, and make shipwreck of the weal of Christendom."

"I never knew thee before hesitate for fear of life," said Richard upbraidingly.

"Nor would I now, my liege," replied the stout-hearted baron, "save that yours lies at pledge
as well as my own."

"Well, thou suspicious mortal," answered Richard, "begone then, and watch the progress of this
remedy. I could almost wish it might either cure or kill me, for I am weary of lying here like
an ox dying of the murrain, when tambours are beating, horses stamping, and trumpets sounding
without."

The baron hastily departed, resolved, however, to communicate his errand to some churchman,
as he felt something burdened in conscience at the idea of his master being attended by an
unbeliever.

The Archbishop of Tyre was the first to whom he confided his doubts, knowing his interest with
his master, Richard, who both loved and honoured that sagacious prelate. The bishop heard the
doubts which De Vaux stated, with that acuteness of intelligence which distinguishes the Roman
Catholic clergy. The religious scruples of De Vaux he treated with as much lightness as propriety
permitted him to exhibit on such a subject to a layman.

"Mediciners," he said, "like the medicines which they employed, were often useful, though the
one were by birth or manners the vilest of humanity, as the others are, in many cases, extracted
from the basest materials. Men may use the assistance of pagans and infidels," he continued,
"in their need, and there is reason to think that one cause of their being permitted to remain
on earth is that they might minister to the convenience of true Christians. Thus we lawfully
make slaves of heathen captives. Again," proceeded the prelate, "there is no doubt that the
primitive Christians used the services of the unconverted heathen. Thus in the ship of Alexandria,
in which the blessed Apostle Paul sailed to Italy, the sailors were doubtless pagans; yet what
said the holy saint when their ministry was needful?--'NISI HI IN NAVI MANSERINT, VOS SALVI
FIERI NON POTESTIS'--Unless these men abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved. Again, Jews are
infidels to Christianity, as well as Mohammedans. But there are few physicians in the camp
excepting Jews, and such are employed without scandal or scruple. Therefore, Mohammedans may
be used for their service in that capacity--QUOD ERAT DEMONSTRANDUM."

This reasoning entirely removed the scruples of Thomas de Vaux, who was particularly moved
by the Latin quotation, as he did not understand a word of it.

But the bishop proceeded with far less fluency when he considered the possibility of the Saracen's
acting with bad faith; and here he came not to a speedy decision. The baron showed him the
letters of credence. He read and re-read them, and compared the original with the translation.

"It is a dish choicely cooked," he said, "to the palate of King Richard, and I cannot but have
my suspicions of the wily Saracen. They are curious in the art of poisons, and can so temper
them that they shall be weeks in acting upon the party, during which time the perpetrator has
leisure to escape. They can impregnate cloth and leather, nay, even paper and parchment, with
the most subtle venom. Our Lady forgive me! And wherefore, knowing this, hold I these letters
of credence so close to my face? Take them, Sir Thomas--take them speedily!"

Here he gave them at arm's-length, and with some appearance of haste, to the baron. "But come,
my Lord de Vaux," he continued, "wend we to the tent of this sick squire, where we shall learn
whether this Hakim hath really the art of curing which he professeth, ere we consider whether
there be safety in permitting him to exercise his art upon King Richard.--Yet, hold! let me
first take my pouncet-box, for these fevers spread like an infection. I would advise you to
use dried rosemary steeped in vinegar, my lord. I, too, know something of the healing art."

"I thank your reverend lordship," replied Thomas of Gilsland; "but had I been accessible to
the fever, I had caught it long since by the bed of my master."

The Bishop of Tyre blushed, for he had rather avoided the presence of the sick monarch; and
he bid the baron lead on.

As they paused before the wretched hut in which Kenneth of the Leopard and his follower abode,
the bishop said to De Vaux, "Now, of a surety, my lord, these Scottish Knights have worse care
of their followers than we of our dogs. Here is a knight, valiant, they say, in battle, and
thought fitting to be graced with charges of weight in time of truce, whose esquire of the
body is lodged worse than in the worst dog-kennel in England. What say you of your neighbours?"

"That a master doth well enough for his servant when he lodgeth him in no worse dwelling than
his own," said De Vaux, and entered the hut.

The bishop followed, not without evident reluctance; for though he lacked not courage in some
respects, yet it was tempered with a strong and lively regard for his own safety. He recollected,
however, the necessity there was for judging personally of the skill of the Arabian physician,
and entered the hut with a stateliness of manner calculated, as he thought, to impose respect
on the stranger.

The prelate was, indeed, a striking and commanding figure. In his youth he had been eminently
handsome, and even in age was unwilling to appear less so. His episcopal dress was of the richest
fashion, trimmed with costly fur, and surrounded by a cope of curious needlework. The rings
on his fingers were worth a goodly barony, and the hood which he wore, though now unclasped
and thrown back for heat, had studs of pure gold to fasten it around his throat and under his
chin when he so inclined. His long beard, now silvered with age, descended over his breast.
One of two youthful acolytes who attended him created an artificial shade, peculiar then to
the East, by bearing over his head an umbrella of palmetto leaves, while the other refreshed
his reverend master by agitating a fan of peacock-feathers.

When the Bishop of Tyre entered the hut of the Scottish knight, the master was absent, and
the Moorish physician, whom he had come to see, sat in the very posture in which De Vaux had
left him several hours before, cross-legged upon a mat made of twisted leaves, by the side
of the patient, who appeared in deep slumber, and whose pulse he felt from time to time. The
bishop remained standing before him in silence for two or three minutes, as if expecting some
honourable salutation, or at least that the Saracen would seem struck with the dignity of his
appearance. But Adonbec el Hakim took no notice of him beyond a passing glance, and when the
prelate at length saluted him in the lingua franca current in the country, he only replied
by the ordinary Oriental greeting, "SALAM ALICUM--Peace be with you."

"Art thou a physician, infidel?" said the bishop, somewhat mortified at this cold reception.
"I would speak with thee on that art."

"If thou knewest aught of medicine," answered El Hakim, "thou wouldst be aware that physicians
hold no counsel or debate in the sick chamber of their patient. Hear," he added, as the low
growling of the staghound was heard from the inner hut, "even the dog might teach thee reason,
Ulemat. His instinct teaches him to suppress his barking in the sick man's hearing. Come without
the tent," said he, rising and leading the way, "if thou hast ought to say with me."

Notwithstanding the plainness of the Saracen leech's dress, and his inferiority of size when
contrasted with the tall prelate and gigantic English baron, there was something striking in
his manner and countenance, which prevented the Bishop of Tyre from expressing strongly the
displeasure he felt at this unceremonious rebuke. When without the hut, he gazed upon Adonbec
in silence for several minutes before he could fix on the best manner to renew the conversation.
No locks were seen under the high bonnet of the Arabian, which hid also part of a brow that
seemed lofty and expanded, smooth, and free from wrinkles, as were his cheeks, where they were
seen under the shade of his long beard. We have elsewhere noticed the piercing quality of his
dark eyes.

The prelate, struck with his apparent youth, at length broke a pause, which the other seemed
in no haste to interrupt, by demanding of the Arabian how old he was?

"The years of ordinary men," said the Saracen, "are counted by their wrinkles; those of sages
by their studies. I dare not call myself older than a hundred revolutions of the Hegira." [Meaning
that his attainments were those which might have been made in a hundred years.]

The Baron of Gilsland, who took this for a literal assertion that he was a century old, looked
doubtfully upon the prelate, who, though he better understood the meaning of El Hakim, answered
his glance by mysteriously shaking his head. He resumed an air of importance when he again
authoritatively demanded what evidence Adonbec could produce of his medical proficiency.

"Ye have the word of the mighty Saladin," said the sage, touching his cap in sign of reverence--"a
word which was never broken towards friend or foe. What, Nazarene, wouldst thou demand more?"

"I would have ocular proof of thy skill," said the baron, "and without it thou approachest
not to the couch of King Richard."

"The praise of the physician," said the Arabian, "is in the recovery of his patient. Behold
this sergeant, whose blood has been dried up by the fever which has whitened your camp with
skeletons, and against which the art of your Nazarene leeches hath been like a silken doublet
against a lance of steel. Look at his fingers and arms, wasted like the claws and shanks of
the crane. Death had this morning his clutch on him; but had Azrael been on one side of the
couch, I being on the other, his soul should not have been left from his body. Disturb me not
with further questions, but await the critical minute, and behold in silent wonder the marvellous
event."

The physician had then recourse to his astrolabe, the oracle of Eastern science, and watching
with grave precision until the precise time of the evening prayer had arrived, he sunk on his
knees, with his face turned to Mecca, and recited the petitions which close the Moslemah's
day of toil. The bishop and the English baron looked on each other, meanwhile, with symptoms
of contempt and indignation, but neither judged it fit to interrupt El Hakim in his devotions,
unholy as they considered them to be.

The Arab arose from the earth, on which he had prostrated himself, and walking into the hut
where the patient lay extended, he drew a sponge from a small silver box, dipped perhaps in
some aromatic distillation, for when he put it to the sleeper's nose, he sneezed, awoke, and
looked wildly around. He was a ghastly spectacle as he sat up almost naked on his couch, the
bones and cartilages as visible through the surface of his skin as if they had never been clothed
with flesh. His face was long, and furrowed with wrinkles; but his eye, though it wandered
at first, became gradually more settled. He seemed to be aware of the presence of his dignified
visitors, for he attempted feebly to pull the covering from his head in token of reverence,
as he inquired, in a subdued and submissive voice, for his master.

"Do you know us, vassal?" said the Lord of Gilsland.

"Not perfectly, my lord," replied the squire faintly. "My sleep has been long and full of dreams.
Yet I know that you are a great English lord, as seemeth by the red cross, and this a holy
prelate, whose blessing I crave on me a poor sinner."

"Thou hast it--BENEDICTIO DOMINI SIT VOBISCUM," said the prelate, making the sign of the cross,
but without approaching nearer to the patient's bed.

"Your eyes witness," said the Arabian, "the fever hath been subdued. He speaks with calmness
and recollection--his pulse beats composedly as yours--try its pulsations yourself."

The prelate declined the experiment; but Thomas of Gilsland, more determined on making the
trial, did so, and satisfied himself that the fever was indeed gone.

"This is most wonderful," said the knight, looking to the bishop; "the man is assuredly cured.
I must conduct this mediciner presently to King Richard's tent. What thinks your reverence?"

"Stay, let me finish one cure ere I commence another," said the Arab; "I will pass with you
when I have given my patient the second cup of this most holy elixir."

So saying he pulled out a silver cup, and filling it with water from a gourd which stood by
the bedside, he next drew forth a small silken bag made of network, twisted with silver, the
contents of which the bystanders could not discover, and immersing it in the cup, continued
to watch it in silence during the space of five minutes. It seemed to the spectators as if
some effervescence took place during the operation; but if so, it instantly subsided.

"Drink," said the physician to the sick man--"sleep, and awaken free from malady."

"And with this simple-seeming draught thou wilt undertake to cure a monarch?" said the Bishop
of Tyre.

"I have cured a beggar, as you may behold," replied the sage. "Are the Kings of Frangistan
made of other clay than the meanest of their subjects?"

"Let us have him presently to the King," said the Baron of Gilsland. "He hath shown that he
possesses the secret which may restore his health. If he fails to exercise it, I will put himself
past the power of medicine."

As they were about to leave the hut, the sick man, raising his voice as much as his weakness
permitted, exclaimed, "Reverend father, noble knight, and you, kind leech, if you would have
me sleep and recover, tell me in charity what is become of my dear master?"

"He is upon a distant expedition, friend," replied the prelate--"on an honourable embassy,
which may detain him for some days."

"Nay," said the Baron of Gilsland, "why deceive the poor fellow?--Friend, thy master has returned
to the camp, and you will presently see him."

The invalid held up, as if in thankfulness, his wasted hands to Heaven, and resisting no longer
the soporiferous operation of the elixir, sunk down in a gentle sleep.

"You are a better physician than I, Sir Thomas," said the prelate--"a soothing falsehood is
fitter for a sick-room than an unpleasing truth."

"How mean you, my reverend lord?" said De Vaux hastily. "Think you I would tell a falsehood
to save the lives of a dozen such as he?"

"You said," replied the bishop, with manifest symptoms of alarm--"you said the esquire's master
was returned--he, I mean, of the Couchant Leopard."

"And he IS returned," said De Vaux. "I spoke with him but a few hours since. This learned leech
came in his company."

"Holy Virgin! why told you not of his return to me?" said the bishop, in evident perturbation.

"Did I not say that this same Knight of the Leopard had returned in company with the physician?
I thought I had," replied De Vaux carelessly. "But what signified his return to the skill of
the physician, or the cure of his Majesty?"

"Much, Sir Thomas--it signified much," said the bishop, clenching his hands, pressing his foot
against the earth, and giving signs of impatience, as if in an involuntary manner. "But where
can he be gone now, this same knight? God be with us--here may be some fatal errors!"

"Yonder serf in the outer space," said De Vaux, not without wonder at the bishop's emotion,
"can probably tell us whither his master has gone."

The lad was summoned, and in a language nearly incomprehensible to them, gave them at length
to understand that an officer had summoned his master to the royal tent some time before their
arrival at that of his master. The anxiety of the bishop appeared to rise to the highest, and
became evident to De Vaux, though, neither an acute observer nor of a suspicious temper. But
with his anxiety seemed to increase his wish to keep it subdued and unobserved. He took a hasty
leave of De Vaux, who looked after him with astonishment, and after shrugging his shoulders
in silent wonder, proceeded to conduct the Arabian physician to the tent of King Richard.

CHAPTER IX.

     This is the prince of leeches; fever, plague,
     Cold rheum, and hot podagra, do but look on him,
     And quit their grasp upon the tortured sinews.
        ANONYMOUS.

The Baron of Gilsland walked with slow step and an anxious countenance towards the royal pavilion.
He had much diffidence of his own capacity, except in a field of battle, and conscious of no
very acute intellect, was usually contented to wonder at circumstances which a man of livelier
imagination would have endeavoured to investigate and understand, or at least would have made
the subject of speculation. But it seemed very extraordinary, even to him, that the attention
of the bishop should have been at once abstracted from all reflection on the marvellous cure
which they had witnessed, and upon the probability it afforded of Richard being restored to
health, by what seemed a very trivial piece of information announcing the motions of a beggardly
Scottish knight, than whom Thomas of Gilsland knew nothing within the circle of gentle blood
more unimportant or contemptible; and despite his usual habit of passively beholding passing
events, the baron's spirit toiled with unwonted attempts to form conjectures on the cause.

At length the idea occurred at once to him that the whole might be a conspiracy against King
Richard, formed within the camp of the allies, and to which the bishop, who was by some represented
as a politic and unscrupulous person, was not unlikely to have been accessory. It was true
that, in his own opinion, there existed no character so perfect as that of his master; for
Richard being the flower of chivalry, and the chief of Christian leaders, and obeying in all
points the commands of Holy Church, De Vaux's ideas of perfection went no further. Still, he
knew that, however unworthily, it had been always his master's fate to draw as much reproach
and dislike as honour and attachment from the display of his great qualities; and that in the
very camp, and amongst those princes bound by oath to the Crusade, were many who would have
sacrificed all hope of victory over the Saracens to the pleasure of ruining, or at least of
humbling, Richard of England.

"Wherefore," said the baron to himself, "it is in no sense impossible that this El Hakim, with
this his cure, or seeming cure, wrought on the body of the Scottish squire, may mean nothing
but a trick, to which he of the Leopard may be accessory, and wherein the Bishop of Tyre, prelate
as he is, may have some share."

This hypothesis, indeed, could not be so easily reconciled with the alarm manifested by the
bishop on learning that, contrary to his expectation, the Scottish knight had suddenly returned
to the Crusaders' camp. But De Vaux was influenced only by his general prejudices, which dictated
to him the assured belief that a wily Italian priest, a false-hearted Scot, and an infidel
physician, formed a set of ingredients from which all evil, and no good, was likely to be extracted.
He resolved, however, to lay his scruples bluntly before the King, of whose judgment he had
nearly as high an opinion as of his valour.

Meantime, events had taken place very contrary to the suppositions which Thomas de Vaux had
entertained. Scarce had he left the royal pavilion, when, betwixt the impatience of the fever,
and that which was natural to his disposition, Richard began to murmur at his delay, and express
an earnest desire for his return. He had seen enough to try to reason himself out of this irritation,
which greatly increased his bodily malady. He wearied his attendants by demanding from them
amusements, and the breviary of the priest, the romance of the clerk, even the harp of his
favourite minstrel, were had recourse to in vain. At length, some two hours before sundown,
and long, therefore, ere he could expect a satisfactory account of the process of the cure
which the Moor or Arabian had undertaken, he sent, as we have already heard, a messenger commanding
the attendance of the Knight of the Leopard, determined to soothe his impatience by obtaining
from Sir Kenneth a more particular account of the cause of his absence from the camp, and the
circumstances of his meeting with this celebrated physician.

The Scottish knight, thus summoned, entered the royal presence as one who was no stranger to
such scenes. He was scarcely known to the King of England, even by sight, although, tenacious
of his rank, as devout in the adoration of the lady of his secret heart, he had never been
absent on those occasions when the munificence and hospitality of England opened the Court
of its monarch to all who held a certain rank in chivalry. The King gazed fixedly on Sir Kenneth
approaching his bedside, while the knight bent his knee for a moment, then arose, and stood
before him in a posture of deference, but not of subservience or humility, as became an officer
in the presence of his sovereign.

"Thy name," said the King, "is Kenneth of the Leopard--from whom hadst thou degree of knighthood?"

"I took it from the sword of William the Lion, King of Scotland," replied the Scot.

"A weapon," said the King, "well worthy to confer honour; nor has it been laid on an undeserving
shoulder. We have seen thee bear thyself knightly and valiantly in press of battle, when most
need there was; and thou hadst not been yet to learn that thy deserts were known to us, but
that thy presumption in other points has been such that thy services can challenge no better
reward than that of pardon for thy transgression. What sayest thou--ha?"

Kenneth attempted to speak, but was unable to express himself distinctly; the consciousness
of his too ambitious love, and the keen, falcon glance with which Coeur de Lion seemed to penetrate
his inmost soul, combining to disconcert him.

"And yet," said the King, "although soldiers should obey command, and vassals be respectful
towards their superiors, we might forgive a brave knight greater offence than the keeping a
simple hound, though it were contrary to our express public ordinance."

Richard kept his eye fixed on the Scot's face, beheld and beholding, smiling inwardly at the
relief produced by the turn he had given to his general accusation.

"So please you, my lord," said the Scot, "your majesty must be good to us poor gentlemen of
Scotland in this matter. We are far from home, scant of revenues, and cannot support ourselves
as your wealthy nobles, who have credit of the Lombards. The Saracens shall feel our blows
the harder that we eat a piece of dried venison from time to time with our herbs and barley-cakes."

"It skills not asking my leave," said Richard, "since Thomas de Vaux, who doth, like all around
me, that which is fittest in his own eyes, hath already given thee permission for hunting and
hawking."

"For hunting only, and please you," said the Scot. "But if it please your Majesty to indulge
me with the privilege of hawking also, and you list to trust me with a falcon on fist, I trust
I could supply your royal mess with some choice waterfowl."

"I dread me, if thou hadst but the falcon," said the King, "thou wouldst scarce wait for the
permission. I wot well it is said abroad that we of the line of Anjou resent offence against
our forest-laws as highly as we would do treason against our crown. To brave and worthy men,
however, we could pardon either misdemeanour.--But enough of this. I desire to know of you,
Sir Knight, wherefore, and by whose authority, you took this recent journey to the wilderness
of the Dead Sea and Engaddi?"

"By order," replied the knight, "of the Council of Princes of the Holy Crusade."

"And how dared any one to give such an order, when I--not the least, surely, in the league--was
unacquainted with it?"

"It was not my part, please your highness," said the Scot, "to inquire into such particulars.
I am a soldier of the Cross--serving, doubtless, for the present, under your highness's banner,
and proud of the permission to do so, but still one who hath taken on him the holy symbol for
the rights of Christianity and the recovery of the Holy Sepulchre, and bound, therefore, to
obey without question the orders of the princes and chiefs by whom the blessed enterprise is
directed. That indisposition should seclude, I trust for but a short time, your highness from
their councils, in which you hold so potential a voice, I must lament with all Christendom;
but, as a soldier, I must obey those on whom the lawful right of command devolves, or set but
an evil example in the Christian camp."

"Thou sayest well," said King Richard; "and the blame rests not with thee, but with those with
whom, when it shall please Heaven to raise me from this accursed bed of pain and inactivity,
I hope to reckon roundly. What was the purport of thy message?"

"Methinks, and please your highness," replied Sir Kenneth, "that were best asked of those who
sent me, and who can render the reasons of mine errand; whereas I can only tell its outward
form and purport."

"Palter not with me, Sir Scot--it were ill for thy safety," said the irritable monarch.

"My safety, my lord," replied the knight firmly, "I cast behind me as a regardless thing when
I vowed myself to this enterprise, looking rather to my immortal welfare than to that which
concerns my earthly body."

"By the mass," said King Richard, "thou art a brave fellow! Hark thee, Sir Knight, I love the
Scottish people; they are hardy, though dogged and stubborn, and, I think, true men in the
main, though the necessity of state has sometimes constrained them to be dissemblers. I deserve
some love at their hand, for I have voluntarily done what they could not by arms have extorted
from me any more than from my predecessors, I have re-established the fortresses of Roxburgh
and Berwick, which lay in pledge to England; I have restored your ancient boundaries; and,
finally, I have renounced a claim to homage upon the crown of England, which I thought unjustly
forced on you. I have endeavoured to make honourable and independent friends, where former
kings of England attempted only to compel unwilling and rebellious vassals."

"All this you have done, my Lord King," said Sir Kenneth, bowing--"all this you have done,
by your royal treaty with our sovereign at Canterbury. Therefore have you me, and many better
Scottish men, making war against the infidels, under your banners, who would else have been
ravaging your frontiers in England. If their numbers are now few, it is because their lives
have been freely waged and wasted."

"I grant it true," said the King; "and for the good offices I have done your land I require
you to remember that, as a principal member of the Christian league, I have a right to know
the negotiations of my confederates. Do me, therefore, the justice to tell me what I have a
title to be acquainted with, and which I am certain to know more truly from you than from others."

"My lord," said the Scot, "thus conjured, I will speak the truth; for I well believe that your
purposes towards the principal object of our expedition are single-hearted and honest, and
it is more than I dare warrant for others of the Holy League. Be pleased, therefore, to know
my charge was to propose, through the medium of the hermit of Engaddi--a holy man, respected
and protected by Saladin himself--"

"A continuation of the truce, I doubt not," said Richard, hastily interrupting him.

"No, by Saint Andrew, my liege," said the Scottish knight; "but the establishment of a lasting
peace, and the withdrawing our armies from Palestine."

"Saint George!" said Richard, in astonishment. "Ill as I have justly thought of them, I could
not have dreamed they would have humbled themselves to such dishonour. Speak, Sir Kenneth,
with what will did you carry such a message?"

"With right good will, my lord," said Kenneth; "because, when we had lost our noble leader,
under whose guidance alone I hoped for victory, I saw none who could succeed him likely to
lead us to conquest, and I accounted it well in such circumstances to avoid defeat."

"And on what conditions was this hopeful peace to be contracted?" said King Richard, painfully
suppressing the passion with which his heart was almost bursting.

"These were not entrusted to me, my lord," answered the Knight of the Couchant Leopard. "I
delivered them sealed to the hermit."

"And for what hold you this reverend hermit--for fool, madman, traitor, or saint?" said Richard.

"His folly, sire," replied the shrewd Scottish man, "I hold to be assumed to win favour and
reverence from the Paynimrie, who regard madmen as the inspired of Heaven--at least it seemed
to me as exhibited only occasionally, and not as mixing, like natural folly, with the general
tenor of his mind."

"Shrewdly replied," said the monarch, throwing himself back on his couch, from which he had
half-raised himself. "Now of his penitence?"

"His penitence," continued Kenneth, "appears to me sincere, and the fruits of remorse for some
dreadful crime, for which he seems, in his own opinion, condemned to reprobation."

"And for his policy?" said King Richard.

"Methinks, my lord," said the Scottish knight, "he despairs of the security of Palestine, as
of his own salvation, by any means short of a miracle--at least, since the arm of Richard of
England hath ceased to strike for it."

"And, therefore, the coward policy of this hermit is like that of these miserable princes,
who, forgetful of their knighthood and their faith, are only resolved and determined when the
question is retreat, and rather than go forward against an armed Saracen, would trample in
their flight over a dying ally!"

"Might I so far presume, my Lord King," said the Scottish knight, "this discourse but heats
your disease, the enemy from which Christendom dreads more evil than from armed hosts of infidels."

The countenance of King Richard was, indeed, more flushed, and his action became more feverishly
vehement, as, with clenched hand, extended arm, and flashing eyes, he seemed at once to suffer
under bodily pain, and at the same time under vexation of mind, while his high spirit led him
to speak on, as if in contempt of both.

"You can flatter, Sir Knight," he said, "but you escape me not. I must know more from you than
you have yet told me. Saw you my royal consort when at Engaddi?"

"To my knowledge--no, my lord," replied Sir Kenneth, with considerable perturbation, for he
remembered the midnight procession in the chapel of the rocks.

"I ask you," said the King, in a sterner voice, "whether you were not in the chapel of the
Carmelite nuns at Engaddi, and there saw Berengaria, Queen of England, and the ladies of her
Court, who went thither on pilgrimage?"

"My lord," said Sir Kenneth, "I will speak the truth as in the confessional. In a subterranean
chapel, to which the anchorite conducted me, I beheld a choir of ladies do homage to a relic
of the highest sanctity; but as I saw not their faces, nor heard their voices, unless in the
hymns which they chanted, I cannot tell whether the Queen of England was of the bevy."

"And was there no one of these ladies known to you?"

Sir Kenneth stood silent.

"I ask you," said Richard, raising himself on his elbow, "as a knight and a gentleman--and
I shall know by your answer how you value either character--did you, or did you not, know any
lady amongst that band of worshippers?"

"My lord," said Kenneth, not without much hesitation, "I might guess."

"And I also may guess," said the King, frowning sternly; "but it is enough. Leopard as you
are, Sir Knight, beware tempting the lion's paw. Hark ye--to become enamoured of the moon would
be but an act of folly; but to leap from the battlements of a lofty tower, in the wild hope
of coming within her sphere, were self-destructive madness."

At this moment some bustling was heard in the outer apartment, and the King, hastily changing
to his more natural manner, said, "Enough--begone--speed to De Vaux, and send him hither with
the Arabian physician. My life for the faith of the Soldan! Would he but abjure his false law,
I would aid him with my sword to drive this scum of French and Austrians from his dominions,
and think Palestine as well ruled by him as when her kings were anointed by the decree of Heaven
itself."

The Knight of the Leopard retired, and presently afterwards the chamberlain announced a deputation
from the Council, who had come to wait on the Majesty of England.

"It is well they allow that I am living yet," was his reply. "Who are the reverend ambassadors?"

"The Grand Master of the Templars and the Marquis of Montserrat."

"Our brother of France loves not sick-beds," said Richard; "yet, had Philip been ill, I had
stood by his couch long since.--Jocelyn, lay me the couch more fairly--it is tumbled like a
stormy sea. Reach me yonder steel mirror--pass a comb through my hair and beard. They look,
indeed, liker a lion's mane than a Christian man's locks. Bring water."

"My lord," said the trembling chamberlain, "the leeches say that cold water may be fatal."

"To the foul fiend with the leeches!" replied the monarch; "if they cannot cure me, think you
I will allow them to torment me?--There, then," he said, after having made his ablutions, "admit
the worshipful envoys; they will now, I think, scarcely see that disease has made Richard negligent
of his person."

The celebrated Master of the Templars was a tall, thin, war-worn man, with a slow yet penetrating
eye, and a brow on which a thousand dark intrigues had stamped a portion of their obscurity.
At the head of that singular body, to whom their order was everything, and their individuality
nothing--seeking the advancement of its power, even at the hazard of that very religion which
the fraternity were originally associated to protect--accused of heresy and witchcraft, although
by their character Christian priests--suspected of secret league with the Soldan, though by
oath devoted to the protection of the Holy Temple, or its recovery--the whole order, and the
whole personal character of its commander, or Grand Master, was a riddle, at the exposition
of which most men shuddered. The Grand Master was dressed in his white robes of solemnity,
and he bore the ABACUS, a mystic staff of office, the peculiar form of which has given rise
to such singular conjectures and commentaries, leading to suspicions that this celebrated fraternity
of Christian knights were embodied under the foulest symbols of paganism.

Conrade of Montserrat had a much more pleasing exterior than the dark and mysterious priest-soldier
by whom he was accompanied. He was a handsome man, of middle age, or something past that term,
bold in the field, sagacious in council, gay and gallant in times of festivity; but, on the
other hand, he was generally accused of versatility, of a narrow and selfish ambition, of a
desire to extend his own principality, without regard to the weal of the Latin kingdom of Palestine,
and of seeking his own interest, by private negotiations with Saladin, to the prejudice of
the Christian leaguers.

When the usual salutations had been made by these dignitaries, and courteously returned by
King Richard, the Marquis of Montserrat commenced an explanation of the motives of their visit,
sent, as he said they were, by the anxious kings and princes who composed the Council of the
Crusaders, "to inquire into the health of their magnanimous ally, the valiant King of England."

"We know the importance in which the princes of the Council hold our health," replied the English
King; "and are well aware how much they must have suffered by suppressing all curiosity concerning
it for fourteen days, for fear, doubtless, of aggravating our disorder, by showing their anxiety
regarding the event."

The flow of the Marquis's eloquence being checked, and he himself thrown into some confusion
by this reply, his more austere companion took up the thread of the conversation, and with
as much dry and brief gravity as was consistent with the presence which he addressed, informed
the King that they came from the Council, to pray, in the name of Christendom, "that he would
not suffer his health to be tampered with by an infidel physician, said to be dispatched by
Saladin, until the Council had taken measures to remove or confirm the suspicion which they
at present conceived did attach itself to the mission of such a person."

"Grand Master of the Holy and Valiant Order of Knights Templars, and you, most noble Marquis
of Montserrat," replied Richard, "if it please you to retire into the adjoining pavilion, you
shall presently see what account we make of the tender remonstrances of our royal and princely
colleagues in this religious warfare."

The Marquis and Grand Master retired accordingly; nor had they been many minutes in the outward
pavilion when the Eastern physician arrived, accompanied by the Baron of Gilsland and Kenneth
of Scotland. The baron, however, was a little later of entering the tent than the other two,
stopping, perchance, to issue some orders to the warders without.

As the Arabian physician entered, he made his obeisance, after the Oriental fashion, to the
Marquis and Grand Master, whose dignity was apparent, both from their appearance and their
bearing. The Grand Master returned the salutation with an expression of disdainful coldness,
the Marquis with the popular courtesy which he habitually practised to men of every rank and
nation. There was a pause, for the Scottish knight, waiting for the arrival of De Vaux, presumed
not, of his own authority, to enter the tent of the King of England; and during this interval
the Grand Master sternly demanded of the Moslem, "Infidel, hast thou the courage to practise
thine art upon the person of an anointed sovereign of the Christian host?"

"The sun of Allah," answered the sage, "shines on the Nazarene as well as on the true believer,
and His servant dare make no distinction betwixt them when called on to exercise the art of
healing."

"Misbelieving Hakim," said the Grand Master, "or whatsoever they call thee for an unbaptized
slave of darkness, dost thou well know that thou shalt be torn asunder by wild horses should
King Richard die under thy charge?"

"That were hard justice," answered the physician, "seeing that I can but use human means, and
that the issue is written in the book of light."

"Nay, reverend and valiant Grand Master," said the Marquis of Montserrat, "consider that this
learned man is not acquainted with our Christian order, adopted in the fear of God, and for
the safety of His anointed.--Be it known to thee, grave physician, whose skill we doubt not,
that your wisest course is to repair to the presence of the illustrious Council of our Holy
League, and there to give account and reckoning to such wise and learned leeches as they shall
nominate, concerning your means of process and cure of this illustrious patient; so shall you
escape all the danger which, rashly taking such a high matter upon your sole answer, you may
else most likely incur."

"My lords," said El Hakim, "I understand you well. But knowledge hath its champions as well
as your military art--nay, hath sometimes had its martyrs as well as religion. I have the command
of my sovereign, the Soldan Saladin, to heal this Nazarene King, and, with the blessing of
the Prophet, I will obey his commands. If I fail, ye wear swords thirsting for the blood of
the faithful, and I proffer my body to your weapons. But I will not reason with one uncircumcised
upon the virtue of the medicines of which I have obtained knowledge through the grace of the
Prophet, and I pray you interpose no delay between me and my office."

"Who talks of delay?" said the Baron de Vaux, hastily entering the tent; "we have had but too
much already. I salute you, my Lord of Montserrat, and you, valiant Grand Master. But I must
presently pass with this learned physician to the bedside of my master."

"My lord," said the Marquis, in Norman-French, or the language of Ouie, as it was then called,
"are you well advised that we came to expostulate, on the part of the Council of the Monarchs
and Princes of the Crusade, against the risk of permitting an infidel and Eastern physician
to tamper with a health so valuable as that of your master, King Richard?"

"Noble Lord Marquis," replied the Englishman bluntly, "I can neither use many words, nor do
I delight in listening to them; moreover, I am much more ready to believe what my eyes have
seen than what my ears have heard. I am satisfied that this heathen can cure the sickness of
King Richard, and I believe and trust he will labour to do so. Time is precious. If Mohammed--may
God's curse be on him! stood at the door of the tent, with such fair purpose as this Adonbec
el Hakim entertains, I would hold it sin to delay him for a minute. So, give ye God'en, my lords."

"Nay, but," said Conrade of Montserrat, "the King himself said we should be present when this
same physician dealt upon him."

The baron whispered the chamberlain, probably to know whether the Marquis spoke truly, and
then replied, "My lords, if you will hold your patience, you are welcome to enter with us;
but if you interrupt, by action or threat, this accomplished physician in his duty, be it known
that, without respect to your high quality, I will enforce your absence from Richard's tent;
for know, I am so well satisfied of the virtue of this man's medicines, that were Richard himself
to refuse them, by our Lady of Lanercost, I think I could find in my heart to force him to
take the means of his cure whether he would or no.--Move onward, El Hakim."

The last word was spoken in the lingua franca, and instantly obeyed by the physician. The Grand
Master looked grimly on the unceremonious old soldier, but, on exchanging a glance with the
Marquis, smoothed his frowning brow as well as he could, and both followed De Vaux and the
Arabian into the inner tent, where Richard lay expecting them, with that impatience with which
the sick man watches the step of his physician. Sir Kenneth, whose attendance seemed neither
asked nor prohibited, felt himself, by the circumstances in which he stood, entitled to follow
these high dignitaries; but, conscious of his inferior power and rank, remained aloof during
the scene which took place.

Richard, when they entered his apartment, immediately exclaimed, "So ho! a goodly fellowship
come to see Richard take his leap in the dark. My noble allies, I greet you as the representatives
of our assembled league; Richard will again be amongst you in his former fashion, or ye shall
bear to the grave what is left of him.--De Vaux, lives he or dies he, thou hast the thanks
of thy prince. There is yet another--but this fever hath wasted my eyesight. What, the bold
Scot, who would climb heaven without a ladder! He is welcome too.--Come, Sir Hakim, to the
work, to the work!"

The physician, who had already informed himself of the various symptoms of the King's illness,
now felt his pulse for a long time, and with deep attention, while all around stood silent,
and in breathless expectation. The sage next filled a cup with spring water, and dipped into
it the small red purse, which, as formerly, he took from his bosom. When he seemed to think
it sufficiently medicated, he was about to offer it to the sovereign, who prevented him by
saying, "Hold an instant. Thou hast felt my pulse--let me lay my finger on thine. I too, as
becomes a good knight, know something of thine art."

The Arabian yielded his hand without hesitation, and his long, slender dark fingers were for
an instant enclosed, and almost buried, in the large enfoldment of King Richard's hand.

"His blood beats calm as an infant's," said the King; "so throbs not theirs who poison princes.
De Vaux, whether we live or die, dismiss this Hakim with honour and safety.--Commend us, friend,
to the noble Saladin. Should I die, it is without doubt of his faith; should I live, it will
be to thank him as a warrior would desire to be thanked."

He then raised himself in bed, took the cup in his hand, and turning to the Marquis and the
Grand Master--"Mark what I say, and let my royal brethren pledge me in Cyprus wine, 'To the
immortal honour of the first Crusader who shall strike lance or sword on the gate of Jerusalem;
and to the shame and eternal infamy of whomsoever shall turn back from the plough on which
he hath laid his hand!'"

He drained the cup to the bottom, resigned it to the Arabian, and sunk back, as if exhausted,
upon the cushions which were arranged to receive him. The physician then, with silent but expressive
signs, directed that all should leave the tent excepting himself and De Vaux, whom no remonstrance
could induce to withdraw. The apartment was cleared accordingly.

CHAPTER X.

     And now I will unclasp a secret book,
     And, to your quick-conceiving discontent,
     I'll read you matter deep and dangerous.
       HENRY IV., PART I.

The Marquis of Montserrat and the Grand Master of the Knights Templars stood together in the
front of the royal pavilion, within which this singular scene had passed, and beheld a strong
guard of bills and bows drawn out to form a circle around it, and keep at distance all which
might disturb the sleeping monarch. The soldiers wore the downcast, silent, and sullen looks
with which they trail their arms at a funeral, and stepped with such caution that you could
not hear a buckler ring or a sword clatter, though so many men in armour were moving around
the tent. They lowered their weapons in deep reverence as the dignitaries passed through their
files, but with the same profound silence.

"There is a change of cheer among these island dogs," said the Grand Master to Conrade, when
they had passed Richard's guards. "What hoarse tumult and revel used to be before this pavilion!--nought
but pitching the bar, hurling the ball, wrestling, roaring of songs, clattering of wine pots,
and quaffing of flagons among these burly yeomen, as if they were holding some country wake,
with a Maypole in the midst of them instead of a royal standard."

"Mastiffs are a faithful race," said Conrade; "and the King their Master has won their love
by being ready to wrestle, brawl, or revel amongst the foremost of them, whenever the humour
seized him."

"He is totally compounded of humours," said the Grand Master. "Marked you the pledge he gave
us! instead of a prayer, over his grace-cup yonder."

"He would have felt it a grace-cup, and a well-spiced one too," said the Marquis, "were Saladin
like any other Turk that ever wore turban, or turned him to Mecca at call of the muezzin. But
he affects faith, and honour, and generosity, as if it were for an unbaptized dog like him
to practise the virtuous bearing of a Christian knight. It is said he hath applied to Richard
to be admitted within the pale of chivalry."

"By Saint Bernard!" exclaimed the Grand Master, "it were time then to throw off our belts and
spurs, Sir Conrade, deface our armorial bearings, and renounce our burgonets, if the highest
honour of Christianity were conferred on an unchristened Turk of tenpence."

"You rate the Soldan cheap," replied the Marquis; "yet though he be a likely man, I have seen
a better heathen sold for forty pence at the bagnio."

They were now near their horses, which stood at some distance from the royal tent, prancing
among the gallant train of esquires and pages by whom they were attended, when Conrade, after
a moment's pause, proposed that they should enjoy the coolness of the evening breeze which
had arisen, and, dismissing their steeds and attendants, walk homewards to their own quarters
through the lines of the extended Christian camp. The Grand Master assented, and they proceeded
to walk together accordingly, avoiding, as if by mutual consent, the more inhabited parts of
the canvas city, and tracing the broad esplanade which lay between the tents and the external
defences, where they could converse in private, and unmarked, save by the sentinels as they
passed them.

They spoke for a time upon the military points and preparations for defence; but this sort
of discourse, in which neither seemed to take interest, at length died away, and there was
a long pause, which terminated by the Marquis of Montserrat stopping short, like a man who
has formed a sudden resolution, and gazing for some moments on the dark, inflexible countenance
of the Grand Master, he at length addressed him thus: "Might it consist with your valour and
sanctity, reverend Sir Giles Amaury, I would pray you for once to lay aside the dark visor
which you wear, and to converse with a friend barefaced."

The Templar half smiled.

"There are light-coloured masks," he said, "as well as dark visors, and the one conceals the
natural features as completely as the other."

"Be it so," said the Marquis, putting his hand to his chin, and withdrawing it with the action
of one who unmasks himself; "there lies my disguise. And now, what think you, as touching the
interests of your own order, of the prospects of this Crusade?"

"This is tearing the veil from my thoughts rather than exposing your own," said the Grand Master;
"yet I will reply with a parable told to me by a santon of the desert. 'A certain farmer prayed
to Heaven for rain, and murmured when it fell not at his need. To punish his impatience, Allah,'
said the santon, 'sent the Euphrates upon his farm, and he was destroyed, with all his possessions,
even by the granting of his own wishes.'"

"Most truly spoken," said the Marquis Conrade. "Would that the ocean had swallowed up nineteen
parts of the armaments of these Western princes! What remained would better have served the
purpose of the Christian nobles of Palestine, the wretched remnant of the Latin kingdom of
Jerusalem. Left to ourselves, we might have bent to the storm; or, moderately supported with
money and troops, we might have compelled Saladin to respect our valour, and grant us peace
and protection on easy terms. But from the extremity of danger with which this powerful Crusade
threatens the Soldan, we cannot suppose, should it pass over, that the Saracen will suffer
any one of us to hold possessions or principalities in Syria, far less permit the existence
of the Christian military fraternities, from whom they have experienced so much mischief."

"Ay, but," said the Templar, "these adventurous Crusaders may succeed, and again plant the
Cross on the bulwarks of Zion."

"And what will that advantage either the Order of the Templars, or Conrade of Montserrat?"
said the Marquis.

"You it may advantage," replied the Grand Master. "Conrade of Montserrat might become Conrade
King of Jerusalem."

"That sounds like something," said the Marquis, "and yet it rings but hollow. Godfrey of Bouillon
might well choose the crown of thorns for his emblem. Grand Master, I will confess to you I
have caught some attachment to the Eastern form of government--a pure and simple monarchy should
consist but of king and subjects. Such is the simple and primitive structure--a shepherd and
his flock. All this internal chain of feudal dependance is artificial and sophisticated; and
I would rather hold the baton of my poor marquisate with a firm gripe, and wield it after my
pleasure, than the sceptre of a monarch, to be in effect restrained and curbed by the will
of as many proud feudal barons as hold land under the Assizes of Jerusalem. [The Assises de
Jerusalem were the digest of feudal law, composed by Godfrey of Boulogne, for the government
of the Latin kingdom of Palestine, when reconquered from the Saracens. "It was composed with
advice of the patriarch and barons, the clergy and laity, and is," says the historian Gibbon,
"a precious monument of feudatory jurisprudence, founded upon those principles of freedom which
were essential to the system."] A king should tread freely, Grand Master, and should not be
controlled by here a ditch, and there a fence-here a feudal privilege, and there a mail-clad
baron with his sword in his hand to maintain it. To sum the whole, I am aware that Guy de Lusignan's
claims to the throne would be preferred to mine, if Richard recovers, and has aught to say
in the choice."

"Enough," said the Grand Master; "thou hast indeed convinced me of thy sincerity. Others may
hold the same opinions, but few, save Conrade of Montserrat, dared frankly avow that he desires
not the restitution of the kingdom of Jerusalem, but rather prefers being master of a portion
of its fragments--like the barbarous islanders, who labour not for the deliverance of a goodly
vessel from the billows, expecting rather to enrich themselves at the expense of the wreck."

"Thou wilt not betray my counsel?" said Conrade, looking sharply and suspiciously. "Know, for
certain, that my tongue shall never wrong my head, nor my hand forsake the defence of either.
Impeach me if thou wilt--I am prepared to defend myself in the lists against the best Templar
who ever laid lance in rest."

"Yet thou start'st somewhat suddenly for so bold a steed," said the Grand Master. "However,
I swear to thee by the Holy Temple, which our Order is sworn to defend, that I will keep counsel
with thee as a true comrade."

"By which Temple?" said the Marquis of Montserrat, whose love of sarcasm often outran his policy
and discretion; "swearest thou by that on the hill of Zion, which was built by King Solomon,
or by that symbolical, emblematical edifice, which is said to be spoken of in the councils
held in the vaults of your Preceptories, as something which infers the aggrandizement of thy
valiant and venerable Order?"

The Templar scowled upon him with an eye of death, but answered calmly, "By whatever Temple
I swear, be assured, Lord Marquis, my oath is sacred. I would I knew how to bind THEE by one
of equal obligation."

"I will swear truth to thee," said the Marquis, laughing, "by the earl's coronet, which I hope
to convert, ere these wars are over, into something better. It feels cold on my brow, that
same slight coronal; a duke's cap of maintenance were a better protection against such a night-breeze
as now blows, and a king's crown more preferable still, being lined with comfortable ermine
and velvet. In a word, our interests bind us together; for think not, Lord Grand Master, that,
were these allied princes to regain Jerusalem, and place a king of their own choosing there,
they would suffer your Order, any more than my poor marquisate, to retain the independence
which we now hold. No, by Our Lady! In such case, the proud Knights of Saint John must again
spread plasters and dress plague sores in the hospitals; and you, most puissant and venerable
Knights of the Temple, must return to your condition of simple men-at-arms, sleep three on
a pallet, and mount two upon one horse, as your present seal still expresses to have been your
ancient most simple custom."

"The rank, privileges, and opulence of our Order prevent so much degradation as you threaten,"
said the Templar haughtily.

"These are your bane," said Conrade of Montserrat; "and you, as well as I, reverend Grand Master,
know that, were the allied princes to be successful in Palestine, it would be their first point
of policy to abate the independence of your Order, which, but for the protection of our holy
father the Pope, and the necessity of employing your valour in the conquest of Palestine, you
would long since have experienced. Give them complete success, and you will be flung aside,
as the splinters of a broken lance are tossed out of the tilt-yard."

"There may be truth in what you say," said the Templar, darkly smiling. "But what were our
hopes should the allies withdraw their forces, and leave Palestine in the grasp of Saladin?"

"Great and assured," replied Conrade. "The Soldan would give large provinces to maintain at
his behest a body of well-appointed Frankish lances. In Egypt, in Persia, a hundred such auxiliaries,
joined to his own light cavalry, would turn the battle against the most fearful odds. This
dependence would be but for a time--perhaps during the life of this enterprising Soldan; but
in the East empires arise like mushrooms. Suppose him dead, and us strengthened with a constant
succession of fiery and adventurous spirits from Europe, what might we not hope to achieve,
uncontrolled by these monarchs, whose dignity throws us at present into the shade--and, were
they to remain here, and succeed in this expedition, would willingly consign us for ever to
degradation and dependence?"

"You say well, my Lord Marquis," said the Grand Master, "and your words find an echo in my
bosom. Yet must we be cautious--Philip of France is wise as well as valiant."

"True, and will be therefore the more easily diverted from an expedition to which, in a moment
of enthusiasm, or urged by his nobles, he rashly bound himself. He is jealous of King Richard,
his natural enemy, and longs to return to prosecute plans of ambition nearer to Paris than
Palestine. Any fair pretence will serve him for withdrawing from a scene in which he is aware
he is wasting the force of his kingdom."

"And the Duke of Austria?" said the Templar.

"Oh, touching the Duke," returned Conrade, "his self-conceit and folly lead him to the same
conclusions as do Philip's policy and wisdom. He conceives himself, God help the while, ungratefully
treated, because men's mouths--even those of his own MINNE-SINGERS [The German minstrels were
so termed.]--are filled with the praises of King Richard, whom he fears and hates, and in whose
harm he would rejoice, like those unbred, dastardly curs, who, if the foremost of the pack
is hurt by the gripe of the wolf, are much more likely to assail the sufferer from behind than
to come to his assistance. But wherefore tell I this to thee, save to show that I am in sincerity
in desiring that this league be broken up, and the country freed of these great monarchs with
their hosts? And thou well knowest, and hast thyself seen, how all the princes of influence
and power, one alone excepted, are eager to enter into treaty with the Soldan."

"I acknowledge it," said the Templar; "he were blind that had not seen this in their last deliberations.
But lift yet thy mask an inch higher, and tell me thy real reason for pressing upon the Council
that Northern Englishman, or Scot, or whatever you call yonder Knight of the Leopard, to carry
their proposals for a treaty?"

"There was a policy in it," replied the Italian. "His character of native of Britain was sufficient
to meet what Saladin required, who knew him to belong to the band of Richard; while his character
of Scot, and certain other personal grudges which I wot of, rendered it most unlikely that
our envoy should, on his return, hold any communication with the sick-bed of Richard, to whom
his presence was ever unacceptable."

"Oh, too finespun policy," said the Grand Master; "trust me, that Italian spiders' webs will
never bind this unshorn Samson of the Isle--well if you can do it with new cords, and those
of the toughest. See you not that the envoy whom you have selected so carefully hath brought
us, in this physician, the means of restoring the lion-hearted, bull-necked Englishman to prosecute
his Crusading enterprise. And so soon as he is able once more to rush on, which of the princes
dare hold back? They must follow him for very shame, although they would march under the banner
of Satan as soon."

"Be content," said Conrade of Montserrat; "ere this physician, if he work by anything short
of miraculous agency, can accomplish Richard's cure, it may be possible to put some open rupture
betwixt the Frenchman--at least the Austrian--and his allies of England, so that the breach
shall be irreconcilable; and Richard may arise from his bed, perhaps to command his own native
troops, but never again, by his sole energy, to wield the force of the whole Crusade."

"Thou art a willing archer," said the Templar; "but, Conrade of Montserrat, thy bow is over-slack
to carry an arrow to the mark."

He then stopped short, cast a suspicious glance to see that no one overheard him, and taking
Conrade by the hand, pressed it eagerly as he looked the Italian in the face, and repeated
slowly, "Richard arise from his bed, sayest thou? Conrade, he must never arise!"

The Marquis of Montserrat started. "What! spoke you of Richard of England--of Coeur de Lion--the
champion of Christendom?"

His cheek turned pale and his knees trembled as he spoke. The Templar looked at him, with his
iron visage contorted into a smile of contempt.

"Knowest thou what thou look'st like, Sir Conrade, at this moment? Not like the politic and
valiant Marquis of Montserrat, not like him who would direct the Council of Princes and determine
the fate of empires--but like a novice, who, stumbling upon a conjuration in his master's book
of gramarye, has raised the devil when he least thought of it, and now stands terrified at
the spirit which appears before him."

"I grant you," said Conrade, recovering himself, "that--unless some other sure road could be
discovered--thou hast hinted at that which leads most direct to our purpose. But, blessed Mary!
we shall become the curse of all Europe, the malediction of every one, from the Pope on his
throne to the very beggar at the church gate, who, ragged and leprous, in the last extremity
of human wretchedness, shall bless himself that he is neither Giles Amaury nor Conrade of Montserrat."

"If thou takest it thus," said the Grand Master, with the same composure which characterized
him all through this remarkable dialogue, "let us hold there has nothing passed between us--that
we have spoken in our sleep--have awakened, and the vision is gone."

"It never can depart," answered Conrade.

"Visions of ducal crowns and kingly diadems are, indeed, somewhat tenacious of their place
in the imagination," replied the Grand Master.

"Well," answered Conrade, "let me but first try to break peace between Austria and England."

They parted. Conrade remained standing still upon the spot, and watching the flowing white
cloak of the Templar as he stalked slowly away, and gradually disappeared amid the fast-sinking
darkness of the Oriental night. Proud, ambitious, unscrupulous, and politic, the Marquis of
Montserrat was yet not cruel by nature. He was a voluptuary and an epicurean, and, like many
who profess this character, was averse, even upon selfish motives, from inflicting pain or
witnessing acts of cruelty; and he retained also a general sense of respect for his own reputation,
which sometimes supplies the want of the better principle by which reputation is to be maintained.

"I have," he said, as his eyes still watched the point at which he had seen the last slight
wave of the Templar's mantle--"I have, in truth, raised the devil with a vengeance! Who would
have thought this stern, ascetic Grand Master, whose whole fortune and misfortune is merged
in that of his order, would be willing to do more for its advancement than I who labour for
my own interest? To check this wild Crusade was my motive, indeed, but I durst not think on
the ready mode which this determined priest has dared to suggest. Yet it is the surest--perhaps
even the safest."

Such were the Marquis's meditations, when his muttered soliloquy was broken by a voice from
a little distance, which proclaimed with the emphatic tone of a herald, "Remember the Holy
Sepulchre!"

The exhortation was echoed from post to post, for it was the duty of the sentinels to raise
this cry from time to time upon their periodical watch, that the host of the Crusaders might
always have in their remembrance the purpose of their being in arms. But though Conrade was
familiar with the custom, and had heard the warning voice on all former occasions as a matter
of habit, yet it came at the present moment so strongly in contact with his own train of thought,
that it seemed a voice from Heaven warning him against the iniquity which his heart meditated.
He looked around anxiously, as if, like the patriarch of old, though from very different circumstances,
he was expecting some ram caught in a thicket some substitution for the sacrifice which his
comrade proposed to offer, not to the Supreme Being, but to the Moloch of their own ambition.
As he looked, the broad folds of the ensign of England, heavily distending itself to the failing
night-breeze, caught his eye. It was displayed upon an artificial mound, nearly in the midst
of the camp, which perhaps of old some Hebrew chief or champion had chosen as a memorial of
his place of rest. If so, the name was now forgotten, and the Crusaders had christened it Saint
George's Mount, because from that commanding height the banner of England was supereminently
displayed, as if an emblem of sovereignty over the many distinguished, noble, and even royal
ensigns, which floated in lower situations.

A quick intellect like that of Conrade catches ideas from the glance of a moment. A single
look on the standard seemed to dispel the uncertainty of mind which had affected him. He walked
to his pavilion with the hasty and determined step of one who has adopted a plan which he is
resolved to achieve, dismissed the almost princely train who waited to attend him, and, as
he committed himself to his couch, muttered his amended resolution, that the milder means are
to be tried before the more desperate are resorted to.

"To-morrow," he said, "I sit at the board of the Archduke of Austria. We will see what can
be done to advance our purpose before prosecuting the dark suggestions of this Templar."

CHAPTER XI.

     One thing is certain in our Northern land--
     Allow that birth or valour, wealth or wit,
     Give each precedence to their possessor,
     Envy, that follows on such eminence,
     As comes the lyme-hound on the roebuck's trace,
     Shall pull them down each one.
              SIR DAVID LINDSAY.

Leopold, Grand Duke of Austria, was the first possessor of that noble country to whom the princely
rank belonged. He had been raised to the ducal sway in the German Empire on account of his
near relationship to the Emperor, Henry the Stern, and held under his government the finest
provinces which are watered by the Danube. His character has been stained in history on account
of one action of violence and perfidy, which arose out of these very transactions in the Holy
Land; and yet the shame of having made Richard a prisoner when he returned through his dominions;
unattended and in disguise, was not one which flowed from Leopold's natural disposition. He
was rather a weak and a vain than an ambitious or tyrannical prince. His mental powers resembled
the qualities of his person. He was tall, strong, and handsome, with a complexion in which
red and white were strongly contrasted, and had long flowing locks of fair hair. But there
was an awkwardness in his gait which seemed as if his size was not animated by energy sufficient
to put in motion such a mass; and in the same manner, wearing the richest dresses, it always
seemed as if they became him not. As a prince, he appeared too little familiar with his own
dignity; and being often at a loss how to assert his authority when the occasion demanded it,
he frequently thought himself obliged to recover, by acts and expressions of ill-timed violence,
the ground which might have been easily and gracefully maintained by a little more presence
of mind in the beginning of the controversy.

Not only were these deficiencies visible to others, but the Archduke himself could not but
sometimes entertain a painful consciousness that he was not altogether fit to maintain and
assert the high rank which he had acquired; and to this was joined the strong, and sometimes
the just, suspicion that others esteemed him lightly accordingly.

When he first joined the Crusade, with a most princely attendance, Leopold had desired much
to enjoy the friendship and intimacy of Richard, and had made such advances towards cultivating
his regard as the King of England ought, in policy, to have received and answered. But the
Archduke, though not deficient in bravery, was so infinitely inferior to Coeur de Lion in that
ardour of mind which wooed danger as a bride, that the King very soon held him in a certain
degree of contempt. Richard, also, as a Norman prince, a people with whom temperance was habitual,
despised the inclination of the German for the pleasures of the table, and particularly his
liberal indulgence in the use of wine. For these, and other personal reasons, the King of England
very soon looked upon the Austrian Prince with feelings of contempt, which he was at no pains
to conceal or modify, and which, therefore, were speedily remarked, and returned with deep
hatred, by the suspicious Leopold. The discord between them was fanned by the secret and politic
arts of Philip of France, one of the most sagacious monarchs of the time, who, dreading the
fiery and overbearing character of Richard, considering him as his natural rival, and feeling
offended, moreover, at the dictatorial manner in which he, a vassal of France for his Continental
domains, conducted himself towards his liege lord, endeavoured to strengthen his own party,
and weaken that of Richard, by uniting the Crusading princes of inferior degree in resistance
to what he termed the usurping authority of the King of England. Such was the state of politics
and opinions entertained by the Archduke of Austria, when Conrade of Montserrat resolved upon
employing his jealousy of England as the means of dissolving, or loosening at least, the league
of the Crusaders.

The time which he chose for his visit was noon; and the pretence, to present the Archduke with
some choice Cyprus wine which had lately fallen into his hands, and discuss its comparative
merits with those of Hungary and of the Rhine. An intimation of his purpose was, of course,
answered by a courteous invitation to partake of the Archducal meal, and every effort was used
to render it fitting the splendour of a sovereign prince. Yet the refined taste of the Italian
saw more cumbrous profusion than elegance or splendour in the display of provisions under which
the board groaned.

The Germans, though still possessing the martial and frank character of their ancestors--who
subdued the Roman Empire--had retained withal no slight tinge of their barbarism. The practices
and principles of chivalry were not carried to such a nice pitch amongst them as amongst the
French and English knights, nor were they strict observers of the prescribed rules of society,
which among those nations were supposed to express the height of civilization. Sitting at the
table of the Archduke, Conrade was at once stunned and amused with the clang of Teutonic sounds
assaulting his ears on all sides, notwithstanding the solemnity of a princely banquet. Their
dress seemed equally fantastic to him, many of the Austrian nobles retaining their long beards,
and almost all of them wearing short jerkins of various colours, cut, and flourished, and fringed
in a manner not common in Western Europe.

Numbers of dependants, old and young, attended in the pavilion, mingled at times in the conversation,
received from their masters the relics of the entertainment, and devoured them as they stood
behind the backs of the company. Jesters, dwarfs, and minstrels were there in unusual numbers,
and more noisy and intrusive than they were permitted to be in better regulated society. As
they were allowed to share freely in the wine, which flowed round in large quantities, their
licensed tumult was the more excessive.

All this while, and in the midst of a clamour and confusion which would better have become
a German tavern during a fair than the tent of a sovereign prince, the Archduke was waited
upon with a minuteness of form and observance which showed how anxious he was to maintain rigidly
the state and character to which his elevation had entitled him. He was served on the knee,
and only by pages of noble blood, fed upon plate of silver, and drank his Tokay and Rhenish
wines from a cup of gold. His ducal mantle was splendidly adorned with ermine, his coronet
might have equalled in value a royal crown, and his feet, cased in velvet shoes (the length
of which, peaks included, might be two feet), rested upon a footstool of solid silver. But
it served partly to intimate the character of the man, that, although desirous to show attention
to the Marquis of Montserrat, whom he had courteously placed at his right hand, he gave much
more of his attention to his SPRUCH-SPRECHER--that is, his man of conversation, or SAYER-OF-SAYINGS--who
stood behind the Duke's right shoulder.

This personage was well attired in a cloak and doublet of black velvet, the last of which was
decorated with various silver and gold coins stitched upon it, in memory of the munificent
princes who had conferred them, and bearing a short staff to which also bunches of silver coins
were attached by rings, which he jingled by way of attracting attention when he was about to
say anything which he judged worthy of it. This person's capacity in the household of the Archduke
was somewhat betwixt that of a minstrel and a counsellor. He was by turns a flatterer, a poet,
and an orator; and those who desired to be well with the Duke generally studied to gain the
good-will of the SPRUCH-SPRECHER.

Lest too much of this officer's wisdom should become tiresome, the Duke's other shoulder was
occupied by his HOFF-NARR, or court-jester, called Jonas Schwanker, who made almost as much
noise with his fool's cap, bells, and bauble, as did the orator, or man of talk, with his jingling
baton.

These two personages threw out grave and comic nonsense alternately; while their master, laughing
or applauding them himself, yet carefully watched the countenance of his noble guest, to discern
what impressions so accomplished a cavalier received from this display of Austrian eloquence
and wit. It is hard to say whether the man of wisdom or the man of folly contributed most to
the amusement of the party, or stood highest in the estimation of their princely master; but
the sallies of both seemed excellently well received. Sometimes they became rivals for the
conversation, and clanged their flappers in emulation of each other with a most alarming contention;
but, in general, they seemed on such good terms, and so accustomed to support each other's
play, that the SPRUCH-SPRECHER often condescended to follow up the jester's witticisms with
an explanation, to render them more obvious to the capacity of the audience, so that his wisdom
became a sort of commentary on the buffoon's folly. And sometimes, in requital, the HOFF-NARR,
with a pithy jest, wound up the conclusion of the orator's tedious harangue.

Whatever his real sentiments might be, Conrade took especial care that his countenance should
express nothing but satisfaction with what he heard, and smiled or applauded as zealously,
to all appearance, as the Archduke himself at the solemn folly of the SPRUCH-SPRECHER and the
gibbering wit of the fool. In fact, he watched carefully until the one or other should introduce
some topic favourable to the purpose which was uppermost in his mind.

It was not long ere the King of England was brought on the carpet by the jester, who had been
accustomed to consider Dickon of the Broom (which irreverent epithet he substituted for Richard
Plantagenet) as a subject of mirth, acceptable and inexhaustible. The orator, indeed, was silent,
and it was only when applied to by Conrade that he observed, "The GENISTA, or broom-plant,
was an emblem of humility; and it would be well when those who wore it would remember the warning."

The allusion to the illustrious badge of Plantagenet was thus rendered sufficiently manifest,
and Jonas Schwanker observed that they who humbled themselves had been exalted with a vengeance.
"Honour unto whom honour is due," answered the Marquis of Montserrat. "We have all had some
part in these marches and battles, and methinks other princes might share a little in the renown
which Richard of England engrosses amongst minstrels and MINNE-SINGERS. Has no one of the joyeuse
science here present a song in praise of the royal Archduke of Austria, our princely entertainer?"

Three minstrels emulously stepped forward with voice and harp. Two were silenced with difficulty
by the SPRUCH-SPRECHER, who seemed to act as master of the revels, and a hearing was at length
procured for the poet preferred, who sung, in high German, stanzas which may be thus translated:--

"What brave chief shall head the forces, Where the red-cross legions gather? Best of horsemen,
best of horses, Highest head and fairest feather."

Here the orator, jingling his staff, interrupted the bard to intimate to the party--what they
might not have inferred from the description--that their royal host was the party indicated,
and a full-crowned goblet went round to the acclamation, HOCH LEBE DER HERZOG LEOPOLD! Another
stanza followed:--

"Ask not Austria why, 'midst princes, Still her banner rises highest; Ask as well the strong-wing'd
eagle, Why to heaven he soars the highest."

"The eagle," said the expounder of dark sayings, "is the cognizance of our noble lord the Archduke--of
his royal Grace, I would say--and the eagle flies the highest and nearest to the sun of all
the feathered creation."

"The lion hath taken a spring above the eagle," said Conrade carelessly.

The Archduke reddened, and fixed his eyes on the speaker, while the SPRUCH-SPRECHER answered,
after a minute's consideration, "The Lord Marquis will pardon me--a lion cannot fly above an
eagle, because no lion hath got wings."

"Except the lion of Saint Mark," responded the jester.

"That is the Venetian's banner," said the Duke; "but assuredly that amphibious race, half nobles,
half merchants, will not dare to place their rank in comparison with ours."

"Nay, it was not of the Venetian lion that I spoke," said the Marquis of Montserrat, "but of
the three lions passant of England. Formerly, it is said, they were leopards; but now they
are become lions at all points, and must take precedence of beast, fish, or fowl, or woe worth
the gainstander."

"Mean you seriously, my lord?" said the Austrian, now considerably flushed with wine. "Think
you that Richard of England asserts any pre-eminence over the free sovereigns who have been
his voluntary allies in this Crusade?"

"I know not but from circumstances," answered Conrade. "Yonder hangs his banner alone in the
midst of our camp, as if he were king and generalissimo of our whole Christian army."

"And do you endure this so patiently, and speak of it so coldly?" said the Archduke.

"Nay, my lord," answered Conrade, "it cannot concern the poor Marquis of Montserrat to contend
against an injury patiently submitted to by such potent princes as Philip of France and Leopold
of Austria. What dishonour you are pleased to submit to cannot be a disgrace to me."

Leopold closed his fist, and struck on the table with violence.

"I have told Philip of this," he said. "I have often told him that it was our duty to protect
the inferior princes against the usurpation of this islander; but he answers me ever with cold
respects of their relations together as suzerain and vassal, and that it were impolitic in
him to make an open breach at this time and period."

"The world knows that Philip is wise," said Conrade, "and will judge his submission to be policy.
Yours, my lord, you can yourself alone account for; but I doubt not you have deep reasons for
submitting to English domination."

"I submit!" said Leopold indignantly--"I, the Archduke of Austria, so important and vital a
limb of the Holy Roman Empire--I submit myself to this king of half an island, this grandson
of a Norman bastard! No, by Heaven! The camp and all Christendom shall see that I know how
to right myself, and whether I yield ground one inch to the English bandog.--Up, my lieges
and merry men; up and follow me! We will--and that without losing one instant--place the eagle
of Austria where she shall float as high as ever floated the cognizance of king or kaiser."

With that he started from his seat, and amidst the tumultuous cheering of his guests and followers,
made for the door of the pavilion, and seized his own banner, which stood pitched before it.

"Nay, my lord," said Conrade, affecting to interfere, "it will blemish your wisdom to make
an affray in the camp at this hour; and perhaps it is better to submit to the usurpation of
England a little longer than to--"

"Not an hour, not a moment longer," vociferated the Duke; and with the banner in his hand,
and followed by his shouting guests and attendants, marched hastily to the central mount, from
which the banner of England floated, and laid his hand on the standard-spear, as if to pluck
it from the ground.

"My master, my dear master!" said Jonas Schwanker, throwing his arms about the Duke, "take
heed--lions have teeth--"

"And eagles have claws," said the Duke, not relinquishing his hold on the banner-staff, yet
hesitating to pull it from the ground.

The speaker of sentences, notwithstanding such was his occupation, had nevertheless some intervals
of sound sense. He clashed his staff loudly, and Leopold, as if by habit, turned his head towards
his man of counsel.

"The eagle is king among the fowls of the air," said the SPRUCH-SPRECHER, "as is the lion among
the beasts of the field--each has his dominion, separated as wide as England and Germany. Do
thou, noble eagle, no dishonour to the princely lion, but let your banners remain floating
in peace side by side."

Leopold withdrew his hand from the banner-spear, and looked round for Conrade of Montserrat,
but he saw him not; for the Marquis, so soon as he saw the mischief afoot, had withdrawn himself
from the crowd, taking care, in the first place, to express before several neutral persons
his regret that the Archduke should have chosen the hours after dinner to avenge any wrong
of which he might think he had a right to complain. Not seeing his guest, to whom he wished
more particularly to have addressed himself, the Archduke said aloud that, having no wish to
breed dissension in the army of the Cross, he did but vindicate his own privileges and right
to stand upon an equality with the King of England, without desiring, as he might have done,
to advance his banner--which he derived from emperors, his progenitors--above that of a mere
descendant of the Counts of Anjou; and in the meantime he commanded a cask of wine to be brought
hither and pierced, for regaling the bystanders, who, with tuck of drum and sound of music,
quaffed many a carouse round the Austrian standard.

This disorderly scene was not acted without a degree of noise, which alarmed the whole camp.

The critical hour had arrived at which the physician, according to the rules of his art, had
predicted that his royal patient might be awakened with safety, and the sponge had been applied
for that purpose; and the leech had not made many observations ere he assured the Baron of
Gilsland that the fever had entirely left his sovereign, and that, such was the happy strength
of his constitution, it would not be even necessary, as in most cases, to give a second dose
of the powerful medicine. Richard himself seemed to be of the same opinion, for, sitting up
and rubbing his eyes, he demanded of De Vaux what present sum of money was in the royal coffers.

The baron could not exactly inform him of the amount.

"It matters not," said Richard; "be it greater or smaller, bestow it all on this learned leech,
who hath, I trust, given me back again to the service of the Crusade. If it be less than a
thousand byzants, let him have jewels to make it up."

"I sell not the wisdom with which Allah has endowed me," answered the Arabian physician; "and
be it known to you, great Prince, that the divine medicine of which you have partaken would
lose its effects in my unworthy hands did I exchange its virtues either for gold or diamonds."

"The Physician refuseth a gratuity!" said De Vaux to himself. "This is more extraordinary than
his being a hundred years old."

"Thomas de Vaux," said Richard, "thou knowest no courage but what belongs to the sword, no
bounty and virtue but what are used in chivalry. I tell thee that this Moor, in his independence,
might set an example to them who account themselves the flower of knighthood."

"It is reward enough for me," said the Moor, folding his arms on his bosom, and maintaining
an attitude at once respectful and dignified, "that so great a king as the Melech Ric [Richard
was thus called by the Eastern nations.] should thus speak of his servant.--But now let me
pray you again to compose yourself on your couch; for though I think there needs no further
repetition of the divine draught, yet injury might ensue from any too early exertion ere your
strength be entirely restored."

"I must obey thee, Hakim," said the King; "yet believe me, my bosom feels so free from the
wasting fire which for so many days hath scorched it, that I care not how soon I expose it
to a brave man's lance.--But hark! what mean these shouts, and that distant music, in the camp?
Go, Thomas de Vaux, and make inquiry."

"It is the Archduke Leopold," said De Vaux, returning after a minute's absence, "who makes
with his pot-companions some procession through the camp."

"The drunken fool!" exclaimed King Richard; "can he not keep his brutal inebriety within the
veil of his pavilion, that he must needs show his shame to all Christendom?--What say you,
Sir Marquis?" he added, addressing himself to Conrade of Montserrat, who at that moment entered
the tent.

"Thus much, honoured Prince," answered the Marquis, "that I delight to see your Majesty so
well, and so far recovered; and that is a long speech for any one to make who has partaken
of the Duke of Austria's hospitality."

"What! you have been dining with the Teutonic wine-skin!" said the monarch. "And what frolic
has he found out to cause all this disturbance? Truly, Sir Conrade, I have still held you so
good a reveller that I wonder at your quitting the game."

De Vaux, who had got a little behind the King, now exerted himself by look and sign to make
the Marquis understand that he should say nothing to Richard of what was passing without. But
Conrade understood not, or heeded not, the prohibition.

"What the Archduke does," he said, "is of little consequence to any one, least of all to himself,
since he probably knows not what he is acting; yet, to say truth, it is a gambol I should not
like to share in, since he is pulling down the banner of England from Saint George's Mount,
in the centre of the camp yonder, and displaying his own in its stead."

"WHAT sayest thou?" exclaimed the King, in a tone which might have waked the dead.

"Nay," said the Marquis, "let it not chafe your Highness that a fool should act according to
his folly--"

"Speak not to me," said Richard, springing from his couch, and casting on his clothes with
a dispatch which seemed marvellous--"Speak not to me, Lord Marquis!--De Multon, I command thee
speak not a word to me--he that breathes but a syllable is no friend to Richard Plantagenet.--Hakim,
be silent, I charge thee!"

All this while the King was hastily clothing himself, and, with the last word, snatched his
sword from the pillar of the tent, and without any other weapon, or calling any attendance,
he rushed out of his pavilion. Conrade, holding up his hands as if in astonishment, seemed
willing to enter into conversation with De Vaux; but Sir Thomas pushed rudely past him, and
calling to one of the royal equerries, said hastily, "Fly to Lord Salisbury's quarters, and
let him get his men together and follow me instantly to Saint George's Mount. Tell him the
King's fever has left his blood and settled in his brain."

Imperfectly heard, and still more imperfectly comprehended, by the startled attendant whom
De Vaux addressed thus hastily, the equerry and his fellow-servants of the royal chamber rushed
hastily into the tents of the neighbouring nobility, and quickly spread an alarm, as general
as the cause seemed vague, through the whole British forces. The English soldiers, waked in
alarm from that noonday rest which the heat of the climate had taught them to enjoy as a luxury,
hastily asked each other the cause of the tumult, and without waiting an answer, supplied by
the force of their own fancy the want of information. Some said the Saracens were in the camp,
some that the King's life was attempted, some that he had died of the fever the preceding night,
many that he was assassinated by the Duke of Austria. The nobles and officers, at an equal
loss with the common men to ascertain the real cause of the disorder, laboured only to get
their followers under arms and under authority, lest their rashness should occasion some great
misfortune to the Crusading army. The English trumpets sounded loud, shrill, and continuously.
The alarm-cry of "Bows and bills, bows and bills!" was heard from quarter to quarter, again
and again shouted, and again and again answered by the presence of the ready warriors, and
their national invocation, "Saint George for merry England!"

The alarm went through the nearest quarter of the camp, and men of all the various nations
assembled, where, perhaps, every people in Christendom had their representatives, flew to arms,
and drew together under circumstances of general confusion, of which they knew neither the
cause nor the object. It was, however, lucky, amid a scene so threatening, that the Earl of
Salisbury, while he hurried after De Vaux's summons with a few only of the readiest English
men-at-arms, directed the rest of the English host to be drawn up and kept under arms, to advance
to Richard's succour if necessity should require, but in fit array and under due command, and
not with the tumultuary haste which their own alarm and zeal for the King's safety might have
dictated.

In the meanwhile, without regarding for one instant the shouts, the cries, the tumult which
began to thicken around him, Richard, with his dress in the last disorder, and his sheathed
blade under his arm, pursued his way with the utmost speed, followed only by De Vaux and one
or two household servants, to Saint George's Mount.

He outsped even the alarm which his impetuosity only had excited, and passed the quarter of
his own gallant troops of Normandy, Poitou, Gascony, and Anjou before the disturbance had reached
them, although the noise accompanying the German revel had induced many of the soldiery to
get on foot to listen. The handful of Scots were also quartered in the vicinity, nor had they
been disturbed by the uproar. But the King's person and his haste were both remarked by the
Knight of the Leopard, who, aware that danger must be afoot, and hastening to share in it,
snatched his shield and sword, and united himself to De Vaux, who with some difficulty kept
pace with his impatient and fiery master. De Vaux answered a look of curiosity, which the Scottish
knight directed towards him, with a shrug of his broad shoulders, and they continued, side
by side, to pursue Richard's steps.

The King was soon at the foot of Saint George's Mount, the sides as well as platform of which
were now surrounded and crowded, partly by those belonging to the Duke of Austria's retinue,
who were celebrating, with shouts of jubilee, the act which they considered as an assertion
of national honour; partly by bystanders of different nations, whom dislike to the English,
or mere curiosity, had assembled together to witness the end of these extraordinary proceedings.
Through this disorderly troop Richard burst his way, like a goodly ship under full sail, which
cleaves her forcible passage through the rolling billows, and heeds not that they unite after
her passage and roar upon her stern.

The summit of the eminence was a small level space, on which were pitched the rival banners,
surrounded still by the Archduke's friends and retinue. In the midst of the circle was Leopold
himself, still contemplating with self-satisfaction the deed he had done, and still listening
to the shouts of applause which his partisans bestowed with no sparing breath. While he was
in this state of self-gratulation, Richard burst into the circle, attended, indeed, only by
two men, but in his own headlong energies an irresistible host.

"Who has dared," he said, laying his hands upon the Austrian standard, and speaking in a voice
like the sound which precedes an earthquake--"Who has dared to place this paltry rag beside
the banner of England?"

The Archduke wanted not personal courage, and it was impossible he could hear this question
without reply. Yet so much was he troubled and surprised by the unexpected arrival of Richard,
and affected by the general awe inspired by his ardent and unyielding character, that the demand
was twice repeated, in a tone which seemed to challenge heaven and earth, ere the Archduke
replied, with such firmness as he could command, "It was I, Leopold of Austria."

"Then shall Leopold of Austria," replied Richard, "presentry see the rate at which his banner
and his pretensions are held by Richard of England."

So saying, he pulled up the standard-spear, splintered it to pieces, threw the banner itself
on the ground, and placed his foot upon it.

"Thus," said he, "I trample on the banner of Austria. Is there a knight among your Teutonic
chivalry dare impeach my deed?"

There was a momentary silence; but there are no braver men than the Germans.

"I," and "I," and "I," was heard from several knights of the Duke"s followers; and he himself
added his voice to those which accepted the King of England's defiance.

"Why do we dally thus?" said the Earl Wallenrode, a gigantic warrior from the frontiers of
Hungary. "Brethren and noble gentlemen, this man's foot is on the honour of your country--let
us rescue it from violation, and down with the pride of England!"

So saying, he drew his sword, and struck at the King a blow which might have proved fatal,
had not the Scot intercepted and caught it upon his shield.

"I have sworn," said King Richard--and his voice was heard above all the tumult, which now
waxed wild and loud--"never to strike one whose shoulder bears the cross; therefore live, Wallenrode--but
live to remember Richard of England."

As he spoke, he grasped the tall Hungarian round the waist, and, unmatched in wrestling, as
in other military exercises, hurled him backwards with such violence that the mass flew as
if discharged from a military engine, not only through the ring of spectators who witnessed
the extraordinary scene, but over the edge of the mount itself, down the steep side of which
Wallenrode rolled headlong, until, pitching at length upon his shoulder, he dislocated the
bone, and lay like one dead. This almost supernatural display of strength did not encourage
either the Duke or any of his followers to renew a personal contest so inauspiciously commenced.
Those who stood farthest back did, indeed, clash their swords, and cry out, "Cut the island
mastiff to pieces!" but those who were nearer veiled, perhaps, their personal fears under an
affected regard for order, and cried, for the most part, "Peace! Peace! the peace of the Cross--the
peace of Holy Church and our Father the Pope!"

These various cries of the assailants, contradicting each other, showed their irresolution;
while Richard, his foot still on the archducal banner, glared round him with an eye that seemed
to seek an enemy, and from which the angry nobles shrunk appalled, as from the threatened grasp
of a lion. De Vaux and the Knight of the Leopard kept their places beside him; and though the
swords which they held were still sheathed, it was plain that they were prompt to protect Richard's
person to the very last, and their size and remarkable strength plainly showed the defence
would be a desperate one.

Salisbury and his attendants were also now drawing near, with bills and partisans brandished,
and bows already bended.

At this moment King Philip of France, attended by one or two of his nobles, came on the platform
to inquire the cause of the disturbance, and made gestures of surprise at finding the King
of England raised from his sick-bed, and confronting their common ally, the Duke of Austria,
in such a menacing and insulting posture. Richard himself blushed at being discovered by Philip,
whose sagacity he respected as much as he disliked his person, in an attitude neither becoming
his character as a monarch, nor as a Crusader; and it was observed that he withdrew his foot,
as if accidentally, from the dishonoured banner, and exchanged his look of violent emotion
for one of affected composure and indifference. Leopold also struggled to attain some degree
of calmness, mortified as he was by having been seen by Philip in the act of passively submitting
to the insults of the fiery King of England.

Possessed of many of those royal qualities for which he was termed by his subjects the August,
Philip might be termed the Ulysses, as Richard was indisputably the Achilles, of the Crusade.
The King of France was sagacious, wise, deliberate in council, steady and calm in action, seeing
clearly, and steadily pursuing, the measures most for the interest of his kingdom--dignified
and royal in his deportment, brave in person, but a politician rather than a warrior. The Crusade
would have been no choice of his own; but the spirit was contagious, and the expedition was
enforced upon him by the church, and by the unanimous wish of his nobility. In any other situation,
or in a milder age, his character might have stood higher than that of the adventurous Coeur
de Lion. But in the Crusade, itself an undertaking wholly irrational, sound reason was the
quality of all others least estimated, and the chivalric valour which both the age and the
enterprise demanded was considered as debased if mingled with the least touch of discretion.
So that the merit of Philip, compared with that of his haughty rival, showed like the clear
but minute flame of a lamp placed near the glare of a huge, blazing torch, which, not possessing
half the utility, makes ten times more impression on the eye. Philip felt his inferiority in
public opinion with the pain natural to a high-spirited prince; and it cannot be wondered at
if he took such opportunities as offered for placing his own character in more advantageous
contrast with that of his rival. The present seemed one of those occasions in which prudence
and calmness might reasonably expect to triumph over obstinacy and impetuous violence.

"What means this unseemly broil betwixt the sworn brethren of the Cross--the royal Majesty
of England and the princely Duke Leopold? How is it possible that those who are the chiefs
and pillars of this holy expedition--"

"A truce with thy remonstrance, France," said Richard, enraged inwardly at finding himself
placed on a sort of equality with Leopold, yet not knowing how to resent it. "This duke, or
prince, or pillar, if you will, hath been insolent, and I have chastised him--that is all.
Here is a coil, forsooth, because of spurning a hound!"

"Majesty of France," said the Duke, "I appeal to you and every sovereign prince against the
foul indignity which I have sustained. This King of England hath pulled down my banner-torn
and trampled on it."

"Because he had the audacity to plant it beside mine," said Richard.

"My rank as thine equal entitled me," replied the Duke, emboldened by the presence of Philip.

"Assert such equality for thy person," said King Richard, "and, by Saint George, I will treat
thy person as I did thy broidered kerchief there, fit but for the meanest use to which kerchief
may be put."

"Nay, but patience, brother of England," said Philip, "and I will presently show Austria that
he is wrong in this matter.--Do not think, noble Duke," he continued, "that, in permitting
the standard of England to occupy the highest point in our camp, we, the independent sovereigns
of the Crusade, acknowledge any inferiority to the royal Richard. It were inconsistent to think
so, since even the Oriflamme itself--the great banner of France, to which the royal Richard
himself, in respect of his French possessions, is but a vassal--holds for the present an inferior
place to the Lions of England. But as sworn brethren of the Cross, military pilgrims, who,
laying aside the pomp and pride of this world, are hewing with our swords the way to the Holy
Sepulchre, I myself, and the other princes, have renounced to King Richard, from respect to
his high renown and great feats of arms, that precedence which elsewhere, and upon other motives,
would not have been yielded. I am satisfied that, when your royal grace of Austria shall have
considered this, you will express sorrow for having placed your banner on this spot, and that
the royal Majesty of England will then give satisfaction for the insult he has offered."

The SPRUCH-SPRECHER and the jester had both retired to a safe distance when matters seemed
coming to blows; but returned when words, their own commodity, seemed again about to become
the order of the day.

The man of proverbs was so delighted with Philip's politic speech that he clashed his baton
at the conclusion, by way of emphasis, and forgot the presence in which he was, so far as to
say aloud that he himself had never said a wiser thing in his life.

"It may be so," whispered Jonas Schwanker, "but we shall be whipped if you speak so loud."

The Duke answered sullenly that he would refer his quarrel to the General Council of the Crusade--a
motion which Philip highly applauded, as qualified to take away a scandal most harmful to Christendom.

Richard, retaining the same careless attitude, listened to Philip until his oratory seemed
exhausted, and then said aloud, "I am drowsy--this fever hangs about me still. Brother of France,
thou art acquainted with my humour, and that I have at all times but few words to spare. Know,
therefore, at once, I will submit a matter touching the honour of England neither to Prince,
Pope, nor Council. Here stands my banner--whatsoever pennon shall be reared within three butts'
length of it--ay, were it the Oriflamme, of which you were, I think, but now speaking--shall
be treated as that dishonoured rag; nor will I yield other satisfaction than that which these
poor limbs can render in the lists to any bold challenge--ay, were it against five champions
instead of one."

"Now," said the jester, whispering his companion, "that is as complete a piece of folly as
if I myself had said it; but yet, I think, there may be in this matter a greater fool than
Richard yet."

"And who may that be?" asked the man of wisdom.

"Philip," said the jester, "or our own Royal Duke, should either accept the challenge. But
oh, most sage SPRUCH-SPECHER, what excellent kings wouldst thou and I have made, since those
on whose heads these crowns have fallen can play the proverb-monger and the fool as completely
as ourselves!"

While these worthies plied their offices apart, Philip answered calmly to the almost injurious
defiance of Richard, "I came not hither to awaken fresh quarrels, contrary to the oath we have
sworn, and the holy cause in which we have engaged. I part from my brother of England as brothers
should part, and the only strife between the Lions of England and the Lilies of France shall
be which shall be carried deepest into the ranks of the infidels."

"It is a bargain, my royal brother," said Richard, stretching out his hand with all the frankness
which belonged to his rash but generous disposition; "and soon may we have the opportunity
to try this gallant and fraternal wager."

"Let this noble Duke also partake in the friendship of this happy moment," said Philip; and
the Duke approached half-sullenly, half-willing to enter into some accommodation.

"I think not of fools, nor of their folly," said Richard carelessly; and the Archduke, turning
his back on him, withdrew from the ground.

Richard looked after him as he retired.

"There is a sort of glow-worm courage," he said, "that shows only by night. I must not leave
this banner unguarded in darkness; by daylight the look of the Lions will alone defend it.
Here, Thomas of Gilsland, I give thee the charge of the standard--watch over the honour of
England."

"Her safety is yet more dear to me," said De Vaux, "and the life of Richard is the safety of
England. I must have your Highness back to your tent, and that without further tarriance."

"Thou art a rough and peremptory nurse, De Vaux," said the king, smiling; and then added, addressing
Sir Kenneth, "Valiant Scot, I owe thee a boon, and I will pay it richly. There stands the banner
of England! Watch it as novice does his armour on the night before he is dubbed. Stir not from
it three spears' length, and defend it with thy body against injury or insult. Sound thy bugle
if thou art assailed by more than three at once. Dost thou undertake the charge?"

"Willingly," said Kenneth; "and will discharge it upon penalty of my head. I will but arm me,
and return hither instantly."

The Kings of France and England then took formal leave of each other, hiding, under an appearance
of courtesy, the grounds of complaint which either had against the other--Richard against Philip,
for what he deemed an officious interference betwixt him and Austria, and Philip against Coeur
de Lion, for the disrespectful manner in which his mediation had been received. Those whom
this disturbance had assembled now drew off in different directions, leaving the contested
mount in the same solitude which had subsisted till interrupted by the Austrian bravado. Men
judged of the events of the day according to their partialities, and while the English charged
the Austrian with having afforded the first ground of quarrel, those of other nations concurred
in casting the greater blame upon the insular haughtiness and assuming character of Richard.

"Thou seest," said the Marquis of Montserrat to the Grand Master of the Templars, "that subtle
courses are more effective than violence. I have unloosed the bonds which held together this
bunch of sceptres and lances--thou wilt see them shortly fall asunder."

"I would have called thy plan a good one," said the Templar, "had there been but one man of
courage among yonder cold-blooded Austrians to sever the bonds of which you speak with his
sword. A knot that is unloosed may again be fastened, but not so the cord which has been cut
to pieces."

CHAPTER XII.

     'Tis woman that seduces all mankind.
        GAY.

In the days of chivalry, a dangerous post or a perilous adventure was a reward frequently assigned
to military bravery as a compensation for its former trials; just as, in ascending a precipice,
the surmounting one crag only lifts the climber to points yet more dangerous.

It was midnight, and the moon rode clear and high in heaven, when Kenneth of Scotland stood
upon his watch on Saint George's Mount, beside the banner of England, a solitary sentinel,
to protect the emblem of that nation against the insults which might be meditated among the
thousands whom Richard's pride had made his enemies. High thoughts rolled, one after each other,
upon the mind of the warrior. It seemed to him as if he had gained some favour in the eyes
of the chivalrous monarch, who till now had not seemed to distinguish him among the crowds
of brave men whom his renown had assembled under his banner, and Sir Kenneth little recked
that the display of royal regard consisted in placing him upon a post so perilous. The devotion
of his ambitious and high-placed affection inflamed his military enthusiasm. Hopeless as that
attachment was in almost any conceivable circumstances, those which had lately occurred had,
in some degree, diminished the distance between Edith and himself. He upon whom Richard had
conferred the distinction of guarding his banner was no longer an adventurer of slight note,
but placed within the regard of a princess, although he was as far as ever from her level.
An unknown and obscure fate could not now be his. If he was surprised and slain on the post
which had been assigned him, his death--and he resolved it should be glorious--must deserve
the praises as well as call down the vengeance of Coeur de Lion, and be followed by the regrets,
and even the tears, of the high-born beauties of the English Court. He had now no longer reason
to fear that he should die as a fool dieth.

Sir Kenneth had full leisure to enjoy these and similar high-souled thoughts, fostered by that
wild spirit of chivalry, which, amid its most extravagant and fantastic flights, was still
pure from all selfish alloy--generous, devoted, and perhaps only thus far censurable, that
it proposed objects and courses of action inconsistent with the frailties and imperfections
of man. All nature around him slept in calm moon-shine or in deep shadow. The long rows of
tents and pavilions, glimmering or darkening as they lay in the moonlight or in the shade,
were still and silent as the streets of a deserted city. Beside the banner-staff lay the large
staghound already mentioned, the sole companion of Kenneth's watch, on whose vigilance he trusted
for early warning of the approach of any hostile footstep. The noble animal seemed to understand
the purpose of their watch; for he looked from time to time at the rich folds of the heavy
pennon, and, when the cry of the sentinels came from the distant lines and defences of the
camp, he answered them with one deep and reiterated bark, as if to affirm that he too was vigilant
in his duty. From time to time, also, he lowered his lofty head, and wagged his tail, as his
master passed and repassed him in the short turns which he took upon his post; or, when the
knight stood silent and abstracted leaning on his lance, and looking up towards heaven, his
faithful attendant ventured sometimes, in the phrase of romance, "to disturb his thoughts,"
and awaken him from his reverie, by thrusting his large rough snout into the knight's gauntleted
hand, to solicit a transitory caress.

Thus passed two hours of the knight's watch without anything remarkable occurring. At length,
and upon a sudden, the gallant staghound bayed furiously, and seemed about to dash forward
where the shadow lay the darkest, yet waited, as if in the slips, till he should know the pleasure
of his master.

"Who goes there?" said Sir Kenneth, aware that there was something creeping forward on the
shadowy side of the mount.

"In the name of Merlin and Maugis," answered a hoarse, disagreeable voice, "tie up your fourfooted
demon there, or I come not at you."

"And who art thou that would approach my post?" said Sir Kenneth, bending his eyes as keenly
as he could on some object, which he could just observe at the bottom of the ascent, without
being able to distinguish its form. "Beware--I am here for death and life."

"Take up thy long-fanged Sathanas," said the voice, "or I will conjure him with a bolt from
my arblast."

At the same time was heard the sound of a spring or check, as when a crossbow is bent.

"Unbend thy arblast, and come into the moonlight," said the Scot, "or, by Saint Andrew, I will
pin thee to the earth, be what or whom thou wilt!"

As he spoke he poised his long lance by the middle, and, fixing his eye upon the object, which
seemed to move, he brandished the weapon, as if meditating to cast it from his hand--a use
of the weapon sometimes, though rarely, resorted to when a missile was necessary. But Sir Kenneth
was ashamed of his purpose, and grounded his weapon, when there stepped from the shadow into
the moonlight, like an actor entering upon the stage, a stunted, decrepit creature, whom, by
his fantastic dress and deformity, he recognized, even at some distance, for the male of the
two dwarfs whom he had seen in the chapel at Engaddi. Recollecting, at the same moment, the
other and far different visions of that extraordinary night, he gave his dog a signal, which
he instantly understood, and, returning to the standard, laid himself down beside it with a
stifled growl.

The little, distorted miniature of humanity, assured of his safety from an enemy so formidable,
came panting up the ascent, which the shortness of his legs rendered laborious, and, when he
arrived on the platform at the top, shifted to his left hand the little crossbow, which was
just such a toy as children at that period were permitted to shoot small birds with, and, assuming
an attitude of great dignity, gracefully extended his right hand to Sir Kenneth, in an attitude
as if he expected he would salute it. But such a result not following, he demanded, in a sharp
and angry tone of voice, "Soldier, wherefore renderest thou not to Nectabanus the homage due
to his dignity? Or is it possible that thou canst have forgotten him?"

"Great Nectabanus," answered the knight, willing to soothe the creature's humour, "that were
difficult for any one who has ever looked upon thee. Pardon me, however, that, being a soldier
upon my post, with my lance in my hand, I may not give to one of thy puissance the advantage
of coming within my guard, or of mastering my weapon. Suffice it that I reverence thy dignity,
and submit myself to thee as humbly as a man-at-arms in my place may."

"It shall suffice," said Nectabanus, "so that you presently attend me to the presence of those
who have sent me hither to summon you."

"Great sir," replied the knight, "neither in this can I gratify thee, for my orders are to
abide by this banner till daybreak--so I pray you to hold me excused in that matter also."

So saying, he resumed his walk upon the platform; but the dwarf did not suffer him so easily
to escape from his importunity.

"Look you," he said, placing himself before Sir Kenneth, so as to interrupt his way, "either
obey me, Sir Knight, as in duty bound, or I will lay the command upon thee, in the name of
one whose beauty could call down the genii from their sphere, and whose grandeur could command
the immortal race when they had descended."

A wild and improbable conjecture arose in the knight's mind, but he repelled it. It was impossible,
he thought, that the lady of his love should have sent him such a message by such a messenger;
yet his voice trembled as he said, "Go to, Nectabanus. Tell me at once, and as a true man,
whether this sublime lady of whom thou speakest be other than the houri with whose assistance
I beheld thee sweeping the chapel at Engaddi?"

"How! presumptuous Knight," replied the dwarf, "think'st thou the mistress of our own royal
affections, the sharer of our greatness, and the partner of our comeliness, would demean herself
by laying charge on such a vassal as thou? No; highly as thou art honoured, thou hast not yet
deserved the notice of Queen Guenevra, the lovely bride of Arthur, from whose high seat even
princes seem but pigmies. But look thou here, and as thou knowest or disownest this token,
so obey or refuse her commands who hath deigned to impose them on thee."

So saying, he placed in the knight's hand a ruby ring, which, even in the moonlight, he had
no difficulty to recognize as that which usually graced the finger of the high-born lady to
whose service he had devoted himself. Could he have doubted the truth of the token, he would
have been convinced by the small knot of carnation-coloured ribbon which was fastened to the
ring. This was his lady's favourite colour, and more than once had he himself, assuming it
for that of his own liveries, caused the carnation to triumph over all other hues in the lists
and in the battle.

Sir Kenneth was struck nearly mute by seeing such a token in such hands.

"In the name of all that is sacred, from whom didst thou receive this witness?" said the knight.
"Bring, if thou canst, thy wavering understanding to a right settlement for a minute or two,
and tell me the person by whom thou art sent, and the real purpose of thy message, and take
heed what thou sayest, for this is no subject for buffoonery."

"Fond and foolish Knight," said the dwarf, "wouldst thou know more of this matter than that
thou art honoured with commands from a princess, delivered to thee by a king? We list not to
parley with thee further than to command thee, in the name and by the power of that ring, to
follow us to her who is the owner of the ring. Every minute that thou tarriest is a crime against
thy allegiance."

"Good Nectabanus, bethink thyself," said the knight. "Can my lady know where and upon what
duty I am this night engaged? Is she aware that my life--pshaw, why should I speak of life--but
that my honour depends on my guarding this banner till daybreak; and can it be her wish that
I should leave it even to pay homage to her? It is impossible--the princess is pleased to be
merry with her servant in sending him such a message; and I must think so the rather that she
hath chosen such a messenger."

"Oh, keep your belief," said Nectabanus, turning round as if to leave the platform; "it is
little to me whether you be traitor or true man to this royal lady--so fare thee well."

"Stay, stay--I entreat you stay," said Sir Kenneth. "Answer me but one question: is the lady
who sent thee near to this place?"

"What signifies it?" said the dwarf. "Ought fidelity to reckon furlongs, or miles, or leagues--like
the poor courier, who is paid for his labour by the distance which he traverses? Nevertheless,
thou soul of suspicion, I tell thee, the fair owner of the ring now sent to so unworthy a vassal,
in whom there is neither truth nor courage, is not more distant from this place than this arblast
can send a bolt."

The knight gazed again on that ring, as if to ascertain that there was no possible falsehood
in the token. "Tell me," he said to the dwarf, "is my presence required for any length of time?"

"Time!" answered Nectabanus, in his flighty manner; "what call you time? I see it not--I feel
it not--it is but a shadowy name--a succession of breathings measured forth by night by the
clank of a bell, by day by a shadow crossing along a dial-stone. Knowest thou not a true knight's
time should only be reckoned by the deeds that he performs in behalf of God and his lady?"

"The words of truth, though in the mouth of folly," said the knight. "And doth my lady really
summon me to some deed of action, in her name and for her sake?--and may it not be postponed
for even the few hours till daybreak?"

"She requires thy presence instantly," said the dwarf, "and without the loss of so much time
as would be told by ten grains of the sandglass. Hearken, thou cold-blooded and suspicious
knight, these are her very words--Tell him that the hand which dropped roses can bestow laurels."

This allusion to their meeting in the chapel of Engaddi sent a thousand recollections through
Sir Kenneth's brain, and convinced him that the message delivered by the dwarf was genuine.
The rosebuds, withered as they were, were still treasured under his cuirass, and nearest to
his heart. He paused, and could not resolve to forego an opportunity, the only one which might
ever offer, to gain grace in her eyes whom he had installed as sovereign of his affections.
The dwarf, in the meantime, augmented his confusion by insisting either that he must return
the ring or instantly attend him.

"Hold, hold, yet a moment hold," said the knight, and proceeded to mutter to himself, "Am I
either the subject or slave of King Richard, more than as a free knight sworn to the service
of the Crusade? And whom have I come hither to honour with lance and sword? Our holy cause
and my transcendent lady!"

"The ring! the ring!" exclaimed the dwarf impatiently; "false and slothful knight, return the
ring, which thou art unworthy to touch or to look upon."

"A moment, a moment, good Nectabanus," said Sir Kenneth; "disturb not my thoughts.--What if
the Saracens were just now to attack our lines? Should I stay here like a sworn vassal of England,
watching that her king's pride suffered no humiliation; or should I speed to the breach, and
fight for the Cross? To the breach, assuredly; and next to the cause of God come the commands
of my liege lady. And yet, Coeur de Lion's behest--my own promise! Nectabanus, I conjure thee
once more to say, are you to conduct me far from hence?"

"But to yonder pavilion; and, since you must needs know," replied Nectabanus, "the moon is
glimmering on the gilded ball which crowns its roof, and which is worth a king's ransom."

"I can return in an instant," said the knight, shutting his eyes desperately to all further
consequences, "I can hear from thence the bay of my dog if any one approaches the standard.
I will throw myself at my lady's feet, and pray her leave to return to conclude my watch.--Here,
Roswal" (calling his hound, and throwing down his mantle by the side of the standard-spear),
"watch thou here, and let no one approach."

The majestic dog looked in his master's face, as if to be sure that he understood his charge,
then sat down beside the mantle, with ears erect and head raised, like a sentinel, understanding
perfectly the purpose for which he was stationed there.

"Come now, good Nectabanus," said the knight, "let us hasten to obey the commands thou hast
brought."

"Haste he that will," said the dwarf sullenly; "thou hast not been in haste to obey my summons,
nor can I walk fast enough to follow your long strides--you do not walk like a man, but bound
like an ostrich in the desert."

There were but two ways of conquering the obstinacy of Nectabanus, who, as he spoke, diminished
his walk into a snail's pace. For bribes Sir Kenneth had no means--for soothing no time; so
in his impatience he snatched the dwarf up from the ground, and bearing him along, notwithstanding
his entreaties and his fear, reached nearly to the pavilion pointed out as that of the Queen.
In approaching it, however, the Scot observed there was a small guard of soldiers sitting on
the ground, who had been concealed from him by the intervening tents. Wondering that the clash
of his own armour had not yet attracted their attention, and supposing that his motions might,
on the present occasion, require to be conducted with secrecy, he placed the little panting
guide upon the ground to recover his breath, and point out what was next to be done. Nectabanus
was both frightened and angry; but he had felt himself as completely in the power of the robust
knight as an owl in the claws of an eagle, and therefore cared not to provoke him to any further
display of his strength.

He made no complaints, therefore, of the usage he had received; but, turning amongst the labyrinth
of tents, he led the knight in silence to the opposite side of the pavilion, which thus screened
them from the observation of the warders, who seemed either too negligent or too sleepy to
discharge their duty with much accuracy. Arrived there, the dwarf raised the under part of
the canvas from the ground, and made signs to Sir Kenneth that he should introduce himself
to the inside of the tent, by creeping under it. The knight hesitated. There seemed an indecorum
in thus privately introducing himself into a pavilion pitched, doubtless, for the accommodation
of noble ladies; but he recalled to remembrance the assured tokens which the dwarf had exhibited,
and concluded that it was not for him to dispute his lady's pleasure.

He stooped accordingly, crept beneath the canvas enclosure of the tent, and heard the dwarf
whisper from without, "Remain here until I call thee."

CHAPTER XIII.

     You talk of Gaiety and Innocence!
     The moment when the fatal fruit was eaten,
     They parted ne'er to meet again; and Malice
     Has ever since been playmate to light Gaiety,
     From the first moment when the smiling infant
     Destroys the flower or butterfly he toys with,
     To the last chuckle of the dying miser,
     Who on his deathbed laughs his last to hear
     His wealthy neighbour has become a bankrupt.
         OLD PLAY.

Sir Kenneth was left for some minutes alone and in darkness. Here was another interruption
which must prolong his absence from his post, and he began almost to repent the facility with
which he had been induced to quit it. But to return without seeing the Lady Edith was now not
to be thought of. He had committed a breach of military discipline, and was determined at least
to prove the reality of the seductive expectations which had tempted him to do so. Meanwhile
his situation was unpleasant. There was no light to show him into what sort of apartment he
had been led--the Lady Edith was in immediate attendance on the Queen of England--and the discovery
of his having introduced himself thus furtively into the royal pavilion might, were it discovered;
lead to much and dangerous suspicion. While he gave way to these unpleasant reflections, and
began almost to wish that he could achieve his retreat unobserved, he heard a noise of female
voices, laughing, whispering, and speaking, in an adjoining apartment, from which, as the sounds
gave him reason to judge, he could only be separated by a canvas partition. Lamps were burning,
as he might perceive by the shadowy light which extended itself even to his side of the veil
which divided the tent, and he could see shades of several figures sitting and moving in the
adjoining apartment. It cannot be termed discourtesy in Sir Kenneth that, situated as he was,
he overheard a conversation in which he found himself deeply interested.

"Call her--call her, for Our Lady's sake," said the voice of one of these laughing invisibles.
"Nectabanus, thou shalt be made ambassador to Prester John's court, to show them how wisely
thou canst discharge thee of a mission."

The shrill tone of the dwarf was heard, yet so much subdued that Sir Kenneth could not understand
what he said, except that he spoke something of the means of merriment given to the guard.

"But how shall we rid us of the spirit which Nectabanus hath raised, my maidens?"

"Hear me, royal madam," said another voice. "If the sage and princely Nectabanus be not over-jealous
of his most transcendent bride and empress, let us send her to get us rid of this insolent
knight-errant, who can be so easily persuaded that high-born dames may need the use of his
insolent and overweening valour."

"It were but justice, methinks," replied another, "that the Princess Guenever should dismiss,
by her courtesy, him whom her husband's wisdom has been able to entice hither."

Struck to the heart with shame and resentment at what he had heard, Sir Kenneth was about to
attempt his escape from the tent at all hazards, when what followed arrested his purpose.

"Nay, truly," said the first speaker, "our cousin Edith must first learn how this vaunted wight
hath conducted himself, and we must reserve the power of giving her ocular proof that he hath
failed in his duty. It may be a lesson will do good upon her; for, credit me, Calista, I have
sometimes thought she has let this Northern adventurer sit nearer her heart than prudence would
sanction."

One of the other voices was then heard to mutter something of the Lady Edith's prudence and wisdom.

"Prudence, wench!" was the reply. "It is mere pride, and the desire to be thought more rigid
than any of us. Nay, I will not quit my advantage. You know well that when she has us at fault
no one can, in a civil way, lay your error before you more precisely than can my Lady Edith.
But here she comes."

A figure, as if entering the apartment, cast upon the partition a shade, which glided along
slowly until it mixed with those which already clouded it. Despite of the bitter disappointment
which he had experienced--despite the insult and injury with which it seemed he had been visited
by the malice, or, at best, by the idle humour of Queen Berengaria (for he already concluded
that she who spoke loudest, and in a commanding tone, was the wife of Richard), the knight
felt something so soothing to his feelings in learning that Edith had been no partner to the
fraud practised on him, and so interesting to his curiosity in the scene which was about to
take place, that, instead of prosecuting his more prudent purpose of an instant retreat, he
looked anxiously, on the contrary, for some rent or crevice by means of which he might be made
eye as well as ear witness to what was to go forward.

"Surely," said he to himself, "the Queen, who hath been pleased for an idle frolic to endanger
my reputation, and perhaps my life, cannot complain if I avail myself of the chance which fortune
seems willing to afford me to obtain knowledge of her further intentions."

It seemed, in the meanwhile, as if Edith were waiting for the commands of the Queen, and as
if the other were reluctant to speak for fear of being unable to command her laughter and that
of her companions; for Sir Kenneth could only distinguish a sound as of suppressed tittering
and merriment.

"Your Majesty," said Edith at last, "seems in a merry mood, though, methinks, the hour of night
prompts a sleepy one. I was well disposed bedward when I had your Majesty's commands to attend
you."

"I will not long delay you, cousin, from your repose," said the Queen, "though I fear you will
sleep less soundly when I tell you your wager is lost."

"Nay, royal madam," said Edith, "this, surely, is dwelling on a jest which has rather been
worn out, I laid no wager, however it was your Majesty's pleasure to suppose, or to insist,
that I did so."

"Nay, now, despite our pilgrimage, Satan is strong with you, my gentle cousin, and prompts
thee to leasing. Can you deny that you gaged your ruby ring against my golden bracelet that
yonder Knight of the Libbard, or how call you him, could not be seduced from his post?"

"Your Majesty is too great for me to gainsay you," replied Edith, "but these ladies can, if
they will, bear me witness that it was your Highness who proposed such a wager, and took the
ring from my finger, even while I was declaring that I did not think it maidenly to gage anything
on such a subject."

"Nay, but, my Lady Edith," said another voice, "you must needs grant, under your favour, that
you expressed yourself very confident of the valour of that same Knight of the Leopard."

"And if I did, minion," said Edith angrily, "is that a good reason why thou shouldst put in
thy word to flatter her Majesty's humour? I spoke of that knight but as all men speak who have
seen him in the field, and had no more interest in defending than thou in detracting from him.
In a camp, what can women speak of save soldiers and deeds of arms?"

"The noble Lady Edith," said a third voice, "hath never forgiven Calista and me, since we told
your Majesty that she dropped two rosebuds in the chapel."

"If your Majesty," said Edith, in a tone which Sir Kenneth could judge to be that of respectful
remonstrance, "have no other commands for me than to hear the gibes of your waiting-women,
I must crave your permission to withdraw."

"Silence, Florise," said the Queen, "and let not our indulgence lead you to forget the difference
betwixt yourself and the kinswoman of England.--But you, my dear cousin," she continued, resuming
her tone of raillery, "how can you, who are so good-natured, begrudge us poor wretches a few
minutes' laughing, when we have had so many days devoted to weeping and gnashing of teeth?"

"Great be your mirth, royal lady," said Edith; "yet would I be content not to smile for the
rest of my life, rather than--"

She stopped, apparently out of respect; but Sir Kenneth could hear that she was in much agitation.

"Forgive me," said Berengaria, a thoughtless but good-humoured princess of the House of Navarre;
"but what is the great offence, after all? A young knight has been wiled hither--has stolen,
or has been stolen, from his post, which no one will disturb in his absence--for the sake of
a fair lady; for, to do your champion justice, sweet one, the wisdom of Nectabanus could conjure
him hither in no name but yours."

"Gracious Heaven! your Majesty does not say so?" said Edith, in a voice of alarm quite different
from the agitation she had previously evinced,--"you cannot say so consistently with respect
for your own honour and for mine, your husband's kinswoman! Say you were jesting with me, my
royal mistress, and forgive me that I could, even for a moment, think it possible you could
be in earnest!"

"The Lady Edith," said the Queen, in a displeased tone of voice, "regrets the ring we have
won of her. We will restore the pledge to you, gentle cousin; only you must not grudge us in
turn a little triumph over the wisdom which has been so often spread over us, as a banner over
a host."

"A triumph!" exclaimed Edith indignantly--"a triumph! The triumph will be with the infidel,
when he hears that the Queen of England can make the reputation of her husband's kinswoman
the subject of a light frolic."

"You are angry, fair cousin, at losing your favourite ring," said the Queen. "Come, since you
grudge to pay your wager, we will renounce our right; it was your name and that pledge brought
him hither, and we care not for the bait after the fish is caught."

"Madam," replied Edith impatiently, "you know well that your Grace could not wish for anything
of mine but it becomes instantly yours. But I would give a bushel of rubies ere ring or name
of mine had been used to bring a brave man into a fault, and perhaps to disgrace and punishment."

"Oh, it is for the safety of our true knight that we fear!" said the Queen. "You rate our power
too low, fair cousin, when you speak of a life being lost for a frolic of ours. O Lady Edith,
others have influence on the iron breasts of warriors as well as you--the heart even of a lion
is made of flesh, not of stone; and, believe me, I have interest enough with Richard to save
this knight, in whose fate Lady Edith is so deeply concerned, from the penalty of disobeying
his royal commands."

"For the love of the blessed Cross, most royal lady," said Edith--and Sir Kenneth, with feelings
which it were hard to unravel, heard her prostrate herself at the Queen's feet--"for the love
of our blessed Lady, and of every holy saint in the calendar, beware what you do! You know
not King Richard--you have been but shortly wedded to him. Your breath might as well combat
the west wind when it is wildest, as your words persuade my royal kinsman to pardon a military
offence. Oh, for God's sake, dismiss this gentleman, if indeed you have lured him hither! I
could almost be content to rest with the shame of having invited him, did I know that he was
returned again where his duty calls him!"

"Arise, cousin, arise," said Queen Berengaria, "and be assured all will be better than you
think. Rise, dear Edith. I am sorry I have played my foolery with a knight in whom you take
such deep interest. Nay, wring not thy hands; I will believe thou carest not for him--believe
anything rather than see thee look so wretchedly miserable. I tell thee I will take the blame
on myself with King Richard in behalf of thy fair Northern friend--thine acquaintance, I would
say, since thou own'st him not as a friend. Nay, look not so reproachfully. We will send Nectabanus
to dismiss this Knight of the Standard to his post; and we ourselves will grace him on some
future day, to make amends for his wild-goose chase. He is, I warrant, but lying perdu in some
neighbouring tent."

"By my crown of lilies, and my sceptre of a specially good water-reed," said Nectabanus, "your
Majesty is mistaken, He is nearer at hand than you wot--he lieth ensconced there behind that
canvas partition."

"And within hearing of each word we have said!" exclaimed the Queen, in her turn violently
surprised and agitated. "Out, monster of folly and malignity!"

As she uttered these words, Nectabanus fled from the pavilion with a yell of such a nature
as leaves it still doubtful whether Berengaria had confined her rebuke to words, or added some
more emphatic expression of her displeasure.

"What can now be done?" said the Queen to Edith, in a whisper of undisguised uneasiness.

"That which must," said Edith firmly. "We must see this gentleman and place ourselves in his
mercy."

So saying, she began hastily to undo a curtain, which at one place covered an entrance or communication.

"For Heaven's sake, forbear--consider," said the Queen--"my apartment--our dress--the hour--my
honour!"

But ere she could detail her remonstrances, the curtain fell, and there was no division any
longer betwixt the armed knight and the party of ladies. The warmth of an Eastern night occasioned
the undress of Queen Berengaria and her household to be rather more simple and unstudied than
their station, and the presence of a male spectator of rank, required. This the Queen remembered,
and with a loud shriek fled from the apartment where Sir Kenneth was disclosed to view in a
compartment of the ample pavilion, now no longer separated from that in which they stood. The
grief and agitation of the Lady Edith, as well as the deep interest she felt in a hasty explanation
with the Scottish knight, perhaps occasioned her forgetting that her locks were more dishevelled
and her person less heedfully covered than was the wont of high-born damsels, in an age which
was not, after all, the most prudish or scrupulous period of the ancient time. A thin, loose
garment of pink-coloured silk made the principal part of her vestments, with Oriental slippers,
into which she had hastily thrust her bare feet, and a scarf hurriedly and loosely thrown about
her shoulders. Her head had no other covering than the veil of rich and dishevelled locks falling
round it on every side, that half hid a countenance which a mingled sense of modesty and of
resentment, and other deep and agitated feelings, had covered with crimson.

But although Edith felt her situation with all that delicacy which is her sex's greatest charm,
it did not seem that for a moment she placed her own bashfulness in comparison with the duty
which, as she thought, she owed to him who had been led into error and danger on her account.
She drew, indeed, her scarf more closely over her neck and bosom, and she hastily laid from
her hand a lamp which shed too much lustre over her figure; but, while Sir Kenneth stood motionless
on the same spot in which he was first discovered, she rather stepped towards than retired
from him, as she exclaimed, "Hasten to your post, valiant knight!--you are deceived in being
trained hither--ask no questions."

"I need ask none," said the knight, sinking upon one knee, with the reverential devotion of
a saint at the altar, and bending his eyes on the ground, lest his looks should increase the
lady's embarrassment.

"Have you heard all?" said Edith impatiently. "Gracious saints! then wherefore wait you here,
when each minute that passes is loaded with dishonour!"

"I have heard that I am dishonoured, lady, and I have heard it from you," answered Kenneth.
"What reck I how soon punishment follows? I have but one petition to you; and then I seek,
among the sabres of the infidels, whether dishonour may not be washed out with blood."

"Do not so, neither," said the lady. "Be wise--dally not here; all may yet be well, if you
will but use dispatch."

"I wait but for your forgiveness," said the knight, still kneeling, "for my presumption in
believing that my poor services could have been required or valued by you."

"I do forgive you--oh, I have nothing to forgive! have been the means of injuring you. But
oh, begone! I will forgive--I will value you--that is, as I value every brave Crusader--if
you will but begone!"

"Receive, first, this precious yet fatal pledge," said the knight, tendering the ring to Edith,
who now showed gestures of impatience.

"Oh, no, no " she said, declining to receive it. "Keep it--keep it as a mark of my regard--my
regret, I would say. Oh, begone, if not for your own sake, for mine!"

Almost recompensed for the loss even of honour, which her voice had denounced to him, by the
interest which she seemed to testify in his safety, Sir Kenneth rose from his knee, and, casting
a momentary glance on Edith, bowed low, and seemed about to withdraw. At the same instant,
that maidenly bashfulness, which the energy of Edith's feelings had till then triumphed over,
became conqueror in its turn, and she hastened from the apartment, extinguishing her lamp as
she went, and leaving, in Sir Kenneth's thoughts, both mental and natural gloom behind her.

She must be obeyed, was the first distinct idea which waked him from his reverie, and he hastened
to the place by which he had entered the pavilion. To pass under the canvas in the manner he
had entered required time and attention, and he made a readier aperture by slitting the canvas
wall with his poniard. When in the free air, he felt rather stupefied and overpowered by a
conflict of sensations, than able to ascertain what was the real import of the whole. He was
obliged to spur himself to action by recollecting that the commands of the Lady Edith had required
haste. Even then, engaged as he was amongst tent-ropes and tents, he was compelled to move
with caution until he should regain the path or avenue, aside from which the dwarf had led
him, in order to escape the observation of the guards before the Queen's pavilion; and he was
obliged also to move slowly, and with precaution, to avoid giving an alarm, either by falling
or by the clashing of his armour. A thin cloud had obscured the moon, too, at the very instant
of his leaving the tent, and Sir Kenneth had to struggle with this inconvenience at a moment
when the dizziness of his head and the fullness of his heart scarce left him powers of intelligence
sufficient to direct his motions.

But at once sounds came upon his ear which instantly recalled him to the full energy of his
faculties. These proceeded from the Mount of Saint George. He heard first a single, fierce,
angry, and savage bark, which was immediately followed by a yell of agony. No deer ever bounded
with a wilder start at the voice of Roswal than did Sir Kenneth at what he feared was the death-cry
of that noble hound, from whom no ordinary injury could have extracted even the slightest acknowledgment
of pain. He surmounted the space which divided him from the avenue, and, having attained it,
began to run towards the mount, although loaded with his mail, faster than most men could have
accompanied him even if unarmed, relaxed not his pace for the steep sides of the artificial
mound, and in a few minutes stood on the platform upon its summit.

The moon broke forth at this moment, and showed him that the Standard of England was vanished,
that the spear on which it had floated lay broken on the ground, and beside it was his faithful
hound, apparently in the agonies of death.

CHAPTER XIV.

     All my long arrear of honour lost,
     Heap'd up in youth, and hoarded up for age.
     Hath Honour's fountain then suck'd up the stream?
     He hath--and hooting boys may barefoot pass,
     And gather pebbles from the naked ford!
          DON SEBASTIAN.

After a torrent of afflicting sensations, by which he was at first almost stunned and confounded,
Sir Kenneth's first thought was to look for the authors of this violation of the English banner;
but in no direction could he see traces of them. His next, which to some persons, but scarce
to any who have made intimate acquaintances among the canine race, may appear strange, was
to examine the condition of his faithful Roswal, mortally wounded, as it seemed, in discharging
the duty which his master had been seduced to abandon. He caressed the dying animal, who, faithful
to the last, seemed to forget his own pain in the satisfaction he received from his master's
presence, and continued wagging his tail and licking his hand, even while by low moanings he
expressed that his agony was increased by the attempts which Sir Kenneth made to withdraw from
the wound the fragment of the lance or javelin with which it had been inflicted; then redoubled
his feeble endearments, as if fearing he had offended his master by showing a sense of the
pain to which his interference had subjected him. There was something in the display of the
dying creature's attachment which mixed as a bitter ingredient with the sense of disgrace and
desolation by which Sir Kenneth was oppressed. His only friend seemed removed from him, just
when he had incurred the contempt and hatred of all besides. The knight's strength of mind
gave way to a burst of agonized distress, and he groaned and wept aloud.

While he thus indulged his grief, a clear and solemn voice, close beside him, pronounced these
words in the sonorous tone of the readers of the mosque, and in the lingua franca mutually
understood by Christians and Saracens:--

"Adversity is like the period of the former and of the latter rain--cold, comfortless, unfriendly
to man and to animal; yet from that season have their birth the flower and the fruit, the date,
the rose, and the pomegranate."

Sir Kenneth of the Leopard turned towards the speaker, and beheld the Arabian physician, who,
approaching unheard, had seated himself a little behind him cross-legged, and uttered with
gravity, yet not without a tone of sympathy, the moral sentences of consolation with which
the Koran and its commentators supplied him; for, in the East, wisdom is held to consist less
in a display of the sage's own inventive talents, than in his ready memory and happy application
of and reference to "that which is written."

Ashamed at being surprised in a womanlike expression of sorrow, Sir Kenneth dashed his tears
indignantly aside, and again busied himself with his dying favourite.

"The poet hath said," continued the Arab, without noticing the knight's averted looks and sullen
deportment, "the ox for the field, and the camel for the desert. Were not the hand of the leech
fitter than that of the soldier to cure wounds, though less able to inflict them?"

"This patient, Hakim, is beyond thy help," said Sir Kenneth; "and, besides, he is, by thy law,
an unclean animal."

"Where Allah hath deigned to bestow life, and a sense of pain and pleasure," said the physician,
"it were sinful pride should the sage, whom He has enlightened, refuse to prolong existence
or assuage agony. To the sage, the cure of a miserable groom, of a poor dog and of a conquering
monarch, are events of little distinction. Let me examine this wounded animal."

Sir Kenneth acceded in silence, and the physician inspected and handled Roswal's wound with
as much care and attention as if he had been a human being. He then took forth a case of instruments,
and, by the judicious and skilful application of pincers, withdrew from the wounded shoulder
the fragment of the weapon, and stopped with styptics and bandages the effusion of blood which
followed; the creature all the while suffering him patiently to perform these kind offices,
as if he had been aware of his kind intentions.

"The animal may be cured," said El Hakim, addressing himself to Sir Kenneth, "if you will permit
me to carry him to my tent, and treat him with the care which the nobleness of his nature deserves.
For know, that thy servant Adonbec is no less skilful in the race and pedigree and distinctions
of good dogs and of noble steeds than in the diseases which afflict the human race."

"Take him with you," said the knight. "I bestow him on you freely, if he recovers. I owe thee
a reward for attendance on my squire, and have nothing else to pay it with. For myself, I will
never again wind bugle or halloo to hound!"

The Arabian made no reply, but gave a signal with a clapping of his hands, which was instantly
answered by the appearance of two black slaves. He gave them his orders in Arabic, received
the answer that "to hear was to obey," when, taking the animal in their arms, they removed
him, without much resistance on his part; for though his eyes turned to his master, he was
too weak to struggle.

"Fare thee well, Roswal, then," said Sir Kenneth--"fare thee well, my last and only friend--thou
art too noble a possession to be retained by one such as I must in future call myself!--I would,"
he said, as the slaves retired, "that, dying as he is, I could exchange conditions with that
noble animal!"

"It is written," answered the Arabian, although the exclamation had not been addressed to him,
"that all creatures are fashioned for the service of man; and the master of the earth speaketh
folly when he would exchange, in his impatience, his hopes here and to come for the servile
condition of an inferior being."

"A dog who dies in discharging his duty," said the knight sternly, "is better than a man who
survives the desertion of it. Leave me, Hakim; thou hast, on this side of miracle, the most
wonderful science which man ever possessed, but the wounds of the spirit are beyond thy power."

"Not if the patient will explain his calamity, and be guided by the physician," said Adonbec
el Hakim.

"Know, then," said Sir Kenneth, "since thou art so importunate, that last night the Banner
of England was displayed from this mound--I was its appointed guardian--morning is now breaking--there
lies the broken banner-spear, the standard itself is lost, and here sit I a living man!"

"How!" said El Hakim, examining him; "thy armour is whole--there is no blood on thy weapons,
and report speaks thee one unlikely to return thus from fight. Thou hast been trained from
thy post--ay, trained by the rosy cheek and black eye of one of those houris, to whom you Nazarenes
vow rather such service as is due to Allah, than such love as may lawfully be rendered to forms
of clay like our own. It has been thus assuredly; for so hath man ever fallen, even since the
days of Sultan Adam."

"And if it were so, physician," said Sir Kenneth sullenly, "what remedy?"

"Knowledge is the parent of power," said El Hakim, "as valour supplies strength. Listen to
me. Man is not as a tree, bound to one spot of earth; nor is he framed to cling to one bare
rock, like the scarce animated shell-fish. Thine own Christian writings command thee, when
persecuted in one city, to flee to another; and we Moslem also know that Mohammed, the Prophet
of Allah, driven forth from the holy city of Mecca, found his refuge and his helpmates at Medina."

"And what does this concern me?" said the Scot.

"Much," answered the physician. "Even the sage flies the tempest which he cannot control. Use
thy speed, therefore, and fly from the vengeance of Richard to the shadow of Saladin's victorious
banner."

"I might indeed hide my dishonour," said Sir Kenneth ironically, "in a camp of infidel heathens,
where the very phrase is unknown. But had I not better partake more fully in their reproach?
Does not thy advice stretch so far as to recommend me to take the turban? Methinks I want but
apostasy to consummate my infamy."

"Blaspheme not, Nazarene," said the physician sternly. "Saladin makes no converts to the law
of the Prophet, save those on whom its precepts shall work conviction. Open thine eyes to the
light, and the great Soldan, whose liberality is as boundless as his power, may bestow on thee
a kingdom; remain blinded if thou will, and, being one whose second life is doomed to misery,
Saladin will yet, for this span of present time, make thee rich and happy. But fear not that
thy brows shall be bound with the turban, save at thine own free choice."

"My choice were rather," said the knight, "that my writhen features should blacken, as they
are like to do, in this evening's setting sun."

"Yet thou art not wise, Nazarene," said El Hakim, "to reject this fair offer; for I have power
with Saladin, and can raise thee high in his grace. Look you, my son--this Crusade, as you
call your wild enterprise, is like a large dromond [The largest sort of vessels then known
were termed dromond's, or dromedaries.] parting asunder in the waves. Thou thyself hast borne
terms of truce from the kings and princes, whose force is here assembled, to the mighty Soldan,
and knewest not, perchance, the full tenor of thine own errand."

"I knew not, and I care not," said the knight impatiently. "What avails it to me that I have
been of late the envoy of princes, when, ere night, I shall be a gibbeted and dishonoured corpse?"

"Nay, I speak that it may not be so with thee," said the physician. "Saladin is courted on
all sides. The combined princes of this league formed against him have made such proposals
of composition and peace, as, in other circumstances, it might have become his honour to have
granted to them. Others have made private offers, on their own separate account, to disjoin
their forces from the camp of the Kings of Frangistan, and even to lend their arms to the defence
of the standard of the Prophet. But Saladin will not be served by such treacherous and interested
defection. The king of kings will treat only with the Lion King. Saladin will hold treaty with
none but the Melech Ric, and with him he will treat like a prince, or fight like a champion.
To Richard he will yield such conditions of his free liberality as the swords of all Europe
could never compel from him by force or terror. He will permit a free pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
and all the places where the Nazarenes list to worship; nay, he will so far share even his
empire with his brother Richard, that he will allow Christian garrisons in the six strongest
cities of Palestine, and one in Jerusalem itself, and suffer them to be under the immediate
command of the officers of Richard, who, he consents, shall bear the name of King Guardian
of Jerusalem. Yet further, strange and incredible as you may think it, know, Sir Knight--for
to your honour I can commit even that almost incredible secret--know that Saladin will put
a sacred seal on this happy union betwixt the bravest and noblest of Frangistan and Asia, by
raising to the rank of his royal spouse a Christian damsel, allied in blood to King Richard,
and known by the name of the Lady Edith of Plantagenet." [This may appear so extraordinary
and improbable a proposition that it is necessary to say such a one was actually made. The
historians, however, substitute the widowed Queen of Naples, sister of Richard, for the bride,
and Saladin's brother for the bridegroom. They appear to have been ignorant of the existence
of Edith of Plantagenet.--See MILL'S History of the Crusades, vol. ii., p. 61.]

"Ha!--sayest thou?" exclaimed Sir Kenneth, who, listening with indifference and apathy to the
preceding part of El Hakim's speech, was touched by this last communication, as the thrill
of a nerve, unexpectedly jarred, will awaken the sensation of agony, even in the torpor of
palsy. Then, moderating his tone, by dint of much effort he restrained his indignation, and,
veiling it under the appearance of contemptuous doubt, he prosecuted the conversation, in order
to get as much knowledge as possible of the plot, as he deemed it, against the honour and happiness
of her whom he loved not the less that his passion had ruined, apparently, his fortunes, at
once, and his honour.--"And what Christian," he said, With tolerable calmness, "would sanction
a union so unnatural as that of a Christian maiden with an unbelieving Saracen?"

"Thou art but an ignorant, bigoted Nazarene," said the Hakim. "Seest thou not how the Mohammedan
princes daily intermarry with the noble Nazarene maidens in Spain, without scandal either to
Moor or Christian? And the noble Soldan will, in his full confidence in the blood of Richard,
permit the English maid the freedom which your Frankish manners have assigned to women. He
will allow her the free exercise of her religion, seeing that, in very truth, it signifies
but little to which faith females are addicted; and he will assign her such place and rank
over all the women of his zenana, that she shall be in every respect his sole and absolute queen."

"What!" said Sir Kenneth, "darest thou think, Moslem, that Richard would give his kinswoman--a
high-born and virtuous princess--to be, at best, the foremost concubine in the haram of a misbeliever?
Know, Hakim, the meanest free Christian noble would scorn, on his child's behalf, such splendid
ignominy."

"Thou errest," said the Hakim. "Philip of France, and Henry of Champagne, and others of Richard's
principal allies, have heard the proposal without starting, and have promised, as far as they
may, to forward an alliance that may end these wasteful wars; and the wise arch-priest of Tyre
hath undertaken to break the proposal to Richard, not doubting that he shall be able to bring
the plan to good issue. The Soldan's wisdom hath as yet kept his proposition secret from others,
such as he of Montserrat, and the Master of the Templars, because he knows they seek to thrive
by Richard's death or disgrace, not by his life or honour. Up, therefore, Sir Knight, and to
horse. I will give thee a scroll which shall advance thee highly with the Soldan; and deem
not that you are leaving your country, or her cause, or her religion, since the interest of
the two monarchs will speedily be the same. To Saladin thy counsel will be most acceptable,
since thou canst make him aware of much concerning the marriages of the Christians, the treatment
of their wives, and other points of their laws and usages, which, in the course of such treaty,
it much concerns him that he should know. The right hand of the Soldan grasps the treasures
of the East, and it is the fountain or generosity. Or, if thou desirest it, Saladin, when allied
with England, can have but little difficulty to obtain from Richard, not only thy pardon and
restoration to favour, but an honourable command in the troops which may be left of the King
of England's host, to maintain their joint government in Palestine. Up, then, and mount--there
lies a plain path before thee."

"Hakim," said the Scottish knight, "thou art a man of peace; also thou hast saved the life
of Richard of England--and, moreover, of my own poor esquire, Strauchan. I have, therefore,
heard to an end a matter which, being propounded by another Moslem than thyself, I would have
cut short with a blow of my dagger! Hakim, in return for thy kindness, I advise thee to see
that the Saracen who shall propose to Richard a union betwixt the blood of Plantagenet and
that of his accursed race do put on a helmet which is capable to endure such a blow of a battle-axe
as that which struck down the gate of Acre. Certes, he will be otherwise placed beyond the
reach even of thy skill."

"Thou art, then, wilfully determined not to fly to the Saracen host?" said the physician. "Yet,
remember, thou stayest to certain destruction; and the writings of thy law, as well as ours,
prohibit man from breaking into the tabernacle of his own life."

"God forbid!" replied the Scot, crossing himself; "but we are also forbidden to avoid the punishment
which our crimes have deserved. And since so poor are thy thoughts of fidelity, Hakim, it grudges
me that I have bestowed my good hound on thee, for, should he live, he will have a master ignorant
of his value."

"A gift that is begrudged is already recalled," said El Hakim; "only we physicians are sworn
not to send away a patient uncured. If the dog recover, he is once more yours."

"Go to, Hakim," answered Sir Kenneth; "men speak not of hawk and hound when there is but an
hour of day-breaking betwixt them and death. Leave me to recollect my sins, and reconcile myself
to Heaven."

"I leave thee in thine obstinacy," said the physician; "the mist hides the precipice from those
who are doomed to fall over it."

He withdrew slowly, turning from time to time his head, as if to observe whether the devoted
knight might not recall him either by word or signal. At last his turbaned figure was lost
among the labyrinth of tents which lay extended beneath, whitening in the pale light of the
dawning, before which the moonbeam had now faded away.

But although the physician Adonbec's words had not made that impression upon Kenneth which
the sage desired, they had inspired the Scot with a motive for desiring life, which, dishonoured
as he conceived himself to be, he was before willing to part from as from a sullied vestment
no longer becoming his wear. Much that had passed betwixt himself and the hermit, besides what
he had observed between the anchorite and Sheerkohf (or Ilderim), he now recalled to recollection,
and tended to confirm what the Hakim had told him of the secret article of the treaty.

"The reverend impostor!" he exclaimed to himself; "the hoary hypocrite! He spoke of the unbelieving
husband converted by the believing wife; and what do I know but that the traitor exhibited
to the Saracen, accursed of God, the beauties of Edith Plantagenet, that the hound might judge
if the princely Christian lady were fit to be admitted into the haram of a misbeliever? If
I had yonder infidel Ilderim, or whatsoever he is called, again in the gripe with which I once
held him fast as ever hound held hare, never again should HE at least come on errand disgraceful
to the honour of Christian king or noble and virtuous maiden. But I--my hours are fast dwindling
into minutes--yet, while I have life and breath, something must be done, and speedily."

He paused for a few minutes, threw from him his helmet, then strode down the hill, and took
the road to King Richard's pavilion.

CHAPTER XV.
     King Edward saw the ruddy streaks
     Of light eclipse the grey,
     And heard the raven's croaking throat
     Proclaim the fated day.
     "Thou'rt right," he said, "for, by the God
     That sits enthron'd on high,
     Charles Baldwin, and his fellows twain,
     This day shall surely die."
                   CHATTERTON.

On the evening on which Sir Kenneth assumed his post, Richard, after the stormy event which
disturbed its tranquillity, had retired to rest in the plenitude of confidence inspired by
his unbounded courage and the superiority which he had displayed in carrying the point he aimed
at in presence of the whole Christian host and its leaders, many of whom, he was aware, regarded
in their secret souls the disgrace of the Austrian Duke as a triumph over themselves; so that
his pride felt gratified, that in prostrating one enemy he had mortified a hundred.

Another monarch would have doubled his guards on the evening after such a scene, and kept at
least a part of his troops under arms. But Coeur de Lion dismissed, upon the occasion, even
his ordinary watch, and assigned to his soldiers a donative of wine to celebrate his recovery,
and to drink to the Banner of Saint George; and his quarter of the camp would have assumed
a character totally devoid of vigilance and military preparation, but that Sir Thomas de Vaux,
the Earl of Salisbury, and other nobles, took precautions to preserve order and discipline
among the revellers.

The physician attended the King from his retiring to bed till midnight was past, and twice
administered medicine to him during that period, always previously observing the quarter of
heaven occupied by the full moon, whose influences he declared to be most sovereign, or most
baleful, to the effect of his drugs. It was three hours after midnight ere El Hakim withdrew
from the royal tent, to one which had been pitched for himself and his retinue. In his way
thither he visited the tent of Sir Kenneth of the Leopard, in order to see the condition of
his first patient in the Christian camp, old Strauchan, as the knight's esquire was named.
Inquiring there for Sir Kenneth himself, El Hakim learned on what duty he was employed, and
probably this information led him to Saint George's Mount, where he found him whom he sought
in the disastrous circumstances alluded to in the last chapter.

It was about the hour of sunrise, when a slow, armed tread was heard approaching the King's
pavilion; and ere De Vaux, who slumbered beside his master's bed as lightly as ever sleep sat
upon the eyes of a watch-dog, had time to do more than arise and say, "Who comes?" the Knight
of the Leopard entered the tent, with a deep and devoted gloom seated upon his manly features.

"Whence this bold intrusion, Sir Knight?" said De Vaux sternly, yet in a tone which respected
his master's slumbers.

"Hold! De Vaux," said Richard, awaking on the instant; "Sir Kenneth cometh like a good soldier
to render an account of his guard. To such the general's tent is ever accessible." Then rising
from his slumbering posture, and leaning on his elbow, he fixed his large bright eye upon the
warrior--"Speak, Sir Scot; thou comest to tell me of a vigilant, safe, and honourable watch,
dost thou not? The rustling of the folds of the Banner of England were enough to guard it,
even without the body of such a knight as men hold thee."

"As men will hold me no more," said Sir Kenneth. "My watch hath neither been vigilant, safe,
nor honourable. The Banner of England has been carried off."

"And thou alive to tell it!" said Richard, in a tone of derisive incredulity. "Away, it cannot
be. There is not even a scratch on thy face. Why dost thou stand thus mute? Speak the truth--it
is ill jesting with a king; yet I will forgive thee if thou hast lied."

"Lied, Sir King!" returned the unfortunate knight, with fierce emphasis, and one glance of
fire from his eye, bright and transient as the flash from the cold and stony flint. "But this
also must be endured. I have spoken the truth."

"By God and by Saint George!" said the King, bursting into fury, which, however, he instantly
checked. "De Vaux, go view the spot. This fever has disturbed his brain. This cannot be. The
man's courage is proof. It CANNOT be! Go speedily--or send, if thou wilt not go."

The King was interrupted by Sir Henry Neville, who came, breathless, to say that the banner
was gone, and the knight who guarded it overpowered, and most probably murdered, as there was
a pool of blood where the banner-spear lay shivered.

"But whom do I see here?" said Neville, his eyes suddenly resting upon Sir Kenneth.

"A traitor," said the King, starting to his feet, and seizing the curtal-axe, which was ever
near his bed--"a traitor! whom thou shalt see die a traitor's death." And he drew back the
weapon as in act to strike.

Colourless, but firm as a marble statue, the Scot stood before him, with his bare head uncovered
by any protection, his eyes cast down to the earth, his lips scarcely moving, yet muttering
probably in prayer. Opposite to him, and within the due reach for a blow, stood King Richard,
his large person wrapt in the folds of his camiscia, or ample gown of linen, except where the
violence of his action had flung the covering from his right arm, shoulder, and a part of his
breast, leaving to view a specimen of a frame which might have merited his Saxon predecessor's
epithet of Ironside. He stood for an instant, prompt to strike; then sinking the head of the
weapon towards the ground, he exclaimed, "But there was blood, Neville--there was blood upon
the place. Hark thee, Sir Scot--brave thou wert once, for I have seen thee fight. Say thou
hast slain two of the thieves in defence of the Standard--say but one--say thou hast struck
but a good blow in our behalf, and get thee out of the camp with thy life and thy infamy!"

"You have called me liar, my Lord King," replied Kenneth firmly; "and therein, at least, you
have done me wrong. Know that there was no blood shed in defence of the Standard save that
of a poor hound, which, more faithful than his master, defended the charge which he deserted."

"Now, by Saint George!" said Richard, again heaving up his arm. But De Vaux threw himself between
the King and the object of his vengeance, and spoke with the blunt truth of his character,
"My liege, this must not be--here, nor by your hand. It is enough of folly for one night and
day to have entrusted your banner to a Scot. Said I not they were ever fair and false?" [Such
were the terms in which the English used to speak of their poor northern neighbours, forgetting
that their own encroachments upon the independence of Scotland obliged the weaker nation to
defend themselves by policy as well as force. The disgrace must be divided between Edward I.
and Edward III., who enforced their domination over a free country, and the Scots, who were
compelled to take compulsory oaths, without any purpose of keeping them.]

