 It seems to me that we can very easily account for it when we recognize that man has
been gradually coming up from the lower orders of life, and that he still has in him the snake
and the hyena, the wolf, the tiger, the bear, all the wild, fierce passions of the animal world
only partly sloughed off, not yet outgrown; when you remember how ignorant he is, how he does
not understand yet the meaning of these divine laws and the divine life, glimpses of which
now and then attract his attention and lure him on; when you remember that selfishness, misguided
by ignorance, can believe that one man can get something for his behoof and happiness and good
at the expense of the welfare of somebody else, and harm come only to the person that is defrauded.
Right in here, if I had time to treat it in still further detail, it seems to me we have a
simple and adequate explanation of all the evil that has ever blasted, blighted, and darkened
the history of man.

Now, man being this kind of a creature, having an animal origin as well as a divine one, gradually
climbing up out of this lower life and looking towards God as his ideal, what is it that he
needs? Is there any need of atonement? All need of atonement! What does atonement mean? The
word itself carries its clearest explanation. In its root it means "atonement," healing the
division, whatever its nature or kind, bringing man into one-ness with God and men into one-ness
with each other. 

The Temple of the Sphinx at Gîza may also be compared with those of Hawara and Knossos. It seems
most probable that the Temple of the Sphinx is a XIIth Dynasty building.

For it must be remembered that within the last few years we have learned
from the excavations in Crete a new chapter of ancient history, which,
it might almost seem, shows us Greece and Egypt in regular communication
from nearly the beginnings of Egyptian history.

As the excavations which have told us this were carried on in Crete, not in Egypt, to describe
them does not lie within the scope of this book, though a short sketch of their results, so
far as they affect Egyptian history in later days, is given in Chapter VII. Here it may suffice
to say that, as far as the early period is concerned, Egypt and Crete were certainly in communication
in the time of the XIIth Dynasty, and quite possibly in that of the
VIth or still earlier.

In fact, this communication seems to go so far back in time that we are gradually being led to
perceive the possibility that the Minoan culture of Greece was in its origin an offshoot from that
of primeval Egypt, probably in early Neolithic times. That is to say, the Neolithic Greeks
and Neolithic Egyptians were both members of the same "Mediterranean" stock, which quite possibly
may have had its origin in Africa, and a portion of which may have crossed the sea to Europe
in very early times, taking with it the seeds of culture which in
Egypt developed in the Egyptian way, in Greece in the Greek way.

Actual communication and connection may not have been maintained at first, and probably they were
not. Prof. Petrie thinks otherwise, and would see in the boats painted on the predynastic Egyptian
vases (see Chapter I) the identical galleys by which, in late Neolithic times, commerce between
Crete and Egypt was carried on across the Mediterranean.

It is certain, however, that these boats are ordinary little river craft, the usual Nile felûkas
and gyassas of the time; they are depicted together with emblems
of the desert and cultivated land,-ostriches, antelopes, hills, and
palm-trees,-and the thoroughly inland and Upper Egyptian character
of the whole design springs to the eye.

There can be no doubt whatever that the predynastic boats were not seagoing galleys.

It was probably not till the time of the pyramid-builders that connection between the Greek Mediterraneans
and the Nilotes was re-established. Thence-forward it increased, and in the time of the XIIth
Dynasty, when the labyrinth of Amenemhat III was built, there seems to have been some kind of more
or less regular communication between the two countries.

It is certain that artistic ideas were exchanged between them at this period. How communication
was carried on we do not know, but it was probably rather by way of Cyprus and the Syrian
coast than directly across the open sea. We shall revert to this point when we come to describe
the connection between Crete and Egypt in the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty, when Cretan ambassadors
visited the Egyptian court and were depicted in tomb paintings at
Thebes.

Between the time of the XIIth Dynasty and that of the XVIIIth this connection seems to have been very
considerably strengthened; for at Knossos have been found an Egyptian statuette of an Egyptian
named Abnub, who from his name must have lived about the end of the
XIIIth Dynasty, and the top of an alabastron with the royal name of
Khian, one of the Hyksos kings.

Quite close to Hawara, at Illahun, in the ruins of the town which
was built by Usertsen's workmen when they were building his pyramid,
Prof. Petrie found fragments of pottery of types which we now know
well from excavations in Crete and Cyprus, though they were then unknown.

They are fragments of the polychrome Cretan ware called, after the name of the place where
it was first found in Crete, Kamares ware, and of a black ware ornamented with small punctures,
which are often filled up with white. This latter ware has been found elsewhere associated
with XIIIth Dynasty antiquities. The former is known to belong in Crete to the "early Minoan" period,
long anterior to the "late Minoan" or "Palace" period, which was contemporary with the Egyptian
XVIIIth Dynasty. We have here another interesting proof of a connection between XIIth Dynasty Egypt
and early Minoan Crete.

The later connection, under the XVIIIth and following dynasties, is also illustrated in the
same reign by Prof. Petrie's finds of late Mycenaean objects and foreign graves at Medinet Gurob.*

*
One man who was buried here bore the name An-Tursha, "Pillar of the Tursha." The Tursha were
a people of the Mediterranean, possibly Tylissians of Crete.

These excavations at Hawara, Illahun, Kahun, and Gurob were carried out in the years 1887-9.
Since then Prof. Petrie and his co-workers have revisited the same district, and Gurob has been
re-examined (in 1904) by Messrs. Loat and Ayrton, who discovered
there a shrine devoted to the worship of fish.

This work was carried on at the same time as Prof. Petrie's main excavation for the Egypt Exploration
Fund at Annas, or Ahnas-yet el-Medina, the site of the ancient Henensu, the Herakleopolis of
the Greeks. Prof. Naville had excavated there for the Egypt Exploration Fund in 1892, but
had not completely cleared the temple. This work was now taken up by Prof. Petrie, who laid the
whole building bare. It is dedicated to Hershefi, the local deity of Herakleopolis. This god,
who was called Ar-saphes by the Greeks, and identified with Herakles, was in fact a form of
Horus with the head of a ram; his name means "Terrible-Face."

The greater part of the temple dates to the time of the XIXth Dynasty, and nothing of the early
period is left. We know, however, that the Middle Kingdom was the flourishing period of the
city of Hershefi. For a comparatively brief period, between the age of Memphite hegemony and
that of Theban dominion, Herakleopolis was the capital city of Egypt. The kings of the IXth
and Xth Dynasties were Herakleopolites, though we know little of them. One, Kheti, is said to have
been a great tyrant. Another, Nebkaurâ, is known only as a figure in the "Legend of the Eloquent
Peasant," a classical story much in vogue in later days. Another, Merikarâ, is a more real
personage, for we have contemporary records of his days in the inscriptions of the tombs at Asyût,
from which we see that the princes of Thebes were already wearing down the Northerners, in spite
of the resistance of the adherents of Herakleopolis, among whom the most valiant were the
chiefs of Asyût. The civil war eventuated in favour of Thebes, and the Theban XIth Dynasty assumed
the double crown. The sceptre passed from Memphis and the North, and Thebes enters upon the scene
of Egyptian history.

With this event the Nile-land also entered upon a new era of development. The metropolis of the
kingdom was once more shifted to the South, and, although the kings of the XIIth Dynasty actually
resided in the North, their Theban origin was never forgotten, and
Thebes was regarded as the chief city of the country.

The XIth Dynasty kings actually reigned at Thebes, and there the later kings of the XIIIth Dynasty
retired after the conquest of the Hyksos. The fact that with Thebes were associated all the
heroic traditions of the struggle against the Hyksos ensured the final stability of the capital
there when the hated Semites were finally driven out, and the national kingdom was re-established
in its full extent from north to south. But for occasional intervals, as when Akhunaten held his court
at Tell el-Amarna and Ramses II at Tanis, Thebes remained the national
capital for six hundred years, till the time of the XXIId Dynasty.

Another great change which differentiates the Middle Kingdom (XIth-XIIIth Dynasties) from the
Old Kingdom was caused by Egypt's coming into contact with other outside nations at this period.
During the whole history of the Old Kingdom, Egyptian relations with the outer world had been
nil. We have some inkling of occasional connection with the Mediterranean peoples, the Ha-nebu
or Northerners; we have accounts of wars with the people of Sinai
and other Bedawin and negroes; and expeditions were also sent to the
land of Punt (Somaliland) by way of the Upper Nile.

But we have not the slightest hint of any connection with, or even knowledge of, the great
nations of the Euphrates valley or the peoples of Palestine. The Babylonian king Narâm-Sin invaded
the Sinaitic peninsula (the land of Magan) as early as 3750 b. c, about the time of the IIId Egyptian
Dynasty. The great King Tjeser, of that dynasty, also invaded Sinai, and so did Snefru, the
last king of the dynasty. But we have no hint of any collision between Babylonians and Egyptians
at that time, nor do either of them betray the slightest knowledge of one another's existence. It
can hardly be that the two civilized peoples of the world in those days were really absolutely
ignorant of each other, but we have no trace of any connection between them, other than the possible
one before the founding of the Egyptian monarchy.

This early connection, however, is very problematical.

We have seen that there seems to be in early Egyptian civilization an element ultimately of
Babylonian origin, and that there are two theories as to how it reached Egypt. One supposes
that it was brought by a Semitic people of Arab affinities (represented by the modern Grallas),
who crossed the Straits of Bab el-Man-deb and reached Egypt either by way of the Wadi Hammamat
or by the Upper Nile. The other would bring it across the Isthmus of Suez to the Delta, where, at
Heliopolis, there certainly seems to have been a settlement of a Semitic type of very ancient
culture. In both cases we should have Semites bringing Babylonian culture to Egypt. This, as we
may remind the reader, was not itself of Semitic origin, but was
a development due to a non-Semitic people, the Sumerians as they are
called, who, so far as we know, were the aboriginal inhabitants of
Babylonia.

The Sumerian language was of agglutinative type, radically distinct
both from the pure Semitic idioms and from Egyptian.

The Babylonian elements of culture which the early Semitic invaders brought with them to Egypt
were, then, ultimately of Sumerian origin. Sumerian civilization had profoundly influenced
the Semitic tribes for centuries before the Semitic conquest of Babylonia, and when the Sumerians
became more and more a conquered race, finally amalgamating with their conquerors and losing their
racial and linguistic individuality, they were conquered by an alien race but not by an alien
culture. For the culture of the Semites was Sumerian, the Semitic races owing their civilization
to the Sumerians. That is as much as to say that a great deal of what we call Semitic culture
is fundamentally non-Semitic.

In the earliest days, then, Egypt received elements of Sumerian culture through a Semitic medium,
which introduced Semitic elements into the language of the people, and a Semitic racial strain.
It is possible. that both theories as to the routes of these primeval conquerors are true,
and that two waves of Semites entered the Nile valley towards the close of the Neolithic period,
one by way of the Upper Nile or Wadi Hammamat, the other by way of
Heliopolis.

After the reconsolidation of the Egyptian people, with perhaps an autocratic class of Semitic
origin and a populace of indigenous Nilotic race, we have no trace of further connection with the
far-away centre of Semitic culture in Babylonia till the time of the Theban hegemony. Under the
XIIth Dynasty we see Egyptians in friendly relations with the Bedawin of Idumsea and Southern
Palestine. Thus Sanehat, the younger son of Amenemhat I, when the death of his royal father
was announced, fled from the new king Usertsen (Senusret) into Palestine, and there married the
daughter of the chief Ammuanshi and became a Syrian chief himself, only finally returning to
Egypt as an old man on the assurance of the royal pardon and favour. We have in the reign of
Usertsen (Senusret) II the famous visit of the Arab chief Abisha (Abêshu') with his following to
the court of Khnumhetep, the prince of the Oryx nome in Middle Egypt, as we see it depicted
on the walls of Khnumhetep's tomb at Beni Hasan. We see Usertsen (Senusret) III invading Palestine
to chastise the land of Sekmem and the vile Syrians.*

* We know of this campaign from the interesting historical stele of the general Sebek-khu (who
took part in it), which was found during Mr. Garstang's excavations
at Abydos, not previously referred to above.

They were carried out in 1900, and resulted in the complete clearance of a part of the great cemetery
which had been created during the XIIth Dynasty. The group of objects from the tombs of this
cemetery, and those of XVIIIth Dynasty tombs also found, is especially valuable as showing the
styles of objects in use at these two periods (see Garstang, el-Ardbah, 1901).

The arm of Egypt was growing longer, and its weight was being felt in regions where it had
previously been entirely unknown. Eventually the collision came.

Egypt collided with an Asiatic power, and got the worst of the encounter. So much the worse that
the Theban monarchy of the Middle Kingdom was overthrown, and Northern Egypt was actually conquered
by the Asiatic foreigners and ruled by a foreign house for several centuries. Who these conquering
Hyksos, or Shepherd Kings, were no recent discovery has told us.

An old idea was that they were Mongols. It was supposed that the remarkable faces of the sphinxes
of Tanis, now in the Cairo Museum, which bore the names of Hyksos kings, were of Mongolian
type, as also those of two colossal royal heads discovered by M. Naville at Bubastis. But M.
Golénischeff has now shown that these heads are really those of XIIth
Dynasty kings, and not of Hyksos at all.

Messrs. Newberry and Garstang have lately endeavoured to show that this type was foreign, and
probably connected with that of the Kheta, or Hittites, of Northern Syria, who came into prominence
as enemies of Egypt at a later period. They think that the type was introduced into the Egyptian
royal family by Nefret, the queen of Usertsen (Senusret) II, whom they suppose to have been
a Hittite princess. At the same time they think it probable that the type was also that of the
Hyksos, whom they consider to have been practically Hittites. They therefore revive the theory
of de Cara, which connects the Hyksos with the Hittites and these with the Pelasgi and Tyrseni.

This is a very interesting theory, which, when carried out to its logical conclusion, would connect the
Hyksos and Hittites racially with the pre-Hellenic "Minoan" Mycenseans of Greece, as well as
with the Etruscans of Italy. But there is little of certainty in it.

It is by no means impossible that we may eventually come to know that the Hittites (Kheta, the
Khatte of the Assyrians) and other tribes of Asia Minor were racially akin to the "Minoans"
of Greece, but the connection between the Hyksos and the Hittites is to seek. The countenances
of the Kheta on the Egyptian monuments of Ramses II's time have an angular cast, and so have
those of the Tanis sphinxes, of Queen Nefret, of the Bubastis statues, and the statues of Usertsen
(Senusret) III and Amenemhat III. We might then suppose, with Messrs. Newberry and Garstang, that
Nefret was a Kheta princess, who gave her peculiar racial traits to her son Usertsen (Senusret)
III and his son Amenem-hat, were it not far more probable that the resemblance between this peculiar
XIIth Dynasty type and the Kheta face is purely fortuitous.

There is really no reason to suppose that the type of face presented by Nefret, Usertsen, and
Amenemhat is not purely Egyptian. It may be seen in many a modern fellah, and the truth probably
is that the sculptors have in the case of these rulers very faithfully and carefully depicted
their portraits, and that their faces happen to have been of a rather hard and forbidding type.
But, if we grant the contention of Messrs. Newberry and Garstang for the moment, where is the connection
between these XIIth Dynasty kings and the Hyksos? All the Tanite monuments with this peculiar
facial type which would be considered Hyksos are certainly of the XIIth Dynasty. The only statue
of a Hyksos king, which was undoubtedly originally made for him and is not one of the XIIth
Dynasty usurped, is the small one of Khian at Cairo, discovered by M. Naville at Bubastis,
and this has no head. So that we have not the slightest idea of what a Hyksos looked like. Moreover,
the evidence of the Hyksos names which are known to us points in quite a different direction. The
Kheta, or Hittites, were certainly not Semites, yet the Hyksos names
are definitely Semitic.

In fact it is most probable that the Hyksos, or Shepherd Kings, were, as the classical authorities
say they were, and as their name (hiku-semut or hihu-shasu,) "princes of the deserts" or ("princes
of the Bedawîn") also testifies, purely and simply Arabs.

Now it is not a little curious that almost at the same time that a nomad Arab race conquered Lower
Egypt and settled in it as rulers (just as 'Amr and the followers of Islam did over two thousand
years later), another Arab race may have imposed its rule upon Babylonia. Yet this may have
been the case; for the First Dynasty of Babylon, to which the famous Hammurabi belonged, was very
probably of Arab origin, to judge by the forms of some of the royal names. It is by no means
impossible that there was some connection between these two conquests,
and that both Babylonia and Egypt fell, in the period before the year
2000 B.C. before some great migratory movement from Arabia, which
overran Babylonia, Palestine, and even the Egyptian Delta.

In this manner Egypt and Babylonia may have been brought together in common subjection to the Arab.
We do not know whether any regular communication between Egypt, under Semitic rule, and Babylonia
was now established; but we do know that during the Hyksos period there were considerable relations
between Egypt and over-sea Crete, and relations with Mesopotamia may possibly have been established.
At any rate, when the war of liberation, which was directed by the
princes of Thebes, was finally brought to a successful conclusion
and the Arabs were expelled, we find the Egyptians a much changed
nation.

They had adopted for war the use of horse and chariot, which they learnt from their Semitic conquerors,
whose victory was in all probability largely gained by their use, and, generally speaking, they
had become much more like the Western Asiatic nations. Egypt was no longer isolated, for she
had been forcibly brought into contact with the foreign world, and had learned much. She was
no longer self-contained within her own borders. If the Semites could conquer her, so could
she conquer the Semites. Armed with horse and chariot, the Egyptians went forth to battle,
and their revenge was complete. All Palestine and Syria were Egyptian domains for five hundred
years after the conquest by Thothmes I and III, and Ashur and Babel sent tribute to the Pharaoh of Egypt.

The
reaction came, and Egypt was thrown prostrate beneath the feet of Assyria; but her claim to
dominion over the Western Asiatics was never abandoned, and was revived in all its pomp by Ptolemy
Euergetes, who brought back in triumph to Egypt the images of the
gods which had been removed by Assyrians and Babylonians centuries
before.

This claim was never allowed by the Asiatics, it is true, and their kings wrote to the proudest
Pharaoh as to an absolute equal. Even the King of Cyprus calls the King of Egypt his brother. But Palestine
was admitted to be an Egyptian possession, and the Phoenicians were always energetic supporters
of the Egyptian régime against the lawless Bedawîn tribes, who were constantly intriguing with the
Kheta or Hittite power to the north against Egypt.

The existence of this extra-Egyptian imperial possession meant that the eyes of the Egyptians
were now permanently turned in the direction of Western Asia, with which they were henceforth
in constant and intimate communication. The first Theban period and the Hyksos invasion, therefore,
mark a turning-point in Egyptian history, at which we may fitly leave it for a time in order
to turn our attention to those peoples of Western Asia with whom the Egyptians had now come into
permanent contact.

Just as new discoveries have been made in Egypt, which have modified our previous conception
of her history, so also have the excavators of the ancient sites in the Mesopotamian valley
made, during the last few years, far-reaching discoveries, which have enabled us to add to
and revise much of our knowledge of the history of Babylonia and Assyria. In Palestine and
the Sinaitic peninsula also the spade has been used with effect, but a detailed account of
work in Sinai and Palestine falls within the limits of a description of Biblical discoveries rather
than of this book. The following chapters will therefore deal chiefly with modern discoveries
which have told us new facts with regard to the history of the ancient Sumerians themselves,
and of the Babylonians, Elamites, Kassites, and Assyrians, the inheritors of the ancient Sumerian
civilization, which was older than that of Egypt, and which, as we
have seen, probably contributed somewhat to its formation.

These were the two primal civilizations of the ancient world. For two thousand years each
marched upon a solitary road, without meeting the other. Eventually the two roads converged.
We have hitherto dealt with the road of the Egyptians; we now describe that of the Mesopotamians,
up to the point of convergence. Excavations have been and are being carried out in Mesopotamia
and the adjacent countries with no less enthusiasm and energy than in Egypt itself, and, although
it cannot be said that they have resulted in any sweeping modification of our conceptions with
regard to the origin and kinship of the early races of Western Asia, yet they have lately added
considerably to our knowledge of the ancient history of the countries
in that region of the world.

This is particularly the case in respect of the Sumerians, who, so far as we know at present,
were the earliest inhabitants of the fertile plains of Mesopotamia. The beginnings of this ancient
people stretch back into the remote past, and their origin is still shrouded in the mists
of antiquity. When first we come across them they have already attained a high level of civilization.
They have built temples and palaces and houses of burnt and unburnt brick, and they have reduced
their system of agriculture to a science, intersecting their country with canals for purposes
of irrigation and to ensure a good supply of water to their cities. Their sculpture and pottery
furnish abundant evidence that they have already attained a comparatively high level in the practice
of the arts, and finally they have evolved a complicated system of
writing which originally had its origin in picture-characters, but
afterwards had been developed along phonetic lines.

To have attained to this pitch of culture argues long periods of previous development, and
we must conclude that they had been settled in Southern Babylonia many centuries before the
period to which we must assign the earliest of their remains at present discovered.

That this people were not indigenous to Babylonia is highly probable, but we have little data
by which to determine the region from which they originally came.


I gladly put all that now behind my back, and come to the grand and positive side of my theme.
I wish to tell you what I myself believe in regard to this matter of prayer. And, in the first
place, let me suggest to you that prayers, even the prayers of the past, any of them, the most
objectionable types, are not made up only of petition; they are not all begging, teasing for
things. There enter into their composition gratitude, adoration, reverence, aspiration, a sense
of communion with the spiritual Being, a longing for higher and finer things; a sense of refuge
in time of trouble, a sense of strength in time of need, a sense of hope, uplift, and outlook
as we glance towards the future. A prayer, then, you see, is a very composite thing, not a
simple thing, not merely made up of the element of pleading with God to give us certain things
that we cannot come into possession of by ordinary means.

Right here let me stop long enough to ask you to attend a little carefully to the teaching
of Jesus on the subject of prayer. You will see he chimes in almost perfectly with the things
I have been saying. If we followed his directions literally, we should never pray in public
at all. He says, Enter into your chamber, and shut to the door, and commune with the Father
in secret. He does not advocate long prayers, nor this kind of pleading, begging prayers that
I have referred to. Do you remember the story of the unjust judge? Jesus tells this parable
on purpose to enforce the point I have been speaking of. He says: Here is an unjust judge:
a widow brings her case before him. She pleads with him until she tires him out; and at last
he says, although I am an unjust judge, and fear neither God nor men, because with her continual
praying she wearies me, I will grant her petition. Jesus does not say you are to weary God
out in order to get your petitions granted, but just the opposite. How much more shall God
give good gifts unto those that ask him Read once more that other story of the man who rises
at night and goes to a neighbor for assistance. The neighbor, for the sake of being gracious
and kind, will rise, although it gives him trouble and he does not wish to, and grant his request.
But God is not like that neighbor: he does not need to be wearied or roused to make him care
for our interests. This is the teaching, you will notice, of Jesus. If there is anything that
appears like contrary teaching, you will find it in the supposed Gospel of John, written by
an anonymous author, in which quite different doctrines are taught in regard to a good many
things from those that are reported of Jesus in the other gospels.

Now I wish to come to my own personal position concerning the subject of prayer. It is fitting
is it not that we should open our hearts with gratitude to God, no matter what has come to
us of good or bright, of beautiful, sweet and true things, no matter through what channel,
by the ministry of what friend, as the result of the working of no matter how many natural
forces. Trace it to its source, and that source is always of necessity the one fountain, the
one eternal Giver. And, if there be no more than courtesy in our hearts, ought it not to be
easy and fitting for us to think, at least, if we do not say, Thank you, Father? Not only thanksgiving,
but adoration.

Any uplook to something beautiful and high and fine above you partakes of the nature of worship.
So that prayer which is worship, is it not altogether fitting and sweet and true? Only as we
look up do we ever rise up, do we ever attain to anything finer and better.

And then there is communion. Is it true that God is Spirit, and that he is Father of his children,
also spirit? Are we made in his likeness? Is there community of nature between him and us?
I believe that he is human in all essential qualities, and that we are divine in all essential
qualities. I believe the only difference between God and man is a difference not of kind, but
of degree, and that there is, possibility of constant interchange of thought, of feeling, communion,
between God and his children.

Communion then possible, the very life of that which is divine within us!

Then I do not believe for one moment that prayer is only a sort of spiritual gymnastics, that
it produces results in us merely by the exercise of spiritual feelings and emotions. I believe
that in the moral and spiritual realms prayer does produce actual results that would not be
produced in any other way. This, however, mark you carefully, not by producing any change in
God, only changing our relations towards God. Can I illustrate it? I have a flower, for example,
a plant in a flower-pot in my room. It seems to be perishing for the lack of something. It
may be that the elements in the air do not properly feed it: it may be that it is hungry for
light. At any rate, I try it: I take it out into the sunshine, I let the air breathe upon it,
the dews fall upon it, the rains touch it and revive it and the plant brightens up, grows,
blossoms, becomes beautiful and fragrant. Have I changed natural laws any? Not to one parunticle.
I have changed the relation of my plant and the air; and I have produced a result of life and
beauty where would have been ugliness and death.

So I believe in prayer in that sense, that it may and does change the spiritual attitude of
the soul towards God so that we come into entirely new relations with him, and the spiritual
life in us grows, unfolds, becomes beautiful and sweet, not because we have changed God, but
because we have got into a new set of relations with him.

If I thought that I could change God by a prayer, that I could interfere in the slightest degree
with the working of any of the natural forces, I would never dare to open my lips in prayer
again so long as I live. We do not need to change God: we need simply to change our attitude
towards him, change our relations to him. Is not this true in every department of human life?
How is it that you produce results anywhere? You wish a mountain stream to work for you. Do
you change the laws of motion? You adapt your machinery to those laws of motion, and all the
power of God becomes yours. You do not change him, you change yourself, your attitude towards
him. And so in every one of the discoveries, in every one of the revolutions, that have come
to the world, simply by discovering God's methods, and humbly adapting our ways to those methods
Thus the forces of God, which are changeless and eternal, produce for us results which they
would not have produced but for adapting our lives to the working of their ways.

A great many people do not think they ever pray. I have never seen a man yet who did not pray.
You cannot live, and not pray: you cannot escape it if you try.

Soul's sincere desire. Yes, the body's desire, the mind's desire, the heart's desire, any desire,
any outreach of life, is a prayer, an appeal for something that only the universe, that only
God, can bestow. So, no matter whether you think you are religious or not, you are a praying
man so long as you are a living man; and you cannot escape the fact if you try. It is merely
a question whether you are a loving praying man or some other kind.

There is another aspect of prayer to which I wish to call your attention. Prayer is the refuge
of a soul in trouble. It does not mean here, again, that you change God any. Can you not understand
what it means to go to God, as it were, and fling yourself, like a child, against his breast
and feel yourself folded in the everlasting arms? Your sorrow may not be removed, the burden
may not be taken away, the life of your friend may not be saved, the sickness may not be healed;
but there is comfort, there is strength, there is peace, there is help. Why, even in our human
life do you not know how it is? You go to some friend you trust and love with your trouble.
Perhaps he cannot lift it with one of his fingers; but he can tell you that he loves you, he
cares, he would help you if only he were able. He can put his arm around you, he can say, God
bless you; and you are stronger. You go away with lifted shoulder and with head that fronts
the heavens; and you are able to bear the burden. Is there nothing akin to this in the sense
of coming into intimate relations with the eternal Father, when troubled, pressed, when the
outside world is dark, and feeling that here is refuge in a love deeper, higher, unspeakably
more tender than that of the dearest friend that ever lived?

And this suggests another point. I have no doubt that sometimes, in my attempts to lead the
devotions of this congregation, I use words which, if I were to sit down and critically analyze,
I could not logically justify. I do not mean to; but, perhaps, sometimes I do. What of it?
When my children were small, and my little boy came and climbed up in my lap and expressed
himself in all sorts of illogical and foolish ways, telling me every sort of thing he wanted,
impossible things, unwise things, things I could not get for him, things I would not get if
I could, because I thought myself wiser than he, did these things trouble me? I loved to have
him pour out his whole little soul into mine, because he was my child and because I did not
expect him to be over-wise. It was this simple touch of kinship, this simple communion of father
and child, which was sweet and tender and true.

So I believe with my whole soul that God loves us, his little children, with an unspeakable
tenderness, a tenderness infinitely beyond that with which any earthly father ever loved a
child, and that we can go to him freely and pour out our hearts, whether it is wise in expression
or unwise; only let us do it with the feeling, "Not my will, Father, but Thine, be done," not
as though we were trying to persuade him to do things for us that he would not otherwise do,
but merely as the pouring out of our gratitude, our tenderness, our love.

There is another thing that needs just a word of suggestion. I believe that we ought to pray
to God, not in the sense of begging for things, but sympathetically bringing in the arms of
our sympathy all those we love and all those we hate, if there are any, and all things that
live on the face of the earth.

Let us reach out our arms of sympathy to all the world and bring the world sympathetically
into the presence of our Father. So our own hearts and loves will broaden, until they, too,
are divine.

And, then, there is one other thing. What a strength prayer has been to the grandest souls
of the ages!

Take Jesus in his hour of agony, take Savonarola with his struggle, take Huss, Wyclif, Luther,
take all the grand souls of the ages when they have simply stood with the feeling, One with
God is a majority, and ready to face the world, if need be, in the conviction that they spoke
for and represented the truth.

This sense that God is for the truth and right, and, if you are standing for the truth and
right, the Almighty Power is backing you up, the ground you stand on impregnable, because of
that position. You do not expect God to work miracles, you do not expect him to do anything;
but simply the sense that you are in his presence, that you are on his side, re- enforces you
more than a thousand men could re-enforce an army in the time of its need. Here is the confidence,
the strength, that comes from prayer, from communion with God, from the sense of being in his
presence, from a feeling of fellowship with the Divine.

The truest and finest, the sweetest prayer must come oft of the loving, the sympathetic, the
tender soul. No selfish prayer can expect to enter into the heart of God. You will note in
the words that Jesus teaches his disciples, it is not "My" Father, it is "Our" Father. And,
if we wish to pray in the divine spirit, we shall broaden that "Our" until it includes not
only our family, our church, our city, our State, our nation, our humanity, but until it includes
all life that swims or walks or flies, feeling that it is the one life of the Father that is
in us all.

THE WORSHIP OF GOD

THERE are those who in religious matters, as well as in all other departments of life, are
content to walk unquestioningly the path which the footsteps of previous generations have made
easy and familiar. But there are others and these among the more thoughtful and earnest minds
to whom it is not enough to utter earnest words concerning enthusiasm and devotion, consecration
and worship. These spiritual attitudes and exercises must first be made to appear reasonable
to them, fitting, fitting to their conception of God, fitting to their ideas of that which
is highest and finest in man.

So there are many things that pass to-day as forms of worship, many ideas connected with worship,
which this class of minds cannot heartily and fully accept. Some of them do not seem to them
fitting, as they look upward towards God. They cannot, for example, believe that God cares
for flattery, cares to sit on his throne, and be told by his creatures how great and how wonderful
he is. They cannot think that he cares to have presents brought to him, gifts offered on his
altar, as men say. They cannot believe that he really is anxious for many of these external
forms and ceremonies, which seem to the onlooker to constitute the essential element of much
that passes as popular worship.

And then, on the other hand, man has grown into a sense of dignity. He has a higher and loftier
idea of his own nature and of what is fitting to a man; and he cannot any longer heartily enter
into the meaning of words which speak of him as a worm of the dust, which seem to him to intimate
that God cares to have him prostrate himself in utter humiliation, to speak of himself always
as a miserable sinner, as one without any good in him.

Many of these things from the point of view of the man himself no longer constitute the real
conviction, the real feeling of the noblest hearts; and so there are many who are troubled
over this question of worship, who are not quite sure as to how much spiritual significance
it may any longer retain, not quite sure as to how vital a part it may play in the development
of the religious life of man.

We find an adequate and perfectly natural explanation of some of these phases of worship that
trouble us to-day, as we look back and note some of the steps in the religious development
of the race. I shall not raise the question as to how or where or in what way the act of human
worship began. I will simply say that one of the first manifestations of that which came to
be religious worship which we are able to trace at the present time is to be found in the burial-mounds
of the dead. Men reverenced the memory of the chief of the tribe who had passed into the invisible.
They did not believe that he had ceased to exist: they rather looked upon him as having become,
because invisible, a higher ruler. They thought of him as still interested in the welfare of
the tribe, still its guardian, still its avenger, still demanding of the tribe the same reverence
that it paid to him while he was yet alive; and his followers clothed him with all the human
attributes with which they were familiar during the time he was among them. He was still hungry,
he was still thirsty, he still wanted his old-time weapons, all those things he was familiar
with during his earthly career. And so they brought food, and laid it on the burial-mound above
his body; and they poured out their libations of drink to quench his spiritual thirst.

These were very real beliefs on the part of man universally during a certain stage of his mental,
his moral, his spiritual growth. It was a very natural step beyond this to the origin of sacrifices.
All sacrifice began right here. It was a religious meal, in which God and his worshippers equally
shared. Some animal, supposed to partake of a life similar to that which distinguished the
god and the worshipper, too, is sacrificed. It is cooked, and the worshippers partake of the
meal; and they fully believe that the god joins in it also. And then the drink they partake
of, and pour out their libation for the invisible spirit.

So the first sacrifice was a meal eaten together; and just as, for example, to-day you see
a remnant of this idea when a man eats with an Arab, although the Arab may discover five minutes
after that it was his bitterest foe, he finds himself at least during a little time bound to
amity and peace by the fact that they have shared this sacred meal together, so in the act
of sacrifice it was believed that the worshipper consecrated himself in loyalty to his God,
and that the God consecrated himself in faithfulness to his worshippers as their guardian and
protector. Here is given the central significance of sacrifices that have made so large a part
of the religious ceremonial of the world.

These are not peculiar to what we call pagan people. Do you remember the story of how, after
the flood, Noah offers a sacrifice, and God up in heaven is represented as smelling the flavor
of the burning meat and as rejoicing in it, accepting the offering, and pledging himself to
guard and care for his worshippers? Do you remember, also, that story of Jacob, how, when he
is on his journey, he falls asleep, and has his wonderful dream, and sees the ladder starting
at his feet and ending at the throne of God, up and down which the angels are passing? When
he wakes in the morning, he says, "Surely, this is holy ground"; and he takes the stone on
which he slept, and sets it up as an altar, and pours out the sacred oil as an offering to his God.

All the way through the Old Testament, in the history of the Hebrew people, you trace these
same ideas that you find in the life of almost all the other nations of the world. It was only
a step beyond this to the idea of presenting gifts to God, no matter what the nature of that
gift might be. And, as men came to make him these sacred offerings, they came also to believe
and in the most natural way in the world that, the more costly the gift, the more likely it
was to be accepted on the part of its sublime recipient.

So human sacrifices arose; for there could be no more sacred gift than for a man to offer his
own child or his own wife to God. The gods were looked upon as sometimes demanding these tremendous
sacrifices as the conditions of their mercy or their care. I refer you for illustration to
one of the most striking and touching of Tennyson's poems. I think it is entitled "The Victim."
There had been famine in the land, and the priests have announced that they have learned that
the gods demand as an offering that which is most sacred and most dear to the heart of the
king; and the question is as to whether it is his son, his boy, or his wife. They think it
must be the boy, because he was the one that would continue the kingly line; but the wife detects
the gladness of her husband when he sees that the boy is to be selected, and knows by that
sense of relief that passes over his face that the priests have made a mistake, and that she
herself is to be the victim. And so, in her love for him and for the people, she rushes upon
the sacrificial knife.

All these ideas, you see, are perfectly natural in certain stages of human development, logically
reasoned out in view of their thought of the gods and of their relations to them and of what
these gods must desire at their hands. It is not only among the very early beliefs that you
find these ideas controlling the thought and action of men. Study the ancient classical times
as they are reflected in the Iliad, in the Odyssey, or in Virgil's Aeneid, and you will find
that the gods were very human in all their feelings, their thoughts, their passions. As, in
the Old Testament, Yahweh is reported to have been a jealous God, not willing that respect
should be paid to anybody but himself, so you find the old Greek and Roman deities very jealous
as to what were regarded as their rights, as to what the people must pay to them; and, if they
are angry, they can be appeased if an offering rare and costly enough be brought by the worshipper.
You can buy their favor; you can ward off their anger, if only you can offer them something
which is precious enough so that they are ready to accept it at the worshipper's hands.

These are not merely Old Testament ideas, nor only pagan ideas. Some years ago, when I was
in Rome, I visited among others one of the many churches dedicated to Mary under one name or
another; and there was a statue of the Virgin by the altar, and it impressed me very much to
see that it was loaded down with gifts. Every place on the statue itself to which anything
could be attached, anything on the altar around it, was weighted down with gold chains, with
jewels, with precious gifts of every kind. These had been brought as thank-offerings, expressions
of worship, or pledges connected with a petition, because I have brought thee this gift, have
mercy, do this for me which I need.

So these old ideas are vital still, and live on in the modern world. And yet modern and magnificent
are those utterances of the old Hebrew prophet, who had so completely outgrown the common customs
even of his time, when he represents God as saying that he is weary of all these external offerings.
He says: I do not want the cattle brought to my temples. Those that wander on a thousand hills
are already mine. If I were hungry, I would not ask thee. He does not want the rivers of oil
poured out. What does he want? And some of the later writers caught a glimpse of the same spiritual
truth when they said, Not burnt- offerings, not calves of a year old; when they cry out, Shall
I bring the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? No, it is a broken and contrite heart,
a heart sorry for its sin, a heart consecrating itself to righteousness and truth, this inner,
spiritual worship.

The prophets, you see, were climbing up to that magnificent ideal so finely set up by Jesus
as reported in the Gospel from which I read our lesson this morning. They had not only believed
that God was to be worshipped after these external fashions, but that there was some special
place, not only where it was easier to think of him, but where he demanded the offering should
be brought. He said to the woman at the well: You think it is Mount Gerizim where the people
ought to worship, and the Jews think it is Mount Moriah; but I say unto you that neither in
this mountain nor yet at Jerusalem shall men worship the Father. God is spirit, the universal
spirit, every place a temple, every spot hallowed, if only those that worship him do so in
spirit and in truth.

You see, then, how up these stairways of gradual approach the human race, in the person of
its highest and finest representatives, has climbed, how near it has come to the spiritual
ideal of God and the spiritual thought of that which he requires at our hands.

Is worship, then, so far as external form is concerned, to pass away? By no manner of means,
as I think. As you analyze any one of these old primitive acts of worship, no matter how crude,
no matter how cruel, how bloody, how repulsive it may be to-day from the outlook of our higher
civilization, you will note that it has in it an element which, I believe, is permanent, and
can never be outgrown. Whatever else there is, there is always the sense of a Presence, Invisible,
mighty, high, and, from the point of view of the worshipper, holy and set apart. There is always
the feeling of being in the shadow of the high and lofty One who inhabiteth eternity. There
is always the sense of uplooking, of worship, in the higher sense of that term. Always, at
any rate, the germ of these; and this, it seems to me, we may be sure and certain, however
it may clothe itself in the future, shall never pass away.

I wish now, if there are any who think it is not befitting the greatness, the nobleness of
man that he should bow himself in the presence of the highest, humiliate himself, if you choose
to use that term, in acts of worship, I wish now, I say, to consider worship under two or three
aspects, and see what it means. And, in the first place, I ask you to note that the ability
to worship is always the measure of the rank of a being, it is the test and the standard of
greatness.

As you look over the animal world, which one of them are we accustomed to think of as coming
the nearest to man? What one do we love to have most with us, to associate most with our joys,
with the peace of our homes? Is it not the dog? And as you examine the dog, study carefully
his nature and characteristics, do you not note that there is in his nature a hint, a suggestion,
of that which is the root of all worship? The dog is the one animal with which man is accustomed
familiarly to associate himself, who looks up with an incipient reverence, love, almost worship,
to his master. And it is this quality in the dog that enables him to look up, and, however
dimly, feel the life of some one that is above him, that lifts him into our society, and makes
us feel this tenderness of heart-kinship with that which is finest in his nature.

And man is man simply because he is able to look above himself. The old Greeks had an anticipation
of that idea when they called man anthropos; for the meaning of the word is the upward-looker.
As in imagination you go back and down to the time when man first appeared, developed from
the lower life which preceded him, the first thing you can think about him as human is the
opening of his eyes in wonder, the lifting of his face in curiosity and question, and the birth
of adoration in his soul. This is that which made him man.

You go and study the lowest type of barbaric life to-day; and you will find that the barbarian
has very little curiosity as compared with the civilized man. You will find that it is very
difficult to astonish him with anything. He does not wonder. He takes everything for granted.
He does not see clearly and deeply enough to appreciate the marvel. Let me illustrate from
a specimen of barbaric life itself. A few years ago the chief of an Indian tribe was brought
from the plains of the West to visit Washington. The idea was to impress him as much as possible
with the idea of our civilization, so that he might report it to his people when he went home.
After they had crossed the Mississippi on their way to the West, the gentleman in whose care
he was travelling asked the chief what the one thing which he had seen during his trip was
which had impressed him the most; and he said at once the St. Louis bridge. But his companion
said, Are you not astonished at the Capitol of Washington? "Yes," he said, "but my people can
pile stones on top of each other; but they cannot make a cobweb of steel hang in the air."

You see how that perception lifted him above the average level of his people? He was showing
his capacity for higher and nobler civilization. It is just this ability in the man to wonder,
to see something to wonder at, to worship, to admire, which lifts him one grade higher than
that of the average level of his tribe. So that which makes man a man is the capacity in him
to admire. All admiration is the essence, the root, of worship. And, the more things a man
admires, the greater and nobler type of man he is seen to be. If he can admire music, if he
can admire painting, if he can admire sculpture, if he can admire poetry, if he can admire
literature of every kind, if he can admire grand architecture, the beautiful monuments of the
world, we say, Here is a large, all-round type of man. We estimate his dignity, his greatness,
by the capacity that he shows for worship in its lower type; for worship is simply looking
up with admiration.

There is another quality about this worship that I wish to speak of. It is the power that is
capable of transforming a man, making him over into the likeness of that which he admires.
You find the man without this capacity, and you know it is hopeless to appeal to him, hopeless
to set up ideals, hopeless to place before him enticing examples. There is nothing in him to
which these things appeal. Take Alexander the Great. It is said he carried around with him
a copy of the Iliad, and that Achilles was his ideal of a hero. Do you not see how this admiration
transformed the life of the young king, and made him after the type of that which he admired?
It does not make any difference what this special admiration may be. Let a man admire Beethoven,
and he will cultivate instinctively the qualities that make the beauty and greatness of Beethoven's
character and the wonders of his career.

This ideal may be in a book, it may be embodied in fiction. I have liked always, either on
the walls of my room or on the walls of my heart, to have certain portraits of persons whom
I have loved, who are no longer living; and they are to me constant stimulus. They speak to
me by day, and in my dreams at night their eyes follow me, and seem to look into my soul; and
in their presence I could not do a mean, an unmanly thing. I love, I reverence, I worship these
lofty ideals. And the quality of these characters filters down through and permeates the thought
and the life.

You remember how the other aspect of this thought is illustrated by Shakspere. He says, "My
nature is subdued To what it works in, like the dyer's hand." If that with which you keep company,
that you admire, is below you, it degrades; if it is above you, it lifts. In any case you are
transformed, shaped into the likeness of that which you admire.

There is another aspect of this close akin to that which I have just been dealing with. It
is only the worshipper who has in him any promise, any possibility, of growth. Whether it is
the individual or the nation, it makes no difference. If you find no capacity to admire that
which is above and beyond you, then there is no hope of progress. Take the young man who thinks
he has exhausted the possibilities of the world, who has reached the stage, who prides himself
on not being surprised, not being over whelmed, not admiring anything. The careful outside
observer knows that, instead of having exhausted the possibilities and greatness and wonders
of the universe, he has simply exhausted himself.

The man who knows how full the world is of that which is beautiful and great and true and noble
walks through the universe with his head bared and bowed, and feels, as did Moses when standing
in the presence of the burning bush, that he ought to take off his shoes from his feet, for
the place where he is standing is holy ground. Wherever you are standing in this universe,
which is full of God from star to dust particle, is holy ground; and, if you do not feel it,
if you are not touched, if you are not bowed, if you are not thrilled with wonder, it is defect
in you, and not lack of God.

If the musician admires his great predecessors and strives to emulate them; if the painter
in the presence of the Sistine Madonna feels lifted and touched, so that he never can be content
with poor work again; if the sculptor is ready to bend his knees in the presence of the Venus
of Melos, as he sees her standing at the end of the long gallery in the Louvre; if the lover
of his kind admires John Howard, and can never be content unless he is doing something for
his fellow- men again; if we can be touched by lives like Clara Barton's, like Florence Nightingale's,
like Dorothea Dix's, like the great and consecrated ones of the earth; if in any department
of life we can be lifted, humbled, thrilled, at the same time with the thought of the greatness
and glory and beauty that are above and beyond us, then there is hope of growth, then there
is life that can come to something fine and noble in the future.

I wish, in the light of these illustrations of what worship means, to note the thought that
a great many men  conscientious, earnest, simple who have never been accustomed to think of
themselves as religious, and perhaps would deny it if a friend suggested to them that they
had in them the possibilities of worship, that perhaps they are worshippers, even if they know
it not. A great many persons have thrown away the common ideals of worship, and perhaps have
settled down to the idea that they are not worshippers at all, while all the time the substance
and the beauty and the glory of worship are in their daily lives and always in their hearts.
I want to suggest two or three grades of worship, to show that this worship climbs; and I want
to call attention to the fact that on the lowest grade it is worship of God just the same as
on the highest, that all worship or admiration for truth, for beauty, for good, wherever, however,
manifested, is really worship of God, whether we think of it or call it by that name or not,
because they all are manifestations of God.

Take the man who is touched and lifted by natural beauty, the sense of natural power; the man
who loves the woods, who turns and stands to see the glory of a sunset, who is lifted by tides
of emotion as he hears the surf beat on the shore, who feels bowed in the presence of the wide
night sky of stars, who is humbled at the same time that he is uplifted in the presence of
the mountains, who is touched by all natural scenes of beauty and peace and glory. Are not
these men in their degree worshippers?

Take the feeling that is expressed in those beautiful lines of Byron. We do not think of Byron
as a religious nature, but certainly he had in him the heart of worship when he could write
such thoughts as these:

"'Tis midnight. On the mountains brown The cold, round moon shines deeply down; Blue roll the
waters; blue the sky Seems like an ocean hung on high, Bespangled with those isles of light,
So wildly, spiritually bright.

Whoever looked upon them shining And turned to earth without repining, Nor wished for wings
to flee away And mix with their eternal ray?"

And so you may run all through the poets, these simply as hints, specimens, every one of them
worshippers, touched by the beauty, glory, uplift of the natural world.

And then pass to the next stage, and come to the worship of the human, to the admiration of
the highest and finest qualities that are manifested in the lives of men and women. Who is
there that is not touched and thrilled by some story of heroic action, of heroic self- sacrifice,
of consecration to duty in the face of danger and death? And no matter what this manifestation
of human goodness may be, if you can be thrilled by it and lifted by it, then you have taken
another step up this ladder of worship which leads you into the very presence chamber of the
Divine.

Let a boy read the life of Lincoln, see his earnest thirst for knowledge, the sacrifice he
was willing to pay for it, his consecration to his ideals of truth, the transparent honesty
of the man, the supreme contempt with which he could look down upon anything poor or mean or
low, the firmness and simplicity with which he assumes high office, the faithfulness, the unassuming
devotion, that he carries into the fulfilment of the trust. Take him all the way through, study
his character and admire, and you are a worshipper of that which is divine.

So in the case of Jesus, the supreme soul of history in its consecration to the Father, its
simple trust in the divine love, its superiority to fear, to question, to death. When we bow
ourselves in the presence of the Nazarene, we are not worshipping another God. We are worshipping
his Father and our Father as lie shines in the face of Jesus, as he illumines and beautifies
his life, as he makes glorious the humble pathways of Galilee, and so casts a reflected glory
over the humblest pathways any of us may be called upon to tread.

The next step in our ascent brings us to the conscious worship of God himself. We cannot grasp
the divine idea. The finite cannot measure or outline the infinite; and so, when we say God,
we mean only the grandest ideal that we can frame, that reaches on towards, but can never adequately
express the Deity. And so we worship this thought, this ideal, growing as our capacity develops,
advancing as the race advances, and ever leading us Godward, as when we follow a ray of light
we are travelling towards its source. And the attitude of our souls in the presence of this
which is divine is truest worship. The humility of it, the exaltation of it, is beautifully
phrased in two or three lines which I wish to repeat to you from Browning's Saul: "I but open
my eyes, and perfection, no more and no less, In the kind I imagined, full-fronts me, and God
is seen God In the star, in the stone, in the flesh, in the soul and the clod. And, thus looking
within and around me, I ever renew (With that stoop of the soul which in bending upraises it,
too), As by each new obeisance in spirit I climb to his feet!"

Here is the significance of the thought I had in mind at the opening. We talk about humbling
ourselves. When we can bend with reverence in the presence of that which is above us, the very
bending is exaltation; for it indicates the capacity to appreciate, to admire, to adore. Thus
we climb up into the ability to worship God, the infinite Spirit, our Father, in spirit and
in truth.

Now to raise one moment the question suggested near the opening, Are forms of worship to pass
away? The reply to this seems to me perfectly clear. Those forms which sprang out of and are
fitted to only lower ideals of worship, ideals which humanity outgrows, these must be left
behind, or else they must be transformed, and filled with a new and higher meaning. But forms
will always remain. But note one thing: they sometimes say that we Unitarians are too cold,
and do not have form enough. You will see that, the higher men rise intellectually, the less
there is always of outward expression.

For example, before men were able to speak with any large vocabulary, they eked out their meaning
by all kinds of motions and gestures. But the most highly cultivated men to- day, in their
conversation, are the ones who get the least excited and have the least recourse to gestures,
because they are capable of expressing the highest, finest, and most varied thoughts by the
elaborate power of speech which they have developed. And perhaps the highest and finest worship
of the world will not be that which has the most elaborate ceremonial and ritual; but it will
have adequate and fitting ceremonial and ritual, because it will naturally seek to express
in some external way that which it feels.

I sometimes wish and perhaps you will pardon me for saying it here and now that we Unitarians
were a little less afraid of adequate posture and gesture in our acts of public worship. God
is, indeed, everywhere as much as he is here; but this is the place we have specially consecrated
to thinking about him and to going through our stated forms of worship. And if, when you enter
the house of a friend, you take off your hat, you bow the head, it seems to me it would be
especially fitting to do it, when one enters a Christian church. And, in the attitude of prayer,
I wish that all might find it in their hearts to sit with bended brow and closed eyes as in
the presence of the Supreme, shutting out the common, the outside world, and trying to realize
what it means to come consciously to the feet of the eternal One.

I love these simple, fitting, external manifestations of the worshipful spirit; and, if we
do not substitute them for the worship, and think we worship when we bend the knee, this appropriate
expression of the spirit, or feeling, it seems to ought to help cultivate the feeling and the
spirit, and make it easier for us to be conscious of the presence of the Divine.

We are men, then, in the highest sense of the term, only as we are worshippers. And the more
worshipful we are, in high and true sense of that word, the nobler and higher manhood, and
the grander the possibilities in us of de intellectual, moral, spiritual growth.

Let us, then, cultivate the admiring, the wondering, the worshipful attitude of heart and mind,
and recognize on lowest steps of this ladder that lifts to God, the presence of the same divine
power and beauty and glory as that which we see clearly on the highest, and know that always,
when we are worshipping any manifestation of God, we are shipping Him who is spirit, in spirit
and in truth.

When on some strain of music Our thoughts are wafted high; When, touched with tender pity,
Kind teardrops dim the eye; When thrilled with scenes of grandeur, Or moved to deeds of love,
Do we not give thee worship, O God in heaven above? For Thou art all life's beauty, And Thou
art all its good: By Thy tides are we lifted To every lofty mood. Whatever good is in us, Whatever
good we see, And every high endeavor, Are they not all from Thee?

MORALITY NATURAL, NOT STATUTORY.

IT is very common for people to identify their special type of religion or their theological
opinions with religion itself, and feel that those who do not agree with them are in the rue
sense not religious. Not only this. It is perhaps quite less common for them to identify their
particular type of religion with the fundamental ideas of morality, and think that the people
who do not agree with them are undermining the moral stability of the world. For example, those
who question the absolute authority of the Catholic Church are looked upon the authorities
of that Church as the enemies, not only of religion, but as the enemies of society, the enemies
of humanity, as doing what they can to shake the very foundations of he social order. You will
find a great many Protestant theologians who seem to hold the opinion that, if you dare to
question the authenticity or authority of some particular nook in the Bible, you are not only
an enemy of religion, but you are an enemy of morality. You are doing what you can to disturb
the stability of the world.

But, if we look at the matter with a little care, we shall see that we ought to turn it quite
around, look at it from another point of view. Though every Bible, every particle of religious
literature, every hymn, every prayer on the face of the earth, were blotted out of existence
to-day, religion would not be touched. Religious books did not create religion, did not make
man a religious being. It is the religious nature of man that made the Bibles, that uttered
itself in prayers, that created the rituals, that sung the hymns and chanted the anthems. It
is man, a religious being, who makes religious institutions, who creates all the external aspects
and appearances of the religious life. And the same is true precisely in regard to moral precepts.
If the Ten Commandments were blotted out of the memory of man, if every single ethical teaching
of Jesus should perish, if the high and fine moral precepts of Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius
and all the great teachers of the pagan world should cease to exist, if there were not a printed
moral precept on earth, morality would not be touched. It is not these that have created morality.
It is the natural moral nature of man that has written all the commandments, whether they have
come to us by the hand of Moses or of Gautama or Mohammed or Confucius or Seneca, or no matter
who the medium may have been.

Man is a moral being, naturally, essentially, eternally, and this is a moral universe, inherently,
necessarily, eternally; and, though all the external expression of moral thought and feeling
should be lost, the human race would simply reproduce them again.

It is sometimes well for us to get down to the bed-rock in our thinking, and find how natural
and necessary the great foundations are. The Hindu priests used to tell their followers that
the earth, which was flat, rested on certain pillars, which rested again on some other foundation
beneath them, and so on until thought was weary in trying to trace that upon which the earth
was supposed to find its stability. And they also told their followers that, if they did not
bring offerings, if they did not pay the special respect which was due to the gods, if they
were not obedient to heir teachings, these pillars would give way, and the earth would be precipitated
into the abyss.

But we have found, as a result of our modern study of he universe, that the earth needs no
pillars on which to rest; but it swings freely in its orbit, as the old verse that used to
read in my schoolboy days says, "Hangs on nothing in the air," part of the universal system
of things, stable in its eternal sound and motion, kept and cared for by the power that lever
sleeps and never is weary. So, by studying into the foundations of the moral nature of man,
we have discovered a last that it needs no artificial props or supports, but that morality
is inherent, natural and eternal.

I shall not raise the question, which is rather curious than practical, as to whether there
are any beginnings of moral feeling in the animal world below man. For our purpose this morning
it is enough to note that the minute that man appears conscience appears, and that conscience
is an act which springs out of social relations. In other words, when the first man rose to
the ability to look into the face of his fellow and think of the other man as another self,
like himself in feelings, in possibilities of pleasure or pain, when this first man was able
imaginatively to put himself in: he place of this other, then morality as a practical fact
was Dorn.

We may imagine, for the purpose of illustration, this man saying: Here is another being who
appears to be like myself. He is capable of suffering pain, as I am. He does not like pain
any better than I do. Therefore, I have no right to make him suffer that which I do not wish
to suffer myself. This other man is capable of pleasure. He desires certain things, similar
things to those which I desire. If I do not wish him to take these things away from me, I have
no right to take them away from him.

I do not mean that this was thought out in this clear way, but that, when there was the first
dim perception of this other self, with similar feelings, similar possibilities, similar pleasures,
similar pains, then there became a conscience, because there was a consciousness of this similarity
of nature. Morality, then, is born as a social fact.

To go a little deeper, and in order to trace the natural and historical growth of the moral
ideal, let me say that morality in its deepest and truest sense is born of the fact of sex,
because it is right in there that we find the root and the germ of permanent social relations.
And I wish you to note another very significant fact. You hear people talking about selfishness
and unselfishness, as though they were direct contraries, mutually exclusive of each other,
as though, in order to make a selfish man unselfish, you must completely reverse his nature,
so to speak. I do not think this is true at all. Unselfishness naturally and necessarily springs
out of selfishness, and, in the deepest sense of the word, is not at all contradictory to that.

For example: A man falls in love with a woman. This, on one side of it, is as selfish as anything
you can possibly conceive. But do you not see by what subtle and divine chemistry the selfishness
is straightway transformed, lifted up, glorified, and becomes unselfishness? The very love
that he professes for her makes it necessary for his own happiness that she should be happy,
so that, in seeking for his own selfish gratification, he is devoting himself unselfishly to
the happiness of somebody else.

And, when a child is born, do you not see, again, how the two selfishnesses, the father's and
the mother's, selfishly, if you please, brooding over and loving the child, at once go out
of themselves, consecrating time and care and thought and love, and even health or life itself,
if need be, for the welfare of the child?

Right in there, then, out of this fact of sex and in the becoming of the family, are born love
and sympathy, and tenderness and mutual care, all those things which are the highest and finest
constituent elements of the noblest developments of the moral nature of men.

Imagination plays a large part in the development of morality; for you must be able to put
yourself imaginatively in the place of another before you can feel for that other, and in that
way recognize the rights of that other and be ready to grant these rights to that other. So
we find that morality at first is a narrow thing: it is confined perhaps to the little family,
the father, the mother, the child, bound together by these ties of kinship, of love, of sympathy,
devoting themselves to each other; but they may look upon some other family as their natural
enemies, and feel no necessity whatever to apply these same principles of love and tenderness
and care beyond the limits of their own little circle.

So you find, as you study the growth of the moral nature of man, that it is confined at first
to the family, then to the patriarchal family, then the tribe; but the fiction of kinship is
still kept up, and, while the member of the primeval tribe feels he has no right to rob or
murder within the limits of his tribe, he has no compunction whatever about robbing or murdering
or injuring the members of some other tribe. So the moral principle in its practical working
is limited to the range of the sympathy of the tribe, which does not go beyond the tribal limits.
We see how that principle works still in the world, from the beginning clear up to the highest
reaches which we have as yet attained.

Take the next step, and find a city like ancient Athens. Still, perhaps, the fiction of kinship
is maintained. All the citizens of Athens are regarded as members of the same great tribe or
family. But even in the time of Plato, whom we are accustomed to look upon as one of the great
teachers of the world, there was no thought of any moral obligation to anybody who lived in
Sparta, lived in any other city of Greece, and less was there any thought of moral obligation
as touching or taking in the outside barbarian. So when the city grew into a nation, and we
came to a point where the world substantially stands to-day, do you not see that practically
the same principle holds, that, while we recognize in some abstract sort of fashion that we
ought to do justice and be kind to people beyond our own limits, yet all our political economy,
all our national ideas, are accustomed to emphasize the fact that we must be just and righteous
to our own people, but that aggression, injustice of almost any kind, is venial in our treatment
of the inhabitants of another country? And it may even flame up into the fire of a wordy patriotism
in certain conditions; and love of country may mean hatred and injustice towards the inhabitants
of another country, or particularly towards the people of another race.

Let me give you a practical illustration of it. What are the relations in which we stand to-day
towards Spain? I have unbounded admiration for the patience, on the whole, for the justice,
the sense of right, which characterize the American people. I doubt if there is another nation
on the face of the earth to-day that would have gone through the last two or three years of
our experience, and maintained such an attitude of impartiality, of faithfulness, of justice,
of right. And yet, if we examine ourselves, we shall find that it is immensely difficult for
us to put ourselves in the place of a Spaniard, to look at the Cuban question from his point
of view, to try to be fair, to be just to him. It is immensely difficult, I say, for us to
look at one of these international questions from the point of view of another race, cherishing
other religious and social ideas, having another style of government.

And there is another illustration of it that has recently occurred here in our country, which
is sadder still to me. Only a little while ago a postmaster in the South was shot by a mob.
The mob surrounds his house, murders him and his child, wounds other members of the family,
burns down his home; and why? Under no impulse whatever except that of pure and simple race
prejudice, the utter inability of a white man to put himself in the position of a black to
such an extent as to recognize, plead for, or defend his inherent rights as a man.

I am not casting any aspersion on the South in what I am saying, none whatever. Were the conditions
reversed, perhaps we should be no better. It is not a practical problem with us. If there were
two or three times as many colored men in the State of New York as there are white men, then
we might understand the question. Let us not mentally cast any stones at the people across
the line. I point it out simply as illustrating the difficulty that we have in recognizing
the rights, the moral rights, of people beyond the limits of that sympathy to which we have
been accustomed and for a long period trained.

I believe the day will come when we shall be as jealous of the right of a man as we are now
of the right of an American. We are not yet. There have been foregleams and prophecies of it
in the past. Long ago a Latin writer said, I am a man, and whatever is human is not foreign
to me. But think what a lone and isolated utterance that has been for hundreds of years. Jesus
taught us to pray, not my Father, but our Father, and we do pray it every day in the-year;
but how many are the people in any of the churches that dream of living it? A hundred years
ago that heretic, who is still looked upon as the bugaboo of all that is fine and good, Thomas
Paine, wrote, "The world is my country, and to do good is my religion," a sentence so fine
that it has been carved on the base of the statue of William Lloyd Garrison on Commonwealth
Avenue in Boston, as being a fitting symbol of his own philanthropic life.

How many of us have risen to the idea of making these grand sentiments the ruling principles
of our lives? But along the lines of moral growth it is to come. The day will be when, as I
said, we shall feel as keenly whatever touches the right of any man as to-day we feel that
which touches the right of one of our own people; and the moral growth of the world will reach
beyond that. I love to dream of a day when men will no longer forget the inherent rights of
any inhabitant of the air or of the waters or of the woods or any of the domesticated animals
that we have come to associate with our lives.

We feel towards them to-day as in the old days a man felt towards another man who was his slave,
that he had a right to abuse, to maltreat, even to kill, if he pleased. We have not yet become
civilized enough, so that we feel it incumbent upon us to recognize the fact that animals can
suffer pain, that animals can enjoy the air or the sunshine, and that they have a right to
each when they do not trespass upon the larger rights of humanity. I was something of a boy
when it first came over me that it was not as amusing to animals to be shot and killed as it
was to me to shoot and kill them. From the time I was able to lift a gun I had always carried
one; but I soon learned that for me there was no pleasure in taking needlessly the life of
anything that lived. We are only partially civilized as yet in the treatment of our domesticated
animals. How many people think of the torture of the curb bit, of the check, of neglect in
the case of cold, of thirst, of hunger? How many people, I say, civilized and in our best society,
are careful yet as to the comfort, the rights, of those that serve them in these humble capacities?

The time will come when our moral sympathetic sense shall widen its boundaries even farther
yet, and shall take in the trees and the shrubs, the waters, the hills, all the natural and
beautiful features of the world. I believe that by and by it will be regarded as immoral, as
unmanly, to deface, to mar, that which God has made so glorious and so beautiful. As soon as
man develops, then, his power of sympathy, so that it can take the world in its arms, so soon
he will have grown to the stature of the Divine in the unfolding of his moral nature.

I wish now to raise the question, for a moment, as to what is to be our guide in regard to
moral facts and moral actions. I was trained, and perhaps most of you were, to believe that
I was unquestioningly to follow my conscience, that whatever conscience told me to do was necessarily
right. The conscience has been spoken of as though it were a sort of little deity set to rule
man's nature, this little kingdom of thought and feeling and action. But conscience is nothing
of the kind. Half of the consciences of the world to-day are all wrong.

Let me hint by way of illustration what I mean: Calvin was just as conscientious in burning
Servetus as Servetus was in pursuing that course of action which led him to the stake. One
of them was wrong in following his conscience, then. You take it to-day: some people will tell
you there is a certain day in the week that you must observe as sacred. Your conscience tells
you there is another day in the week that you must observe as sacred. Can both be right? Many
of the greatest tragedies of the world have come about through these controversies and confusions
of conscience. The Quaker in old Boston went at the cart's tail, in disgrace, because he followed
his conscience; and the Puritan put him there because he followed his conscience. Were both
of them right? The inquisitor in Spain put to death hundreds and thousands of people conscientiously;
and the hundreds and thousands of people conscientiously went to their deaths.

What is conscience, then? Conscience is not a moral guide. It is simply that monitor within
that reiterates to us forever and forever and forever, Do right. But conscience does not tell
us what is right. We must decide those questions as a matter of calm study and judgment in
the light of human experience. It is the judgment that should tell us whether a thing is right
or wrong. And how shall we know whether it is right or wrong? Simply by the consequences. That
which helps, that which lifts man up, that which adds to the happiness and the well-being of
the world, as the result of human experience, is right. That which hurts, that which injures
men and women, that which takes away from their welfare and happiness, that is wrong. All these
things, as we shall see before I get through, are inherent in the nature of things, not created
by statute, not the result of the moral teaching of anybody.

This leads me to extend this idea a little farther, and to raise the question as to what is
the standard by which you are to judge moral action. If you will think it out with a little
care, you will find that the standard of all moral action may be summed up in the one word
"life." Life, first, as continuance; second, to use a philosophical term, content, that which
it includes. Life, this is the standard of right and wrong.

To illustrate, take me physically, leave out of account all the rest of my nature now for a
moment, and consider me as an animal. From the point of view of my body, that which conduces
to length of life, to fullness, to completion, to enjoyment of life, is right, the only right,
from this physical point of view. That which threatens my life, that which takes away my sum
of strength, injures my health, takes away from my possibility of enjoyment, that, from a physical
point of view, is wrong; and there can be no other right or wrong from the point of view of
the body.

But I am not simply body. So this principle must be modified. Come up to the fact that I am
an intellectual being. In order to develop myself intellectually, I may have to forego things
that would be pleasant on the bodily plane. I sacrifice the lower for the higher; and that
which would be right on the physical plane becomes relatively wrong now, because it interferes
with something that is higher and more important.

Rise one step to man as an affectional being. If you wish to develop him to the finest and
highest here, you may not only be obliged under certain conditions to sacrifice the body, but
you may be obliged to sacrifice his intellectual development. In order that he may be the best
up here, he must put the others sometimes, relatively, under his feet. So, again, that which
would be right on the physical plane or the intellectual plane becomes relatively wrong, if
it interferes with that which is higher still.

And so, if you recognize man as a spiritual being, a child of God, then you say it is right,
if need be, to put all these other things under his feet, in order that he may attain the highest
and best that he is capable of here. But you see it is life all the way, it is the physical
life or it is the mental life or it is the affectional life or it is the spiritual life; and
that which is necessary for the cultivation and development of these different grades of life
becomes on those grades right, and that which threatens or injures one or either of these grades
becomes, so far as that grade is concerned, wrong.

Life, then, continuance, fullness, joy, use, this is the standard of right and wrong; a standard
which no book ever set up, which no book can ever overthrow; a standard which is inherent,
natural, necessary, a part of the very nature of things.

I wish now for a moment I must of course do it briefly to consider the relation of religion
to this natural morality. And perhaps you will hardly be ready some of you, at any rate for
the statement which I propose to make, that sometimes, in order to be grandly moral, a man
must be irreligious. I mean, of course, from the point of view of the conventional religion
of his time, he must be ready to be regarded as irreligious. In the earliest development of
the religious and moral life of a tribe, very likely, the two went hand in hand, side by side;
for the dead chief now worshipped as god would be looked upon as in favor of those customs
or practices which the tribe had come to regard as right. But religion perhaps you will know
by this time, if you have thought of it carefully is the most conservative thing in the world.
Naturally, it is the last thing that people are willing to change. This reluctance grows out
of their reverence, grows out of their worshipful nature, grows out of their fear that they
may be wrong.

But now let me illustrate what I mean. Religion, standing still in this way, has become an
institution, a set of beliefs, of rites and ceremonies, which do not change. The moral experience
of the people goes right on; and so it sometimes comes to pass that the moral ideal has outgrown
the religious ideal of the community. And now, as a practical illustration to illume the whole
point, let us go back to ancient Athens for a moment at the time of Socrates. Here we are confronted
with the curious fact that Socrates, who has been regarded from that day to this as the most
grandly moral man of his time, the one man who taught the highest and noblest human ideals,
is put to death as an irreligious man. The popular religion of the time cast him out, and put
the hemlock to his lips; and at the same time his teaching in regard to righteousness and truth
was unspeakably ahead of the popular religion of his day.

Let us come to the modern Athens for a moment, to the time of Theodore Parker in Boston. We
are confronted here, again, with this strange fact. There was not a church in Boston that could
abide him, not even the Unitarian churches; and in the prayer-meetings of the day they were
beseeching God to take him out of the world, because they thought he was such a force for evil.
And at the same time Theodore Parker stood for the very highest, tenderest, truest moral ideal
of his age.

There was no man walking the earth at that time who so grandly voiced the real law of God as
did Theodore Parker. And yet he was outcast by the popular religious sentiment of his time. 

Yet it is possible, after all, that this loss to us is not so great as it might seem. Some of his
best speeches, as we know--those, for instance, against Verres and in defence of Milo--were written
in the closet, and never spoken at all; and most of the others were reshaped and polished for
publication. Nor is it certain that his declamation, which some of his Roman rivals found fault
with as savouring too much of the florid Oriental type, would have been agreeable to our colder
English taste. He looked upon gesture and action as essential elements of the orator's power,
and had studied them carefully from the artists of the theatre. There can be no doubt that we
have his own views on this point in the words which he has put into the mouth of his "Brutus",
in the treatise on oratory which bears that name.

He protests against the "Attic coldness" of style which, he says, would soon empty the benches
of their occupants. He would have the action and bearing of the speaker to be such that even
the distant spectator, too far off to hear, should "know that there was a Roscius on the stage".
He would have found a French audience in this respect more sympathetic
than an English one.[1] His own highly nervous temperament would certainly
tend to excited action.

The speaker, who, as we are told, "shuddered visibly over his whole body when he first began
to speak", was almost sure, as he warmed to his work, to throw himself into it with a passionate
energy.

[Footnote 1: Our speakers certainly fall into the other extreme.

The British orator's style of gesticulation may still be recognised, mutatis mutandis, in Addison's
humorous sketch of a century ago: "You may see many a smart rhetorician turning his hat in his
hands, moulding it into several different cocks, examining sometimes the lining and sometimes
the button, during the whole course of his harangue. A deaf man would think that he was cheapening
a beaver, when he is talking perhaps of the fate of the British nation".]

He has put on record his own ideas of the qualifications and the duties
of the public speaker, whether in the Senate or at the bar, in three
continuous treatises on the subject, entitled respectively, 'On Oratory',
'Brutus', and 'The Orator', as well as in some other works of which
we have only fragments remaining.

With the first of these works, which he inscribed to his brother, he was himself exceedingly
well satisfied, and it perhaps remains still the ablest, as it was the first, attempt to reduce
eloquence to a science. The second is a critical sketch of the great orators of Rome: and in
the third we have Cicero's view of what the perfect orator should be. His ideal is a high one,
and a true one; that he should not be the mere rhetorician, any more than the mere technical
lawyer or keen partisan, but the man of perfect education and perfect taste, who can speak
on all subjects, out of the fulness of his mind, "with variety and copiousness".

Although, as has been already said, he appears to have attached but little value to a knowledge
of the technicalities of law, in other respects his preparation for his work was of the most
careful kind; if we may assume, as we probably may, that it is his own experience which, in his
treatise on Oratory, he puts into the mouth of Marcus Antonius, one of his greatest predecessors
at the Roman bar.

"It is my habit to have every client explain to me personally his own case; to allow no one
else to be present, that so he may speak more freely. Then I take the opponent's side, while I make
him plead his own cause, and bring forward whatever arguments he can think of. Then, when he
is gone, I take upon myself, with as much impartiality as I can, three different characters--my
own, my opponent's, and that of the jury. Whatever point seems likely to help the case rather
than injure it, this I decide must be brought forward; when I see that anything is likely to do
more harm than good, I reject and throw it aside altogether. So I gain this,--that I think
over first what I mean to say, and speak afterwards; while a good
many pleaders, relying on their abilities, try to do both at once".[1]

[Footnote
1: De Oratore, II.

24, 72.]

He reads a useful lesson to young and zealous advocates in the same treatise--that sometimes
it may be wise not to touch at all in reply upon a point which makes against your client,
and to which you have no real answer; and that it is even more important to say nothing which may injure
your case, than to omit something which might possibly serve it. A maxim which some modern barristers
(and some preachers also) might do well to bear in mind.

Yet he did not scorn to use what may almost be called the tricks of
his art, if he thought they would help to secure him a verdict.

The outward and visible appeal to the feelings seems to have been as effective in the Roman forum
as with a British jury. Cicero would have his client stand by his side dressed in mourning,
with hair dishevelled, and in tears, when he meant to make a pathetic appeal to the compassion
of the jurors; or a family group would be arranged, as circumstances allowed,--the wife and children,
the mother and sisters, or the aged father, if presentable, would be introduced in open court
to create a sensation at the right moment. He had tears apparently as ready at his command as an
eloquent and well-known English Attorney-General. Nay, the tears seem to have been marked down,
as it were, upon his brief. "My feelings prevent my saying more", he declares in his defence of
Publius Sylla. "I weep while I make the appeal"--"I cannot go on for tears"--he repeats towards
the close of that fine oration in behalf of Milo--the speech that never was spoken. Such phrases
remind us of the story told of a French preacher, whose manuscripts were found to have marginal
stage directions: "Here take out your handkerchief;"--"here cry--if possible". But such were
held to be the legitimate adjuncts of Roman oratory, and it is quite possible to conceive
that the advocate, like more than one modern tragedian who could be named, entered so thoroughly
into the spirit of the part that the tears flowed quite naturally.

A far less legitimate weapon of oratory--offensive and not defensive--was the bitter and coarse
personality in which he so frequently indulged. Its use was held perfectly lawful in the Roman forum,
whether in political debate or in judicial pleadings, and it was sure to be highly relished by
a mixed audience. There is no reason to suppose that Cicero had recourse to it in any unusual
degree; but employ it he did, and most unscrupulously. It was not only private character that
he attacked, as in the case of Antony and Clodius, but even personal defects or peculiarities
were made the subject of bitter ridicule. He did not hesitate to season his harangue by a sarcasm
on the cast in the prosecutor's eye, or the wen on the defendant's neck, and to direct the
attention of the court to these points, as though they were corroborative evidence of a moral
deformity.

The most conspicuous instance of this practice of his is in the invective which he launched in
the Senate against Piso, who had made a speech reflecting upon him. Referring to Cicero's exile,
he had made that sore subject doubly sore by declaring that it was not Cicero's unpopularity,
so much as his unfortunate propensity to bad verse, which had been the cause of it. A jingling
line of his to the effect that

"The gown wins grander triumphs than the sword"[1]

had been thought to be pointed against the recent victories of Pompey, and to have provoked him
to use his influence to get rid of the author. But this annotation of Cicero's poetry had not
been Piso's only offence. He had been consul at the time of the exile, and had given vent, it
may be remembered, to the witticism that the "saviour of Rome" might
save the city a second time by his absence.

Cicero was not the man to forget it.

The beginning of his attack on Piso is lost, but there is quite enough remaining. Piso was of
a swarthy complexion, approaching probably to the negro type. "Beast"--is the term by which Cicero
addresses him. "Beast! there is no mistaking the evidence of that slave-like hue, those bristly cheeks,
those discoloured fangs. Your eyes, your brows, your face, your whole aspect, are the tacit
index to your soul".[2]

[Footnote 1: "Cedant arma togae, concedat laurea linguae".]

[Footnote 2: Such flowers of eloquence are not encouraged at the modern bar. But they were common
enough, even in the English law-courts, in former times. Mr. Attorney-General Coke's language
to Raleigh at his trial--"Thou viper!"--comes quite up to Cicero's. Perhaps the Irish House
of Parliament, while it existed, furnished the choicest modern specimens
of this style of oratory.

Mr. O'Flanagan, in his 'Lives of the Lord Chancellors of Ireland', tells us that a member for
Galway, attacking an opponent when he knew that his sister was present during the debate, denounced
the whole family--"from the toothless old hag that is now grinning in the gallery, to the white-livered
scoundrel that is shivering on the floor".]

It is not possible,
within the compass of these pages, to give even the briefest account
of more than a few of the many causes (they are twenty-four in number)
in which the speeches made by Cicero, either for the prosecution or
the defence, have been preserved to us.

Some of them have more attraction for the English reader than others, either from the facts of
the case being more interesting or more easily understood, or from their affording more opportunity
for the display of the speaker's powers.

Mr. Fox had an intense admiration for the speech in defence of Caelius. The opinion of one who
was no mean orator himself, on his great Roman predecessor, may be worth quoting:

"Argumentative contention is not what he excels in; and he is never, I think, so happy as when
he has an opportunity of exhibiting a mixture of philosophy and pleasantry, and especially when
he can interpose anecdotes and references to the authority of the eminent characters in the history of
his own country.

No man appears, indeed, to have had such a real respect for authority as he; and therefore
when he speaks on that subject he is always natural and earnest".[1]

[Footnote 1: Letter to G. Wakefield--Correspondence, p. 35.]

There is anecdote and pleasantry enough in this particular oration; but the scandals of Roman
society of that day, into which the defence of Caelius was obliged to enter, are not the most
edifying subject for any readers. Caelius was a young man of "equestrian" rank, who had been
a kind of ward of Cicero's, and must have given him a good deal of trouble by his profligate habits,
if the guardianship was anything more than nominal. But in this particular case the accusation
brought against him--of trying to murder an ambassador from Egypt by means of hired assassins, and
then to poison the lady who had lent him the money to bribe them with--was probably untrue. Clodia,
the lady in question, was the worthy sister of the notorious Clodius, and bore as evil a reputation
as it was possible for a woman to bear in the corrupt society of
Rome--which is saying a great deal.

She is the real mover in the case, though another enemy of Caelius, the son of a man whom he
had himself brought to trial for bribery, was the ostensible prosecutor. Cicero, therefore, throughout
the whole of his speech, aims the bitter shafts of his wit and eloquence at Clodia. His brilliant
invectives against this lady, who was, as he pointedly said, "not only noble but notorious",
are not desirable to quote. But the opening of the speech is in the advocate's best style.
The trial, it seems, took place on a public holiday, when it was not usual to take any cause
unless it were of pressing importance.

"If any spectator be here present, gentlemen, who knows nothing of
our laws, our courts of justice, or our national customs, he will
not fail to wonder what can be the atrocious nature of this case,
that on a day of national festival and public holiday like this, when
all other business in the Forum is suspended, this single trial should
be going on; and he will entertain no doubt but that the accused is
charged with a crime of such enormity, that if it were not at once
taken cognisance of, the constitution itself would be in peril.

And if he heard that there was a law which enjoined that in the case of seditious and disloyal
citizens who should take up arms to attack the Senate-house, or use violence against the magistrates,
or levy war against the commonwealth, inquisition into the matter should be made at once,
on the very day;--he would not find fault with such a law: he would only ask the nature of
the charge. But when he heard that it was no such atrocious crime, no treasonable attempt,
no violent outrage, which formed the subject of this trial, but that a young man of brilliant
abilities, hard-working in public life, and of popular character, was here accused by the son of
a man whom he had himself once prosecuted, and was still prosecuting, and that all a bad woman's
wealth and influence was being used against him,--he might take no exception to the filial zeal
of Atratinus; but he would surely say that woman's infamous revenge
should be baffled and punished.... I can excuse Atratinus; as to the
other parties, they deserve neither excuse nor forbearance".

It was a strange story, the case for the prosecution, especially as regarded the alleged attempt
to poison Clodia. The poison was given to a friend of Caelius, he was to give it to some slaves
of Clodia whom he was to meet at certain baths frequented by her, and they were in some way to administer
it. But the slaves betrayed the secret; and the lady employed certain gay and profligate young
men, who were hangers-on of her own, to conceal themselves somewhere
in the baths, and pounce upon Caelius's emissary with the poison in
his possession.

But this scheme was said to have failed. Clodia's detectives had rushed from their place of concealment
too soon, and the bearer of the poison escaped. The counsel for the prisoner makes a great point
of this.

"Why, 'tis the catastrophe of a stage-play--nay, of a burlesque; when no more artistic solution
of the plot can be invented, the hero escapes, the bell rings, and--the curtain falls! For
I ask why, when Licinius was there trembling, hesitating, retreating, trying to escape--why
that lady's body-guard let him go out of their hands? Were they afraid lest, so many against one,
such stout champions against a single helpless man, frightened as he was and fierce as they
were, they could not master him? I should like exceedingly to see them, those curled and scented
youths, the bosom-friends of this rich and noble lady; those stout men-at-arms who were posted
by their she-captain in this ambuscade in the baths. And I should like to ask them how they
hid themselves, and where? A bath?--why, it must rather have been a Trojan horse, which bore
within its womb this band of invincible heroes who went to war for a woman! I would make them
answer this question,--why they, being so many and so brave, did not either seize this slight
stripling, whom you see before you, where he stood, or overtake him when he fled? They will
hardly be able to explain themselves, I fancy, if they get into that witness-box, however
clever and witty they may be at the banquet,--nay, even eloquent
occasionally, no doubt, over their wine.

But the air of a court of justice is somewhat different from that of the banquet-hall; the benches
of this court are not like the couches of a supper-table; the array of this jury presents a
different spectacle from a company of revellers; nay, the broad glare of sunshine is harder
to face than the glitter of the lamps. If they venture into it, I shall have to strip them
of their pretty conceits and fools' gear. But, if they will be ruled by me, they will betake themselves
to another trade, win favour in another quarter, flaunt themselves elsewhere than in this court.
Let them carry their brave looks to their lady there; let them lord it at her expense, cling
to her, lie at her feet, be her slaves; only let them make no attempt
upon the life and honour of an innocent man".

The satellites of Clodia could scarcely have felt comfortable under this withering fire of sarcasm.
The speaker concluded with an apology--much required--for his client's
faults, as those of a young man, and a promise on his behalf--on the
faith of an advocate--that he would behave better for the future.

He wound up the whole with a point of sensational rhetoric which was common, as has been said,
to the Roman bar as to our own--an appeal to the jurymen as fathers. He pointed to the aged
father of the defendant, leaning in the most approved attitude upon the shoulder of his son. Either
this, or the want of evidence, or the eloquence of the pleader, had its due effect. Caelius was
triumphantly acquitted; and it is a proof that the young man was not wholly graceless, that he rose
afterwards to high public office, and never forgot his obligations to his eloquent counsel,
to whom he continued a stanch friend. He must have had good abilities, for he was honoured with
frequent letters from Cicero when the latter was governor of Cilicia.

He kept up some of his extravagant tastes; for when he was Aedile (which involved the taking upon
him the expense of certain gladiatorial and wild-beast exhibitions), he wrote to beg his friend
to send him out of his province some panthers for his show. Cicero complied with the request, and
took the opportunity, so characteristic of him, of lauding his own administration of Cilicia,
and making a kind of pun at the same time. "I have given orders to the hunters to see about the
panthers; but panthers are very scarce, and the few there are complain, people say, that in the
whole province there are no traps laid for anybody but for them". Catching and skinning the
unfortunate provincials, which had been a favourite sport with governors like Verres, had been
quite done away with in Cilicia, we are to understand, under Cicero's
rule.

His defence of Ligarius, who was impeached of treason against
the state in the person of Caesar, as having borne arms against him
in his African campaign, has also been deservedly admired. There was
some courage in Cicero's undertaking his defence; as a known partisan
of Pompey, he was treading on dangerous and delicate ground. Jesus says, "Neither this man nor his parents have sinned," and you think
at first that you are going to get an adequate explanation; but he straightway adds that the
man was blind in order that the works of God might be manifest in him; which we cannot accept
to-day as quite an adequate explanation.

Then take the case of the man who was lying at the pool of Bethesda, and was reported as cured.
Jesus meets him, after a good deal of question and criticism on the part of the Jews, and says,
"Now you have been healed, see to it that you sin no more, lest a worse thing come to you,"
seeming to imply again that sin might be punished by lameness, by affliction of this kind or that.

So it seems to me that we do not get, even in the New Testament, entirely free from this old
conception. Indeed, there are the verses which I read as a part of our lesson from the fifth
chapter of Matthew, one of which for a clear or more spiritual insight I have quoted as a part
of my text, "Blessed are they that do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall
be filled" with what? Filled with righteousness; not filled with health, external prosperity,
many children, friends, political position, honor. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall what? See God. "Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Here is a clear
and explicit annunciation of the eternal, universal law of cause and effect, of the idea that
those things which happen are not arbitrary infliction, but natural and necessary result.

Let us, then, consider this matter for a little as we look over the face of human life as it
is manifested to us at the present time. I suppose hardly a week passes that, either by letter
or in conversation, I do not come face to face with this same old problem, showing that only
partially and here and there have men and women even to-day come to comprehend the real method
after which this universe of ours is governed. For example, let me give you a few illustrations.

I have a friend in Boston, one of the noblest men I ever knew, sweet, gentle, true: he came
to me one day, and said: "Mr. Savage, I have tried all my life to be an honest man. I do not
own an ill-gotten dollar. I have tried to be kind and helpful to people in need, in trouble;
and yet," and then it began to dawn on him that he was not on a very logical track, for he
smiled, "and yet I have not got on very well in the world; I have not made a great deal of
money; I have not been specially prosperous in business." And the implication was that here,
next door or in another street, was a man who had a good many ill-gotten dollars, and who had
not been generous or kindly or humane or tender, but who had prospered and become rich, as
he had not. And he raised this as a serious objection against the justice of the government
of the world.

I have had mothers; I presume a thousand times, say to me: "I have tried to take the best possible
care of my child. I loved my child, I watched over it night and day, I have money enough to
give it a good education, I could train it into fitness for life; and yet my child is taken
away." Here is somebody else who has not the means to educate her child, perhaps whose character
and intelligence are a good deal below the average level. Her child is spared, spared for what?
Spared for a career for which it will be entirely unfitted; and the question is, Why does God
do such things, why is the universe governed in this fashion?

And I have had persons say to me: "I have been ill all my life, I have suffered no end of pain
and trouble: I wonder why? What have I done that I must be burdened and afflicted after this
fashion?" So these questions are coming up perpetually, showing that underlying the ordinary
surface of our common daily life is still this theory that God arbitrarily governs the world,
and rewards people for being good with health and with money and with children and with all
sorts of prosperity. There is no end of talk in regard to judgments, as they are called. I
remember when I was living in the West I take this as an illustration as good as any a neighboring
small city was badly devastated by fire. All the ministers around me in my city began to preach
about it as a judgment of God for the supposed wickedness of this city. One peculiar thing
about this particular judgment, which I noticed as reported in the papers, was that the last
thing which the fire burned was a church; and it left standing next door, and untouched, a
liquor saloon. It seemed to me a very peculiar kind of divine judgment, if that is what it
really was.

And so, as you look into these cases of supposed divine judgments, which people are so ready
to see in regard to their neighbors, you will find that it has some serious defect of this
sort almost always that makes you question whether a wise man would be guilty of that method
of conducting his affairs.

This, perhaps, is enough by way of setting forth the popular method of looking at these problems.
I want to ask you now to go with me for a little while, as I attempt to analyze some of these
cases, and get at the real principle involved as to what it is that is really going on.

Now take this case of the mother whose child is taken away from her, as she says. Let us see
if we can find out what is really being done. It is possible, of course, that the child has
inherited, it may be from a grandfather or great-grandfather, from somewhere along the line,
a tendency to a particular kind of disease. It may be that, without anybody's being to blame
for it or anybody's knowing it, the child was exposed to some contagious disease on the street
or at school. It may be that the mother, through a little otherwise pardonable vanity, wishing
to display the beauty of the child rather than to dress it in the healthiest manner, has been
the means of exposing it to cold. It may be any one of a dozen things has caused the death
of this child. And do you not see that in every case it has nothing whatever to do with the
mother's moral goodness or spiritual cultivation? It is absurd to think that the mother, in
this case, is being punished for something that she is entirely unconscious of having been
guilty of. Do you not see that there is no logical connection between an inherited disease,
between exposure, between taking cold, between any of these natural causes and the goodness
of the mother? Is it not absurd to talk about their having anything whatever to do with each other?

I remember hearing a famous revivalist preach some years ago; and in this particular sermon
he represented God as using all means to try to turn such a man from his path of evil, as he
regarded it, into the way of right and truth and salvation; and he said: First, perhaps, God
takes his property away from him; and that does not change him. And by and by he takes his
wife; and that does not change him. And then he takes one of his children; and, as he expressed
it, he lays these coffins across his pathway in order to warn him of his sinful condition,
and turn him into the right way.

Think of a God who kills other people on account of my wrong!

I had a friend in Boston once, a lady, a school-teacher, who in all seriousness told me, when
her sister died, that she was afraid God had taken her sister away because she had not been
sufficiently faithful in attending church services during Lent. Think of it! Not only the lack
of logic in linking things like these together, but the practical impiety of attributing to
God such feelings and action in regard to his dealings with his children!

Let us take the case of a man who, not being highly elevated in character, becomes rich. Let
us see if we can get at the principles involved here. Perhaps you can call to mind one or another
case that you may be thinking of while I speak. Of course I shall mention no names. Here is
a man who possesses remarkable natural business ability, power to read the commerce, the business
of his times. He deals with these in a practical way. He complies with the conditions of accumulating
wealth. No matter for the present whether he does wrong in doing it or not, that is, whether
he is unjust or hard or cruel; but he complies with the conditions for the obtaining of money
in this particular department of life. Now do you not see that, no matter what his moral character
may be in other directions, whether he is kind to his wife, whether he is loving towards his
children, whether he is generous in a charitable way, whether he is politically stanch or corrupt,
do you not see that these questions are entirely irrelevant, have nothing whatever to do with
the question of success in the money field? He sows according to the laws of the product which
he wishes to raise, and the product appears.

Or take the case of a farmer: Here is a certain tract of land adapted to a particular crop.
He sows wisely in this field. He cultivates it: the rain and the sun do their part; and in
the fall he has a magnificent result. Now has that anything whatever to do with the question
whether the man was a good man or not, as to whether he went to prayer-meeting or not, as to
whether he read his Bible or not, as to whether he was profane or not, as to whether he was
a good neighbor or not? Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he reap, and reap it where he sows
it. Is it not perfectly plain? So in any department of human life, I care not what, trace it
out, and you will find that precisely the same principle is involved, and that you get results,
not arbitrary bestowal's of reward or punishment.

Now I must come having, I hope, made this sufficiently clear, though after this fragmentary
fashion to deal a little more with some of the ethical sides of this question. I have had no
end of persons tell me, first and last, that it seemed to them that the universe could not
be a moral universe, that it was not governed fairly, that reward and punishment were not meted
out evenly to people; and they based their criticism on statements of fact similar to those
with which I have been dealing.

Now let us look into the matter a little deeply; and let us see if we can find any hint of
light and guidance. I have had a person within a week say to me, "I do not feel at all sure
that it means much that people get the moral results of their moral action in a particular
department of life. If a person becomes a little bit callous and hard, wisely selfish and prudent,
and so prospers in the affairs of this life, I am not sure that he is not as well off as anybody,
perhaps a little better off, perhaps a little better off than a person who is sensitive, and
worries because he does not reach his ideals; and it is possible that he serves the world after
all quite as well." This is a kind of criticism, I say, that has been made to me in the last week.

Let us look at it for just a minute. People do not seem able as yet to understand that a man
is really "punished," in the popular sense of that word, unless they can see him publicly whipped.
It does not seem to them to mean anything because a man deteriorates, because the highest and
finest qualities in him atrophy and threaten to die out. I used an illustration in my sermon
two weeks ago to which I shall have to recur again, to see if I can make it mean more than
it did then. It is the story of Ulysses who fell into the hands of the famous sorceress, and
whose companions were turned into swine. Now would you be willing to be turned into a pig,
merely because, being a pig, you would not know anything about it, and would not suffer? Would
you be willing to be reduced to the life of an oyster, merely because, being an oyster, you
would be haunted by no restless ideals, and, so far as you had any sense at all, would probably
be very comfortable indeed? Is there no "punishment" in this deprivation of the highest and
finest things that we can conceive of?

It seems to me that a person who has deteriorated, who has become selfish, who has become mean,
who has lost all taste for high and fine and sweet things, and is unconscious of them, is having
meted out to him the worst conceivable retribution. If a man is mean and knows it, if a man
is selfish and is conscious of it, if a man is unjust and is stung by the reflection, there
is a little hope for him, there is life there, there is moral vitality, there is a chance for
him to recuperate, to climb up into something higher and finer; but, if he has not only become
degraded and mean, but has become contented in that condition, it seems to me that he is worse
off than almost anybody else of whom we can dream.

Let us see for a moment on what conditions a man who has deteriorated is well off. There are
three big "ifs" in the way, in my thought of it. If a man really is a spiritual being, if he
is a child of God, if there are in him possibilities of unfolding of all that is sweet and
divine, then he is not well off when he is not developing these, and is content not to develop
them. Browning says, in his introduction to "Sordello," "The culture of a soul, little else
is of any value."

If we are souls, and if the culture of a soul is of chiefest importance, then cursed beyond
all words is the man who has deteriorated and become degraded and is content to have it so.
Blessed beyond all words is the soul that is haunted by discontent, haunted by unattained and
unattainable ideals, who is restless because of that which he feels he might be and yet is
not, he who is touched by the far-off issues of divinity, and cannot rest until he has grown
into the stature of the Divine!

And then, once more, if it be true that it is worth our while to help our fellow-men in the
higher side of their nature, to help them be men and women, to help them realize that they
are children of God, and to grow into the realization of it, if, I say, this be worth while,
then lamentable beyond all power of expression is the condition of that man who does not feel
it and does not care for it, and does not consecrate himself to its attainment. Look over the
long line of those who have served mankind. Who are they? From Abraham down, the prophets of
Israel; Jesus, Paul, Savonarola, Huss, Wyclif, Luther, Channing, Parker, who have these men
been but the ones who were ready at any price to do something to lift up and lead on the progress
of mankind? These are the ones who have felt the meaning of those sublime words of Jesus: "He
that loseth his life shall save it."

If, I say, there is any meaning in that magnificent song, then indeed it is worth while to
be miserable, if need be, worth while to suffer, worth while to sacrifice for the sake of planting
seed in the spiritual fields, and looking for its spiritual results, and not finding fault
with the universe because we do not get results of spiritual goodness in material realms.

There is one other "if." If it be true, as I believe it is, that this life goes right on, and
that we carry into the to-morrow of another life the precise and accurate results that we have
wrought out in the to-day of this; if it be true that, when we get over there, it will be spiritual
facts and spiritual things with which we shall deal, then the man who has cultivated his spiritual
nature and has reaped spiritual results has no right to find fault with the universe because
it has not paid him with material good.

Let us remember, then, that we get what we sow. God has not promised to pay you in greenbacks
for being good; God has not promised to give you physical health because you are gentle and
tender; God has not promised to give you long life because you are generous; God has not promised
to give you positions of social or political honor because you are kind to your neighbors,
faithful to your wife, true to your children. Can you not see that whatsoever a man sowest,
that shall he reap; and that he will reap in the field where he sows, and not in some other;
and that God is dealing fairly, justly, tenderly, truly, with you in giving you the results
at which you aim, and not the results at which you do not aim?

So, if you really care to be a man, if you care to be a woman, honest, noble, tender, true,
then be these, and be grateful that you reap the reward where you sowed, and do not find fault
with God or the universe because he does not pay you for things that you have not done, because
he does not make a crop grow in some field that you have not cultivated, because it is eternally
true that God is not mocked, and that whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.

THINGS WHICH DOUBT CANNOT DESTROY.

THE critical and investigating work of the modern world threatens to shake not the earth only,
but also heaven. And there are large numbers of people who are disturbed and afraid: they are
troubled lest certain things that are precious, that are dear to them, may be taken away. Not
only this, they are troubled lest things of vital importance to the highest life of the world
be taken away. I propose, then, this morning to run in rapid review over a few of the changes
that are caused by the investigating spirit of the time, and then to point out some things
that are not touched, that cannot be shaken, and that therefore must remain. And I ask you
to have in mind, as I pursue this line of thought, the question whether doubt has taken away
anything really valuable from mankind. The negative part of my theme I shall touch on very
lightly, and dispose of as briefly as I may.

What has doubt, what has investigation, done concerning the universe of which we are a part?
In the old days, before doubt began its work, before men asked questions and demanded proof,
we lived in a little, petty, tiny world, which the imagination of the superstitious and the
fear of ignorant men had created. But the cycles and epicycles which Ptolemy devised, and by
means of which he explained, as well as he knew how, the movements of the heavenly bodies around
us, these have passed away. The breath of doubt has blown upon them; and they have gone, like
mists driven by the wind.

But has doubt quenched the light of any star? Has doubt taken away from the glory of the universe?
Rather, as the result of the work of these myriad investigators, whose one aim and end was
truth, at last we have a universe worthy to be the home of an infinite God, a universe that
matches our thought of the Divine, a universe that thrills and lifts us, fills us with reverence,
and bends us to our knees in the attitude of worship.

The same spirit has raised no end of questions concerning God. What has been the result? We
have lost the old thought of God in the shape of a man sitting on a throne located in the heavens
just above the blue or on some distant star. We have lost the thought of a God as a tyrant,
as a jealous being, as angry every day with his children, as ready to punish these children
forever for their ignorance, for their intellectual mistakes, for their sins of whatever kind.
We have changed our conception of him; but have we lost God? I will not answer that question
at this stage of the discourse, because I wish merely to suggest it now, and dwell on it a
little more when I come to the positive treatment of our morning's theme.

Let us glance at the Bible a moment. Doubt and investigation have been at work there. What
has been the result? Have we lost the Bible? No. We have gained it. We have lost those things
about it which were intellectual burdens because we could not believe them, which were a moral
burden because they conflicted with our highest and noblest sense of right. We no longer feel
under the necessity of reconciling human mistakes with divine infallibility. Professor Goldwin
Smith has told us recently that these old theories of the Bible were a millstone about the
neck of Christendom, and that they must be gotten rid of if Christianity was to live. This
is all that doubt and investigation have done to the Bible. They have cleared away the things
that no sane and earnest and devout mind wishes to keep; and they have restored to us in all
their dignity and beauty and sweetness and power the real human Bible, the Bible which poured
out of the heart of the olden time, and which is in all its truth and sweetness, so far as
they go, a revelation of the divinest things in human thought and human dream.

Preachers tell us every little while that those who ask questions have taken away our Lord,
and they know not where he has been laid. What has this spirit done concerning Jesus? Has it
taken him away from us? Rather, as the result of all this question and criticism, at last we
have found him, found him who has been hidden away for ages, found the man, divine son of God,
son of man, brother, friend, inspirer, companion, helper. It has done for Jesus the grandest
service of which we can conceive.

And now one more point. People used to suppose they knew all about the next world. They knew
where heaven was and where hell was, and who were to be the inhabitants of either place, and
why. Doubt and question have been at work here, and now we do not know where heaven is; and
we do not know where hell is, except that it is within the heart of those that are not in accord
with the divine life. Where the places are, we know not; but blessed beyond all words be ignorance
like this! We know because we believe in righteousness and truth that there is no hell except
that which we create for ourselves; and that is in this world, in any world where there is
a breach of a divine law. But has the great hope gone? Has doubt touched that, so that it has
shrivelled and become as nothing? That I shall have occasion to touch on a little more at length
in a moment; and so I leave it here with this suggestion.

I wish you now to note, and to note with a great deal of care, that doubt, criticism, question,
investigation, have no power to destroy anything. People talk as though, if you doubted a thing,
it disappeared, as though doubt had magical power to annihilate in some way a truth. If you
really do doubt an important divine truth, it may disturb and trouble you for a while; but
the truth remains just the same. I remember some years ago a parishioner came to me, an intelligent
lady, and said, "Mr. Savage, I have about lost my belief in any future life." I smiled, and
said: "I am sorry for you, if it interferes with your comfort and peace; but remember one thing,
neither your doubt nor my belief touches or changes the fact." The eternal life is not something
to be puffed away with a breath, if it be real. So rest right there in the firm assurance that
whatever is true is true, and rests on the eternal foundation of the permanence of God; and
asking questions about it, digging away at its foundations, testing it in any and all sorts
of ways, cannot by any possibility injure it. Enforce thus this idea, simple as it seems, because
thousands of men and women at the present time are made to tremble by utterances from the pulpit,
as though doubt were really a destroyer. Of course, it seems commonplace the moment you think
of it; and, still for your peace and for the restfulness of your mind as you look on the things
that are taking place about us, hold fast to this simple idea.

There is one other point which I wish to raise. What is the use of criticism? What is the use
of all this investigating? Why indulge in all this doubt? And now let me give you an illustration
which will lead me to answering this question and enforcing the point I have in mind. A farmer,
if he selects a favorable piece of ground, plants good seed, cultivates it properly, if the
rain falls and the sun shines, and the weather is propitious, will have a successful crop.
Does it make any difference now whether the farmer has correct ideas about soil and seed and
cultivation? Does it make any difference whether he has any true conception of the nature and
work of the sunshine in producing this crop? In one sense, No. In another, a very important
sense, Yes. Suppose the farmer, having gotten into his mind the idea that the sun is the source
of all the life and growth of the things that he plants and the crops he cultivates, should
say, "Well, now, it does not make any difference whether I have correct scientific theories
about the sun or not: the sun carries on his work just the same." I have heard people say,
over and over again, using an illustration like this: "What difference does it make what your
theories are about the spiritual life, about the origin and nature of religion, about morality?
If you live a good life, the results are just the same, whatever your thinking may be." And
I grant it. But now suppose the farmer should say to himself: "The sun is the source of all
the life that I am able to produce, that I see growing around me; and now I will worship him
as a god. I will pray to him, I will sing songs of praise to him, I will bring birds and animals
and burn sacrifices to him; and so I will win his favor, and get him to produce these wonderful
results for me." Suppose he should so seek his results, and pay no attention to the character
of the soil, to the kind of seed he planted, or to proper cultivation: would that make no difference?

Do you not see that theory may be of immense practical importance in certain contingencies?
Whether he has any knowledge of the sun or not, if he complies with the laws, the conditions,
if he is fortunately obedient, then his results will be produced. But, if his ignorance, his
superstition, lead him to neglect the natural forces with which he deals, then it may make
all the difference in the world. So, as I study the history and development of religious thought,
I see everywhere that men and women, through their ignorance in regard to the real nature of
the universe and of God and of their own souls, are going astray, wasting time, wasting thought,
wasting effort, misdirecting all these instead of complying with the real natural universal
conditions on which these noblest and highest results which they desire depend.

If a man, for example, believes that he is to please God by a sacrifice, by an offering, by
swinging incense, by going through a certain ceremony, instead of being righteous and true,
does it make no difference? Carry out the idea as far as you please, I think I have made plain
the thought I had in mind.

So it does make a difference what our thoughts, our theories, may be; and, therefore, there
is good in this work of investigation which proposes to sift and test and try things, and find
out the real nature of the forces which confront us and with which we have to deal.

Now, then, I come to the positive answering of our question. Are there some things that doubt
cannot touch? And are these things the most important ones, the ones that we need to feel solid
under our feet? What do we need? We do not need to be able to unravel all the mysteries of
the universe. Any quantity of the questions we ask are not practical ones. We do not need to
wait for an answer to them. Any number of the things that are in doubt are of no practical
consequence; and we need not wait for their settlement before we begin to live and to help
our fellowmen and to do what we can to bring in the coming kingdom of our Father.

I wish to note now a few of the things that seem to me very stable things, that doubt cannot
disturb. And first I will say that which I mean when I use the word "God." I wish you to learn
to separate between the word and the reality. Sometimes people are quarrelling over a label
instead of the reality that is back of all. I care very little for a name. I care for things,
for the eternal truths of the universe. May we then feel that modern doubt does not touch our
belief in God? I ask you to consider a moment, and see. As we wake up, assuming nothing, and
look abroad, what do we find? We find ourselves in the presence of a Power that is not ourselves,
another Power, a Power that was here before we were born, a Power that will be here after we
have died, a Power that has produced us, and so is our father and mother on any theory you
choose to hold of it, a Power out of which we have come. Now suppose we look abroad, and try
to find something in regard to the nature of this Power. We can conceive no beginning: we can
conceive no end. And let me say right here that, as the result of all his lifelong study and
thinking as an evolutionist, Mr. Herbert Spencer has said that the existence of this infinite
and eternal Power, of which all the phenomenal universe is only a partial and passing manifestation,
is the one item of human knowledge of which we are most certain of all.

An Infinite Power, then, an eternal Power, shall I say an intelligent Power? At any rate, just
as far as our intelligence can reach, we find that the universe matches that intelligence,
responds to it, so that we must think of it, it seems to me, as intelligent. Out of that Power,
as I have said, we have come; and who are we? Persons, persons that think, persons that feel,
persons that love, persons that hope; and we are the children of this Power, and, according
to one of the fundamental principles of science, nothing can be evolved which was not first
involved, the stream cannot rise higher than its source, that which is produced must be equal
to that which produces it.

This Power, then, eternal, infinite, intelligent, must be as much as what we mean by person,
by thought, by love, by hope, by all that makes us what we are. Shall we call a Power like
this God? Shall we call it Nature? Shall we call it Law? Shall we call it Force? It seems to
me that, if we take any name less and lower than God, we are indulging in a huge assumption,
and a negative assumption at that. Suppose that, looking at one of you, I should call you body
instead of calling you man. I should be assuming that you are only body, which I have no right
to do. If I call this Infinite Power, then, Nature, Force, Law, Matter, I am indulging in a
negative assumption which is scientifically unwarranted. As a reasonable being, then, I think
I am scientifically warranted in saying that belief in God is something that all investigation
only affirms, and affirms over and over again, and with still greater and greater force.

I have not time to go into this at any further length this morning; but I believe that we are
scientifically right in saying that all the doubt, all the investigation, all the questioning
of the world, have only given us a stronger and more solid assurance that we have a divine
Power around us, and that we are the children of that Power.

In the next place, to carry the idea a little farther, we want, if we may, to believe that
this Infinite and eternal Power manifested in the universe is a good Power. If it be not, we
are hopeless. I hear reformers sometimes in their zeal picturing the dreadful condition of
affairs socially or industrially or politically, and saying that the world is getting worse
and worse, that the rich are getting richer, and the poor are getting poorer, and the republic
is becoming more corrupt week by week and year by year, giving the impression that the world
in general is on the down grade. If I believed that, I should give it up, I should see no reason
for struggle and effort. If an Infinite Power is against me in my efforts to do good, what
is the use of my making the effort?

We want to know, then, as to whether a belief in the goodness of this Infinite Power is a thing
that doubt and investigation have not touched and cannot disturb. Let us consider just a moment
one or two thoughts bearing upon it.

The pessimist tells us that the universe is bad all the way through, that this is the worst
possible kind of world. When a man makes a statement like that, I always wish to ask him a
question which it seems to me absolutely overturns his position, how did he happen to find
it out? If the universe is bad all through, essentially bad, where did he get his moral ideal
in the light of which to judge and condemn it? How does this bad universe produce an amount
of justice and truth and love to be used as a measuring-rod in order to find out whether it
will correspond with these ideals or not? That one question seems to me enough to turn pessimism
into nonsense.

Let us look at it in another way. As we look back, as far as we can towards the beginning of
things, we find this fact: when man appeared on the earth, conscience was born, as I told you
the other day, a sense of right came with him, and since that day he has been struggling to
attain and realize an ever and ever enlarging and heightening ideal. This, then, the conscience,
the sense of right, the ideal, must be a part of the nature of the universe that has produced
them. And we notice that these have been growing with the advance of the ages. Before dwelling
on that a little farther, let me touch another consideration which is germane to it.

If you look over the face of human society, you get proof positive, scientific demonstration
unquestionable, that good is in the majority, love is the majority power of the world. How
do I know? You draw up a list of all those things that you call evil, and you will note, as
you analyze them, that they are the things that tend to disintegrate, to separate, to tear
down; and you draw up a list of those things that you call good, and you will find that they
are the things that tend to build up, that bind human society together, and help on life and
growth and happiness.

Now the simple fact that human society exists proves that the things that tend to bind together
are more powerful than the things that tend to disintegrate and tear down. Just as, for instance,
if you see a planet swinging in the blue to-night, you will know that the centripetal power
is stronger than the centrifugal, or there would be no planet there. That which tends to hold
it together is mightier than that which tends to disintegrate and fling its particles away
from each other. So the simple fact that human society exists proves that good is in the majority.

And then, as we trace the development of human society from the far-off beginning, we find
that justice, truth, tenderness, pity, love, helpfulness, all these qualities have been on
the increase, and are growing; and, since the Power that has wrought in lifting up and leading
on mankind is unspent, we believe that that Infinite Power of which we have been speaking is
underneath this lifting, is behind this progress, and that the end may reasonably be expected
to issue in that perfection of which we dream and whose outlines we dimly see afar off.

An infinite power, then, a power that is good, a power that we may study, partially understand,
at any rate, and co-operate with. We can help on this progress instead of hindering it. We
can do something to make the world better. Here are two things then, God and goodness, that
no doubt, no investigation, have ever been able to touch or destroy.

A third thing. We want to believe that there is a meaning in these little individual lives
of ours. Sometimes, when we read of pestilences or the great wars of the world, when we think
of children born and dying so soon almost as they are born, when we note the brevity of even
the longest life and take into account the sweep of the ages, we sometimes find ourselves depressed
with the thought that these human lives of ours mean so little. It sometimes seems as though
nature cared nothing for us, and swept us away as the first cold and the frost sweep away the
millions of flies that had been buzzing their little hour of sunshine.

We need to feel, then, if we are to live manly, womanly lives, that there is some plan, or
may be some purpose in our being born, in our little struggle of a few years, in our being
thwarted, in our succeeding, in our being sick or well, in our being rich or poor, in our being
learned or ignorant. Does it make any difference how we live these lives of ours? Is there
significance in them, any purpose, any plan, any outcome, to make it worth while for us to
struggle and strive? IN THE MONKEY-HOUSE;

OR, CAGE VERSUS CLUB.

PROFESSOR GARNER goes to the Gaboon To garner Monkey talk; a dubious boon! Stucco Philistia shows
in many shapes The babble of baboons, the chat of apes. Why hang, Sir, up a tree, in a big
cage, To study Simian speech, which in our age May be o'erheard on
Platform or in Pub, And studied 'mid the comforts of a Club?

And yet perchance your forest apes would shrink From Smoke-room chat of apes who never think,
But cackle imitatively all round, Till their speech hath an automatic sound. Put the dread name
of GL-DST-NE in the slot SMELFUNGUS calls his mouth, and rabid rot
Will gurgle forth in a swift sewer-like gush Of coarse abuse would
make a bargee blush.

SMELFUNGUS is a soldier, and a swell, But--the Gaboon can scarce surpass Pall-Mall In vicious,
gibbering vulgarity Of coarse vituperation. Decency, Courtesy, common-sense, all cast aside!
Pheugh! GARNER, in his cage, would open wide His listening ears, did Jacko of the forest So
"slate" a foeman when his head was sorest. Strange that to rave and rant, like scullion storm,
Like low virago scold, should seem "good form" To our Society Simians, when one name Makes vulgar
spite oblivious of its shame! "Voluntary and deliberate," their speech, "Articulate too"--those Apes!
Then could they teach Their--say descendants,--much. Does Club or cage Hear most of rabid and
unreasoned rage? "Apes' manner of delivery shows" (they say) "They're conscious of the meaning
they'd convey!" Then pardon, GARNER! Apes, though found in clans. Are not, of course, political
partisans. Tired of the Club-room's incoherent rage, One pines for the Gaboon, and GARNER's
cage. For what arboreal ape could rage and rail Like him, with fierce Gladstonophobia pale,
That Smoke-room Simian, though without a tail!

* * * * *

THE PICK OF THE BASKETS.

The Daily Graphic published a specific against cholera, alleged to have been invented by Doctor PICK,
a German. Evidently "Our pick'd man of countries."

As it is something to drink, and not to eat, the inventor is under no necessity to be known
henceforth as Dr. PICK-AND-CHEWS. His remedy is to treat the bacilli to Rhine Wine. The result
of experiments has been "so much the worse for the bacilli." Substitute for the first vowel
in "grapes" the third of the vowels, and it is of that the poor bacillus suffers, and dies.
As the poet GROSSMITH sings of the German Rhine,--

"That of the Fatherland, The happy Fatherland, Gives the greatest pain inside."

However, the Bacillus is an enemy, and if he can be got rid of by grape-shot, pour it in and spare
not.

* * * * *

NEW PUBLICATION.--"The Dumb D." Musical Novel. Companion to The Silent Sea, by Mrs. MACLEOD.

*
* * * *

INNS AND OUTS.

NO. IV.--THE WINDOW-SHUTTERS.

"And efery time he gif a shoomp, he make de winders sound."

I do not allude to the white wooden Venetian work that shades the Grand Hôtel windows. It is of
the clique who insist on shutting the windows that I write. Briefly speaking, the inmates of the
Grand Hôtel may be divided into two classes--the window-openers and the window-shutters. The former
are all British. The same Britons who at the Club scowl at a suspicion of draught, and luxuriate
in an asphyxiating atmosphere, band against "the foreigners" in this respect. We have a national
reputation to keep up. We are the nation of soap, of fresh air, of condescending discontent;
and when we are on the Continent every one else, including the native, is "a foreigner;" we
carry our nationality about with us like a camp-stool; we squat on
it; we are jealous of it; it is a case of "Regardez, mais ne touchez
pas!"

This patriotic obtrusiveness culminates in the Battle of the Windows. It is an oppressive evening.
The Table d'Hôte-room is seething like a caldron; a few chosen conspirators
and myself open the campaign early; we "tip"

ADOLF "the wink." That diplomatist orders the great window to be half-opened. If things go smoothly,
he will gradually open out other sources of ventilation.

The Noah's Ark procession files in--all shapes and all languages, like the repast itself; DONNERWITZ,
TARTARIN, SHIRTSOFF, SCAMPELINI; there is nothing in common between them--save the paper collar; they
would hail international declarations of war to-morrow; but the sight of us, and that speck
of air leagues them. "Mein Gott, Die Engländer!" coughs DONNERWITZ; "Ce sont de fanatiques
enrhumés!" hisses TARTARIN; SHIRTSOFF sneezes the sneeze of All the Russias; "Corpo di Bacco!"
cries SCAMPALINI; still nothing is done; the "Potage à la reine,"--so called from the predominance
of rain-water--ebbs away in the commingled smacks and gulps of the infuriated Powers; "Saumon du
Rhin, sauce Tartare" is being apportioned to the knives of all nations;
it is perhaps the sight of his knife, from which soup only is sacred,
that nerves the fuming DONNERWITZ to lead the attack.

"Hst!" he shouts to the studiously unheeding ADOLF; "'nother bottil Pellell--ver' well sare!"
chirrups ADOLF reassuringly to me; DONNERWITZ raises his knife; I fear for the consequences;
he brings it down with a clang on the hardened tumbler of the Grand Hôtel; the timid pensionnaire
of numberless summers starts and grows pale; SHIRTSOFF looks with peremptory encouragement
towards the Teuton; "Ach, gräsglich!" rattles out DONNERWITZ, and strikes again; the cobra-like
gutturality of that "Ach" is heart-rending; still no ADOLF; at a gold-fraught glance from
my companions, he has ordered another detachment to the front; a
fresh current of air invades the room.

DONNERWITZ's knife is now brandishing peas; his offended napkin chokes him; with the yell and
spring of a corpulent hyena, he rises and rushes to the windows. The timid pensionnaire and her shrinking
sisterhood follow him, under the misconception that he is summoning them to admire the sunset;
the sunset is their evening excitement, and DONNERWITZ can be sentimental in his calmer moments;
but no "Wie wunder, wunderschön!" escapes him; a Saxon word, that even they can understand,
is on his lips; the ring on his forefinger gleams luridly; bang, bang, bang; he opens fire;
down go the windows, and DONNERWITZ resumes his seat of war, his
napkin waving like a standard before him.

It is now my turn; I don't like it; but my co-conspirators expect
me to maintain the honour of our country: ADOLF cannot be trusted
further; I advance furtively; the eyes of Europe are upon me; one
by one I open them again and subside; a terrible silence supervenes.

What next?--that is the question!

But DONNERWITZ is not only a MOLTKE, he is also a BISMARCK; flushed and moist with exertion, he
has foreseen this move; it is the hour of that inevitable "Bavaroise";
the fork has succeeded to the knife: his mouth is at last free to
confabulate with his neighbour--the Lady from Chicago.

"Wal, I call that slap-up rude," I hear her remark. "In Amur'ca we should just hev' him removed;
but Englishmen are built that way; they fancy, I s'pose, they discovered CO-LUMBUS;" and then
DONNERWITZ leans over the table and, grasping the united weapons of fork, knife, and spoon,
addresses me with effervescent deliberation. "Pardon,--Mister,--but--dis--leddy,--haf--gatarrh;
in a Sherman shentleman's house--most--keep--first--de--leddy zimmer; so!" I don't fully understand,
but I feel that my chivalry is impugned. My confederates, too, round upon me; "Of course," they whisper,
"had no idea the lady was an invalid." The brutes! I stutter an apology, and "climb down;"
the windows are again hermetically sealed; and, as I slink away.

I hear "Viva!" "Hoch!" and clinking glasses. Then ADOLF hurries up surreptitiously, and whispers,
"Tell you vat, Sare: to-morrer you shoost dine on de terass; dere, plenty breeze, hein?" "Plenty
breeze!"--and you pay three francs extra, and catch a cold.

* * * * *

SIGH NO MORE, LOTTIE.

["The disinfecting process has ruined all the dresses of Miss COLLINS."--New York Telegram.]

Sigh
no more, LOTTIE, sigh no more, Those gowns have gone for ever; You've
cut some capers on that shore That you expected never; Then sigh not
so, but let them go, And be you blithe and bonny, Converting all your
sounds of woe To Tarara--boom--de nonny.

Sing that vile ditty yet once more, And win almighty dollars From Yankees who have spoilt your
store Of frocks, frills, cuffs and collars; The air will run in their heads like one O'clock,
till it makes the same ache. While on you shines prosperity's sun. Your Tarara-boom-de hay make!

*
* * * *

AT THE PATTENMAKERS' BANQUET.--At the Court Dinner of the Pattenmakers, held at the Metropole. the
eulogies of the Worshipful Master, Sir AUGUSTUS DRURIOLANUS (now Master of Horse at Drury Lane),
were plentiful, and he had a considerable amount of patten on the back from all his guests. The
great dish of the evening was Partridge au Patten, an English substitute for Perdrix au chou.

* * * * *

OUR GRAND YOUNG GARDNER (HERBERT II.),

IN HIS NEW CHARACTER OF THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE.

(With Song)--"Here's to the Health of the Parley Mow!"

* * * * *

SONNET ON CHILLON.

(WHERE THE ELECTRIC LIGHT IS NOW INSTALLED IN THE DUNGEON OF BONIVARD.)

Electric lighting, dear to modern mind, Bright in this dungeon! Switzerland, thou art Too mad
for things quite fin-de-siècle smart! Surely the trains, that rumble just behind, And Vevey tramcars,
in my thoughts consigned To even hotter place, had been enough To scare SAND, HUGO, SHELLEY,
in a huff; Make BYRON cast his poem to the wind! Chillon, thy prison may become a place With
little marble tables in a row, Where tourists, dressed with artless English grace, May drink their
bock or café down below, And foreign penknives rapidly efface The boasted names this light
is meant to show.

* * * * *

MUSICAL NOTE.--The most tranquillising, or even somniferous melodies ever composed, must have
been those written by the celebrated LULLI. The first thing by LULLI was a "Lulliby."

* * * * *

NEW WORDS TO AN OLD TUNE (AND A SYLLABLE TO SPARE).--Song for the SECRETARY for IRELAND:--"'Tis
all for good luck, quoth bould Rory O'Mor-ley."

* * * * *

ALL THE DIFFERENCE--between "Sir G.O.M." and "The G.O.M."

* * * * *

EXAMINATION PAPER FOR A PRESS CANDIDATE.

(WITH A VIEW TO CARRYING OUT THE SUGGESTION OF THE INSTITUTE OF JOURNALISTS.)

1. What are the principal duties of an Editor? State what you would do if you were visited by
bores of the following kinds:--(1), a friend; (2), an enemy; (3), a proprietor.

2. Show how a political article may be written, saying as little as possible in the greatest amount
of space? Give specimens of "writing round a subject" without offending susceptibilities.

3. What are the duties of a Dramatic Critic? Show, by a specimen article, how a critique of a bad play,
indifferently performed, can yet be made to give satisfaction to the Author, the Manager, the Company,
and the Public?

4. What are the duties of a Special Correspondent at a Seat of War? Give a short descriptive
article of a battle written in such a manner that the readers of your paper may learn everything
without your getting shot as a spy, or drummed out of camp as an informer.

5. What are the duties of a Reviewer?

Describe the process of log-rolling, and give specimen of notices of books:--(1), when the
Author is your friend, but you object to the Publisher; (2), when you hate the writer, but must not
offend the gentleman whose name appears as the distributor, and (3), when you know nothing of
the volume and its producer, but suspect that the Author reviews for another periodical, and
that you may possibly get an order from his literary introducer.

6. What are the duties of a Musical Critic? Show how it is feasible to write a most scientific
notice without being able to distinguish the National Anthem, MASCAGNI's "Intermezzo," or "The
Wedding March," from "The Slue Bells of Scotland."

7. Distinguish the difference between "Our Own Commissioner" and "Our Own Correspondent," and "Our
Special Reporter" and "An Occasional Contributor." Give the rates of remuneration (if any) attaching
to each office.

8. What is "City Intelligence?" Is it affected by the rise and fall of the advertisement columns?
State the difference between "News Specially Communicated" and a puff paragraph.

9. Give the statistics (if you are able) of the number of aspirants to Journalism who have risen
and fallen. Show that a small certainty in the City is better than an occasional ten-pound
note earned in Fleet Street.

10.

Write an essay upon the subject that Journalism is better as a stick than a crutch, and show
that it is useless to take up your pen if you have not already provided (from other sources) for the
payment of your butcher's book.

* * * * *

TO FOOTBALL.

Farewell to thee, Cricket, Thy last match is o'er; Thy bat, ball, and wicket, Are needed no more.
To thy sister we turn, For her coming we pray: Her worshippers burn For the heat of the fray.

Hail!
Goddess of battle, Yet hated of Ma(r)s, How ceaseless their tattle Of tumbles and scars! Such warnings
are vain, For thy rites we prepare, Youth is yearning again In thy perils to share.

Broken limbs and black eyes, May, perchance, be our lot; But grant goals and ties And we care
not a jot. Too sacred to name With thy posts, ball, and field, There is no winter game To which
thou canst yield.

* * * * *

NEW TRANSLATION--"VERY CHOICE ITALIAN,"--"Sotto voce;" i.e., in a drunken tone of voice.

* * * * *

AN EN-NOBBLING SPECTACLE!

BEING SOME ACCOUNT OF THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER OF DRURY LANE.

CHAPTER I.--THE TEA-URN OF THE HUNTER.
SIR JOHN HENRY NEVILLE WOODMERE was the most considerate of men,
and he had a very considerate family, and a large circle of considerate
acquaintances. He was obliging to the last degree, Among those he
knew, and to whom he owed a deep debt of gratitude (for they had furnished
him with an old family mansion, a stud of racers, and passes for himself
and circle to Paris) were AUGUSTE LE GRAND, and HENRI LE PETTITT.

"My
good friend," said HENRI, "your daughter is charming. She has been
well brought up, and has the finest sentiments; but it is necessary
that she should run away to Paris, and dodge the parson. Otherwise,
how could she be called The Prodigal Daughter?"

Sir JOHN saw the
force of this reasoning, and consented.

"And stay," said AUGUSTE,
"we must really have a good set, and you must go a fox-hunting. You
must have armour, and a breakfast, and all of you must wear hunting-coats.
And look here, we can't do without flowers, and coats-of-arms, and
open windows."

"But," objected Sir JOHN, "if I am going a fox-hunting,
surely it should be in the winter or spring. And how about the flowers?"

"You
have got them from Nice," replied AUGUSTE.

So it was thus arranged.
Sir JOHN's daughter, who was called ROSE MILLWARD WOODMERE, eloped
and broke her father's heart.

"But," exclaimed her bereaved parent,
preparing to mount a horse that was waiting for him on the lawn amongst
the flower-beds, "although my heart is breaking, I will show the world
I am a true English gentleman by starting off to head the chace!"

And
he said this out of consideration for AUGUSTE and HENRI, because he
knew they wanted what is technically known as a Curtain. And by this
means he gave them one. And a good one too.

CHAPTER II.--A LITTLE
TRIP TO PARIS.

And then Sir JOHN and all his considerate family and
acquaintances went to Paris to stay at the Grand Hôtel, which seemed
to have been surrendered to them (at convenient times) for their special
use. Sir JOHN was accompanied by a most useful villain, who showed
the depth of his depravity by wearing a moustache of the deepest dye.
So that this depth might be better known, he called himself DEEPWATER.

"Sir
JOHN," said this villain, "your daughter has come to Paris with Captain
HARRY VERNON, and you should trounce him."

"I will," replied Sir
JOHN, heartily; "but surely I have seen my daughter, and my niece,
and Captain HARRY BOYNE VERNON, and the Hon. JULIAN KNIGHT BELFORD,
and Lord HARRY NICHOLLS BANBERRY (a comic Peer), and his wife (a converted
Quakeress), and DUDLEY J.L. SHINE ROPER, a wicked but amusing Hebrew,
hanging about. Cannot we meet for two minutes, and set everything
to-rights?"

"My dear Sir JOHN," returned MAURICE FERNANDEZ DEEPWATER,
"pray consider yourself mistaken. As you say, if we all met together
for two minutes in a room, the whole thing would be settled. But then
I am distinctly under the impression that AUGUSTE LE GRAND and HENRI
LE PETTITT would be confoundedly annoyed."

"Oh," exclaimed Sir JOHN,
"if you think they would be annoyed, do not say another word about
it!"

So the various characters gave one another a clear berth, and
missed each other at the nick of time.

But after awhile ROSE was
left alone with the Hon. JULIAN BELFORD.

"It is not very clear to
me why we haven't married," said he.

"Nor to me either!" she replied.
"We dawdled a bit, and I daresay put it off because what one knows
can be done at any moment is often not done at all."

"Well, hadn't
we better go to the British Embassy?"

"Why, yes." she replied, with
some hesitation; "but I really think you had better say you will marry
my cousin. I fancy it would please AUGUSTE and HENRI."

"Anything
to oblige them," returned the Hon. JULIAN.

"That being settled, please
leave me, as I have to fall in a dead faint--must get an effective
Curtain, you know!"

The HON. JULIAN KNIGHT BELFORD nodded his head,
and then ROSE MILLWARD WOODMERE fainted--with the desired result.

CHAPTER
III.--CACKLE V. 'OSSES. THE FAVOURITE WINS.

And now Sir JOHN and
his considerate circle had come to England, and were close to Liverpool.

"My
dear people," said HENRI, "never mind your love-making, never mind
your plot, leave it to AUGUSTE, and he will pull you through." It has left nothing behind that is of any value to us. It has transformed or sublimed
or lifted all up into the higher range of the life that we are living to-day, and contains
within itself a promise of the higher and the grander life that we reach forward to to-morrow.

I wish now, for a moment, to illustrate the working of this in regard to some of the institutions
of the world. If I had time, I could show you that the same law is apparent in the development
of the arts, sculpture, painting, poetry. I must pass them by, however. As illustrating what
I mean, let me take the one art of music. From the very beginning man has been interested in
making some sort of sounds which, I suppose, have been regarded as music by him. Most of those
that are associated with the barbaric man would be anything but music to us. The music, for
example, that they give in connection with a play in a Chinese theatre would not be acceptable
to the cultivated ear of Americans. We have left behind much that the world called music. We
have left behind any number of musical instruments. We do not now have those that the Psalmist
makes so much of, the old-time harp, the sackbut, the psaltery. I do not know, though you may,
what kind of instruments they were. The world has completely forgotten them, and left them
out of sight. And yet no musical note, no musical chord, no musical thought, no musical feeling,
has been forgotten or dropped along the advancing pathway of the world's progress; and in our
organs all the attempts at instruments of that kind from the beginning of the world are preserved,
transformed and glorified. In our magnificent orchestras all the first feeble beginnings are
developed until we have a conception of music to-day such as would have been utterly incomprehensible
to the primeval man. What I wish you to note is and this is the use of my illustration that
the advancing growth of the music of the world has forgotten nothing that it was worth while
to keep.

Let me give you one more illustration. Take it in the line of government. The first tribes
were governed by two forces, brute force and superstitious fear. These were the two things
that kept the primal tribes of the world in order, such order as was maintained in those far-off
times. The world has gone on developing different types of government, different types of social
order. I need not stop to outline them for you this morning: you know what they are; and I
only wish you to catch the thought I have in mind. I suppose that every time one of the old
types was about to pass away the adherents of that type have been in a panic lest anarchy was
threatening the world. Believers in these types have said that it was absolutely necessary
to keep them, in order to preserve social order. Take the attitude of the monarchy to-day,
for example, as towards the republic. When we attempted to establish our republic here in this
western world, it was freely said by the adherents of the old political idea in Europe that
it would of necessity be a failure, that there was no possibility of a stable human order without
a hierarchy of nobles with a king at the top; and I suppose they believed it. But we have proved
beyond question that we can have a strong government, an orderly government, without either
nobility or king. There is less government in the United States here to-day than in almost
any other country of the world, a nearer approach to what the philosopher would call anarchy.
Anarchy does not mean disorder, when a philosopher is talking: it means merely the absence
of external government. And that is the ideal that we are approaching.

Paul says, you know, that the law was made for wicked people, for the disobedient and the disorderly,
not for good people. How many people are there in New York to-day, for example, who are honest,
who pay their debts, who did not commit a burglary last night, who do not propose to be false
to wife and home, on account of the law, the existence of courts and police? The great majority
of the citizens of America to-day would go right on being honest and kind and loving and helpful,
whether there were any laws or not. They are not kept to these courses of conduct by the law.
They have learned that these are the fitting ways of life that these are the things for a man
to do; and they despise themselves if they are less than man. In other words, this governmental
order, which exists as an outside force, at last gets written in the heart and becomes a law
of life.

Now precisely the same process is going on in other departments of the world: it is going on
in religion. And now let me come to religion, and illustrate the working of the law here. The
old types of religious thought and life and practice, the first ones that the world knew, are
long since outgrown. We regard them as barbaric, as cruel.

We have learned that there are not a million gods of whom we need stand in awe. We have learned
that God is no partial God. We have learned that God does not want us, as universal man once
believed, to sacrifice the dearest object of our love. We have learned that he does not want
us to sacrifice our first-born child, as the old Hebrews used to, and the remains of which
custom are plainly visible throughout the Old Testament everywhere. We have left behind these
old types of religious thought and life; but the world has lost nothing in the process. The
world has not left religion behind. The whole process of growth and development in the sphere
of the religious life and the development of man has been one of outgrowing crude and partial
and inadequate thoughts and feelings about the universe and God and man and duty and destiny.

We do not care so much about ceremony as the world did once. The most civilized people in the
world are not so given to these things in their religious development. We do not care so much
about creed as they did a thousand or five hundred years ago. We do not believe that God is
going to judge us by our intellectual conceptions of him and of our fellow- men. And I suppose
it is true, always has been true as it is to-day, that the adherent of any particular form
or theory of the religious life has the feeling that, when that is threatened, religion is
threatened; and he defends it passionately, fights for it, perhaps bitterly, feels justified
in opposing, perhaps hating, those he regards as the enemies of God and his great and sacred
and religious hopes. And yet we know, as we study the past, whether we can quite appreciate
it as true in regard to the theories which I am voicing to-day, that the truth has never been
in any danger, and the highest and finest and sweetest things in the religious life have never
been in any danger, are not in any danger to-day.

Let me indicate in two or three directions. There has been a class of thinkers, which has done
a good deal of talking and writing in this direction, who are telling us that the poetry, the
romance, the wonder, the mystery, of the world  those things that tend to bring a man to his
knees and to lift his eyes in awe and reverence are passing away; that science is going to
explore everything; that there is going to be no more unknown; and that, when we have completed
this process, one of the great essentials of religious thought and feeling and life will have
perished from among men. I venture to say to you that there has never been a time in the history
of the world when there was so much of mystery, so much of wonder, so much of reverence, so
much of awe, as there is to-day. We are apt to fool ourselves in our thinking, and, when we
have observed a fact, and labelled it, to think we know it.

For example, here is this mysterious force that we call electricity, which is flashing such
light in our homes and through our streets as the world has never known before. The cars, loaded,
are speeding along our highways with no visible means of propulsion. We step up to a little
box, and put a shell to our ear, and speak and listen, and converse with a friend in Boston
or Chicago, recognizing the voice perfectly, as though this friend were by our side. We send
a message over a wire, under the deep, and talk to London and all round the globe; and we have
labelled this force electricity. And, instead of getting down on our knees in reverence, we
get impatient if our communication is delayed two minutes or three. We fool ourselves with
the thought that, because we have called it electricity, we know it, we have taken the mystery
out of the fact. Why, friends, do you know anything about electricity? Do you know what it
is? Do you know why it works as it does? I do not; and I do not know of anybody on the face
of the earth who does. The wonder of the "Arabian Nights" is cheap and tame and theatrical
compared to the wonder of this everyday workaday world of ours, in the midst of which and by
means of which we are carrying on our business and our daily avocations. The wonder of the
carpet that would carry the person through the air who sat upon it and wished is nothing compared
with the power of electricity, steam, any one of these invisible, intangible powers that are
thrilling through the world to-day. There never was so much room for mystery, for awe, for
poetry, for romance, as there is in the midst of our commercial life in this nineteenth century.

This element of religion, then, is in no danger. We know nothing ultimately. Who can tell me
what a particle of matter is? Who can tell me what a ray of light is, as it comes from a star?
Who can tell me how the movements in the particles of air striking my eye run up into nerve
and brain, and become translated into thought, into light, into form, into motion, into all
this wondrous universe that surrounds us on every hand?

Then take the element of trust. People used to think they could trust in their gods. Rebecca,
for example, stole her father's gods, and hid them in the trappings of her camel, and sat on
them. She thought, then, that she had a god near her who would care for her. The old Hebrew,
with an ox-team, carried his God, in a box that he called the ark, into battle, and supposed
that he had a very present help in time of need. But we have the eternal stability and order
of the universe, a God that never forgets, a God on whom we can lean, in whom we can trust,
who is not away off in heaven, but here, closer to us than the air we breathe, a God in whom
we live and move and have our being.

And has this evolution of the religious life of the world threatened the stability of truth?
There never was a time on earth when there was such a passion for truth as there is today.
What means all this intense activity of the scientific world? these men that devote their lives
to some little fraction of the universe which they study through their microscope, not for
pay, to find one little fragment of the truth of God; these critics that are rummaging the
dust-heaps of the ages in the hope that they may find one little, bright-glittering particle
of truth in the midst of the rubbish? There never was such a passion for truth as there is
here and now.

Are we going to lose the sense of righteousness which is the very heart of religion? There
never was a time since the world began when the average man cared so much for righteousness,
when he laid so much emphasis on human conduct, on kindness, on help, on all those things that
make this life of ours desirable and sweet. The ideal of character and behavior has risen step
by step from the beginning, and is higher to-day than it ever was before. Not because men fear
a whipping, not because they are threatened with hell in another world, not because a God of
vengeance is preached to them, because they have grown to see the beauty of righteousness,
because they know that obedience to the laws of God means health, means sanity, means peace,
means prosperity, means well-being, means all high and good and noble things. This righteousness
is not driven into one by blows from outside: it blossoms out from the intellect and the conscience
and the heart, as the recognized law of all fine and desirable and human living.

What are we losing, then, as the result of this growth of the world in accordance with the
law of evolution? Are we losing our hope of the future? The form of that hope is passing away.
We no longer believe in an underground world of the dead, as the Hebrews did. We no longer
believe in a heaven just above the blue, as Christendom has believed for so long. We no longer
believe in a heaven where all struggle and thought and study and growth are left out, where
there is to be only a monotonous enjoyment that would pall upon any living rational soul. The
form of it is passing away; but there never was a time when there was such a great and inspiring
hope, not simply for myself and my friends, not simply for my neighbors, not simply for my
particular church. There never was a time when there was such a great hope, including humanity
for this world and for the next, as that which inspires us now.

Nothing, then, in religion that is of any worth has the world forgotten or is it likely to
forget. All the old reverences and loves and trusts and inspirations and hopes and tendernesses
are here intermingled. They are in the highest and noblest people; and they are being carried
on and refined and purified and glorified as the world goes on.

And now let me suggest one thought more that may be of comfort to some. A great many people
have been accustomed to associate so much of their religion with the forms of their religious
expression that they fancy that the world's outgrowing these means that religion is being outgrown.
I said, you remember, when touching upon government as an illustration of the working of the
law of evolution, that governmental forms were being outgrown just as fast as the world was
becoming civilized. If this world ever becomes perfect, government will cease to be, in the
sense of these external forms, simply because there will be no need of it; just as you take
down a staging when you have completed a house. So I look forward to less and less care for
the external forms of the religious life. I believe they will remain, and they ought to remain,
just as long as they are any practical help to anybody; but, because a person ceases to need
them, you must not think that he has ceased to be religious. When the world gets to be perfectly
religious, there will be no need of any churches, there will be no need any more of preachers,
there will be no need of any of the external ceremony of religion.

You remember what the old seer says in the book of Revelation, as he looks forward to the perfect
condition of things. He is picturing that ideal city which he saw in his vision coming down
from God out of heaven. This was his poetical way of setting forth his idea of the perfected
condition of humanity; and he said, speaking of that city, "And I saw no temple therein, for
the Lord God was the temple of it."

The external forms pass away when the life needs them no more. Take, for example, the condition
of things when Jesus came to Jerusalem. You know how they put him to death. And what did they
put him to death for? They put him to death because he preached of a time when there would
be no need of any temple, no need of any priesthood, no need of any of the external things
that they regarded as essential to religious life. They thought he was blaspheming, they thought
he was an enemy of God and of his fellowmen, because he talked that way. He said to the woman
of Samaria, You think you must worship God on this mountain, Gerizim, and the Jews think they
must worship him on Mount Moriah; but God is spirit, and the time will come when you will not
care whether you are in this place or that, but will worship him in spirit and in truth.

You see it was just along these lines that Jesus was preaching and working in his day. So,
when humanity becomes perfected, external forms, that have helped mould and shape man into
his perfection, will be needed no more. They will fall off, pass away, and be forgotten; but
that will not mean that humanity has forgotten or left behind any great essential to the religious
life. It will mean simply that he has taken them up into his own heart, absorbed them into
his life. He naturally drops them when he is no longer in need of external supports.

This law of evolution, then, is simply the method of God's progress from the beginning, the
same method which was to be found in the lowest, the method which has lifted us to where we
are, the method which looks out with promise towards the better things which are to come.

The one life thrilled the star-dust through, In nebulous masses whirled, Until, globed like
a drop of dew, Shone out a new-made world. The one life on the ocean shore, Through primal
ooze and slime, Crept slowly on from less to more Along the ways of time. The one life in the
jungles old, From lowly creeping things, Did ever some new form unfold, Swift feet or soaring
wings. The one life all the ages through Pursued its wondrous plant Till, as the tree of promise
grew, It blossomed into man. The one life reacheth onward still; As yet no eye may see The
far-off fact, man's dream fulfill? The glory yet to be.

WHY ARE NOT ALL EDUCATED PEOPLE UNITARIANS?

THE religious opinions of the average person in any community do not count for much, if any
one is studying them with the endeavor to find out their bearing on what is true or what is
false. This is true not only of popular religious opinions, but of any other set of opinions
whatever; and for the simple reason that most people do not hold their opinions as the result
of any study, of any investigation, because they have seriously tried to find out what is true,
and have become convinced that this, and not that, represents the reality of things.

Let us note for a moment and I do this rather to clear the way than because I consider it of
any very great importance  how it is that the great majority of people come by the religious
opinions which they happen to hold. I suppose it is true in thousands of cases that a man or
a woman is in this church rather than that merely as the result of inheritance and childhood
training. People inherit their religious ideas. They are taught certain things in their childhood,
they have accepted them perhaps without any sort of question; and so they are where they happen
to be to-day. If you stop and think of it for just a moment, you will see that this may be
all right as a starting-point, but is not quite an adequate reason why we should hold permanently,
and throughout our lives, a particular set of ideas. If all of us were to accept opinions in
this sort of fashion, and never put them behind us or make any change, where would the growth
of the world be? How would it be possible for one generation to make a little advance on that
which preceded it, so that we could speak of the progress of mankind? Then, when persons do
make up their minds to change, to leave one church and go to another, it is not an uncommon
thing for them simply to select a particular place of worship or a special organization for
no better reason than that they happen to like it, to be attracted to it for some superficial
cause. How many people who do leave one church for another do it as the result of any earnest
study, or real endeavor to find the truth? And yet, if you will give the matter a moment's
serious consideration, you will see that we have no sort of right to choose one theory rather
than another, one set of ideas rather than another, because we happen to like one thing, and
not something else. Liking or disliking, a superficial preference or aversion, is an impertinence
when dealing with these great, high, and deep questions of God and the soul, of the true or
the false.

Then I have known a great many people in my life who went to a particular church for no better
reason than mere convenience. It was easily accessible, it was just around the corner, they
did not have to make any long journey, and did not have to put themselves out any to get up
a little earlier on Sunday morning, which they would otherwise need to do. A mere matter of
convenience! And this is so many times allowed to settle some great question of right or wrong.
Then you will find those who select a particular church or a particular church organization,
become identified with it, merely because on a casual visit to the place they were taken with
the minister, happened to like his appearance, his method of speaking, the way he presented
his ideas. Or perhaps they were attracted by the music. There are persons who decide these
great questions of God and truth and the soul for no more important a reason than the organization
and the capacity of the church choir.

It is not an uncommon thing for people to attend some particular church because it promises
to be socially advantageous to them. It is fashionable in a particular town. I have a friend,
I still call him friend, a Boston lawyer, who told me in conversation about this subject one
day that he deliberately went to the largest church he could find, and that, if in the particular
city in which he was residing the Roman Catholic Church was in the majority, he should attend
that. There are thousands of persons who wish to be in the swim, and who are diverted this
way or that by what seems to them socially profitable. Think of it, claiming to be followers
of the Nazarene, who was outcast, spit upon, treated with contempt, on whom the scribes and
Pharisees of his day looked down with bitterness and scorn, and who led the world for the sake
of his love for God out into a larger truth, who made himself of no reputation, claim to be
followers of him, and let a matter of fashion decide whether they will go this way or walk
in some other path I Think of the irony of a situation like that!

Then, again, there are those who attach themselves to some one church rather than to another
because, after looking over the ground, they made up their minds that it would be to their
business advantage. They will become associated with a set of people who can help them on in
the world. It is all very well, if there be no higher consideration, for a person to be governed
in his action by motives like these; but is it quite right to decide a question of truth or
falsehood, of God or duty, of the consecration of the human soul, of the service of one's fellow-
men, on the basis of supposed financial advantage? There is hardly a year goes by that persons
do not come to me, considering the question as to whether they will attend my church. I can
see in a few minutes' conversation with them that they have some purpose to gain. They wish
to be helped on in the prosecution of some scheme for their own advancement. If they succeed,
they are devout Unitarians and loyal followers of mine. If not, within a few weeks I hear of
them as devoted attendants somewhere else, where they have been able to make their personal
plans a success.

These are some of the reasons there are worthier ones than these which influence the crowd.
There are, I say, worthier ones. Let me hint one or two. I do not think it is any sacrilege,
or betrayal of confidence, for me to speak a name. The late Frances E. Willard, one of the
ablest, truest, most devoted women I have ever known, frankly confessed to me in personal conversation
that she was more in sympathy with my religious ideas than of those of the Church with which
she was connected, but her love, her tender love and reverence for her mother and the memory
of her mother's religion were such that she could not find it in her heart to break away. She
loved the services her mother loved, she loved the hymns her mother sung, she loved the associations
connected with her mother's life. All sweet, beautiful, noble; but, if nobody from the beginning
of the world had ever advanced beyond mothers' ideas where should we be to-day? Is it not,
after all, the truest reverence for mother, in the spirit of consecration she showed to follow
the truth as you see it to-day, as she followed it as she saw it yesterday?

So much to justify the statement I made, that the average popular belief on any subject is
not a reliable guide to a person who is earnestly desiring to find the simple truth.

Now let us come to the answer of the specific question which I have propounded. Why are not
all educated people Unitarians? I ask this question, not because I originated it, but because
it has been put to me, I suppose, a hundred times. People say, You claim to have studied these
matters very carefully, you have tried to find the truth, you think you have found it. You
have followed what you regard as the true method of search. If you have found the truth, and
if other people, using this same method and being as unbiased as you, could also find it, how
does it happen that Unitarians are in the minority? Why do not all persons who study and who
are educated accept the Unitarian faith? This question, I say, has been asked me a great many
times; and it is a question that deserves a fair, an earnest and sympathetic answer. Such an
answer I am now to try to give.

In the first place, let me make a few assertions. I have not time to prove them this morning;
but they are capable of proof. The advantage of a scientific statement is that, though you
do not stop to prove it, you know it can be proved any time, whenever a person chooses to take
the time or trouble. For example, if I state the truth of the Copernican system, or that the
earth revolves around the sun, and you challenge me to prove it in two minutes, I may not be
able to; it may take longer than that; but I know it can be demonstrated to-morrow or next
week or any time, because it has been demonstrated over and over again.

I wish now to assert the truth of certain fundamental principles; and these principles, you
note, are those which constitute the peculiarity of the Unitarian people as a body of theological
believers. For example, that this which is all around us and of which we are a part is a universe
is demonstrated beyond question. It is one, the unity of the universe. The unity of force,
the unity of substance or matter, the unity of law, the unity of life, the unity of humanity,
the unity of the fundamental principles of ethics, the unity of the religious life and aspiration
of the world, these, I say, are demonstrated. And do you not see that demonstrating these carries
along with it the unquestioned, the absolute demonstration of the unity of the power that is
in the universe and manifests itself through it? The unity of God? The Lord our God is one!
And this is no question of speculation, it is demonstrated truth. Now, as to any speculative
or metaphysical division of God's nature into three parts or personalities, there is not, and
there cannot be, in the nature of things, one slightest particle of proof. The unity is demonstrated:
anything else is incapable of demonstration.

Next, the Unitarian contention I say Unitarian, not because we originated it by any means,
but simply because we first and chiefly among religious bodies have accepted it as to the origin
and nature of man as science has unfolded it to us, thus precluding the possibility of the
truth of any doctrine of any fall. This is not speculation, it is not whim. It is not something
picked up by the way, that a man chooses because he likes it, and because he does not like
something else. This is demonstrated truth, as clearly and fully demonstrated as is the law
of gravity or the fact that water will freeze at a certain temperature. Then the question of
the Bible. The Unitarian position in regard to the origin, the method of composition, the authenticity
and the authority of Biblical books, is a commonplace of scholarship. There is no rational
question in regard to it any more. Next, the question of the origin and nature of Jesus the
Christ. The naturalness of his birth, the naturalness of his death, his pure humanity, are
made clearer and surer by every new step which investigation takes; and there is nothing in
the nature of proof that is conceivable in regard to any other theory. If any one chooses to
accept it, well; but nobody claims, or can claim, to prove it, to settle it, to demonstrate
it as true. It becomes an article of faith, a question of voluntary belief; but there is no
possibility of holding it in any other way. So as to the nature of salvation. It is a matter
of character; a man is saved when he is right. And that he cannot be saved in any other way
is demonstrable and demonstrated truth.

Now, these are the main principles which constitute the beliefs of Unitarians; and in any court
of reason they are able to make good their claim against any corner. And, if there be no other
motive at work except the one clear-eyed, simple desire to find the truth, there can be no
two opinions concerning any of them.

Why, then, are not all thoughtful, educated people Unitarians? Well may the listener ask, in
wonder, if the statements I have just been making are true. Now I propose to offer some suggestions,
showing what are some of the influences at work which determine belief, and which have very
little to do with the question as to whether the beliefs are capable of establishing themselves
as true or not.

In the first place, let us raise the question as to what is generally meant by education. We
assume that all educated people ought to agree on all great questions; and they ought, note
now what I am saying, they ought, if they are really and truly educated, and if with a clear
and single eye they are seeking simply the truth. But, in order to understand the situation,
we need to note a good many other things that enter into this matter of determining the religious
path in which people will walk. Now what do we mean by education? Popularly, if a man has been
to school, particularly if he is a college graduate, if he can read a little Latin and speak
French, and knows something of music, if he has graduated anywhere, he is spoken of as educated.
But is that a correct use of language? Are we sure that a man is educated merely because he
knows a lot of things or has been through a particular course of study? What does a human education
mean? Does it not mean the unfolding, the development of our faculties in such a way that in
the intellectual sphere we can come into contact with and possession of the reality of things,
the truth? Intellectually, is there any other object of education than to fit a man to find
the truth? And yet let me give you a case. Here is a man, I take it as an illustration simply,
not because I have anything particular against the Catholic Church any more than against any
other body of believers, who has been through a Catholic college, has made himself master of
Catholic doctrine, become familiar with theological and ecclesiastical literature; suppose
he knows all the languages, or a dozen of them, having them at his fingers' ends. Do you not
see that as a truth-seeker in a free world he may not be educated at all? He may be educated,
as we say, or trained is the better word, into acceptance of a certain system of traditional
thought, that can give no good reason for itself; for his prejudices, his loves and hates may
be called into play. He may be trained into the earnest conviction that it is his highest duty
to be loyal to a particular set of ideas.

Take the way I was educated. I grew up reading the denominational reviews, and the denominational
newspapers. I was taught that it was dangerous and wicked to doubt. I must not think freely:
that was the one thing I was not permitted to do. I went to a theological school, and had drilled
into me year after year that such beliefs, about God and man and Jesus and the Bible and the
future world, were unquestionably true, and that I must not look at anything that would throw
a doubt upon them. And I was sent out into the world graduated, not as a truth-seeker, but
to fight for my system, as a West Point graduate is taught that he must fight for his country
without asking any questions.

Do you not see that this, which goes under the name of education, instead of fitting a man
to find the truth, may distinctly and definitely unfit him, make it harder for him to find
any truth except that which is contained in the system which has been drilled into him from
his childhood up and year after year? Education, in order to fit a man to be a truth-seeker,
must be something different from this merely teaching a man a certain system, a certain set
of ideas, and drilling him into the belief that he must defend these ideas against all corners.

A good many people, then, who are called educated, are not educated at all. I have had this
question asked me repeatedly: If your position is true, here is a college graduate, and here
is another; and here is a minister of such a denomination, or a priest of the Catholic Church;
why do they not accept your ideas? Do you not see, however, that this so-called education may
stand squarely in the way?

Now, in the second place, I want to dwell a little on the difficulty of people's getting rid
of a theory which possesses their minds, and substituting for it another theory. And I wish
you to note that it is not a religious difficulty nor a theological difficulty nor a Baptist
difficulty nor a Presbyterian difficulty: it is a human difficulty. There is no body of people
on the face of the earth that is large enough to contain all the world's bigotry. It overflows
all fences and gets into all enclosures. Discussing the subject a little while ago, by correspondence
with a prominent scientific man in New England, I got from him the illustrations which I hold
in my hand, tending to set forth how difficult it is for scientific men themselves to get rid
of a theory which they have been working for and trying to prove, and substitute for it another
theory. I imagine that there may be a physiological basis for the difficulty. I suggest it,
at any rate. We say that the mind tends to run in grooves of thought. That means, I suppose,
that there is something in the molecular movements of the brain that comes to correspond to
a well-trodden pathway. It is easy to walk that path, and it is not easy to get out of it.
Let it rain on the top of a hill; and, if you watch the water, you will see that it seeks little
grooves that have been worn there by the falling of past rains, and that the little streams
obey the scientific law and follow the lines of least resistance. There comes a big shower,
a heavy downfall; and perhaps it will wash away the surface and change the beds of these old
watercourses, create new ones. So, then, when there comes a deluge of new truth, it washes
away the ruts along which people have been accustomed to think; and they are able to reconstruct
their theories. Now let me give you some of these scientific illustrations. First, that heat
is a mode of motion was proved by Sir Humphry Davy and Count Rumford before 1820. In 1842 Joule,
of Manchester, England, proved the quantitative relation between mechanical energy and heat.
In 1863 note the dates  Tyndall gave a course of lectures on heat as a mode of motion, and
was even then sneered at by some scientific men for his temerity. Tait, of Glasgow, was particularly
obstreperous. To-day nobody questions it; and we go back to Sir Humphry Davy and Count Rumford
for our proofs, too. It was proved scientifically proved then; but it took the world all these
years, even the scientific world, to get rid of its prejudices in favor of some other theory,
and see the force of the proof.

Now, in the second place, it was held originally that light was a series of corpuscles that
flew off from a heated surface; but Thomas Young, about the year 1804, demonstrated the present
accepted theory of light. But it was fought for years. Only after a long time did the scientific
world give up its prejudice in favor of the theory that was propounded by Newton. But to-day
we go back to Young, and see that he demonstrated it beyond question.

In the third place, take another fact. Between 1830 and 1845 Faraday worked out a theory of
electrical and magnetic phenomena. It was proved to be correct. Maxwell, a famous chemist in
London, looked over the matter, and persuaded himself that Faraday was right; but nobody paid
much attention to either of them; until after a while the scientific world, through the work
of its younger men, those least wedded to the old-time beliefs, conceded that it must be true.

The Nebular Theory was proved and worked out by Kant more than a hundred and thirty years ago.
In 1799 Laplace worked it out again; but it was a long time before it was accepted. And now
we go back to Kant and Laplace for our demonstration.

Darwin's "Origin of Species" was published in 1859. But it was attacked by scientists as well
as theologians on every hand. Huxley even looked at it with a good deal of hesitancy before
he accepted it. To-day, however, everybody goes back to the "Origin of Species," and finds
the whole thing there, demonstration and all.

Lyell published a book on the antiquity of man in 1863. It was twenty- five years before all
the scientific men of the world were ready to give up the idea that man had been on the earth
more than six or eight thousand years.

So we find that it is not theologians only; it is scientists, too, that find it difficult to
accept new ideas. I know scientific men among my personal friends who are simply incapable
of being hospitable to an idea that would compel them to reconstruct a theory that they have
already accepted. Why are not all educated men Unitarians? Why do not scientific men accept
demonstrated truth when it is first demonstrated as truth? It puts them to too much trouble.
It touches their pride. They do not like to feel that they have thrown away half their lives
following an hypothesis that is not capable of being substantiated.

Then, in the third place, there are men, and educated men as the world goes, who deliberately
decline to study new truth; and they are men in the scientific field and in the religious field.
They purposely refuse to look at anything which would tend to disturb their present accepted
belief. In my boyhood I used to hear Dr. John O. Fiske, a famous preacher in Maine. He told
a friend of mine, in his old age, that he simply refused to read any book that would tend to
disturb his beliefs. Professor William G. T. Shedd, one of the most distinguished theologians
of this country, a leading Presbyterian divine, published so I am not slandering him by saying
it a statement that he did not consider any book written since the seventeenth century worth
his reading. And yet we have a new world since the seventeenth century, a new revelation of
God and of man. To follow the teaching of the seventeenth century would be to go wrong in almost
every conceivable direction. What is the use of paying any attention to the theological or
religious opinions of a man who avows an attitude like that?

Faraday, to come now to a scientific illustration, so that you will not think I am too hard
on theologians, Faraday belonged to one of the most orthodox sects in England; and he used
to say deliberately that he kept his religion and his science apart. He says, "When I go into
my closet, I lock the door of my laboratory; and, when I go into my laboratory, I lock the
door of my closet." He did very wisely to keep them apart; for, if they had got together, there
would certainly have been an explosion.

Another scientific illustration is Agassiz. Agassiz unconsciously wrought out and developed
some of the most wondrous and beautiful proofs of evolution that the world has ever known;
and yet he fought evolution to the last day of his life, simply because he had accepted the
other theory. And he got it into his head that there was something about evolution that tended
to injure religion and degrade man, not a rational objection, not a scientific objection, but
a feeling, a prejudice.

There is another class of people that I must refer to. Institutions and organizations come
into being, created, in the first place, as the embodiment and expression of new and grand
truths; and after a Arile their momentum becomes such that the persons who are connected with
them cannot control their movements, and these persons become victims of the organizations
and institutions to which they belong. So, when a new truth appears, the old organization rolls
on like a Juggernaut car, and crushes the life, so far as it is possible, out of everything
in its way. Take, for example, and note what a power it is and what an unconscious bribe it
is to those who belong to it, the great Anglican Church. A man's ambitions, if he has learning,
power, ability, tell him that there is the Archbishopric of Canterbury ahead of him as a possibility.
His hopes, the chances of promotion and power, are with the institution. And, then, it is such
a tremendous social influence. It is no wonder, then, that men who are not over-strong, who
have not the stuff in them out of which heroes are made, should cling to the institution and
remain loyal to it, even while they are false to the truth that used to animate it and for
which alone any institution ought to exist.

Let me give you another illustration. Edward Temple, late Bishop of London, and who is now
the Archbishop of Canterbury, had a priest of the established Church come to him and make a
confession of holding certain beliefs which he knew were heretical. The archbishop said to
him frankly: As Edward Temple, I believe them, I am in sympathy with your views. As the head
of the English Church, I must be opposed to them; and the opinions which you hold cannot be
tolerated. That is what the influence of a great organization may come to.

Let me give you another concrete illustration. Here is our American Bible Society, which publishes
and circulates millions of Bibles all over the world. It is obliged, as at present organized,
to print and distribute the King James version of the Bible; but there is not a scholar or
a minister connected with the organization anywhere who does not know at least, since the revision
at any rate that in many important respects the King James version is not an accurate translation
of the original, even if that is conceded to be infallible. So that this organization stands
to-day in the position of being obliged to circulate all over the world for God's truth any
number of teachings that are simply blunders of the translator, of the copyist, or interpolated
passages that have come down from the past.

So men in every direction become persuaded that they must be loyal to the organization. I know
cases where a minister in conversation with a friend has said: So long as I remain a member
of this Church, I have got a great institution back of me, and I can accomplish so much socially
and in every way on account of it. I know I do not believe half of the creed, but any number
of other ministers are in the same box. And so they stay true to the organization, while truth
to the truth is sacrificed.

One other influence that keeps so many of these old ideas alive or prolongs their existence
beyond the natural term  is right in here. Any number of men, educated, strong, prominent men,
give their countenance and influence to the support of old-time religious organizations because
they believe that somehow or other they are serviceable as a police force in the world, they
keep people quiet, they help preserve social order. I have had people over and over again say
that they believed it would be a great calamity to disturb the Roman Catholic Church, because
it keeps so many people quiet. Do you know, friends, I regard this as the worst infidelity
that I know of on the face of the earth. It is doubt of God, his ability to lead and manage
his world without cheating it. It is doubt of truth, as to whether it is safe for anybody except
very wise people, like a few of us! It is doubt of humanity, its capacity to find the truth,
and believe in it and live on it. Do you believe that God has made this universe so that it
is healthier for the masses to live on a lie than it is for them to live on the truth? Is that
your confidence in God? Is that the kind of God you worship? It is not the kind I worship.
There is no danger of the ignorant masses of the world getting wise too fast, judging by the
experience of the past up to the present time. There is only one thing that is safe; and that
is truth. Do you know what the trouble was at the time of the French Revolution? It was not
that the people began to reason and think, and lost their faith, as so frequently said by superficial
historians: it was that they waked up at last to the idea that the aristocracy and the priesthood
had not only been fleecing them financially and keeping them down socially, but had been fooling
them religiously, until at last they broke away, having no confidence left in God or priest
or educated people or nobility or anything. No wonder they made havoc. If you want to make
a river dangerous, dam it up, keep the waters back, until by and by the pressure from the hills
and the mountains becomes so great that it can be restricted no longer; and it not only breaks
through the dam, but bursts all barriers, floods the country, sweeps away homes, farms, cattle,
human beings, towns, cities, leaving ruin in its path. Let rivers flow as God meant them to;
and they will be safe.

So let the world learn,-- learn gradually, and adapt itself to new truth as it learns, and
there will be an even and orderly march of human progress. The danger is in our setting ourselves
up as being wiser than God, wiser than the universe, and doling out to the multitude the little
fragments of truth that we think are fitted for their digestion. The impertinence of it, and
the impiety of it!

I must not stop to deal with other reasons which lie in my mind this morning. You can think
along other channels for yourselves. I have simply wished to suggest that, in the kind of world
we are living in, you may not be sure, at any particular age in history, that a set of ideas
is going to be accepted by the multitude merely because they are true; and, because they are
not accepted at once, you are not, therefore, to come to the conclusion that they are not true.
There never has been a time in the history of the world when the truth was not in the minority.
Go back to the time of Jesus: do you not remember how the people asked whether any of the scribes
or the Pharisees believed on him? They were ready to accept him if they could go with the crowd;
but it never occurred to them to raise the question as to whether it was their duty to go with
him while he was alone, as to whether two or three might not represent some higher conception
of God, some forward step on the part of humanity. Consider for just a moment, let it be in
literature, in art, in government, in ethics, anywhere, find out where the crowd is, and you
will find where the truth is not. Disraeli made a very profound remark when he said that a
popular opinion was always the opinion which was about to pass away. By the time a notion gets
accepted by the crowd, the deeper students are seeing some higher and finer truth towards which
they are reaching.

The pioneers are always in the minority. The vanguard of an army is never so large as the main
body that comes along behind after the way has been laid out for it.

"Then to side with Truth is noble when we share her wretched crust."

That is Lowell's suggestion, in that famous poem of his. If we care for truth, we shall not
wait until it becomes popular. The truth in any direction to-day, if we had the judgment of
the world, would be voted down. Christianity would be voted down among the religions; Protestantism
would be voted down in Christianity; and the highest and finest thinkers in the Protestant
churches would be voted down by the majority of the members.

Do not be disturbed, then, or troubled, because you have not the crowd and the shouting accompanying
you on your onward march; and remember that there must be something of heroism in this consecration
to truth. I wish to quote to you, as bearing on this truth, a wonderfully fine word which I
have just come across in a recent number of the Cosmopolitan Magazine, the word of the Hon.
Thomas B. Reed, the Speaker of the House of Representatives. He says, "One with God may be
a majority; but crucifixion and the fagot may antedate the counting of the votes." But, if
it means crucifixion and the fagot, and we claim to be followers of the Nazarene and worthy
of him, even for that we shall not shrink. It is our business simply to raise the question,
and try to answer it or ourselves, Which way must I go to follow the truth? And that way I
must tread, whether it means life or death, whatever the consequences; for the truth-seeker
is the only God-seeker.

WHERE IS THE EVANGELICAL CHURCH?

As you are aware, there are certain churches that have taken the name of Evangelical, thereby,
of course, putting forth the claim that in some special or peculiar way they have the gospel
in keeping. For "Evangel" is the word translated "gospel," "Evangelist" is a "preacher of the
gospel," "Evangelical" is the appropriate name for the church whose ministers preach the gospel.
And the word "gospel," as you know, translated, means good news. It is the proclamation of
hope, of something that the world has been groping in darkness for, a message that should lift
the burden off the human heart, make men stronger to endure, fill them with cheer in the midst
of life's difficulties and dangers, and give them a trust with which to walk out into the darkness
that lies at the end.

A certain section, I say, of the Christian Church has appropriated this name; and by common
consent it has been conceded to it. And as usage makes language, and the dictionaries only
record the results of popular usage, why, of course, we must confess that this use of words
is right. Right in that sense, I say. But I wish to go back of this popular usage this morning,
and raise the question as to whether these churches that claim the title are the ones to whom
it peculiarly or exclusively belongs. I wish to put forward the claim that we, though the idea
is entirely against popular thought, are really the ones who are preaching the gospel of God,
and that the liberals of the world come nearer today to proclaiming the actual original gospel
of Jesus the Christ than do any other body of Christians in the world. I wish to do this, not
in any spirit of antagonism, but simply by way of clear definition, and that we may understand
where we are, and may unfalteringly and trustingly and loyally and hopefully go on to do the
highest work that was ever committed to human hands.

At the outset, though it will necessitate my saying certain things which I have said to you
before, I must outline briefly that body of doctrine which goes by the name of "Evangelical."
I will not go back two or three hundred years to include in it such dogmas as Foreordination,
Election, the Damnation of non-Elect or non-Baptized Infants, though these doctrines still
remain in the creeds. The first plan had been to murder the consuls of the year before, and
seize the government. It had failed through his own impatience. He now hired assassins against
Cicero, choosing the opportunity of the election of the incoming consuls, which always took place some
time before their entrance on office. But the plot was discovered, and the election was put off.
When it did take place, Cicero appeared in the meeting, wearing somewhat ostentatiously a corslet
of bright steel, to show that he knew his danger; and Catiline's partisans found the place of
meeting already occupied by a strong force of the younger citizens of the middle class, who had armed
themselves for the consul's protection. The election passed off quietly, and Catiline was again
rejected. A second time he tried assassination, and it failed--so watchful and well informed
was the intended victim. And now Cicero, perhaps, was roused to a consciousness that one or other
must fall; for in the unusually determined measures which he took in the suppression of the
conspiracy, the mixture of personal alarm with patriotic indignation is very perceptible. By a
fortunate chance, the whole plan of the conspirators was betrayed. Rebel camps had been formed
not only in Italy, but in Spain and Mauritania: Rome was to be set on fire, the slaves to be
armed, criminals let loose, the friends of order to be put out of the way. The consul called a
meeting of the senate in the temple of Jupiter Stator, a strong position on the Palatine Hill,
and denounced the plot in all its details, naming even the very day fixed for the outbreak. The
arch-conspirator had the audacity to be present, and Cicero addressed him personally in the
eloquent invective which has come to us as his "First Oration against Catiline". His object
was to drive his enemy from the city to the camp of his partisans, and thus to bring matters at
once to a crisis for which he now felt himself prepared.

This daily state of public insecurity and personal danger had lasted too long, he said:

"Therefore, let these conspirators at once take their side; let them separate themselves from
honest citizens, and gather themselves together somewhere else; let them put a wall between us,
as I have often said. Let us have them no longer thus plotting the assassination of a consul
in his own house, overawing our courts of justice with armed bands, besieging the senate-house
with drawn swords, collecting their incendiary stores to burn our
city.

Let us at last be able to read plainly in every Roman's face whether he be loyal to his country
or no. I may promise you this, gentlemen of the Senate--there shall be no lack of diligence
on the part of your consuls; there will be, I trust, no lack of dignity and firmness on your own,
of spirit amongst the Roman knights, of unanimity amongst all honest
men, but that when Catiline has once gone from us, everything will
be not only discovered and brought into the light of day, but also
crushed,--ay, and punished.

Under such auspices, I bid you, Catiline. go forth to wage your impious and unhallowed war.--go,
to the salvation of the state, to your own overthrow and destruction, to the ruin of all who
have joined you in your great wickedness and treason. And thou, great Jupiter, whose worship
Romulus founded here coeval with our city;--whom we call truly the 'Stay'[1] of our capital and our empire;
thou wilt protect thine own altars and the temples of thy kindred gods, the walls and roof-trees
of our homes, the lives and fortunes of our citizens, from yon man
and his accomplices.

These enemies of all good men, invaders of their country, plunderers of Italy, linked together
in a mutual bond of crime and an alliance of villany, thou wilt surely, visit with an everlasting
punishment, living and dead'".

[Footnote 1: 'Stator'.]

Catiline's courage did not fail him. He had been sitting alone--for, all the other senators had
shrunk away from the bench of which he had taken possession. He rose, and in reply to Cicero,
in a forced tone of humility protested his innocence. He tried also another point. Was he,--a
man of ancient and noble family;--to be hastily condemned by his fellow-nobles on the word of
this 'foreigner', as he contemptuously called Cicero--this parvenu
from Arpinum? Everlasting Damnation eliminated, Foreordination not referred to, the Trinity transformed,
Infallibility no longer insisted on, the humanity of Jesus granted, to be orthodox, according
to Dr. Abbott, has become a comparatively simple thing.

In my conversations with clergymen of other churches during the past winter I have discovered
that there, too, among certain men, the conditions of being orthodox are a great deal simpler
than they were a hundred years ago. An Episcopalian tells me it is only necessary to accept
the Nicene and the Apostles' Creeds, and that even then one is at liberty to interpret them
as he pleases; that this is what constitutes Orthodoxy and makes one evangelical.

But this process of eliminating the hard doctrines has not gone on in any authoritative way
on the part of the Church itself. There has been no proclamation of any such liberty allowed;
and I am not aware that the most of these men have made any public statement in their own churches
of these positions. It may be known through personal conversations that they hold these views;
and, if they are rendering good service, they may not be disturbed by the church authorities
in their positions.

So much, then, for a statement as to what constitutes the Evangelical Church, as to what must
be the message of the minister who is to preach "the gospel of Christ."

Now I wish to call your attention for a moment to another way of looking at these doctrines.
I am not to question their truth. I simply wish to ask you to note as to whether, considering
them true, we should be inclined to speak of them as good news. Are they a gospel? Can we with
gladness proclaim them to men? For example, suppose God, after creating the world, loses control
of it, an evil power comes in, his enemy, takes possession of his fair earth, alienates from
him the hearts of the only two of his children who are in existence here, and who are to be
the parents of a countless race. Suppose that is true. Is it something we would like to believe?
Is it good news? Can we call it an integral part of a gospel?

Suppose, again, that God writes a book, an infallible book, and gives it to whom? To a few
people, to the little company of Jews who lived on that little narrow strip of land on the
eastern shore of the Mediterranean. He does not give it to anybody else. He has given, indeed,
according to this theory, the Old Testament and the New to Christendom since that day. But
think a moment.

According to what we know to be true now, man was on this planet for two or three hundred thousand
years before God revealed himself at all; and the race went stumbling on and falling in darkness,
no light, no hand stretched out to help, no voice speaking out of the silent heavens, the world,
apparently, absolutely forgotten, so far as God's truth was concerned. Suppose that, after
two or three hundred thousand years, God did give an infallible book to the world. As I had
occasion to say a moment ago, comparatively a very small part of his children have heard anything
about it. And, then, what is very striking, the proofs of its having come from him are so weak
that most of the wisest, the best, the noblest of the world, cannot accept any such claim on
its behalf. Is this, if it be true, good news? Would we speak of it as a gospel, something
of which to be glad, something to proclaim to mankind as a cheer, a message from on high?

Once more, suppose, after the world had been in existence for two or three hundred thousand
years, God comes down, incarnates himself, wears a human body, and does what he can to save
men. If it is true, in the economy of the divine government, that human souls could be saved
in no other way, is that good news? Would we think of it as a gospel to proclaim to mankind,
that God himself must suffer, must be outcast, be spit upon, be reviled, be put to death, and
that only so could he forgive one of his wandering children, and bring him back to himself?

Then, once more, suppose all this to be true, and suppose that, as the outcome of it all, the
countless millions of men and women and children that have walked the earth during the last
three hundred thousand years, until the Jews received their first light from heaven, suppose
that they have been lost: that is a part of this gospel. Suppose that since that time all the
nations outside of Christendom have been lost: that is a part of this gospel. Suppose that
not only this be true, but that all people in Christendom who have not been members of churches
have been lost. Suppose even, as I used to hear it preached when I was a boy, that large numbers
of those who were church members were not really children of God, and would be lost. Suppose
this most horrible doctrine be true. Is it good news? Could we proclaim it with any heart of
courage as a part of the gospel of God?

It seems to me, then, that I am bringing no railing accusation when I say that those Churches
that claim to be Evangelical are not proclaiming a gospel to the world. But, though this be
literally true, they may claim that they are delivering the message of Jesus the Christ, and
that, from their point of view, this is relatively a piece of good news, good news, at any
rate, to the few who are going to be saved. So I ask you now to turn, while I examine with
you for a few moments the essence of the gospel which Jesus proclaimed. Note its terms. Was
this the essential thing in the gospel of Christ?

Let me ask you now to look with me for a few moments. You are perfectly well aware of the fact
that the Jews cherished a belief in the coming of a Messiah and the establishment of God's
kingdom here on earth and among men. You are not so well aware, perhaps, unless you have made
a study of it, that a belief like this has not been confined to the Jews. In many other nations
a similar expectation has been cherished. We find it, for example, among some of the tribes
of our North American Indians. It is world-wide, in other words, in its range. It is no peculiarity
of the Jews. But let us confine ourselves a moment to their particular hope. It is a perfectly
natural belief. It required no revelation in order for it to grow up. They believed that the
God of the world, of the universe, was their God; that they were his chosen people. Do you
not see what a necessary corollary would be a belief in their ultimate prosperity and triumph?
God would certainly bless and give the kingdom to that people which he had specially selected
for his own. And so, as the coming of the kingdom was postponed, they believed that it was
because they had not complied with the divine conditions, they had not kept the law or they
had not been good, they had not obeyed him. Somehow, they had done wrong; and that was the
reason the kingdom so long delayed.

Remember another thing. We have come, in this modern time, to place the kingdom away off in
another world after the close of this life. The Jews had no such belief about it. They expected
it to come right here on this poor little planet of ours; and they expected that a kingdom
was to be set up which was not only to place them at the head of humanity, but through them
was to bless all mankind. Different thinkers among them held different views, but this in substance
was the belief; and they were constantly looking for signs of this imminent revolution which
was to make the kingdoms of this world the kingdoms of our God and of his Christ, that is,
his Anointed One.

John the Baptist preached that this kingdom was coming. But he was imprisoned and beheaded,
having come into conflict with the civil authority. Jesus, then, having come from Nazareth,
where he had studied and thought and brooded over the divine will, takes up this broken work
of John, and begins a proclamation of the gospel; and the one thing which constituted that
gospel was: The kingdom of God is at hand, repent and believe; accept this statement. He landed
at Brundusium on his daughter's birthday. She had only just lost her husband Piso, who had gallantly
maintained her father's cause throughout, but she was the first to welcome him with tears of
joy which overmastered her sorrow. He was careful to lose no chance of making his return impressive.
He took his way to Rome with the slow march of a conqueror.

The journey which Horace made easily in twelve days, occupied Cicero twenty-four. But he chose
not the shortest but the most public route, through Naples, Capua, Minturnae, Terracina, and Aricia.

Let
him tell the story of his own reception. If he tells it (as he does more than once) with an
undisguised pride, it is a pride with which it is impossible not to sympathise.


The kingdom, then, that Jesus preached was a kingdom of righteousness here on this earth, among
just the kind of people that we are. And, note, he said, This kingdom of God does not come
by observation. You are not to say, Lo here, Lo there, look for wonders. He says, The kingdom
of God is within you, or among you. It is translated both ways; and, I suppose, nobody knows
which way it ought to be. I believe both. The kingdom of God that Jesus preached is essentially
in us. It is also, after it is in a few of us, among us, right here already, so far as it extends,
and reaching out its limits and growing as rapidly as men discern it and become obedient to
its laws.

Now I have been asked a great many times how I can be sure, or practically sure, as to what
sayings in the Gospels are really those of Jesus and what are traditional in their authority,
what are doubtfully his. I cannot go into a long explanation this morning; but I want to suggest
one line of thought. And I do this because I wish it to be the basis of a statement that Jesus
has not made any of these things that are to-day labelled "Evangelical" any essential part
of his gospel at all. Jesus, for example, does not preach any Garden of Eden or any Fall of
Man. Jesus says nothing about any infallible book. Jesus says not a word about any Trinity.
He nowhere makes any claim to be God. His doctrine concerning the future is doubtful. He had surrounded
himself with guards; had obtained authority from the Senate to carry out all decrees and orders
left by the late Dictator; and when he could not find, amongst Caesar's memoranda, materials to
serve his purpose, he did not hesitate to forge them. Cicero had no power, and might be in
personal danger, for Antony knew his sentiments as to state matters generally, and more particularly
towards himself. Rome was no longer any place for him, and he soon
left it--this time a voluntary exile.

I am perfectly well aware that somebody may quote to me, "He that believeth and is baptized
shall be saved; and he that believeth not shall be damned." But the reply to that would be,
The acknowledged statement to-day on the part of all competent scholars is that Jesus never
uttered those words. They are left out of the Revised Version of the New Testament: they are
no authentic part of the story of his life or his teaching.

