Many, we believe, were the gains that rewarded the arboreal apprenticeship of man's ancestors.
Many, likewise, were the results of leaving the trees and coming down to the solid earth--a
transition which marked the emergence of more than tentative men. What great steps followed?

Some of the greatest were--the working out of a spoken language and of external methods of
registration; the invention of tools; the discovery of the use of fire; the utilisation of
iron and other metals; the taming of wild animals such as dog and sheep, horses and cattle;
the cultivation of wild plants such as wheat and rice; and the irrigation of fields. All through
the ages necessity has been the mother of invention and curiosity its father; but perhaps we
miss the heart of the matter if we forget the importance of some leisure time--wherein to observe
and think. If our earth had been so clouded that the stars were hidden from men's eyes the
whole history of our race would have been different. Rose turned the pages of her book. Her father and
Nan continued their conference in low tones in the adjoining room.

"You promise--don't you--that you won't ever do foolish things like that any more," and Fred
put out his hand half in farewell, half as though the clasp he invited would mean a pledge.

"Please
forget it. I'll probably never have another chance. That was the kind of thing you do only
once; there wouldn't be any fun in doing it over again."

"Your father has been mighty nice to me: I wanted to tell him I appreciated it. I felt I'd like
to say that to him on Christmas--just a kind of sentimental feeling
about it.

But you please say it for me. He'll understand; I couldn't say it before the others."

She responded passively: there were a good many things that she must say to her father!

Kirkwood and Nan reappeared as they heard Fred saying good-bye to Rose.

Nan said she and her sister must be going, too, as they had some calls
to make.

At the door Nan kissed Phil, and asked her to come to see her the next day. The kiss and this
special invitation, half-whispered, confirmed Phil's belief that her father and Nan would
have told her of their engagement if Fred's coming had not interfered. She was glad for the delay,
and yet it would have been easier in many ways to have met the issue squarely before Nan and
Rose. She and her father watched Fred and the women pass from sight toward town.

"He seems to be a nice fellow," remarked Kirkwood, as they returned to the living-room--"a clean,
manly sort of chap."

"He's all that," replied Phil. "He came to thank you for something: he's too shy to talk much
in company and he asked me to tell you how much he appreciated something or other you had
done for him."

"Queer chap, for a Holton," Kirkwood observed, striking a match on
the underside of the slate mantel-shelf.

 "There's a real nobility in that
 boy. He didn't tell you what
 he wanted to speak to me about? That's
 better yet. I imagine his brother isn't
 so shy about publishing his good
 works before men."
 
 Kirkwood's eyes sought the roses. The "attentions" Phil
 was receiving had roused in him the mixed
 bewilderment and awe with which a father realizes that he has on
 his hands a daughter upon whom other men have begun to look covetously.

Half a dozen young fellows were dancing attendance upon Phil.

In the hotel and at the theater in Indianapolis men and women had
paid her the tribute of a second glance, and Mrs. Fitch had been enthusiastic
about her.

His tolerant spirit had not visited upon the young Holtons the sins
of their uncle.

Charles's devotion to Phil had rather amused him; he had taken it as an oblique compliment to
himself, assuming that it was due to anxiety on Charles's part to ingratiate himself with Phil's
father quite as much as with Phil.

"I suppose what Fred meant was a little matter between us in the traction business. You know
that farm he settled on next to Amzi's? He's turned it over to me."

"You mean he doesn't own it any more?" asked Phil.

"Strictly speaking, no. In the general Holton mess he thought he ought to surrender the property.
Rather quixotic, but creditable to the boy. You see Charlie was executor of their father's estate.
Charlie's beyond doubt a very smooth young person. And no end plausible. He got Fred to take
that farm in settlement of all claims against Samuel's estate. And when Fred found out there was trouble
over his father's financiering of the Sycamore he hopped on the trolley and came to the city and turned
over the farm to me as trustee. He seemed no end grateful to me for allowing him to do it."

"But
you didn't let him--it isn't fair! Why the farm's no good anyhow! And besides, Charlie wouldn't
have done Fred an injury.

He talked to me the other day at his aunt's skating-party about all that traction business and
I'm sure he never meant any harm. He couldn't help what his father did. But to take Fred's farm
away--why, daddy, that would be the supreme grand limite!"

Kirkwood laughed and pinched her chin.

"What a terrible young person you are! You seem to forget that I'm not the Holtons' attorney. I'm
hired by the poor innocents who bought Sam Holton's bonds, and it's my business to get all the money
for them I can. Charles's tricks with his father's estate only figure incidentally, but they
have a dark look. It's merely a case of the sins of the parents being visited upon the children--"

He
had been speaking half-carelessly, not really heeding what he said, and he arrested himself
with an impatient shrug of the shoulders. The visitation of a parent's sins upon children was
not a subject for discussion in that household, as Phil realized
with a poignancy born of her morning's adventure.

Kirkwood was instantly contrite as he saw tears in Phil's eyes.

He would not for worlds have wounded her. It was impossible for him to know how in her new sensitiveness
this careless speech, which a day earlier would have passed unheeded, aroused all her instincts of
defense. She was half-aware of the irony by which their talk about the nephews of Jack Holton
had carried them with so fateful a directness to her mother.

Kirkwood frowned. His former wife was of all subjects the most ungrateful on this Christmas day. The
old wounds had healed absolutely and the scars even had vanished in his new hope and happiness.
He did not mean to have his day spoiled. He crossed the room to the window where Phil stood pulling
idly at a withered geranium leaf. He drew her round and kissed her.

"Forgive me, dear old Phil! I wouldn't hurt you for ten thousand kingdoms. And I didn't mean
that. I don't think it; moreover, I don't believe in that philosophy."

His contrition was unmistakedly sincere; yet she knew that if he had not obliterated the thought
of her mother from his mind he would not have let slip that reference to parental sins. His forgetfulness
was worse than the offense itself.

She experienced a sensation, new in all their intercourse, of wanting to hurt him. This was, in all
kindness and charity, the instant for announcing her mother's return;
and yet before making that disclosure Phil meant to force him to tell
her in so many words that he was engaged to marry Nan.

This was the most astonishing of all Phil's crowding experiences of the day, that she harbored
with cruel satisfaction the thought of inflicting pain upon her father--her old comrade, with
whom she had so joyfully camped and tramped and lived so many happy days in this little house,
where now for the first time shadows danced malevolently.

"I wanted this to be a happy day, Phil. What do we care about the Holtons or Sycamore Traction!
Charlie and Fred are all right, and I must say that I've been a good
deal pleased by the attitude of both the young fellows.

But I have something to tell you; something you've been prepared for for a long time in that wise, old
head of yours. It's made me the happiest man in the world; and I hope it will make you almost as
happy. And I believe it's for your good; that it's going to be a great big factor in working
out all your problems and mine! Come now, forgive me, and tell me whether you want three guesses
as to what it is!"

He rested the tips of his fingers on her shoulders, standing off and
looking at her with all the old fondness in his eyes.

He had spoken buoyantly; his manner was that of a young man about to confide a love affair to a
sympathetic sister.

Phil slipped from under his hands and stood rigid, with her back against the geranium box. She
swallowed a sob and lifted her head to meet the blow. He would not have it thus, but caught her hands
and swung them in a tight clasp.

"It's Nan, Phil, dear: Nan's promised to marry me! She's been saying she never would. It was
only last night she agreed to take this poor old wreck and try to make a man of me. We meant to tell
you to-day if Fred Holton hadn't come in, and then the girls had to run. But nobody is to know for
a month yet; we mean to be married at Easter. That last point we fixed up just now in the
library. You see what a lot of things can happen right here in dear old Montgomery within twenty-four
hours."

He waited for one of her characteristic Philesque outbursts--one of the tumultuous mussings with
which she celebrated her happy surprises. Nothing was needed to complete his joy but Phil's
approval, about which he had never had the slightest question. In his last talk with Nan on
Christmas Eve they had discussed Phil and the effect of their marriage
upon her rather more than upon themselves.

And he had now exhausted himself upon the announcement; there was
nothing more that he could say.

Phil's hands were cold in his, and with an almost imperceptible pressure
she was thrusting him away from her.

Two great tears welled in her eyes and stole down her cheeks.

"Why, Phil! I thought you--you of all people in the world--"

"Mamma has come back!" said Phil colorlessly; and repeated, "mamma has come back. She is at
Uncle Amy's, and I have seen her."

There was silence for a little space while he stared at her. Their eyes met in a long gaze. He grew
suddenly white and she felt the trembling of his hands.

"O God, no!" he said hoarsely. "You don't mean that, Phil. This is a joke--not here; not in Montgomery!
She would never do that. Come, you mustn't trifle with me; it's--it's too horrible."

His voice sank to a whisper with his last word. The word and his tone in uttering it had not expressed
the full sense of the horror that was in his face.

"It is true, daddy," she said softly, kindly. "I have seen her; I have talked with her."

"You saw her at Amzi's?" he asked dully.

"Yes; she came last night.

I didn't know it until I got to the house this morning. They were all there, and when I went
in they tried to send me off; they thought I oughtn't to see her."

"There was a scene, then; they were ugly about it?"

"They tried to be; but it didn't go!"

He noted the faltering triumph of her tone and looked at her more closely.

"They wanted her to go and she held her ground against them?"

"I held it with her," said Phil.

"You didn't think she should go; was that it, Phil?"

"I didn't think she should be treated like a dog!"

Phil drew away, with her head held high, her fists tightly clenched. Kirkwood walked slowly
across the room thrice while she stood immovable. He recalled her presence in a moment and
remarked absently:--

"Amzi should have told me. It wasn't fair for him to do this. If I had known last night that
she was here--"

He broke off with a groan. The resigned, indifferent air he had lately flung off possessed him again,
and seeing it the pity stole back into her heart. She moved about, avoiding him, fearful of
meeting again that hurt, wounded look in his eyes. The short day was drawing to an end, and the
shadows deepened. He was mechanically lighting his pipe, and she
crouched in her favorite seat by the fire.

"It's a little tough, Phil," he said finally with a revival of courage, pausing in his slow,
aimless wandering through the rooms. "It's a little tough after so long, and now."

She could not controvert this; she merely waited to see what further he had to say. He paused
presently, his arm on the mantel-shelf, his fingers nervously playing with his pipe.

"What is she like, Phil?"

"Oh, she is lovely! She is the most charming woman that ever lived!"

"You liked her, then; she was nice to you?"

"She is dear and sweet and wonderful! Oh, I didn't know she would be like that!"

His eyes opened and shut quickly. There was an implied accusation
against him in the fervor of her admiration for the wife who had deserted
him.

He groped for something in self-justification with which to confute Lois Montgomery's daughter.

"You
found her what you would like your mother to be,--you didn't think
her hard or cruel?"

"No."

"You wouldn't have thought her a woman who would desert a husband and a helpless baby and run
away with another man?"

There was silence in the room. He had mercilessly condensed the case against Lois Montgomery, reducing
it to its harshest terms for Phil's contemplation. It was in Phil's mind that she had nothing to
do with those things; that the woman against whose cheek she had laid her own was not Thomas Kirkwood's
recreant wife, but another and very different person. She did not know how to express this; it
seemed preposterous to insist to her father that his former wife was not the same woman that
she had held speech with that day.

"I can't talk about her in that way, daddy. I can't tell you just how I feel. But it seemed so
wonderful, when I went into the house, and those horrible creatures were circling round her like
wolves, that we understood each other, she and I, without a word being said! And I hated them
all, except dear old Amy. They all went home and Amy went off and left us alone, and we talked
just as though we had been old friends."

She ceased as though to attempt to describe it would be profanation.

    "What did she say--about me?" he asked blindly.
    
    "Oh, she didn't talk about you at all! It wasn't that kind of talk--not
    about what she had done--not even about what she meant to do! She
    is so young! She is just like a girl! And she speaks so charmingly,
    with the loveliest voice. It's like the way the water ripples round
    the big boulders at The Run."
    
    "She hadn't anything to say about her going off? I don't quite believe
    you mean that, Phil."

"That's exactly the truth, daddy"; and there was grieved surprise in her tone. "Why, she isn't like
that; she wouldn't ever say anything to hurt any one. I haven't words to tell you about her,
because there was never any one like her. She is all sunniness and sweetness. And she's the most
amusing person I ever saw,--ever so droll and funny!"

Phil's refusal or inability to see her mother in robes of sin irritated Kirkwood. For Phil to call her an
amusing person was sheer childish naïveté. Phil was the victim of an infatuation which he could understand
now that his wife began to live again in his imagination. He had read in books that the maternal instinct
will assert itself after long separations, where mother and child are without other clue than
that of the mysterious filial and maternal tie to guide them; but his practical sense rejected
the idea.

If he had been warned of Lois's unaccountable return, he might have fortified Phil against her charms,
but now it was too late. Lois was Phil's mother. Shocked as he was by this termination of his Christmas-Day
happiness, his nature revolted against any attempt to shatter Phil's new idol. The fact that
Lois had sinned as much against Phil as against himself was not something
that he could urge now that Phil had taken her stand.

The thought of Lois brought before him not only the unhappy past, but she seemed, with the cruelest
calculation, to have planted herself in the path of his happy future.

He was intent upon a situation that called for immediate handling. He tried to bring the scattered
dim stars in this new firmament to focus. He might go to Nan and endeavor to minimize the effects
of Lois's return, urging that if she wished to spend the rest of her life in Montgomery it
was her affair, and had nothing whatever to do with her former husband or the woman he meant to marry.
This was a sane, reasonable view of the situation; but its sanity and reasonableness were not
likely to impress Nan Bartlett. Such an event as the sudden return of Lois would pass into local
history as a great sensation. Jack Holton's re-appearance only a few weeks earlier had caused
his fellow-townsmen to attack the old scandal with the avidity of a dog unearthing a neglected
bone; and the return of the woman in the case could hardly fail to prove far more provocative
of gossip. If Lois persisted in remaining in Montgomery, it was wholly unlikely that Nan would
ever marry him; nor could he with any delicacy insist upon her doing so. They might marry and
move to Indianapolis, thereby escaping the discomforts of the smaller town's criticism; and
this was made possible by his brightening prospects.

At any rate, it was only fair to go to Nan at once and lay the matter
before her.

Even now the news might have reached her; news spreads quickly in
the world's compact Montgomerys.

Phil aroused herself as she heard him fumbling for his coat at the hall-rack. She found a match
and lighted the gas.

"Going out, daddy?" she asked in something like her usual tone.

He looked at her vaguely as he drew on his coat, as though trying to understand what she had said.

"Well,
you'll be back for supper. There'll be the usual holiday-cold-turkey supper, daddy."

"Yes, Phil; I'll be back after while. I'm going for a tramp."

But
she knew that he had gone to see Nan.

CHAPTER XVIII

AMZI IS FLABBERGASTED

Struby's
drug-store did a large business in hot drinks in the week following
Christmas, as citizens and citizenesses met to discuss the return
of Lois Montgomery. The annual choir-row in Center Church caused scarcely
a ripple; the county poorhouse burned to the ground, and nobody cared
particularly; an august professor in the college was laid low with
whooping-cough, and even this calamity failed to tickle the community
as it would have done in ordinary circumstances.

Wonder and mystery
were in the air of Main Street. Persons who had no money in Montgomery's
Bank, and whom the liveliest imagination could not dramatize as borrowers
from that institution, dropped in casually on fictitious errands,
in the hope of seeing or hearing something. Housewives who lived beyond
the college, or over in the new bungalow addition across the Monon
tracks, who had no business whatever in the neighborhood of the old
Montgomery place, made flimsy excuses for visiting that region in
the hope of catching a glimpse of a certain lady who, after a long
absence, had reappeared in town with bewildering suddenness. What
Amzi had said to his sisters Kate, Josie, and Fanny and what they
had said to him, and what Mrs. Lois Montgomery Holton had said to
them all afforded an ample field for comment where facts were known;
and where there were no facts, speculation and invention rioted outrageously.
Had Tom Kirkwood seen his former wife? Would Phil break with her father
and go to live at Amzi's with her mother? Was it true that Lois had
come back to Indiana in the hope of effecting a reconciliation with
Jack Holton, of whom unpleasant reports were now reaching Montgomery
from the state capital? An intelligent community possessed of a healthy
curiosity must be pardoned for polishing its spectacles when a drama
so exciting and presenting so many characters is being disclosed upon
its stage.

It was said that Mrs. Holton emerged from Amzi's house
daily to take the air. She had been observed by credible witnesses
at the stamp window of the post-office; again, she had bought violets
at the florist's; she had been seen walking across the Madison campus.
The attendants in the new Carnegie library had been thrilled by a
visit from a strange lady who could have been none other than Mrs.
Holton.

At four o'clock on the afternoon of January 2, Mrs. Holton
drank a cup of bouillon at Struby's counter, informed the white-jacketed
attendant that it was excellent, and crossed Main Street to Montgomery's
Bank under the admiring eyes of a dozen young collegians who happened
to be loafing in the drug-store. Amzi escorted his sister at once
to his private room at the rear, poked the fire, buttoned his coat
and sat down.

"Well, Lois, how goes it?"

His question was the one
he habitually asked his customers, and he had no idea that anything
of importance had happened to his sister since he left her at one
o'clock.

"The air in the counting-room is bad, Amzi; you ought to
put in ventilators. A little fresh air would increase the efficiency
of the clerks one hundred per cent," she remarked, tossing her muff
and a package on the table. It was a solid package that fell with
a bang.

"Then they'd want more pay. You've got another guess coming."

"No.
You'd cut down their wages because they worked less time."

He rubbed
his head and chuckled. It was plainly written on his face that he
was immensely fond of her, that her presence in the dim, dingy old
room gave him pleasure. He clasped his hands behind his head to emphasize
his comfort.

"I passed Center Church on my way down just as my perfectly
good sisters three were entering the side door. The Presbyterians
haven't set up a confessional, have they?"

"Lemme see. I guess this
is the afternoon they sew for the heathen. No. This is Tuesday. Pastor's
Aid Society. Caught 'em in the act, did you?"

"I suppose I did. They
bowed and I bowed. When I got to the corner I turned round to take
a look at the steeple and they were inspecting my clothes. They're
rather funny human beings, those sisters of ours. How do you suppose
they ever happened anyhow? How do you suppose they came to be so good
and you and I so naughty? I mention your naughtiness, Amzi, just to
keep from being so lonesome."

"Thunder!" he puffed, evidently rejoicing
in the wickedness she conferred upon him.

"I came to talk business
a little, Amzi. Didn't want to do it at the house. In fact, I'm out
of money; broke; busted. I bought a cup of soup at the drug-store
over the way and left my last dime on the counter."

He rubbed his
pink pate and cleared his throat. He was not surprised; he had expected
her to be broke. Several times in the week that had passed since her
return, he had thought of broaching the subject of money, but had
refrained. Lois could have anything he had; that was his feeling about
it; and no doubt when she needed money she would ask for it. His other
sisters had never hesitated.

"Just say how much, Lois."

His tone
was reassuring. The others had bled him for years; he had kept an
account of his "advances," as they called them, in a pass-book, and
within a few days he had credited Lois with an amount equal to the
total of these sums. It was approximately this amount that he had
tried to bestow upon Phil the previous fall when that unreasonable
young person had scorned it.

Lois had not answered him. Her face
wore a look of abstraction and she compressed her lips poutingly.
He had found her increasingly interesting and amusing as the days
passed. The subjects she discussed in their long evenings together
were as various as her costumes. She was always cheery, always a delight
to his admiring eyes. Now that she needed money she would be sure
to ask for it in her own charming fashion.

"Speak up; don't be afraid.
The sooner we fix it the quicker we can forget it," he added kindly.

"I
was just wondering how to divide things around a little," she replied.

"Divide
how? Among your creditors?"

"Creditors? Bless your silly head, Amzi,
I haven't any creditors!"

"I thought you said you were broke."

"Oh,
I believe I did," she replied, still only half-attentive to what he
said, and apparently not particularly interested in explaining herself.
She reached for a pad and made rapid calculations. He lighted a cigar
and watched her gloved hand dancing over the paper. The package she
had tossed on the table was much bewaxed and sealed. "When I said
I was broke, I meant that I hadn't any money in my pocket. The intrepid explorers of
the Scotia voyage found quite a number of Arctic terns spending our winter within the summer
of the Antarctic Circle--which means girdling the globe from pole to pole; and every now and
then there are incursions of rare birds, like Pallas's Sand-grouse, into Britain, just as if
they were prospecting in search of a promised land. Twice or thrice the distinctively North
American Killdeer Plover has been found in Britain, having somehow or other got across the
Atlantic. We miss part of the meaning of evolution if we do not catch this note of insurgence
and adventure, which some animal or other never ceases to sound, though many establish themselves
in a security not easily disturbed, and though a small minority give up the struggle against
the stream and are content to acquiesce, as parasites or rottenness eaters, in a drifting life
of ease.

More important than very peculiar cases is the broad fact that over and over again in different
groups of animals there have been attempts to master different kinds of haunts--such as the
underground world, the trees, the freshwaters, and the air. There are burrowing amphibians,
burrowing reptiles, burrowing birds, and burrowing mammals; there are tree-toads, tree-snakes,
tree-lizards, tree-kangaroos, tree-sloths, tree-shrews, tree-mice, tree-porcupines, and so
on; enough of a list to show, without mentioning birds, how many different kinds of animals
have entered upon an arboreal apprenticeship--an apprenticeship often with far-reaching consequences.
What the freeing of the hand from being an organ of terrestrial support has meant in the evolution
of monkeys is a question that gives a spur to our imagination.

The Case of the Robber Crab

On some of the coral islands of the Indian and Pacific Oceans there lives a land-crab, Birgus,
which has learned to breathe on land. It breathes dry air by means of curious blood-containing
tufts in the upper part of its gill-cavity, and it has also rudimentary gills. It is often
about a foot long, and it has very heavy great claws, especially on the left-hand side. With
this great claw it hammers on the "eye-hole" of a coconut, from which it has torn off the fibrous
husk. It hammers until a hole is made by which it can get at the pulp. Part of the shell is
sometimes used as a protection for the soft abdomen--for the robber-crab, as it is called,
is an offshoot from the hermit-crab stock. Every year this quaint explorer, which may go far
up the hills and climb the coco-palms, has to go back to the sea to spawn. The young ones are
hatched in the same state as in our common shore-crab. That is to say, they are free-swimming
larvæ which pass through an open-water period before they settle down on the shore, and eventually
creep up on to dry land. Just as open-water turtles lay their eggs on sandy shores, going back
to their old terrestrial haunt, so the robber-crab, which has almost conquered the dry land,
has to return to the seashore to breed. There is a peculiar interest in the association of
the robber-crab with the coco-palm, for that tree is not a native of these coral islands, but
has been introduced, perhaps from Mexico, by the Polynesian mariners before the discovery of
America by Columbus. So the learning to deal with coconuts is a recent achievement, and we
are face to face with a very good example of evolution going on.

The Story of the Salmon

In late autumn or in winter the salmon spawn in the rivers. The female makes a shallow trough
in the gravel by moving her tail from side to side, and therein lays many eggs. The male, who
is in attendance, fertilises these with the milt, and then the female covers them deeply with
gravel. The process is repeated over and over again for a week or more till all the eggs are
shed. For three to four months the eggs develop, and eventually there emerge the larvæ or alevins,
which lurk among the pebbles. They cannot swim much, for they are encumbered by a big legacy
of yolk. In a few weeks, perhaps eight, the protruding bag of yolk has disappeared and the
fry, about an inch long, begin to move about more actively and to fend for themselves. By the
end of the year they have grown to be rather trout-like parr, about four inches long. In two
years these are double that length. Usually in the second year, but it may be earlier or later,
the parr become silvery smolts, which go out to sea, usually about the month of May. They feed
on young herring and the like and grow large and strong. When they are about three and a half
years old they come up the rivers as grilse and may spawn. Or they may pass through the whole
grilse stage in the sea and come up the rivers with all the characters of the full-grown fish.
In many cases the salmon spawn only once, and some (they are called kelts after spawning) are
so much exhausted by starting a new generation that they die or fall a victim to otters and
other enemies. In the case of the salmon of the North Pacific (in the genus Oncorhynchus, not
Salmo) all the individuals die after spawning, none being able to return to the sea. It must
be remembered that full-grown salmon do not as a rule feed in fresh water, though they may
be unable to resist snapping at the angler's strange creations. A very interesting fact is
that the salmon keeps as it were a diary of its movements, which vary a good deal in different
rivers. This diary is written in the scales, and a careful reading of the concentric lines
on the scales shows the age of the fish, and when it went out to sea, and whether it has spawned
or not, and more besides.

Interpretation of the Salmon's Story

When an animal frequents two different haunts, in one of which it breeds, it is very often
safe to say that the breeding-place represents the original home. The flounder is quite comfortable
far up the rivers, but it has to go to the shore-waters to spawn, and there is no doubt that
the flounder is a marine fish which has recently learned to colonise the fresh waters. Its
relatives, like plaice and sole, are strictly marine. But it is impossible to make a dogma
of the rule that the breeding-place corresponds to the original home. Thus some kinds of bass,
which belong to the marine family of sea-perches, live in the sea or in estuaries, while two
have become permanent residents in fresh water. Or, again, the members of the herring family
are very distinctively marine, but the shad, which belong to this family, spawn in rivers and
may spend their lives there.

So there are two different ways of interpreting the life-history of the salmon. Some authorities
regard the salmon as a marine fish which is establishing itself in fresh water. But others
read the story the other way and regard the salmon as a member of a freshwater race, that has
taken to the sea for feeding purposes. In regard to trout, we know that the ranks of those
in rivers and lakes are continually being reinforced by migrants from the sea, and that some
trout go down to the sea while others remain in the freshwater. We know also in regard to a
related fish, the char, that while the great majority of kinds are now permanent residents
in cold and deep, isolated northern lakes, there are Arctic forms which live in the sea but
enter the rivers to spawn. These facts favour the view that the salmon was originally a marine
fish. But there are arguments on both sides, and, for our present purpose, the important fact
is that the salmon is conquering two haunts. Its evolution is going on.

The Romance of the Eel

Early in summer, at dates varying with the distance of the rivers from the open Atlantic, crowds
of young eels or elvers come up-stream. Sometimes the procession or eel-fare includes thousands
of individuals, each about the length of our first finger, and as thick as a stout knitting
needle. They obey an inborn impulse to swim against the stream, seeking automatically to have
both sides of their body equally stimulated by the current. So they go straight ahead. The
obligation works only during the day, for when the sun goes down behind the hills the elvers
snuggle under stones or beneath the bank and rest till dawn. In the course of time they reach
the quiet upper reaches of the river or go up rivulets and drainpipes to the isolated ponds.
Their impulse to go on must be very imperious, for they may wriggle up the wet moss by the
side of a waterfall or even make a short excursion in a damp meadow.

In the quiet-flowing stretches of the river or in the ponds they feed and grow for years and
years. They account for a good many young fishes. Eventually, after five or six years in the
case of the males, six to eight years in the case of the females, the well-grown fishes, perhaps
a foot and a half to two feet long, are seized by a novel restlessness. They are beginning
to be mature. They put on a silvery jacket and become large of eye, and they return to the
sea. In getting away from the pond it may be necessary to wriggle through the damp meadow-grass
before reaching the river. They travel by night and rather excitedly. The Arctic Ocean is too
cold for them and the North Sea too shallow. They must go far out to sea, to where the old
margin of the once larger continent of Europe slopes down to the great abysses, from the Hebrides
southwards. Eels seem to spawn in the deep dark water; but the just liberated eggs have not
yet been found. The young fry rises to near the surface and becomes a knife-blade-like larva,
transparent all but its eye. It lives for many months in this state, growing to be about three
inches long, rising and sinking in the water, and swimming gently. These open-sea young eels
are known as Leptocephali, a name given to them before their real nature was proved. They gradually
become shorter, and the shape changes from knife-blade-like to cylindrical. During this change
they fast, and the weight of their delicate body decreases. They turn into glass-eels, about
2-1/2 inches long, like a knitting-needle in girth. They begin to move towards the distant
shores and rivers, and they may be a year and a half old before they reach their destination
and go up-stream as elvers. Those that ascend the rivers of the Eastern Baltic must have journeyed
three thousand miles. It is certain that no eel ever matures or spawns in fresh water. It is
practically certain that all the young eels ascending the rivers of North Europe have come
in from the Atlantic, some of them perhaps from the Azores or further out still. It is interesting
to inquire how the young eels circumvent the Falls of the Rhine and get into Lake Constance,
or how their kindred on the other side of the Atlantic overcome the obstacle of Niagara; but
it is more important to lay emphasis on the variety of habitats which this fish is trying--the
deep waters, the open sea, the shore, the river, the pond, and even, it may be, a little taste
of solid earth. It seems highly probable that the common eel is a deep-water marine fish which
has learned to colonise the freshwaters. It has been adventurous and it has succeeded. The
only shadow on the story of achievement is that there seems to be no return from the spawning.
There is little doubt that death is the nemesis of their reproduction. In any case, no adult
eel ever comes back from the deep sea. We are minded of Goethe's hard saying: "Death is Nature's
expert advice to get plenty of life."

§ 4

Forming New Habits

There is a well-known mudfish of Australia, Neoceratodus by name, which has turned its swim-bladder
into a lung and comes to the surface to spout. It expels vitiated air with considerable force
and takes fresh gulps. At the same time, like an ordinary fish, it has gills which allow the
usual interchange of gases between the blood and the water. Now this Australian mudfish or
double-breather (Dipnoan), which may be a long way over a yard in length, is a direct and little-changed
descendant of an ancient extinct fish, Ceratodus, which lived in Mesozoic times, as far back
as the Jurassic, which probably means over five millions of years ago. The Queensland mudfish
is an antiquity, and there has not been much change in its lineage for millions of years. We
might take it as an illustration of the inertia of evolution. And yet, though its structure
has changed but little, the fish probably illustrates evolution in process, for it is a fish
that is learning to breathe dry air. It cannot leave the water; but it can live comfortably
in pools which are foul with decomposing animal and vegetable matter. In partially dried-up
and foul waterholes, full of dead fishes of various kinds, Neoceratodus has been found vigorous
and lively. Unless we take the view, which is possible, that the swim-bladder of fishes was
originally a lung, the mud-fishes are learning to breathe dry air. They illustrate evolution
agoing.

The herring-gull is by nature a fish-eater; but of recent years, in some parts of Britain,
it has been becoming in the summer months more and more of a vegetarian, scooping out the turnips,
devouring potatoes, settling on the sheaves in the harvest field and gorging itself with grain.
Similar experiments, usually less striking, are known in many birds; but the most signal illustration
is that of the kea or Nestor parrot of New Zealand, which has taken to lighting on the loins
of the sheep, tearing away the fleece, cutting at the skin, and gouging out fat. Now the parrot
belongs to a vegetarian or frugivorous stock, and this change of diet in the relatively short
time since sheep-ranches were established in New Zealand is very striking. Here, since we know
the dates, we may speak of evolution going on under our eyes. It must be remembered that variations
in habit may give an animal a new opportunity to test variations in structure which arise mysteriously
from within, as expressions of germinal changefulness rather than as imprints from without.
For of the transmissibility of the latter there is little secure evidence.

Experiments in Locomotion

It is very interesting to think of the numerous types of locomotion which animals have discovered--pulling
and punting, sculling and rowing, and of the changes that are rung on these four main methods.
How striking is the case of the frilled lizard (Chlamydosaurus) of Australia, which at the
present time is, as it were, experimenting in bipedal progression--always a rather eventful
thing to do. It gets up on its hind-legs and runs totteringly for a few feet, just like a baby
learning to walk.

How beautiful is the adventure which has led our dipper or water-ouzel--a bird allied to the
wrens--to try walking and flying under water! How admirable is the volplaning of numerous parachutists--"flying
fish," "flying frog," "flying dragon," "flying phalanger," "flying squirrel," and more besides,
which take great leaps through the air. For are these not the splendid failures that might
have succeeded in starting new modes of flight?

Most daring of all, perhaps, are the aerial journeys undertaken by many small spiders. On a
breezy morning, especially in the autumn, they mount on gate-posts and palings and herbage,
and, standing with their head to the wind, pay out three or four long threads of silk. When
the wind tugs at these threads, the spinners let go, and are borne, usually back downwards,
on the wings of the wind from one parish to another. It is said that if the wind falls they
can unfurl more sail, or furl if it rises. In any case, these wingless creatures make aerial
journeys. When tens of thousands of the used threads sink to earth, there is a "shower of gossamer."
On his Beagle voyage Darwin observed that vast numbers of small gossamer spiders were borne
on to the ship when it was sixty miles distant from the land.

New Devices

It is impossible, we must admit, to fix dates, except in a few cases, relatively recent; but
there is a smack of modernity in some striking devices which we can observe in operation to-day.
Thus no one will dispute the statement that spiders are thoroughly terrestrial animals breathing
dry air, but we have the fact of the water-spider conquering the under-water world. There are
a few spiders about the seashore, and a few that can survive douching with freshwater, but
the particular case of the true water-spider, Argyroneta natans, stands by itself because the
creature, as regards the female at least, has conquered the sub-aquatic environment. A flattish
web is woven, somehow, underneath the water, and pegged down by threads of silk. Along a special
vertical line the mother spider ascends to the surface and descends again, having entangled
air in the hairs of her body. She brushes off this air underneath her web, which is thereby
buoyed up into a sort of dome. She does this over and over again, never getting wet all the
time, until the domed web has become like a diving-bell, full of dry air. In this eloquent
anticipation of man's rational device, this creature--far from being endowed with reason--lays
her eggs and looks after her young. The general significance of the facts is that when competition
is keen, a new area of exploitation is a promised land. Thus spiders have spread over all the
earth except the polar areas. But here is a spider with some spirit of adventure, which has
endeavoured, instead of trekking, to find a new corner near at home. It has tackled a problem
surely difficult for a terrestrial animal, the problem of living in great part under water,
and it has solved it in a manner at once effective and beautiful.

In Conclusion

We have given but a few representative illustrations of a great theme. When we consider the
changefulness of living creatures, the transformations of cultivated plants and domesticated
animals, the gradual alterations in the fauna of a country, the search after new haunts, the
forming of new habits, and the discovery of many inventions, are we not convinced that Evolution
is going on? And why should it stop?

VII

THE DAWN OF MIND

THE DAWN OF MIND

In the story of evolution there is no chapter more interesting than the emergence of mind in
the animal kingdom. But it is a difficult chapter to read, partly because "mind" cannot be
seen or measured, only inferred from the outward behaviour of the creature, and partly because
it is almost impossible to avoid reading ourselves into the much simpler animals.

§ 1

Two Extremes to be Avoided

The one extreme is that of uncritical generosity which credits every animal, like Brer Rabbit--who,
by the way, was the hare--with human qualities. The other extreme is that of thinking of the
animal as if it were an automatic machine, in the working of which there is no place or use
for mind. Both these extremes are to be avoided.

When Professor Whitman took the eggs of the Passenger Pigeon (which became extinct not long
ago with startling rapidity) and placed them a few inches to one side of the nest, the bird
looked a little uneasy and put her beak under her body as if to feel for something that was
not there. But she did not try to retrieve her eggs, close at hand as they were. In a short
time she flew away altogether. This shows that the mind of the pigeon is in some respects very
different from the mind of man. On the other hand, when a certain clever dog, carrying a basket
of eggs, with the handle in his mouth, came to a stile which had to be negotiated, he laid
the basket on the ground, pushed it gently through a low gap to the other side, and then took
a running leap over. We dare not talk of this dog as an automatic machine.

A Caution in Regard to Instinct

In studying the behaviour of animals, which is the only way of getting at their mind, for it
is only of our own mind that we have direct knowledge, it is essential to give prominence to
the fact that there has been throughout the evolution of living creatures a strong tendency
to enregister or engrain capacities of doing things effectively. Thus certain abilities come
to be inborn; they are parts of the inheritance, which will express themselves whenever the
appropriate trigger is pulled. The newly born child does not require to learn its breathing
movements, as it afterwards requires to learn its walking movements. The ability to go through
the breathing movements is inborn, engrained, enregistered.

In other words, there are hereditary pre-arrangements of nerve-cells and muscle-cells which
come into activity almost as easily as the beating of the heart. In a minute or two the newborn
pigling creeps close to its mother and sucks milk. It has not to learn how to do this any more
than we have to learn to cough or sneeze. Thus animals have many useful ready-made, or almost
ready-made, capacities of doing apparently clever things. In simple cases of these inborn pre-arrangements
we speak of reflex actions; in more complicated cases, of instinctive behaviour. Now the caution
is this, that while these inborn capacities usually work well in natural conditions, they sometimes
work badly when the ordinary routine is disturbed. We see this when a pigeon continues sitting
for many days on an empty nest, or when it fails to retrieve its eggs only two inches away.
But it would be a mistake to call the pigeon, because of this, an unutterably stupid bird.
We have only to think of the achievements of homing pigeons to know that this cannot be true.
We must not judge animals in regard to those kinds of behaviour which have been handed over
to instinct, and go badly agee when the normal routine is disturbed. In ninety-nine cases out
of a hundred the enregistered instinctive capacities work well, and the advantage of their
becoming stereotyped was to leave the animal more free for adventures at a higher level. Being
"a slave of instinct" may give the animal a security that enables it to discover some new home
or new food or new joy. Somewhat in the same way, a man of methodical habits, which he has
himself established, may gain leisure to make some new departure of racial profit.

When we draw back our finger from something very hot, or shut our eye to avoid a blow from
a rebounding branch, we do not will the action; and this is more or less the case, probably,
when a young mammal sucks its mother for the first time. Some Mound-birds of Celebes lay their
eggs in warm volcanic ash by the shore of the sea, others in a great mass of fermenting vegetation;
it is inborn in the newly hatched bird to struggle out as quickly as it can from such a strange
nest, else it will suffocate. If it stops struggling too soon, it perishes, for it seems that
the trigger of the instinct cannot be pulled twice. Similarly, when the eggs of the turtle,
that have been laid in the sand of the shore, hatch out, the young ones make instinctively
for the sea. Some of the crocodiles bury their eggs two feet or so below the surface among
sand and decaying vegetation--an awkward situation for a birthplace. When the young crocodile
is ready to break out of the egg-shell, just as a chick does at the end of the three weeks
of brooding, it utters instinctively a piping cry. On hearing this, the watchful mother digs
away the heavy blankets, otherwise the young crocodile would be buried alive at birth. Now
there is no warrant for believing that the young Mound-birds, young crocodiles, and young turtles
have an intelligent appreciation of what they do when they are hatched. They act instinctively,
"as to the manner born." But this is not to say that their activity is not backed by endeavour
or even suffused with a certain amount of awareness. Of course, it is necessarily difficult
for man, who is so much a creature of intelligence, to get even an inkling of the mental side
of instinctive behaviour.

In many of the higher reaches of animal instinct, as in courtship or nest-building, in hunting
or preparing the food, it looks as if the starting of the routine activity also "rang up" the
higher centres of the brain and put the intelligence on the qui vive, ready to interpose when
needed. So the twofold caution is this: (1) We must not depreciate the creature too much if,
in unusual circumstances, it acts in an ineffective way along lines of behaviour which are
normally handed over to instinct; and (2) we must leave open the possibility that even routine
instinctive behaviour may be suffused with awareness and backed by endeavour.

§ 2

A Useful Law

But how are we to know when to credit the animal with intelligence and when with something
less spontaneous? Above all, how are we to know when the effective action, like opening the
mouth the very instant it is touched by food in the mother's beak, is just a physiological
action like coughing or sneezing, and when there is behind it--a mind at work? The answer to
this question is no doubt that given by Prof. Lloyd Morgan, who may be called the founder of
comparative psychology, that we must describe the piece of behaviour very carefully, just as
it occurred, without reading anything into it, and that we must not ascribe it to a higher
faculty if it can be satisfactorily accounted for in terms of a lower one. In following this
principle we may be sometimes niggardly, for the behaviour may have a mental subtlety that
we have missed; but in nine cases out of ten our conclusions are likely to be sound. It is
the critical, scientific way.

Bearing this law in mind, let us take a survey of the emergence of mind among backboned animals.

Senses of Fishes

Fishes cannot shut their eyes, having no true lids; but the eyes themselves are very well developed
and the vision is acute, especially for moving objects. Except in gristly fishes, the external
opening to the ear has been lost, so that sound-waves and coarser vibrations must influence
the inner ear, which is well developed, through the surrounding flesh and bones. It seems that
the main use of the ear in fishes is in connection with balancing, not with hearing. In many
cases, however, the sense of hearing has been demonstrated; thus fishes will come to the side
of a pond to be fed when a bell is rung or when a whistle is blown by someone not visible from
the water. The fact that many fishes pay no attention at all to loud noises does not prove
that they are deaf, for an animal may hear a sound and yet remain quite indifferent or irresponsive.
This merely means that the sound has no vital interest for the animal. Some fishes, such as
bullhead and dogfish, have a true sense of smell, detecting by their nostrils very dilute substances
permeating the water from a distance. Others, such as members of the cod family, perceive their
food in part at least by the sense of taste, which is susceptible to substances near at hand
and present in considerable quantity. This sense of taste may be located on the fins as well
as about the mouth. At this low level the senses of smell and taste do not seem to be very
readily separated. The chief use of the sensitive line or lateral line seen on each side of
a bony fish is to make the animal aware of slow vibrations and changes of pressure in the water.
The skin responds to pressures, the ear to vibrations of high frequency; the lateral line is
between the two in its function.

Interesting Ways of Fishes

The brain of the ordinary bony fish is at a very low level. Thus the cerebral hemispheres,
destined to become more and more the seat of intelligence, are poorly developed. In gristly
fishes, like skates and sharks, the brain is much more promising. But although the state of
the brain does not lead one to expect very much from a bony fish like trout or eel, haddock
or herring, illustrations are not wanting of what might be called pretty pieces of behaviour.
Let us select a few cases.

The Stickleback's Nest

The three-spined and two-spined sticklebacks live equally well in fresh or salt water; the
larger fifteen-spined stickleback is entirely marine. In all three species the male fish makes
a nest, in fresh or brackish water in the first two cases, in shore-pools in the third case.
The little species use the leaves and stems of water-plants; the larger species use seaweed
and zoophyte. The leaves or fronds are entangled together and fastened by glue-like threads,
secreted, strange to say, by the kidneys. It is just as if a temporary diseased condition had
been regularised and turned to good purpose. Going through the nest several times, the male
makes a little room in the middle. Partly by coercion and partly by coaxing he induces a female--first
one and then another--to pass through the nest with two doors, depositing eggs during her short
sojourn. The females go their way, and the male mounts guard over the nest. He drives off intruding
fishes much bigger than himself. When the young are hatched, the male has for a time much to
do, keeping his charges within bounds until they are able to move about with agility. It seems
that sticklebacks are short-lived fishes, probably breeding only once; and it is reasonable
to suppose that their success as a race depends to some extent on the paternal care. Now if
we could believe that the nesting behaviour had appeared suddenly in its present form, we should
be inclined to credit the fish with considerable mental ability. But we are less likely to
be so generous if we reflect that the routine has been in all likelihood the outcome of a long
racial process of slight improvements and critical testings. The secretion of the glue probably
came about as a pathological variation; its utilisation was perhaps discovered by accident;
the types that had wit enough to take advantage of this were most successful; the routine became
enregistered hereditarily. The stickleback is not so clever as it looks.

The Mind of a Minnow

To find solid ground on which to base an appreciation of the behaviour of fishes, it is necessary
to experiment, and we may refer to Miss Gertrude White's interesting work on American minnows
and sticklebacks. After the fishes had become quite at home in their artificial surroundings,
their lessons began. Cloth packets, one of which contained meat and the other cotton, were
suspended at opposite ends of the aquarium. The mud-minnows did not show that they perceived
either packet, though they swam close by them; the sticklebacks were intrigued at once. Those
that went towards the packet containing meat darted furiously upon it and pulled at it with
great excitement. Those that went towards the cotton packet turned sharply away when they were
within about two inches off. They then perceived what those at the other end were after and
joined them--a common habit amongst fishes. Although the minnows were not interested in the
tiny "bags of mystery," they were even more alert than the sticklebacks in perceiving moving
objects in or on the water, and there is no doubt that both these shallow-water species discover
their food largely by sense of sight.

The next set of lessons had to do with colour-associations. The fishes were fed on minced snail,
chopped earthworm, fragments of liver, and the like, and the food was given to them from the
end of forceps held above the surface of the water, so that the fishes could not be influenced
by smell. They had to leap out of the water to take the food from the forceps. Discs of coloured
cardboard were slipped over the end of the forceps, so that what the fishes saw was a morsel
of food in the centre of a coloured disc. After a week or so of preliminary training, they
were so well accustomed to the coloured discs that the presentation of one served as a signal
for the fishes to dart to the surface and spring out of the water. When baits of paper were
substituted for the food, the fishes continued to jump at the discs. When, however, a blue
disc was persistently used for the paper bait and a red disc for the real food, or vice versa,
some of the minnows learned to discriminate infallibly between shadow and substance, both when
these were presented alternately and when they were presented simultaneously. This is not far
from the dawn of mind.

In the course of a few lessons, both minnows and sticklebacks learned to associate particular
colours with food, and other associations were also formed. A kind of larva that a minnow could
make nothing of after repeated trials was subsequently ignored. The approach of the experimenter
or anyone else soon began to serve as a food-signal. There can be no doubt that in the ordinary
life of fishes there is a process of forming useful associations and suppressing useless responses.
Given an inborn repertory of profitable movements that require no training, given the power
of forming associations such as those we have illustrated, and given a considerable degree
of sensory alertness along certain lines, fishes do not require much more. And in truth they
have not got it. Moving with great freedom in three dimensions in a medium that supports them
and is very uniform and constant, able in most cases to get plenty of food without fatiguing
exertions and to dispense with it for considerable periods if it is scarce, multiplying usually
in great abundance so that the huge infantile mortality hardly counts, rarely dying a natural
death but usually coming with their strength unabated to a violent end, fishes hold their own
in the struggle for existence without much in the way of mental endowment. Their brain has
more to do with motion than with mentality, and they have remained at a low psychical level.

Yet just as we should greatly misjudge our own race if we confined our attention to everyday
routine, so in our total, as distinguished from our average, estimate of fishes, we must remember
the salmon surmounting the falls, the wary trout eluding the angler's skill, the common mud-skipper
(Periophthalmus) of many tropical shores which climbs on the rocks and the roots of the mangrove-trees,
or actively hunts small shore-animals. We must remember the adventurous life-history of the
eel and the quaint ways in which some fishes, males especially, look after their family. The
male sea-horse puts the eggs in his breast-pocket; the male Kurtus carries them on the top
of his head; the cock-paidle or lumpsucker guards them and aerates them in a corner of a shore-pool.

§ 3

The Mind of Amphibians

Towards the end of the age of the Old Red Sandstone or Devonian, a great step in evolution
was taken--the emergence of Amphibians. The earliest representatives had fish-like characters
even more marked than those which may be discerned in the tadpoles of our frogs and toads,
and there is no doubt that amphibians sprang from a fish stock. But they made great strides,
associated in part with their attempts to get out of the water on to dry land. From fossil
forms we cannot say much in regard to soft parts; but if we consider the living representatives
of the class, we may credit amphibians with such important acquisitions as fingers and toes,
a three-chambered heart, true ventral lungs, a drum to the ear, a mobile tongue, and vocal
cords. When animals began to be able to grasp an object and when they began to be able to utter
sufficient sounds, two new doors were opened. Apart from insects, whose instrumental music
had probably begun before the end of the Devonian age, amphibians were the first animals to
have a voice. The primary meaning of this voice was doubtless, as it is to-day in our frogs,
a sex-call; but it was the beginning of what was destined to play a very important part in
the evolution of the mind. In the course of ages the significance of the voice broadened out;
it became a parental call; it became an infant's cry. Broadening still, it became a very useful
means of recognition among kindred, especially in the dark and in the intricacies of the forest.
Ages passed, and the voice rose on another turn of the evolutionary spiral to be expressive
of particular emotions beyond the immediate circle of sex--emotions of joy and of fear, of
jealousy and of contentment. Finally, we judge, the animal--perhaps the bird was first--began
to give utterance to particular "words," indicative not merely of emotions, but of particular
things with an emotional halo, such as "food," "enemy," "home." Long afterwards, words became
in man the medium of reasoned discourse. Sentences were made and judgments expressed. But was
not the beginning in the croaking of Amphibia?

Senses of Amphibians

Frogs have good eyes, and the toad's eyes are "jewels." There is evidence of precise vision
in the neat way in which a frog catches a fly, flicking out its tongue, which is fixed in front
and loose behind. There is also experimental proof that a frog discriminates between red and
blue, or between red and white, and an interesting point is that while our skin is sensitive
to heat rays but not to light, the skin of the frog answers back to light rays as well. Professor
Yerkes experimented with a frog which had to go through a simple labyrinth if it wished to
reach a tank of water. At the first alternative between two paths, a red card was placed on
the wrong side and a white one on the other. When the frog had learned to take the correct
path, marked by the white card, Prof. Yerkes changed the cards. The confusion of the frog showed
how thoroughly it had learned its lesson.

We know very little in regard to sense of smell or taste in amphibians; but the sense of hearing
is well developed, more developed than might be inferred from the indifference that frogs show
to almost all sounds except the croaking of their kindred and splashes in the water.

The toad looks almost sagacious when it is climbing up a bank, and some of the tree-frogs are
very alert; but there is very little that we dare say about the amphibian mind. We have mentioned
that frogs may learn the secret of a simple maze, and toads sometimes make for a particular
spawning-pond from a considerable distance. But an examination of their brains, occupying a
relatively small part of the broad, flat skull, warns us not to expect much intelligence. On
the other hand, when we take frogs along a line that is very vital to them, namely, the discrimination
of palatable and unpalatable insects, we find, by experiment, that they are quick to learn
and that they remember their lessons for many days. Frogs sometimes deposit their eggs in very
unsuitable pools of water; but perhaps that is not quite so stupid as it looks. The egg-laying
is a matter that has been, as it were, handed over to instinctive registration.

Experiments in Parental Care

It must be put to the credit of amphibians that they have made many experiments in methods
of parental care, as if they were feeling their way to new devices. A common frog lays her
clumps of eggs in the cradle of the water, sometimes far over a thousand together; the toad
winds two long strings round and between water-weeds; and in both cases that is all. There
is no parental care, and the prolific multiplication covers the enormous infantile mortality.
This is the spawning solution of the problem of securing the continuance of the race. But there
is another solution, that of parental care associated with an economical reduction of the number
of eggs. Thus the male of the Nurse-Frog (Alytes), not uncommon on the Continent, fixes a string
of twenty to fifty eggs to the upper part of his hind-legs, and retires to his hole, only coming
out at night to get some food and to keep up the moisture about the eggs. In three weeks, when
the tadpoles are ready to come out, he plunges into the pond and is freed from his living burden
and his family cares. In the case of the thoroughly aquatic Surinam Toad (Pipa), the male helps
to press the eggs, perhaps a hundred in number, on to the back of the female, where each sinks
into a pocket of skin with a little lid. By and by fully formed young toads jump out of the
pockets.

In the South American tree-frogs called Nototrema there is a pouch on the back of the female
in which the eggs develop, and it is interesting to find that in some species what come out
are ordinary tadpoles, while in other species the young emerge as miniatures of their parents.
Strangest of all, perhaps, is the case of Darwin's Frog (Rhinoderma of Chili), where the young,
about ten to fifteen in number, develop in the male's croaking-sacs, which become in consequence
enormously distended. Eventually the strange spectacle is seen of miniature frogs jumping out
of their father's mouth. Needless to say we are not citing these methods of parental care as
examples of intelligence; but perhaps they correct the impression of amphibians as a rather
humdrum race. Whatever be the mental aspect of the facts, there has certainly been some kind
of experimenting, and the increase of parental care, so marked in many amphibians, with associated
reduction of the number of offspring is a finger-post on the path of progress.

§ 4

The Reptilian Mind

We speak of the wisdom of the serpent; but it is not very easy to justify the phrase. Among
all the multitude of reptiles--snakes, lizards, turtles, and crocodiles, a motley crowd--we
cannot see much more than occasional traces of intelligence. The inner life remains a tiny rill.

No doubt many reptiles are very effective; but it is an instinctive rather than an intelligent
efficiency. The well-known "soft-shell" tortoise of the United States swims with powerful strokes
and runs so quickly that it can hardly be overtaken. It hunts vigorously for crayfish and insect
larvæ in the rivers. It buries itself in the mud when cold weather comes. It may lie on a floating
log ready to slip into the water at a moment's notice; it may bask on a sunny bank or in the
warm shallows. Great wariness is shown in choosing times and places for egg-laying. The mother
tramps the earth down upon the buried eggs. All is effective. Similar statements might be made
in regard to scores of other reptiles; but what we see is almost wholly of the nature of instinctive
routine, and we get little glimpse of more than efficiency and endeavour.

In a few cases there is proof of reptiles finding their way back to their homes from a considerable
distance, and recognition of persons is indubitable. Gilbert White remarks of his tortoise:
"Whenever the good old lady came in sight who had waited on it for more than thirty years,
it always hobbled with awkward alacrity towards its benefactress, while to strangers it was
altogether inattentive." Of definite learning there are a few records. Thus Professor Yerkes
studied a sluggish turtle of retiring disposition, taking advantage of its strong desire to
efface itself. On the path of the darkened nest of damp grass he interposed a simple maze in
the form of a partitioned box. After wandering about constantly for thirty-five minutes the
turtle found its way through the maze by chance. Two hours afterwards it reached the nest in
fifteen minutes; and after another interval of two hours it only required five minutes. After
the third trial, the routes became more direct, there was less aimless wandering. The time
of the twentieth trial was forty-five seconds; that of the thirtieth, forty seconds. In the
thirtieth case, the path followed was quite direct, and so it was on the fiftieth trip, which
only required thirty-five seconds. Of course, the whole thing did not amount to very much;
but there was a definite learning, a learning from experience, which has played an important
part in the evolution of animal behaviour.

Comparing reptiles with amphibians, we may recognise an increased masterliness of behaviour
and a hint of greater plasticity. The records of observers who have made pets of reptiles suggest
that the life of feeling or emotion is growing stronger, and so do stories, if they can be
accepted, which suggest the beginning of conjugal affection.

The error must be guarded against of interpreting in terms of intelligence what is merely the
outcome of long-continued structure adaptation. When the limbless lizard called the Slow-worm
is suddenly seized by the tail, it escapes by surrendering the appendage, which breaks across
a preformed weak plane. But this is a reflex action, not a reflective one. It is comparable
to our sudden withdrawal of our finger from a very hot cinder. The Egg-eating African snake
Dasypeltis gets the egg of a bird into its gullet unbroken, and cuts the shell against downward-projecting
sharp points of the vertebræ. None of the precious contents is lost and the broken "empties"
are returned. It is admirable, indeed unsurpassable; but it is not intelligent.

§ 5

Mind in Birds

Sight and hearing are highly developed in birds, and the senses, besides pulling the triggers
of inborn efficiencies, supply the raw materials for intelligence. There is some truth, though
not the whole truth, in the old philosophical dictum, that there is nothing in the intellect
which was not previously in the senses. Many people have admired the certainty and alacrity
with which gulls pick up a fragment of biscuit from the white wake of a steamer, and the incident
is characteristic. In their power of rapidly altering the focus of the eye, birds are unsurpassed.

To the sense of sight in birds, the sense of hearing comes a good second. A twig breaks under
our feet, and out sounds the danger-call of the bird we were trying to watch. Many young birds,
like partridges, respond when two or three hours old to the anxious warning note of the parents,
and squat motionless on the ground, though other sounds, such as the excited clucking of a
foster-mother hen, leave them indifferent. They do not know what they are doing when they squat;
they are obeying the living hand of the past which is within them. Their behaviour is instinctive.
But the present point is the discriminating quality of the sense of hearing; and that is corroborated
by the singing of birds. It is emotional art, expressing feelings in the medium of sound. On
the part of the females, who are supposed to listen, it betokens a cultivated ear.

As to the other senses, touch is not highly developed except about the bill, where it reaches
a climax in birds like the wood-cock, which probe for unseen earthworms in the soft soil. Taste
seems to be poorly developed, for most birds bolt their food, but there is sometimes an emphatic
rejection of unpalatable things, like toads and caterpillars. Of smell in birds little is known,
but it has been proved to be present in certain cases, e.g. in some nocturnal birds of prey.
It seems certain that it is by sight, not by smell, that the eagles gather to the carcass;
but perhaps there is more smell in birds than they are usually credited with. One would like
to experiment with the oil from the preen gland of birds to see whether the scent of this does
not help in the recognition of kin by kin at night or amid the darkness of the forest. There
may be other senses in birds, such as a sense of temperature and a sense of balance; but no
success has attended the attempts made to demonstrate a magnetic sense, which has been impatiently
postulated by students of bird migration in order to "explain" how the birds find their way.
The big fact is that in birds there are two widely open gateways of knowledge, the sense of
sight and the sense of hearing.

Instinctive Aptitudes

Many a young water-bird, such as a coot, swims right away when it is tumbled into water for
the first time. So chicks peck without any learning or teaching, very young ducklings catch
small moths that flit by, and young plovers lie low when the danger-signal sounds. But birds
seem strangely limited as regards many of these instinctive capacities--limited when compared
with the "little-brained" ants and bees, which have from the first such a rich repertory of
ready-made cleverness. The limitation in birds is of great interest, for it means that intelligence
is coming to its own and is going to take up the reins at many corners of the daily round.
Professor Lloyd Morgan observed that his chickens incubated in the laboratory had no instinctive
awareness of the significance of their mother's cluck when she was brought outside the door.
Although thirsty and willing to drink from a moistened finger-tip, they did not instinctively
recognize water, even when they walked through a saucerful. Only when they happened to peck
their toes as they stood in the water did they appreciate water as the stuff they wanted, and
raise their bills up to the sky. Once or twice they actually stuffed their crops with "worms"
of red worsted!

Instinctive aptitudes, then, the young birds have, but these are more limited than in ants,
bees, and wasps; and the reason is to be found in the fact that the brain is now evolving on
the tack of what Sir Ray Lankester has called "educability." Young birds learn with prodigious
rapidity; the emancipation of the mind from the tyranny of hereditary obligations has begun.
Young birds make mistakes, like the red worsted mistake, but they do not make the same mistakes
often. They are able to profit by experience in a very rapid way. We do not mean that creatures
of the little-brain type, like ants, bees, and wasps, are unable to profit by experience or
are without intelligence. There are no such hard-and-fast lines. We mean that in the ordinary
life of insects the enregistered instinctive capacities are on the whole sufficient for the
occasion, and that intelligent educability is very slightly developed. Nor do we mean that
birds are quite emancipated from the tyranny of engrained instinctive obligations, and can
always "ring up" intelligence in a way that is impossible for the stereotyped bee. The sight
of a pigeon brooding on an empty nest, while her two eggs lie disregarded only a couple of
inches away, is enough to show that along certain lines birds may find it impossible to get
free from the trammels of instinct. The peculiar interest of birds is that they have many instincts
and yet a notable power of learning intelligently.

Intelligence co-operating with Instinct

Professor Lloyd Morgan was foster-parent to two moorhens which grew up in isolation from their
kindred. They swam instinctively, but they would not dive, neither in a large bath nor in a
current. But it happened one day when one of these moorhens was swimming in a pool on a Yorkshire
stream, that a puppy came barking down the bank and made an awkward feint towards the young
bird. In a moment the moorhen dived, disappeared from view, and soon partially reappeared,
his head just peeping above the water beneath the overhanging bank. This was the first time
the bird had dived, and the performance was absolutely true to type.

There can be little doubt as to the meaning of this observation. The moorhen has an hereditary
or instinctive capacity for swimming and diving, but the latter is not so easily called into
activity as the former. The particular moorhen in question had enjoyed about two months of
swimming experience, which probably counted for something, but in the course of that experience
nothing had pulled the trigger of the diving capacity. On an eventful day the young moorhen
saw and heard the dog; it was emotionally excited; it probably did to some extent intelligently
appreciate a novel and meaningful situation. Intelligence cooperated with instinct, and the
bird dived appropriately.

Birds have inborn predispositions to certain effective ways of pecking, scratching, swimming,
diving, flying, crouching, lying low, nest-building, and so on; but they are marked off from
the much more purely instinctive ants and bees by the extent to which individual "nurture"
seems to mingle with the inherited "nature." The two together result in the fine product which
we call the bird's behaviour. After Lloyd Morgan's chicks had tried a few conspicuous and unpalatable
caterpillars, they had no use for any more. They learned in their early days with prodigious
rapidity, illustrating the deep difference between the "big-brain" type, relatively poor in
its endowment of instinctive capacities, but eminently "educable," and the "little-brain" type,
say, of ants and bees, richly endowed with instinctive capacities, but very far from being
quick or glad to learn. We owe it to Sir Ray Lankester to have made it clear that these two
types of brain are, as it were, on different tacks of evolution, and should not be directly
pitted against one another. The "little-brain" type makes for a climax in the ant, where instinctive
behaviour reaches a high degree of perfection; the "big-brain" type reaches its climax in horse
and dog, in elephant and monkey. The particular interest that attaches to the behaviour of
birds is in the combination of a good deal of instinct with a great deal of intelligent learning.
This is well illustrated when birds make a nest out of new materials or in some quite novel
situation. It is clearly seen when birds turn to some new kind of food, like the Kea parrot,
which attacks the sheep in New Zealand.

Some young woodpeckers are quite clever in opening fir cones to get at the seeds, and this
might be hastily referred to a well-defined hereditary capacity. But the facts are that the
parents bring their young ones first the seeds themselves, then partly opened cones, and then
intact ones. There is an educative process, and so it is in scores of cases.

Using their Wits

When the Greek eagle lifts the Greek tortoise in its talons, and lets it fall from a height
so that the strong carapace is broken and the flesh exposed, it is making intelligent use of
an expedient. Whether it discovered the expedient by experimenting, as is possible, or by chance,
as is more likely, it uses it intelligently. In the same way herring-gulls lift sea-urchins
and clams in their bills, and let them fall on the rocks so that the shells are broken. In
the same way rooks deal with freshwater mussels.

The Thrush's Anvil

A very instructive case is the behaviour of the song-thrush when it takes a wood-snail in its
beak and hammers it against a stone, its so-called anvil. To a young thrush, which she had
brought up by hand, Miss Frances Pitt offered some wood-snails, but it took no interest in
them until one put out its head and began to move about. The bird then pecked at the snail's
horns, but was evidently puzzled when the creature retreated within the shelter of the shell.
This happened over and over again, the thrush's inquisitive interest increasing day by day.
It pecked at the shell and even picked it up by the lip, but no real progress was made till
the sixth day, when the thrush seized the snail and beat it on the ground as it would a big
worm. On the same day it picked up a shell and knocked it repeatedly against a stone, trying
first one snail and then another. After fifteen minutes' hard work, the thrush managed to break
one, and after that it was all easy. A certain predisposition to beat things on the ground
was doubtless present, but the experiment showed that the use of an anvil could be arrived
at by an untutored bird. After prolonged trying it found out how to deal with a difficult situation.
It may be said that in more natural conditions this might be picked up by imitation, but while
this is quite possible, it is useful to notice that experiments with animals lead us to doubt
whether imitation counts for nearly so much as used to be believed.

§ 6

The Mind of the Mammal

When we watch a collie at a sheep-driving competition, or an elephant helping the forester,
or a horse shunting waggons at a railway siding, we are apt to be too generous to the mammal
mind. For in the cases we have just mentioned, part of man's mind has, so to speak, got into
the animal's. On the other hand, when we study rabbits and guinea-pigs, we are apt to be too
stingy, for these rodents are under the average of mammals, and those that live in domestication
illustrate the stupefying effect of a too sheltered life. The same applies to domesticated
sheep contrasted with wild sheep, or even with their own lambs. If we are to form a sound judgment
on the intelligence of mammals we must not attend too much to those that have profited by man's
training, nor to those whose mental life has been dulled by domestication.

Instinctive Aptitudes

What is to be said of the behaviour of beavers who gnaw the base of a tree with their chisel-edged
teeth till only a narrow core is left--to snap in the first gale, bringing the useful branches
down to the ground? What is to be said of the harvest-mouse constructing its nest, or of the
squirrel making cache after cache of nuts? These and many similar pieces of behaviour are fundamentally
instinctive, due to inborn predispositions of nerve-cells and muscle-cells. But in mammals
they seem to be often attended by a certain amount of intelligent attention, saving the creature
from the tyranny of routine so marked in the ways of ants and bees.

Sheer Dexterity

Besides instinctive aptitudes, which are exhibited in almost equal perfection by all the members
of the same species, there are acquired dexterities which depend on individual opportunities.
They are also marked by being outside and beyond ordinary routine--not that any rigorous boundary
line can be drawn. We read that at Mathura on the Jumna doles of food are provided by the piety
of pilgrims for the sacred river-tortoises, which are so crowded when there is food going that
their smooth carapaces form a more or less continuous raft across the river. On that unsteady
slippery bridge the Langur monkeys (Semnopithecus entellus) venture out and in spite of vicious
snaps secure a share of the booty. This picture of the monkeys securing a footing on the moving
mass of turtle-backs is almost a diagram of sheer dexterity. It illustrates the spirit of adventure,
the will to experiment, which is, we believe, the main motive-force in new departures in behaviour.

Power of Association

A bull-terrier called Jasper, studied by Prof. J. B. Watson, showed great power of associating
certain words with certain actions. From a position invisible to the dog the owner would give
certain commands, such as "Go into the next room and bring me a paper lying on the floor."
Jasper did this at once, and a score of similar things.

Lord Avebury's dog Van was accustomed to go to a box containing a small number of printed cards
and select the card TEA or OUT, as the occasion suggested. It had established an association
between certain black marks on a white background and the gratification of certain desires.
It is probable that some of the extraordinary things horses and dogs have been known to do
in the way of stamping a certain number of times in supposed indication of an answer to an
arithmetical question (in the case of horses), or of the name of an object drawn (in the case
of dogs), are dependent on clever associations established by the teacher between minute signs
and a number of stampings. What is certain is that mammals have in varying degrees a strong
power of establishing associations. There is often some delicacy in the association established.
Everyone knows of cases where a dog, a cat, or a horse will remain quite uninterested, to all
appearance, in its owner's movements until some little detail, such as taking a key from its
peg, pulls the trigger. Now the importance of this in the wild life of the fox or the hare,
the otter or the squirrel, is obviously that the young animals learn to associate certain sounds
in their environment with definite possibilities. They have to learn an alphabet of woodcraft,
the letters of which are chiefly sounds and scents.

The Dancing Mouse as a Pupil

The dancing or waltzing mouse is a Japanese variety with many peculiarities, such as having
only one of the three semicircular canals of the ear well developed. It has a strong tendency
to waltz round and round in circles without sufficient cause and to trip sideways towards its
dormitory instead of proceeding in the orthodox head-on fashion. But this freak is a very educable
creature, as Professor Yerkes has shown. In a careful way he confronted his mouse-pupil with
alternative pathways marked by different degrees of illumination, or by different colours.
If the mouse chose compartment A, it found a clear passage direct to its nest; if it chose
compartment B, it was punished by a mild electric shock and it had to take a roundabout road
home. Needless to say, the A compartment was sometimes to the right hand, sometimes to the
left, else mere position would have been a guide. The experiments showed that the dancing mice
learn to discriminate the right path from the wrong, and similar results have been got from
other mammals, such as rats and squirrels. There is no proof of learning by ideas, but there
is proof of learning by experience. And the same must be true in wild life.

Many mammals, such as cats and rats, learn how to manipulate puzzle-boxes and how to get at
the treasure at the heart of a Hampton Court maze. Some of the puzzle-boxes, with a reward
of food inside, are quite difficult, for the various bolts and bars have to be dealt with in
a particular order, and yet many mammals master the problem. What is plain is that they gradually
eliminate useless movements, that they make fewer and fewer mistakes, that they eventually
succeed, and that they register the solution within themselves so that it remains with them
for a time. It looks a little like the behaviour of a man who learns a game of skill without
thinking. It is a learning by experience, not by ideas or reflection. Thus it is very difficult
to suppose that a rat or a cat could form any idea or even picture of the Hampton Court maze--which
they nevertheless master.

Learning Tricks

Given sufficient inducement many of the cleverer mammals will learn to do very sensible things,
and no one is wise enough to say that they never understand what they are doing. Yet it is
certain that trained animals often exhibit pieces of behaviour which are not nearly so clever
as they look. The elephant at the Belle Vue Gardens in Manchester used to collect pennies from
benevolent visitors. When it got a penny in its trunk it put it in the slot of an automatic
machine which delivered up a biscuit. When a visitor gave the elephant a halfpenny it used
to throw it back with disgust. At first sight this seemed almost wise, and there was no doubt
some intelligent appreciation of the situation. But it was largely a matter of habituation,
the outcome of careful and prolonged training. The elephant was laboriously taught to put the
penny in the slot and to discriminate between the useful pennies and the useless halfpennies.
It was not nearly so clever as it looked.

Using their Wits

In the beautiful Zoological Park in Edinburgh the Polar Bear was wont to sit on a rocky peninsula
of a water-filled quarry. The visitors threw in buns, some of which floated on the surface.
It was often easy for the Polar Bear to collect half a dozen by plunging into the pool. But
it had discovered a more interesting way. At the edge of the peninsula it scooped the water
gently with its huge paw and made a current which brought the buns ashore. This was a simple
piece of behaviour, but it has the smack of intelligence--of putting two and two together in
a novel way. It suggests the power of making what is called a "perceptual inference."

On the occasion of a great flood in a meadow it was observed that a number of mares brought
their foals to the top of a knoll, and stood round about them protecting them against the rising
water. A dog has been known to show what was at any rate a plastic appreciation of a varying
situation in swimming across a tidal river. It changed its starting-point, they say, according
to the flow or ebb of the tide. Arctic foxes and some other wild mammals show great cleverness
in dealing with traps, and the manipulative intelligence of elephants is worthy of all our
admiration.

§ 7

Why is there not more Intelligence?

When we allow for dexterity and power of association, when we recognise a certain amount of
instinctive capacity and a capacity for profiting by experience in an intelligent way, we must
admit a certain degree of disappointment when we take a survey of the behaviour of mammals,
especially of those with very fine brains, from which we should naturally expect great things.
Why is there not more frequent exhibition of intelligence in the stricter sense?

The answer is that most mammals have become in the course of time very well adapted to the
ordinary conditions of their life, and tend to leave well alone. They have got their repertory
of efficient answers to the ordinary questions of everyday life, and why should they experiment?
In the course of the struggle for existence what has been established is efficiency in normal
circumstances, and therefore even the higher animals tend to be no cleverer than is necessary.
So while many mammals are extraordinarily efficient, they tend to be a little dull. Their mental
equipment is adequate for the everyday conditions of their life, but it is not on sufficiently
generous lines to admit of, let us say, an interest in Nature or adventurous experiment. Mammals
always tend to "play for safety."

We hasten, however, to insert here some very interesting saving clauses.

Experimentation in Play

A glimpse of what mammals are capable of, were it necessary, may be obtained by watching those
that are playful, such as lambs and kids, foals and calves, young foxes and others. For these
young creatures let themselves go irresponsibly, they are still unstereotyped, they test what
they and their fellows can do. The experimental character of much of animal play is very marked.

It is now recognised by biologists that play among animals is the young form of work, and that
the playing period, often so conspicuous, is vitally important as an apprenticeship to the
serious business of life and as an opportunity for learning the alphabet of Nature. But the
playing period is much more; it is one of the few opportunities animals have of making experiments
without too serious responsibilities. Play is Nature's device for allowing elbow-room for new
departures (behaviour-variations) which may form part of the raw materials of progress. Play,
we repeat, gives us a glimpse of the possibilities of the mammal mind.

Other Glimpses of Intelligence

A squirrel is just as clever as it needs to be and no more; and of some vanishing mammals,
like the beaver, not even this can be said. Humdrum non-plastic efficiency is apt to mean stagnation.
Now we have just seen that in the play of young mammals there is an indication of unexhausted
possibilities, and we get the same impression when we think of three other facts. (a) In those
mammals, like dog and horse, which have entered into active cooperative relations with man,
we see that the mind of the mammal is capable of much more than the average would lead us to
think. When man's sheltering is too complete and the domesticated creature is passive in his
grip, the intelligence deteriorates. (b) When we study mammals, like the otter, which live
a versatile life in a very complex and difficult environment, we get an inspiriting picture
of the play of wits. (c) Thirdly, when we pass to monkeys, where the fore-limb has become a
free hand, where the brain shows a relatively great improvement, where "words" are much used,
we cannot fail to recognise the emergence of something new--a restless inquisitiveness, a desire
to investigate the world, an unsatisfied tendency to experiment. We are approaching the Dawn
of Reason.

THE MIND OF MONKEYS

§ 8

There is a long gamut between the bushy-tailed, almost squirrel-like marmosets and the big-brained
chimpanzee. There is great variety of attainment at different levels in the Simian tribe.

Keen Senses

To begin at the beginning, it is certain that monkeys have a first-class sensory equipment,
especially as regards sight, hearing, and touch. The axes of the two eyes are directed forwards
as in man, and a large section of the field of vision is common to both eyes. In other words,
monkeys have a more complete stereoscopic vision than the rest of the mammals enjoy. They look
more and smell less. They can distinguish different colours, apart from different degrees of
brightness in the coloured objects. They are quick to discriminate differences in the shapes
of things, e.g. boxes similar in size but different in shape, for if the prize is always put
in a box of the same shape they soon learn (by association) to select the profitable one. They
learn to discriminate cards with short words or with signs printed on them, coming down when
the "Yes" card is shown, remaining on their perch when the card says "No." Bred to a forest
life where alertness is a life-or-death quality, they are quick to respond to a sudden movement
or to pick out some new feature in their surroundings. And what is true of vision holds also
for hearing.

Power of Manipulation

Another quality which separates monkeys very markedly from ordinary mammals is their manipulative
expertness, the co-ordination of hand and eye. This great gift follows from the fact that among
monkeys the fore-leg has been emancipated. It has ceased to be indispensable as an organ of
support; it has become a climbing, grasping, lifting, handling organ. The fore-limb has become
a free hand, and everyone who knows monkeys at all is aware of the zest with which they use
their tool. They enjoy pulling things to pieces--a kind of dissection--or screwing the handle
off a brush and screwing it on again.

Activity for Activity's Sake

Professor Thorndike hits the nail on the head when he lays stress on the intensity of activity
in monkeys--activity both of body and mind. They are pent-up reservoirs of energy, which almost
any influence will tap. Watch a cat or a dog, Professor Thorndike says; it does comparatively
few things and is content for long periods to do nothing. It will be splendidly active in response
to some stimulus such as food or a friend or a fight, but if nothing appeals to its special
make-up, which is very utilitarian in its interests, it will do nothing. "Watch a monkey and
you cannot enumerate the things he does, cannot discover the stimuli to which he reacts, cannot
conceive the raison d'etre of his pursuits. Everything appeals to him. He likes to be active
for the sake of activity."

This applies to mental activity as well, and the quality is one of extraordinary interest,
for it shows the experimenting mood at a higher turn of the spiral than in any other creature,
save man. It points forward to the scientific spirit. We cannot, indeed, believe in the sudden
beginning of any quality, and we recall the experimenting of playing mammals, such as kids
and kittens, or of inquisitive adults like Kipling's mongoose, Riki-Tiki-Tavi, which made it
his business in life to find out about things. But in monkeys the habit of restless experimenting
rises to a higher pitch. They appear to be curious about the world. The psychologist whom we
have quoted tells of a monkey which happened to hit a projecting wire so as to make it vibrate.
He went on repeating the performance hundreds of times during the next few days. Of course,
he got nothing out of it, save fun, but it was grist to his mental mill. "The fact of mental
life is to monkeys it own reward." The monkey's brain is "tender all over, functioning throughout,
set off in action by anything and everything."

Sheer Quickness

Correlated with the quality of restless inquisitiveness and delight in activity for its own
sake there is the quality of quickness. We mean not merely the locomotor agility that marks
most monkeys, but quickness of perception and plan. It is the sort of quality that life among
the branches will engender, where it is so often a case of neck or nothing. It is the quality
which we describe as being on the spot, though the phrase has slipped from its original moorings.
Speaking of his Bonnet Monkey, an Indian macaque, second cousin to the kind that lives on the
Rock of Gibraltar, Professor S. J. Holmes writes: "For keenness of perception, rapidity of
action, facility in forming good practical judgments about ways and means of escaping pursuit
and of attaining various other ends, Lizzie had few rivals in the animal world.... Her perceptions
and decisions were so much more rapid than my own that she would frequently transfer her attention,
decide upon a line of action, and carry it into effect before I was aware of what she was about.
Until I came to guard against her nimble and unexpected manoeuvres, she succeeded in getting
possession of many apples and peanuts which I had not intended to give her except upon the
successful performance of some task."

Quick to Learn

Quite fundamental to any understanding of animal behaviour is the distinction so clearly drawn
by Sir Ray Lankester between the "little-brain" type, rich in inborn or instinctive capacities,
but relatively slow to learn, and the "big-brain" type, with a relatively poor endowment of
specialised instincts, but with great educability. The "little-brain" type finds its climax
in ants and bees; the "big-brain" type in horses and dogs, elephants and monkeys. And of all
animals monkeys are the quickest to learn, if we use the word "learn" to mean the formation
of useful associations between this and that, between a given sense-presentation and a particular
piece of behaviour.

The Case of Sally

Some of us remember Sally, the chimpanzee at the "Zoo" with which Dr. Romanes used to experiment.
She was taught to give her teacher the number of straws he asked for, and she soon learned
to do so up to five. If she handed a number not asked for, her offer was refused; if she gave
the proper number, she got a piece of fruit. If she was asked for five straws, she picked them
up individually and placed them in her mouth, and when she had gathered five she presented
them together in her hand. Attempts to teach her to give six to ten straws were not very successful.
For Sally "above six" meant "many," and besides, her limits of patience were probably less
than her range of computation. This was hinted at by the highly interesting circumstance that
when dealing with numbers above five she very frequently doubled over a straw so as to make
it present two ends and thus appear as two straws. The doubling of the straw looked like an
intelligent device to save time, and it was persistently resorted to in spite of the fact that
her teacher always refused to accept a doubled straw as equivalent to two straws. Here we get
a glimpse of something beyond the mere association of a sound--"Five"--and that number of straws.

The Case of Lizzie

The front of the cage in which Professor Holmes kept Lizzie was made of vertical bars which
allowed her to reach out with her arm. On a board with an upright nail as handle, there was
placed an apple--out of Lizzie's reach. She reached immediately for the nail, pulled the board
in and got the apple. "There was no employment of the method of trial and error; there was
direct appropriate action following the perception of her relation to board, nail, and apple."
Of course her ancestors may have been adepts at drawing a fruit-laden branch within their reach,
but the simple experiment was very instructive. All the more instructive because in many other
cases the experiments indicate a gradual sifting out of useless movements and an eventful retention
of the one that pays. When Lizzie was given a vaseline bottle containing a peanut and closed
with a cork, she at once pulled the cork out with her teeth, obeying the instinct to bite at
new objects, but she never learned to turn the bottle upside down and let the nut drop out.
She often got the nut, and after some education she got it more quickly than she did at first,
but there was no indication that she ever perceived the fit and proper way of getting what
she wanted. "In the course of her intent efforts her mind seemed so absorbed with the object
of desire that it was never focussed on the means of attaining that object. There was no deliberation,
and no discrimination between the important and the unimportant elements in her behaviour.
The gradually increasing facility of her performances depended on the apparently unconscious
elimination of useless movements." This may be called learning, but it is learning at a very
low level; it is far from learning by ideas; it is hardly even learning by experiment; it is
not more than learning by experience, it is not more than fumbling at learning!

Trial and Error

A higher note is struck in the behaviour of some more highly endowed monkeys. In many experiments,
chiefly in the way of getting into boxes difficult to open, there is evidence (1) of attentive
persistent experiment (2) of the rapid elimination of ineffective movements, and (3) of remembering
the solution when it was discovered. Kinnaman taught two macaques the Hampton Court Maze, a
feat which probably means a memory of movements, and we get an interesting glimpse in his observation
that they began to smack their lips audibly when they reached the latter part of their course,
and began to feel, dare one say, "We are right this time."

In getting into "puzzle-boxes" and into "combination-boxes" (where the barriers must be overcome
in a definite order), monkeys learn by the trial and error method much more quickly than cats
and dogs do, and a very suggestive fact emphasized by Professor Thorndike is "a process of
sudden acquisition by a rapid, often apparently instantaneous abandonment of the unsuccessful
movements and selection of the appropriate one, which rivals in suddenness the selections made
by human beings in similar performances." A higher note still was sounded by one of Thorndike's
monkeys which opened a puzzle-box at once, eight months after his previous experience with
it. For here was some sort of registration of a solution.

Imitation

Two chimpanzees in the Dublin Zoo were often to be seen washing the two shelves of their cupboard
and "wringing" the wet cloth in the approved fashion. It was like a caricature of a washerwoman,
and someone said, "What mimics they are!" Now we do not know whether that was or was not the
case with the chimpanzees, but the majority of the experiments that have been made do not lead
us to attach to imitation so much importance as is usually given to it by the popular interpreter.
There are instances where a monkey that had given up a puzzle in despair returned to it when
it had seen its neighbour succeed, but most of the experiments suggested that the creature
has to find out for itself. Even with such a simple problem as drawing food near with a stick,
it often seems of little use to show the monkey how it is done. Placing a bit of food outside
his monkey's cage, Professor Holmes "poked it about with the stick so as to give her a suggestion
of how the stick might be employed to move the food within reach, but although the act was
repeated many times Lizzie never showed the least inclination to use the stick to her advantage."
Perhaps the idea of a "tool" is beyond the Bonnet Monkey, yet here again we must be cautious,
for Professor L. T. Hobhouse had a monkey of the same macaque genus which learned in the course
of time to use a crooked stick with great effect.

The Case of Peter

Perhaps the cleverest monkey as yet studied was a performing chimpanzee called Peter, which
has been generally described by Dr. Lightner Witmer. Peter could skate and cycle, thread needles
and untie knots, smoke a cigarette and string beads, screw in nails and unlock locks. But what
Peter was thinking about all the time it was hard to guess, and there is very little evidence
to suggest that his rapid power of putting two and two together ever rose above a sort of concrete
mental experimenting, which Dr. Romanes used to call perceptual inference. Without supposing
that there are hard-and-fast boundary lines, we cannot avoid the general conclusion that, while
monkeys are often intelligent, they seldom, if ever, show even hints of reason, i.e. of working
or playing with general ideas. That remains Man's prerogative.

The Bustle of the Mind

In mammals like otters, foxes, stoats, hares, and elephants, what a complex of tides and currents
there must be in the brain-mind! We may think of a stream with currents at different levels.
Lowest there are the basal appetites of hunger and sex, often with eddies rising to the surface.
Then there are the primary emotions, such as fear of hereditary enemies and maternal affection
for offspring. Above these are instinctive aptitudes, inborn powers of doing clever things
without having to learn how. But in mammals these are often expressed along with, or as it
were through, the controlled life of intelligent activity, where there is more clear-cut perceptual
influence.

Higher still are the records or memories of individual experience and the registration of individual
habits, while on the surface is the instreaming multitude of messages from the outside world,
like raindrops and hailstones on the stream, some of them penetrating deeply, being, as we
say, full of meaning. The mind of the higher animal is in some respects like a child's mind,
in having little in the way of clear-cut ideas, in showing no reason in the strict sense, and
in its extraordinary educability, but it differs from the child's mind entirely in the sure
effectiveness of a certain repertory of responses. It is efficient to a degree.

"Until at last arose the Man."

Man's brain is more complicated than that of the higher apes--gorilla, orang, and chimpanzee--and
it is relatively larger. But the improvements in structure do not seem in themselves sufficient
to account for man's great advance in intelligence. The rill of inner life has become a swift
stream, sometimes a rushing torrent. Besides perceptual inference or Intelligence--a sort of
picture-logic, which some animals likewise have--there is conceptual inference--or Reason--an
internal experimenting with general ideas. Even the cleverest animals, it would seem, do not
get much beyond playing with "particulars"; man plays an internal game of chess with "universals."
Intelligent behaviour may go a long way with mental images; rational conduct demands general
ideas. It may be, however, that "percepts" and "concepts" differ rather in degree than in kind,
and that the passage from one to the other meant a higher power of forming associations. A
clever dog has probably a generalised percept of man, as distinguished from a memory-image
of the particular men it has known, but man alone has the concept Man, or Mankind, or Humanity.
Experimenting with concepts or general ideas is what we call Reason.

Here, of course, we get into deep waters, and perhaps it is wisest not to attempt too much.
So we shall content ourselves here with pointing out that Man's advance in intelligence and
from intelligence to reason is closely wrapped up with his power of speech. What animals began--a
small vocabulary--he has carried to high perfection. But what is distinctive is not the vocabulary
so much as the habit of making sentences, of expressing judgments in a way which admitted of
communication between mind and mind. The multiplication of words meant much, the use of words
as symbols of general ideas meant even more, for it meant the possibility of playing the internal
game of thinking; but perhaps the most important advance of all was the means of comparing
notes with neighbours, of corroborating individual experience by social intercourse. With words,
also, it became easier to enregister outside himself the gains of the past. It is not without
significance that the Greek Logos, which may be translated "the word," may also be translated Mind.

§ 9

Looking Backwards

When we take a survey of animal behaviour we see a long inclined plane. The outer world provokes
simple creatures to answer back; simple creatures act experimentally on their surroundings.
From the beginning this twofold process has been going on, receiving stimuli from the environment
and acting upon the environment, and according to the efficiency of the reactions and actions
living creatures have been sifted for millions of years. One main line of advance has been
opening new gateways of knowledge--the senses, which are far more than five in number. The
other main line of advance has been in most general terms, experimenting or testing, probing
and proving, trying one key after another till a door is unlocked. There is progress in multiplying
the gateways of knowledge and making them more discriminating, and there is progress in making
the modes of experimenting more wide-awake, more controlled, and more resolute. But behind
both of these is the characteristically vital power of enregistering within the organism the
lessons of the past. In the life of the individual these enregistrations are illustrated by
memories and habituations and habits; in the life of the race they are illustrated by reflex
actions and instinctive capacities.

Body and Mind

We must not shirk the very difficult question of the relation between the bodily and the mental
side of behaviour.

(a) Some great thinkers have taught that the mind is a reality by itself which plays upon the
instrument of the brain and body. As the instrument gets worn and dusty the playing is not
so good as it once was, but the player is still himself. This theory of the essential independence
of the mind is a very beautiful one, but those who like it when applied to themselves are not
always so fond of it when it is applied to other intelligent creatures like rooks and elephants.
It may be, however, that there is a gradual emancipation of the mind which has gone furthest
in Man and is still progressing.

(b) Some other thinkers have taught that the inner life of thought and feeling is only, as
it were, an echo of the really important activity--that of the body and brain. Ideas are just
foam-bells on the hurrying streams and circling eddies of matter and energy that make up our
physiological life. To most of us this theory is impossible, because we are quite sure that
ideas and feelings and purposes, which cannot be translated into matter and motion, are the
clearest realities in our experience, and that they count for good and ill all through our
life. They are more than the tickings of the clock; they make the wheels go round.

(c) There are others who think that the most scientific position is simply to recognise both
the bodily and the mental activities as equally important, and so closely interwoven that they
cannot be separated. Perhaps they are just the outer and the inner aspects of one reality--the
life of the creature. Perhaps they are like the concave and convex curves of a dome, like the
two sides of a shield. Perhaps the life of the organism is always a unity, at one time appearing
more conspicuously as Mind-body, at another time as Body-mind. The most important fact is that
neither aspect can be left out. By no jugglery with words can we get Mind out of Matter and
Motion. And since we are in ourselves quite sure of our Mind, we are probably safe in saying
that in the beginning was Mind. This is in accordance with Aristotle's saying that there is
nothing in the end which was not also in kind present in the beginning--whatever we mean by
beginning.

In conclusion

What has led to the truly wonderful result which we admire in a creature like a dog or an otter,
a horse or a hare? In general, we may say, just two main processes--(1) testing all things,
and (2) holding fast that which is good. New departures occur and these are tested for what
they are worth. Idiosyncrasies crop up and they are sifted. New cards come mysteriously from
within into the creature's hand, and they are played--for better or for worse. So by new variations
and their sifting, by experimenting and enregistering the results, the mind has gradually evolved
and will continue to evolve.

VIII

FOUNDATIONS OF THE UNIVERSE

THE WORLD OF ATOMS

Most people have heard of the oriental race which puzzled over the foundations of the universe,
and decided that it must be supported on the back of a giant elephant. But the elephant? They
put it on the back of a monstrous tortoise, and there they let the matter end. If every animal
in nature had been called upon, they would have been no nearer a foundation. Most ancient peoples,
indeed, made no effort to find a foundation. The universe was a very compact little structure,
mainly composed of the earth and the great canopy over the earth which they called the sky.
They left it, as a whole, floating in nothing. And in this the ancients were wiser than they
knew. Things do not fall down unless they are pulled down by that mysterious force which we
call gravitation. The earth, it is true, is pulled by the sun, and would fall into it; but
the earth escapes this fiery fate by circulating at great speed round the sun. The stars pull
each other; but it has already been explained that they meet this by travelling rapidly in
gigantic orbits. Yet we do, in a new sense of the word, need foundations of the universe. Our
mind craves for some explanation of the matter out of which the universe is made. For this
explanation we turn to modern Physics and Chemistry. Both these sciences study, under different
aspects, matter and energy; and between them they have put together a conception of the fundamental
nature of things which marks an epoch in the history of human thought.

§ 1

The Bricks of the Cosmos

More than two thousand years ago the first men of science, the Greeks of the cities of Asia
Minor, speculated on the nature of matter. You can grind a piece of stone into dust. You can
divide a spoonful of water into as many drops as you like. Apparently you can go on dividing
as long as you have got apparatus fine enough for the work. But there must be a limit, these
Greeks said, and so they supposed that all matter was ultimately composed of minute particles
which were indivisible. That is the meaning of the Greek word "atom."

Like so many other ideas of these brilliant early Greek thinkers, the atom was a sound conception.
We know to-day that matter is composed of atoms. But science was then so young that the way
in which the Greeks applied the idea was not very profound. A liquid or a gas, they said, consisted
of round, smooth atoms, which would not cling together. Then there were atoms with rough surfaces,
"hooky" surfaces, and these stuck together and formed solids. The atoms of iron or marble,
for instance, were so very hooky that, once they got together, a strong man could not tear
them apart. The Greeks thought that the explanation of the universe was that an infinite number
of these atoms had been moving and mixing in an infinite space during an infinite time, and
had at last hit by chance on the particular combination which is our universe.

This was too simple and superficial. The idea of atoms was cast aside, only to be advanced
again in various ways. It was the famous Manchester chemist, John Dalton, who restored it in
the early years of the nineteenth century. He first definitely formulated the atomic theory
as a scientific hypothesis. The whole physical and chemical science of that century was now
based upon the atom, and it is quite a mistake to suppose that recent discoveries have discredited
"atomism." An atom is the smallest particle of a chemical element. No one has ever seen an
atom. Even the wonderful new microscope which has just been invented cannot possibly show us
particles of matter which are a million times smaller than the breadth of a hair; for that
is the size of atoms. We can weigh them and measure them, though they are invisible, and we
know that all matter is composed of them. It is a new discovery that atoms are not indivisible.
They consist themselves of still smaller particles, as we shall see. But the atoms exist all
the same, and we may still say that they are the bricks of which the material universe is built.

But if we had some magical glass by means of which we could see into the structure of material
things, we should not see the atoms put evenly together as bricks are in a wall. As a rule,
two or more atoms first come together to form a larger particle, which we call a "molecule."
Single atoms do not, as a rule, exist apart from other atoms; if a molecule is broken up, the
individual atoms seek to unite with other atoms of another kind or amongst themselves. For
example, three atoms of oxygen form what we call ozone; two atoms of hydrogen uniting with
one atom of oxygen form water. It is molecules that form the mass of matter; a molecule, as
it has been expressed, is a little building of which atoms are the bricks.

In this way we get a useful first view of the material things we handle. In a liquid the molecules
of the liquid cling together loosely. They remain together as a body, but they roll over and
away from each other. There is "cohesion" between them, but it is less powerful than in a solid.
Put some water in a kettle over the lighted gas, and presently the tiny molecules of water
will rush through the spout in a cloud of steam and scatter over the kitchen. The heat has
broken their bond of association and turned the water into something like a gas; though we
know that the particles will come together again, as they cool, and form once more drops of water.

In a gas the molecules have full individual liberty. They are in a state of violent movement,
and they form no union with each other. If we want to force them to enter into the loose sort
of association which molecules have in a liquid, we have to slow down their individual movements
by applying severe cold. That is how a modern man of science liquefies gases. No power that
we have will liquefy air at its ordinary temperature. In very severe cold, on the other hand,
the air will spontaneously become liquid. Some day, when the fires of the sun have sunk very
low, the temperature of the earth will be less than -200° C.: that is to say, more than two
hundred degrees Centigrade below freezing-point. It will sink to the temperature of the moon.
Our atmosphere will then be an ocean of liquid air, 35 feet deep, lying upon the solidly frozen
masses of our water-oceans.

In a solid the molecules cling firmly to each other. We need a force equal to twenty-five tons
to tear asunder the molecules in a bar of iron an inch thick. Yet the structure is not "solid"
in the popular sense of the word. If you put a piece of solid gold in a little pool of mercury,
the gold will take in the mercury between its molecules, as if it were porous like a sponge.
The hardest solid is more like a lattice-work than what we usually mean by "solid"; though
the molecules are not fixed, like the bars of a lattice-work, but are in violent motion; they
vibrate about equilibrium positions. I should think you would be tempted."

"I didn't feel the temptation particularly," answered Fred; "but it
was kind of him to come and see me."

"Well, there is that," Phil replied indifferently. "You seemed to get on first-rate with Uncle
Amy. Was that the first time you ever talked to him?"

"Yes. But I remember that once when I was a little chap he met me in the street over by the college--I
remember the exact spot--and gave me a penny. I seem to remember that he used to do that with
children quite unexpectedly. I imagine that he does a lot of nice things for people."

"Uncle Amy," said Phil deliberately, "is the second grandest man now present on earth. Daddy
is the first."

"I don't know your father, except as I see him in the street."

"I suppose not," said Phil.

These commonplaces were leading nowhere, and they were becoming the least bit trying.

"My aunts have decided that the Montgomerys and the Holtons might as well bury the hatchet. They're
going to ask your Uncle William to my party. They can't stand not knowing your aunt."

He did not at once grasp this.

He was only dimly conscious of Montgomery social values and the prominence of his Uncle William's
wife had not seemed to him a matter of importance. His acquaintance with that lady was indeed
slight, and he did not see at once wherein Phil's aunts had anything to gain by cultivating her
society, nor did Phil enlighten him. This turn of the talk embarrassed him by its suggestion
of the escapade in which Phil's mother and his uncle had figured. Phil was not apparently troubled
by this.

"They didn't invite you to my party, did they?"

He did not know exactly whom she meant by "they"; and he had not heard of Phil's party.

"No," he answered, smiling; "they probably never heard of me."

"Well, you will be invited. Your brother and sister are coming. Your brother Charlie told me
so. He's going to give up a trip to New York just to be there."

Phil, he reflected, had been pleased by Charles's magnanimity in changing
plans that embraced the magical name of New York to be present at
her coming-out party.

From his knowledge of his brother he felt quite sure that Charles must think it worth while to abandon
the visit to New York to pay the tribute of his presence to a daughter of the Montgomerys. This contributed
to Fred's discomfiture and made it more difficult to talk to Phil. On the face of it Phil was
not a difficult person. He had seen her dance round a corn-shock in the moonlight, and a girl
who would do that ought to be easy to talk to; and he had seen her, aproned at her kitchen door,
throw an apple at a cat with enviable exactness of aim, and a girl who threw apples at cats should
be human and approachable. It must be her smart city frock that made the difference: he hated
Phil's clothes, and he resented with particular animosity the gloves
that concealed her hands.

She saw the frown on his face.

"I don't believe I heard you say whether you were coming to my party or not. If you expect to
travel about that time you needn't put yourself out, of course. You shall have one of our regular
engraved invitations. How do you get mail out here?" she ended practically.

"R.F.D. 7. It will be thrilling to get something out of that bird's nest besides bills, fertilizer
and incubator circulars, and the bulletins of the Department of Agriculture. Thank you very much.
But if, after conferring with your aunts, you find that they don't approve of me, it will be all
right."

"You have funny thoughts in your head, don't you?

Don't you suppose I'm going to have something to say about my own
party?

Just for a postscript I'll tell you now that I expect you to come. If I've got to have a party
I want to have as many fellow-sufferers as possible."

"Does that mean"--and Fred laughed--"that you are not terribly excited about your own party?
It sounded that way."

He was not interested in parties himself; he had hardly been to one since he was a child, and
the thought of such an imposing function as he assumed Phil's coming out would be appalled
him. And there was the matter of clothes: the dress-suit he had purchased while he was in college
had gone glimmering long ago. The Sunday best he wore to-day was two years old, and a discerning
eye might have detected its imperfections which a recent careful
pressing had not wholly obliterated.

His gaze turned for a moment toward the land in which lay his hope; he had to look past Phil to
see those acres. His thoughts were still upon her party and his relation to it, so that it was
with a distinct shock that he heard her say softly and wistfully:--

"It's queer, isn't it?"

"What is?"

She lifted her arm with a sweeping gesture.

"The world--things generally--what interests you and me; what interests Uncle Amy and Mr. Perry;
the buzzings in all our noddles. Thousands of people, in towns just like Montgomery, live along
some way or other, and most of them do the best they can, and keep out of jails and poorhouses,
mostly, and nothing very important happens to them or has to. It always strikes me as odd how unimportant
we all are.

We're just us, and if God didn't make us very big or wise or good, why, there's nothing to
be done about it. And no matter how hard we get knocked, or how often we stumble, why, most
of us like the game and wouldn't give it up for anything. I think that's splendid; the way
we just keep plugging on. We all think something pleasant is going to happen to-morrow or day-after-to-morrow.
Everybody does. And that's what keeps the world moving and everybody
tolerably cheerful and happy."

Phil the philosopher was still another sort of person. She had spoken in her usual tone and
he looked at her wonderingly. It was a new experience to hear life reduced to the simple terms
Phil used. She seemed to him like a teacher who keeps a dull pupil after class, and, by eliminating
all unessential factors, makes clear what an hour before had been only a jumble of meaningless
terms in the student's mind.

He was still dumb before this new Phil with her a, b, c philosophy when her eyes brightened,
and she sprang to her feet.

Bending forward with her hand to her ear, and then dropping her arms
to her sides, she said:--

"Adown the orchard aisles they come, methinks,--
My lord who guardest well his treasure chests, Attended by his squire
and faithful drudge, And back to town I soon must lightly skip Else
father will be roaring for his tea."

She was, indeed, a mystifying being! It was not until the absurdity of her last line broke upon him
that he saw that this was only another side of Phil the inexplicable. She threw up her arm and
signaled to her Uncle Amzi, who was approaching with Perry. The interruption
was unwelcome.

It had been a bewildering experience to sit beside Phil on the sunny orchard slope. He had not known
that any girl could be like this.

"Do you write poetry?" he asked, from the depths of his humility.

She turned with a mockery of disdain.

"I should think you could see, Mr. Holton, that these are not singing robes, nor is this lovely
creation of a hat wrought in the similitude of a wreath of laurel; but both speak for the plain
prose of life. You have, therefore, no reason to fear me."

In a moment they were all on their way to the house; and soon Phil and Amzi were driving homeward.

"What
was Fred Holton talking to you about?" asked Amzi, as he shook the reins over the back of his
roadster.

"He wasn't talking to me, Amy; I was talking to him. He's a nice boy."

"He doesn't run so much to gold watches and chains as the rest of 'em. He seems to be pretty
decent. Perry says he's got the right stuff in him." And then, with more animation: "Those
Holtons! Thunder!"

CHAPTER X

PHIL'S PARTY

Mr. Amzi Montgomery thought it only proper to learn all that was possible of the affairs of his customers.
This was the part of wisdom in a cautious banker; and he was distressed when checks that were
not self-explanatory passed through the receiving-teller's window. A small bank is a good place
in which to sharpen one's detective sense. Every check tells a story and is in some degree a clue.

No
account on his bank's ledgers was more often scrutinized than that of Nancy Bartlett, and when
she deposited a draft for $2115.15, the incident was not one to be passed lightly. No such
sum had ever before been placed to Nan's credit. He knew that she received five- and ten-
and even fifty-dollar drafts from Eastern periodicals, and he had
touched these with reverent hands: but two thousand dollars in a lump
from one of the best-known publishers in the country staggered Amzi.

To add to his mystification, half the amount plus one cent, to-wit, $1057.58, was immediately
transferred to Thomas Kirkwood's account, and this left Amzi away up in the air. Just what right
Tom Kirkwood had to participate in Nan's earnings Amzi did not know, nor did he see immediately
any way of finding out.

What did happen, though, coincident with this event, and much to his gratification, was the
installation of a girl-of-all-work in Kirkwood's house. Phil had been dislodged from the kitchen,
and Amzi was mightily relieved by this. A kitchen was no place for his niece, that flower of the
Montgomery flock. His spirits rose when Phil hailed him one morning as he stood baring his head
to the November air on the bank steps, and told him that her occupation was gone. She made
the confession ruefully; it was unfair for her father to discharge her just as she was getting
the hang of the range and learning to broil a steak without incinerating it. "Just for that" she
would spend a great deal of time in Main Street, and ruin her constitution
at Struby's soda-fountain.

While Amzi was still trying to account for Nan's check, two other incidents contributed further
to his perplexities. On his way home one evening he saw Nan and Kirkwood walking together. It
was only a fair assumption that the two friends had met by chance and that Kirkwood was merely
accompanying Nan to her door, as he had every right to do. They were walking slowly and talking
earnestly. To avoid passing them, Amzi turned off at the first cross-street, but stood for a
moment staring after them. Then the next evening he had gone to call at the Bartletts' and
all his intervening speculations were overthrown when he found Kirkwood there alone with Rose,
Nan being, it seemed, in Indianapolis on a visit. Rose and Kirkwood had evidently been deeply engrossed,
too, when Amzi interrupted their conference with the usual thump
of the drumstick.

The piano, he observed, was closed, and it was inexplicable that Kirkwood should be spending
an unmusical evening with Rose. Nor was Phil with her father. This was another damaging fact.
It was a blow to Amzi to find that such things could happen in his own town, and under his very
eyes.

If it hadn't been for Phil's party, the preparations for which gave him plenty to do, Amzi's winter
would have opened most unhappily; but Phil's party was an event of importance not only in her
life, but in Amzi's as well. Everybody who had the slightest title
to consideration received an invitation.

    He was glad his sisters had suggested that the Holtons be invited.
    It gave him an excuse for opening the doors wide. He heard much
    from his kinsfolk about the prosperity of the Holtons, who were held
    up to him in rebuke for his own sluggish business methods. He wanted
    his sisters and the rest of the world to know that the First National
Bank of Montgomery aroused in him no jealous pangs.

Phil arrived at Amzi's early and ran upstairs to take off her wraps.

When this was accomplished and her Aunt Fanny's housemaid, lent for the occasion, had duly
admired her, she knocked boldly on her uncle's door.

"Come in, you Phil," he shouted.

Amzi stood before his chiffonier in his shirt sleeves, trying to make a bow of his white tie. A
cigar, gripped firmly in his teeth, was not proving of much assistance in the operation. As Phil
crossed the room, he jerked off the strip of lawn and threw it into the open drawer.

"See what you've done? See all that litter?

All that stuff crumpled up and wasted just on your account?

I told that fellow in Indianapolis to give me the ready-made kind that buckles behind, but
he wouldn't listen; said they don't keep 'em any more. And look at that! It's a good thing I
got a dozen! Thunder!"
The "Thunder" was due to the fact that in his excess of emotion over
the difficulties with his raiment, his eyes had not until that instant
taken in Phil. His jaw fell as he stared and tears filled his eyes.
Above the soft folds of her white crêpe gown the firm clean lines
of her shoulders and throat were revealed and for the first time he
fully realized that the Phil who had gladdened his days by her pranks--Phil
the romp and hoyden--had gone, and that she would never be quite the
same again. There was a distinct shock in the thought. It carried
him back to the day when her mother had danced across the threshold
from youth to womanhood, with all of Phil's charm and grace and her
heart of laughter.

Phil fanned herself languidly, feigning to ignore
his bewilderment. An aigrette in her hair emphasized her height. She
lifted her arms and, whistling softly, pirouetted about the room.
Her movements were those of vigorous, healthy youth. Her eyes were
bright and her cheeks aglow.

"Thunder!" gasped Amzi, feeling absently
of his collar. "Is that you, Phil?"

"Generally speaking, it ain't,
Amy. What do you think of the gladness of these joyful rags anyhow?"

"You
look right, Phil. You've grown about six inches since I saw you last.
High heels?"

She thrust out a slipper for his inspection.

"Those
clothes are not as bad as some I've seen. I don't mind the low-in-the-neck
effect when there's a neck to show like yours. Most of 'em look like
the neck of a picked gander. I guess Fanny did about the right thing.
Fanny's taste is usually pretty fair."

"Oh, the whole syndicate took
a hand in it," said Phil with a sigh. "They nearly wore me out; but
they were so busy consulting each other that they didn't notice that
I chose the crêpe myself. But I wanted you to like my things, Amy."

"Of
course I like 'em. You certainly look grand."

He rummaged in one
of the chiffonier drawers.

"Just wait a minute," he said; "you've
got to fix this fool thing for me." He placed a fresh tie round his
white-wing collar and loosely crossed the ends. "I ain't going to
take any chances of spoiling this. Now, Phil, do your noblest."

"With
gloves on? Well, I'm used to doing daddy's over again, so here goes."

He
stood with his chin in air while she tied the bow. Her youth, her
loveliness, her red lips, compressed at the crucial moment when the
bow took form, moved and thrilled him. No one in the world had ever
been so dear to him as Phil! When she rested her hands on his shoulders
and tilted her head to one side to study her handiwork he raised himself
on his toes and lifted his hands, in one of which he had concealed
something.

"Bend your head a little, Phil; I ought to have a ladder
for this."

And in a moment he drew down upon her neck a chain with
a pendant of pearls, which he had chosen with the greatest care at
the best jeweler's in Indianapolis.

"Now look at yourself!"

She
sprang to the mirror, and while she was exclaiming over it, he remarked,
"I guess it don't make you look much worse, Phil. But it doesn't make
you look much nicer. Thunder! Nothing could!"

"Amy! I'm going to
muss you up!" she cried, wheeling round.

"Phil--don't you touch me;
don't you dare!"

He backed away and began drawing on his coat, and
she abandoned the idea of mussing him to make sure his tie didn't
crawl up over his collar. She clasped him tight and kissed him on
the mouth.

"What a dear old pal you are, Amy," she said, laying her
cheek against his. "Don't you ever think I don't appreciate what you
do for me--what you are to me!"

"I guess that's all right, Phil,"
he said, and turned round to the chiffonier and blew his nose furiously.
"Where's Tom?"

"I guess daddy's gone downstairs."

"Well, most of
your aunts are on the job somewhere and we'd better go down and start
this party. I hear the fiddlers tuning up."

Amzi II had built a big
house with a generous hall and large rooms, and it had been a matter
of pride with Amzi III to maintain it as it had been, refusing to
listen to the advice of his sisters that he shut off part of it. Amzi
liked space, and he was not in the least dismayed by problems of housekeeping.
In preparing for Phil's party he had had all the white woodwork repainted,
and the floors of the drawing- and living-rooms had been polished
for dancing.

In Montgomery functions of all sorts begin early. The
number of available public vehicles is limited, and by general consent
the citizens take turns in the use of them. There hadn't been a party
at the Montgomery homestead since the marriage of the last of the
Montgomery girls. They found a certain kind of pitchblende which was very active, and
they analysed tons of it, concentrating always on the radiant element in it. After a time,
as they successively worked out the non-radiant matter, the stuff began to glow. In the end
they extracted from eight tons of pitchblende about half a teaspoonful of something that was
a million times more radiant than uranium. There was only one name for it--Radium.

That was the starting-point of the new development of physics and chemistry. From every laboratory
in the world came a cry for radium salts (as pure radium was too precious), and hundreds of
brilliant workers fastened on the new element. The inquiry was broadened, and, as year followed
year, one substance after another was found to possess the power of emitting rays, that is,
to be radio-active. We know to-day that nearly every form of matter can be stimulated to radio-activity;
which, as we shall see, means that its atoms break up into smaller and wonderfully energetic
particles which we call "electrons." This discovery of electrons has brought about a complete
change in our ideas in many directions.

So, instead of atoms being indivisible, they are actually dividing themselves, spontaneously,
and giving off throughout the universe tiny fragments of their substance. We shall explain
presently what was later discovered about the electron; meanwhile we can say that every glowing
metal is pouring out a stream of these electrons. Every arc-lamp is discharging them. Every
clap of thunder means a shower of them. Every star is flooding space with them. We are witnessing
the spontaneous breaking up of atoms, atoms which had been thought to be indivisible. The sun
not only pours out streams of electrons from its own atoms, but the ultra-violet light which
it sends to the earth is one of the most powerful agencies for releasing electrons from the
surface-atoms of matter on the earth. It is fortunate for us that our atmosphere absorbs most
of this ultra-violet or invisible light of the sun--a kind of light which will be explained
presently. It has been suggested that, if we received the full flood of it from the sun, our
metals would disintegrate under its influence and this "steel civilisation" of ours would be
impossible!

But we are here anticipating, we are going beyond radium to the wonderful discoveries which
were made by the chemists and physicists of the world who concentrated upon it. The work of
Professor and Mme. Curie was merely the final clue to guide the great search. How it was followed
up, how we penetrated into the very heart of the minute atom and discovered new and portentous
mines of energy, and how we were able to understand, not only matter, but electricity and light,
will be told in the next chapter.

THE DISCOVERY OF THE ELECTRON AND HOW IT EFFECTED A REVOLUTION IN IDEAS

What the discovery of radium implied was only gradually realised. Radium captivated the imagination
of the world; it was a boon to medicine, but to the man of science it was at first a most puzzling
and most attractive phenomenon. It was felt that some great secret of nature was dimly unveiled
in its wonderful manifestations, and there now concentrated upon it as gifted a body of men--conspicuous
amongst them Sir J. J. Thomson, Sir Ernest Rutherford, Sir W. Ramsay, and Professor Soddy--as
any age could boast, with an apparatus of research as far beyond that of any other age as the
Aquitania is beyond a Roman galley. Within five years the secret was fairly mastered. Not only
were all kinds of matter reduced to a common basis, but the forces of the universe were brought
into a unity and understood as they had never been understood before.

§ 5

The Discovery of the Electron

Physicists did not take long to discover that the radiation from radium was very like the radiation
in a "Crookes tube." It was quickly recognised, moreover, that both in the tube and in radium
(and other metals) the atoms of matter were somehow breaking down.

However, the first step was to recognise that there were three distinct and different rays
that were given off by such metals as radium and uranium. Sir Ernest Rutherford christened
them, after the first three letters of the Greek alphabet, the Alpha, the Beta, and Gamma rays.
We are concerned chiefly with the second group and purpose here to deal with that group only.[3]

    [3] The "Alpha rays" were presently recognised as atoms of helium
    gas, shot out at the rate of 12,000 miles a second.

The "Gamma rays" are waves, like the X-rays, not material particles. They appear to be a type
of X-rays. They possess the remarkable power of penetrating opaque substances; they will pass
through a foot of solid iron, for example.

The "Beta rays," as they were at first called, have proved to be one of the most interesting
discoveries that science ever made. They proved what Crookes had surmised about the radiations
he discovered in his vacuum tube. But it was not a fourth state of matter that had been found,
but a new property of matter, a property common to all atoms of matter. The Beta rays were
later christened Electrons. They are particles of disembodied electricity, here spontaneously
liberated from the atoms of matter: only when the electron was isolated from the atom was it
recognised for the first time as a separate entity. Electrons, therefore, are a constituent
of the atoms of matter, and we have discovered that they can be released from the atom by a
variety of agencies. Electrons are to be found everywhere, forming part of every atom.

"An electron," Sir William Bragg says, "can only maintain a separate existence if it is travelling
at an immense rate, from one three-hundredth of the velocity of light upwards, that is to say,
at least 600 miles a second, or thereabouts. Otherwise the electron sticks to the first atom
it meets." These amazing particles may travel with the enormous velocity of from 10,000 to
more than 100,000 miles a second. It was first learned that they are of an electrical nature,
because they are bent out of their normal path if a magnet is brought near them. And this fact
led to a further discovery: to one of those sensational estimates which the general public
is apt to believe to be founded on the most abstruse speculations. The physicist set up a little
chemical screen for the "Beta rays" to hit, and he so arranged his tube that only a narrow
sheaf of the rays poured on to the screen. He then drew this sheaf of rays out of its course
with a magnet, and he accurately measured the shift of the luminous spot on the screen where
the rays impinged on it. But when he knows the exact intensity of his magnetic field--which
he can control as he likes--and the amount of deviation it causes, and the mass of the moving
particles, he can tell the speed of the moving particles which he thus diverts. These particles
were being hurled out of the atoms of radium, or from the negative pole in a vacuum tube, at
a speed which, in good conditions, reached nearly the velocity of light, i.e. nearly 186,000
miles a second.

Their speed has, of course, been confirmed by numbers of experiments; and another series of
experiments enabled physicists to determine the size of the particles. Only one of these need
be described, to give the reader an idea how men of science arrived at their more startling
results.

Fog, as most people know, is thick in our great cities because the water-vapour gathers on
the particles of dust and smoke that are in the atmosphere. This fact was used as the basis
of some beautiful experiments. Artificial fogs were created in little glass tubes, by introducing
dust, in various proportions, for supersaturated vapour to gather on. Smith retreated, and Tromp,
eager to win a victory all by himself, abandoned the rest of the Dutch fleet and pursued Smith.
Thus the action broke into two widely separated parts. The English van and center succeeded
in forcing the corresponding Dutch divisions to retreat, and if Monk had turned to the help of
Smith he might have taken or destroyed all of the 39 ships in Tromp's division. Instead, he
and Rupert went careering on in pursuit of the enemy directly ahead of them. Eventually de Ruyter's
ships found refuge in shallow water and then Monk turned to catch
Tromp.

But the latter proved too clever for his adversaries and slipped between them to an anchorage
alongside of de Ruyter.

Although the victory was not nearly so decisive as it should have been with the opportunity offered,
nevertheless it served the need of the hour. De Ruyter was no longer able to blockade the Thames
and the Straits of Dover.

And Monk, following up his success, carried the war to the enemy's
coast, where he burned a merchant fleet of 160 vessels in the roadstead
of the island of Terschelling, and destroyed one of the towns.

Early in 1666 active operations on both sides dwindled down, and Charles, anxious to use naval
appropriations for other purposes, allowed the fleet to fall into a condition of unreadiness
for service. One of the least scandals in this corrupt age was the unwillingness or inability of the
officials to pay the seamen their wages.

In consequence large numbers of English prisoners in Holland actually preferred taking service
in the Dutch navy rather than accepting exchange, on the ground that the Dutch government paid its
men while their own did not.

Early in June, 1667, de Ruyter took advantage of the condition of the English fleet by inflicting
perhaps the greatest humiliation on England that she has ever suffered. Entering the Thames unopposed,
he was prevented from attacking London only by unfavorable wind and tide. He then turned his attention
to the dockyards of Chatham and burnt or captured seven great ships of the line, besides numerous
smaller craft, carried off the naval stores at Sheerness, and then for the next six weeks kept
a blockade on the Thames and the eastern and southern coasts of England. This mortifying situation
continued until the signing of the "Peace of Breda" concluded the war.

The Third Dutch War

Less than five years later Charles again made war on the Netherlands.

For this there was not the shadow of excuse, but Louis XIV saw fit
to attack the Dutch, and Charles was ever his willing vassal.

The English began hostilities without any declaration of war by a piratical attack on a Dutch convoy.

At
this juncture Holland was reduced to the last extremity. Attacked on her land frontiers by France,
then the dominating military power, and on her sea frontiers by England, the strongest naval
power, she seemed to have small chance to survive. But her people responded with a heroism worthy
of her splendid history.

They opened their dykes to check the armies of invasion and strained every nerve to equip a fleet
large enough to cope with the combined navies of France and England. In this Third Dutch War
four great naval battles were fought: that of Solebay, May 28, 1672, the two engagements off Schooneveldt,
May 28 and June 4, 1673, and that of the Texel, August 11, 1673.

In all of these the honors go to the Dutch and their great admiral, de Ruyter. Since these actions
did not restore the Netherlands to their old-time position or check
the ascendancy of England, they need not be discussed individually
here.

The outstanding feature of the whole story is the surpassing skill and courage of de Ruyter
in the face of overwhelming odds. In this war he showed the full stature of his genius as never
before, and won his title as the greatest seaman of the 17th century. After his death one must
wait till the day of Suffren and Nelson to find men worthy to rank with him.

In this campaign de Ruyter showed his powers not only as a tactician but as a strategist. His
master, Martin Tromp, is regarded as the father of the line ahead formation for battle, but he undoubtedly
taught de Ruyter its limitations as well as its advantages, and there is no trace of the stupid
formalism of the Duke of York's regulations in de Ruyter's brilliant work.

[Footnote 1: INFLUENCE OF SEA POWER UPON HISTORY, p. 144.]

At this time he had no worthy opponent. As Monk was dead, the Duke of York had again assumed
active command with Rupert as his lieutenant.

Although the Duke was honestly devoted to the navy he was dull-witted, and in spite of the advantage
of numbers and the dogged courage of officers and men which so often in English history has made up
for stupid leadership, he was wholly unable to cope with de Ruyter's genius. As for the French
navy, their ships were superb, the best in Europe, but their officers had no experience and apparently
small desire for close fighting. At all events, despite the odds against him, de Ruyter defeated
the allies in all four battles, prevented their landing an army of
invasion, and broke up their attempt to blockade the coast.

The war was unpopular in England and as it met with ill success it became more so. After the battle
of the Texel, in 1673, active operations died down to practically nothing, and at the beginning
of the year England made peace. By this time Holland had managed to find other allies on the
Continent--Spain and certain German states--and while she had to continue her struggle against
Louis XIV by land she was relieved of the menace of her great enemy on the sea. Fifteen years
later, by a curious freak of history, a Dutch prince became King William III of England, and the
two old enemies became united in alliance. But the Netherlands had exhausted themselves by their
protracted struggle. They had saved their independence, but after the close of the 17th century
they ceased to be a world power of any consequence.

The persistent enmity of the French king for the Dutch gained nothing
for France but everything for England.

Unwittingly he poured out his resources in money and men to the end
that England should become the great colonial and maritime rival of
France.

As a part of her spoils England had gained New York and New Jersey, thus linking her northern
and southern American colonies, and she had taken St. Helena as a base for her East Indies merchantmen.
She had tightened her hold in India, and by repeatedly chastising the Barbary pirates had
won immunity for her traders in the Mediterranean. At the beginning of the Second Dutch War
Monk had said with brutal frankness, "What matters this or that reason? What we want is more of
the trade which the Dutch have." This, the richest prize of all, fell from the hands of the Dutch into
those of the English. During the long drawn war which went on after the English peace of 1674,
while Holland with her allies fought against Louis XIV, the great bulk of the Dutch carrying
trade passed from the Dutch to the English flag.

The close of the 17th century, therefore, found England fairly started on her career as an
ocean empire, unified by sea power. Her navy, despite the vices it had caught from the Stuart
régime, had become firmly established as a permanent institution with a definite organization.
By this time every party recognized its essential importance to England's future.

Nevertheless, whatever satisfaction may be felt by men of English speech in this rapid growth of England's
power and prestige as a result of the three wars with the Dutch, one cannot avoid the other
side of the picture. A people small in numbers but great in energy and genius was hounded to the
point of extinction by the greed of its powerful neighbors. Peace-loving, asking merely to
be let alone, the only crime of the Dutch was to excite the envy of the English and the French.

REFERENCES

See next chapter, page 221. From this time on, for over 125 years, England was involved in a series
of wars with France. They began with the threat of Louis to dominate Europe and ended with the
similar threat on the part of Napoleon. In all this conflict the sea power of England was a factor
of paramount importance. Even when the fighting was continental rather than naval, the ability
of Great Britain to cut France off from her overseas possessions resulted in the transfer of
enormous tracts of territory to the British Empire.

During the 18th century, the territorial extent of the expire grew by leaps and bounds, with
the single important loss of the American colonies. And even this brought no positive advantage to France
for it did not weaken her adversary's grip on the sea.

The War of the League of Augsburg

The accession of William III was the signal for England's entry into the war of the League of Augsburg
(1688-1697) against France, and the effort of the French king to put James II back again upon
the English throne. By this time the French navy had been so greatly strengthened that at
the outset it outnumbered the combined fleets of the English and the Dutch. It boasted the only notable
admiral of this period, Tourville, but it missed every opportunity to do something decisive.
It failed to keep William from landing in England with an army; it failed also to keep the
English from landing and supplying an army in Ireland, where they raised the siege of Londonderry
and won the decisive victory of the Boyne. On the other hand the British navy was handled with
equal irresolution and blindness in strategy.

It accomplished what it did in keeping communications open with Ireland
through the mistakes of the French, and its leaders seemed to be equally
unaware of the importance of winning definitely the control of the
sea.

If the naval strategy on both sides was feeble the tactics were equally so. The contrast between
the fighting of Blake, Monk, Tromp and de Ruyter and that of the admirals of this period is striking.
For example, on May 1, 1689, the English admiral Herbert and the French admiral Châteaurenault
fought an indecisive action in Bantry Bay, Ireland. After considerable powder had been shot away
without the loss of a ship on either side, the French went back to protect their transports in the
bay; Herbert also withdrew, and was made Earl of Torrington for his "victory." This same officer commanding
a Dutch and English fleet encountered the French under Tourville off Beachy Head on the south coast
of England (July 10, 1690). It is true that Tourville's force was stronger, but Torrington acted
with no enterprise and was thoroughly beaten. At the same time the French admiral showed lack
of push in following up his victory, which might have been crushing. By this time the line ahead
order of fighting had become a fetich on both sides. The most noted naval battle of this war is
that of La Hogue (May 29, 1692), which has been celebrated as a great British victory. In this
action an allied fleet of 99 were opposed to a French fleet of 44 under Tourville. Tourville offered
battle under such odds only because he had imperative orders from
his king to fight the enemy.

During the action the French did not lose a single ship, but in the four days' retreat the vessels
became separated in trying to find shelter and fifteen were destroyed or taken. This was a severe
blow to the the French navy but by no means decisive. The subsequent inactivity of the fleet
was due to the demands of the war on land.

As the war became more and more a continental affair, Louis was compelled to utilize all his
resources for his military campaigns. For this reason the splendid fleet with which he had begun
the war gradually disappeared from the sea. Some of these men of war were lent to great privateersmen
like Jean Bart and Du Guay Trouin, who took out powerful squadrons of from five to ten ships of
the line, strong enough to overcome the naval escorts of a British
convoy, and ravaged English commerce.

In this matter of protecting shipping the naval strategy was as vacillating
and blind as in everything else.

Nevertheless no mere commerce destroying will serve to win the control
of the sea, and despite the losses in trade and the low ebb to which
English naval efficiency had sunk, the British flag still dominated
the ocean routes while the greater part of the French fleet rotted
in port.

In this war of the League of Augsburg, Louis XIV was fighting practically all Europe, and the
strain was too great for a nation already weakened by a long series of wars. By the terms of
peace which he found himself obliged to accept, he lost nearly everything that he had gained
by conquest during his long reign.

Wars of the Spanish and the Austrian Succession

After a brief interval of peace war blazed out again over the question whether a French Bourbon
should be king of Spain,--the War of the Spanish Succession, 1702-1713.

England's aim in this war was to acquire some of the Spanish colonies in America and to prevent
any loss of trading privileges hitherto enjoyed by the English and the Dutch. But as it turned
out nothing of importance was accomplished in the western hemisphere except by the terms of
peace. The French and Spanish attempted no major operations by sea. But the English navy captured
Minorca, with its important harbor of Port Mahon, and Rooke, with more initiative than he had ever
shown before in his career, took Gibraltar (August 4, 1704). These two prizes made Great Britain
for the first time a Mediterranean power, and the fact that she held the gateway to the inland
sea was of great importance in subsequent naval history.

In addition to these captures the terms of peace (the Treaty of Utrecht) yielded to England from
the French Newfoundland, the Hudson Bay territory, and Nova Scotia. All that the French had left
on the eastern coast of Canada was Cape Breton Island, with Louisburg, which was the key to the
St. Lawrence. As for commercial privileges, England had gained from the Portuguese, who had been allies
in the war, a practical monopoly of their carrying trade; and from France she had taken the
entire monopoly of the slave trade to the Spanish American colonies
which had been formerly granted by Spain to France.

    Holland got nothing out of the war as affecting her interests
    at sea,--not even a trading post. Her alliance with Great Britain
    had become as some one has called it, that of "the giant
    and the dwarf." At the conclusion of the War of the Spanish Succession,
    to quote the words of Mahan, "England was the sea power; there was
    no second."
    
    In this war as in the preceding, French privateersmen made great inroads
    on British commerce, and some of these privateering operations were
    conducted on a grand scale. For example, Du Guay Trouin took a squadron
    of six ships of the line and two frigates, together with 2000 troops,
across the Atlantic and attacked Rio Janeiro.

He had little difficulty in forcing its submission and extorting
a ransom of $400,000.

The activities of the privateers led to a clause in the treaty of peace requiring the French
to destroy the fortifications of the port of Dunkirk, which was notorious
as the nest of these corsairs.

The War of the Austrian Succession, 1740-1748, was another of the dynastic quarrels of this
age, with France and Spain arrayed against England. It has no naval interest for our purposes
here. The peace of 1748, however, leaving things exactly as they were when the war began,
settled none of the existing grudge between Great Britain and France. Eight years later, hostilities
began again in the Seven Years' War, 1756-1763, in which Great Britain entered on the side
of Prussia against a great coalition of Continental powers headed by France.

The Seven Years' War

The naval interest of this war is centered in the year 1759, when
France, having lost Louisburg on account of England's control of the
sea, decided to concentrate naval and military forces on an invasion
of England. Before the plans for this projected thrust were completed,
Quebec also had fallen to the British. The attempted invasion of 1759
is not so well known as that of Napoleon in 1805, but it furnished
the pattern that Napoleon copied and had a better chance of success
than his. In brief, a small squadron under the famous privateer Thurot
was to threaten the Scotch and Irish coasts, acting as a diversion
to draw off the British fleet. Meanwhile the squadron at Toulon was
to dodge the British off that port, pass the Straits and join Conflans,
who had the main French fleet at Brest. The united forces were then
to cover the crossing of the troops in transports and flatboats to
the English coast.

This plan was smashed by Admiral Hawke in one
of the most daring feats in British naval annals. Thurot got away
but did not divert any of the main force guarding the Channel. The
Toulon fleet also eluded the English for a time but went to pieces
outside the Straits largely on account of mismanagement on the part
of its commander. The remnants were either captured or driven to shelter
in neutral ports by the English squadron under Boscawen. On November
9, a heavy gale and the necessities of the fleet compelled Hawke to
lift his blockade of Brest and take shelter in Torbay, after leaving
four frigates to watch the port. As we saw, the nucleus of an atom
of matter consists of positive electricity which holds together a number of electrons, or charges
of negative electricity.[4] This certainly tells us to some extent what electricity is, and
how it is related to matter, but it leaves us with the usual difficulty about fundamental realities.
But we now know that electricity, like matter, is atomic in structure; a charge of electricity
is made up of a number of small units or charges of a definite, constant amount. It has been
suggested that the two kinds of electricity, i.e. positive and negative, are right-handed and
left-handed vortices or whirlpools in ether, or rings in ether, but there are very serious
difficulties, and we leave this to the future.

    [4] The words "positive" and "negative" electricity belong to the
    days when it was regarded as a fluid. A body overcharged with the
    fluid was called positive; an undercharged body was called negative.
    A positively-electrified body is now one whose atoms have lost some
    of their outlying electrons, so that the positive charge of
    electricity predominates. The negatively-electrified body is one
    with more than the normal number of electrons.

§ 10

What an Electric Current is

The discovery of these two kinds of electricity has, however, enabled us to understand very
fairly what goes on in electrical phenomena. The outlying electrons, as we saw, may pass from
atom to atom, and this, on a large scale, is the meaning of the electric current. In other
words, we believe an electric current to be a flow of electrons. Let us take, to begin with,
a simple electrical "cell," in which a feeble current is generated: such a cell as there is
in every house to serve its electric bells.

In the original form this simple sort of "battery" consisted of a plate of zinc and a plate
of copper immersed in a chemical. Long before anything was known about electrons it was known
that, if you put zinc and copper together, you produce a mild current of electricity. We know
now what this means. Zinc is a metal the atoms of which are particularly disposed to part with
some of their outlying electrons. Why, we do not know; but the fact is the basis of these small
batteries. Electrons from the atoms of zinc pass to the atoms of copper, and their passage
is a "current." Each atom gives up an electron to its neighbour. It was further found long
ago that if the zinc and copper were immersed in certain chemicals, which slowly dissolve the
zinc, and the two metals were connected by a copper wire, the current was stronger. In modern
language, there is a brisker flow of electrons. The reason is that the atoms of zinc which
are stolen by the chemical leave their detachable electrons behind them, and the zinc has therefore
more electrons to pass on to the copper.

Such cells are now made of zinc and carbon, immersed in sal-ammoniac, but the principle is
the same. The flow of electricity is a flow of electrons; though we ought to repeat that they
do not flow in a body, as molecules of water do. You may have seen boys place a row of bricks,
each standing on one end, in such order that the first, if it is pushed, will knock over the
second, the second the third, and so on to the last. There is a flow of movement all along
the line, but each brick moves only a short distance. So an electron merely passes to the next
atom, which sends on an electron to a third atom, and so on. In this case, however, the movement
from atom to atom is so rapid that the ripple of movement, if we may call it so, may pass along
at an enormous speed. We have seen how swiftly electrons travel.

But how is this turned into power enough even to ring a bell? The actual mechanical apparatus
by which the energy of the electron current is turned into sound, or heat, or light will be
described in a technical section later in this work. We are concerned here only with the principle,
which is clear. While zinc is very apt to part with electrons, copper is just as obliging in
facilitating their passage onward. Electrons will travel in this way in most metals, but copper
is one of the best "conductors." So we lengthen the copper wire between the zinc and the carbon
until it goes as far as the front door and the bell, which are included in the circuit. When
you press the button at the door, two wires are brought together, and the current of electrons
rushes round the circuit; and at the bell its energy is diverted into the mechanical apparatus
which rings the bell.

Copper is a good conductor--six times as good as iron--and is therefore so common in electrical
industries. Some other substances are just as stubborn as copper is yielding, and we call them
"insulators," because they resist the current instead of letting it flow. Their atoms do not
easily part with electrons. Glass, vulcanite, and porcelain are very good insulators for this
reason.

What the Dynamo does

But even several cells together do not produce the currents needed in modern industry, and
the flow is produced in a different manner. As the invisible electrons pass along a wire they
produce what we call a magnetic field around the wire, they produce a disturbance in the surrounding
ether. To be exact, it is through the ether surrounding the wire that the energy originated
by the electrons is transmitted. To set electrons moving on a large scale we use a "dynamo."
By means of the dynamo it is possible to transform mechanical energy into electrical energy.
The modern dynamo, as Professor Soddy puts it, may be looked upon as an electron pump. We cannot
go into the subject deeply here, we would only say that a large coil of copper wire is caused
to turn round rapidly between the poles of a powerful magnet. That is the essential construction
of the "dynamo," which is used for generating strong currents. We shall see in a moment how
magnetism differs from electricity, and will say here only that round the poles of a large
magnet there is a field of intense disturbance which will start a flow of electrons in any
copper that is introduced into it. On account of the speed given to the coil of wire its atoms
enter suddenly this magnetic field, and they give off crowds of electrons in a flash.

It is found that a similar disturbance is caused, though the flow is in the opposite direction,
when the coil of wire leaves the magnetic field. And as the coil is revolving very rapidly
we get a powerful current of electricity that runs in alternate directions--an "alternating"
current. Electricians have apparatus for converting it into a continuous current where this
is necessary.

A current, therefore, means a steady flow of the electrons from atom to atom. Sometimes, however,
a number of electrons rush violently and explosively from one body to another, as in the electric
spark or the occasional flash from an electric tram or train. The grandest and most spectacular
display of this phenomenon is the thunderstorm. As we saw earlier, a portentous furnace like
the sun is constantly pouring floods of electrons from its atoms into space. The earth intercepts
great numbers of these electrons. In the upper regions of the air the stream of solar electrons
has the effect of separating positively-electrified atoms from negatively-electrified ones,
and the water-vapour, which is constantly rising from the surface of the sea, gathers more
freely round the positively-electrified atoms, and brings them down, as rain, to the earth.
Thus the upper air loses a proportion of positive electricity, or becomes "negatively electrified."
In the thunderstorm we get both kinds of clouds--some with large excesses of electrons, and
some deficient in electrons--and the tension grows until at last it is relieved by a sudden
and violent discharge of electrons from one cloud to another or to the earth--an electric spark
on a prodigious scale.

§ 11

Magnetism

We have seen that an electric current is really a flow of electrons. Now an electric current
exhibits a magnetic effect. The surrounding space is endowed with energy which we call electro-magnetic
energy. A piece of magnetised iron attracting other pieces of iron to it is the popular idea
of a magnet. If we arrange a wire to pass vertically through a piece of cardboard and then
sprinkle iron filings on the cardboard we shall find that, on passing an electric current through
the wire, the iron filings arrange themselves in circles round it. The magnetic force, due
to the electric current, seems to exist in circles round the wire, an ether disturbance being
set up. Even a single electron, when in movement, creates a magnetic "field," as it is called,
round its path. There is no movement of electrons without this attendant field of energy, and
their motion is not stopped until that field of energy disappears from the ether. The modern
theory of magnetism supposes that all magnetism is produced in this way. All magnetism is supposed
to arise from the small whirling motions of the electrons contained in the ultimate atoms of
matter. We cannot here go into the details of the theory nor explain why, for instance, iron
behaves so differently from other substances, but it is sufficient to say that here, also,
the electron theory provides the key. This theory is not yet definitely proved, but it furnishes
a sufficient theoretical basis for future research. The earth itself is a gigantic magnet,
a fact which makes the compass possible, and it is well known that the earth's magnetism is
affected by those great outbreaks on the sun called sun-spots. Now it has been recently shown
that a sun-spot is a vast whirlpool of electrons and that it exerts a strong magnetic action.
There is doubtless a connection between these outbreaks of electronic activity and the consequent
changes in the earth's magnetism. The precise mechanism of the connection, however, is still
a matter that is being investigated.

ETHER AND WAVES

Ether and Waves

The whole material universe is supposed to be embedded in a vast medium called the ether. It
is true that the notion of the ether has been abandoned by some modern physicists, but, whether
or not it is ultimately dispensed with, the conception of the ether has entered so deeply into
the scientific mind that the science of physics cannot be understood unless we know something
about the properties attributed to the ether. The ether was invented to explain the phenomena
of light, and to account for the flow of energy across empty space. Light takes time to travel.
We see the sun at any moment by the light that left it 8 minutes before. It has taken that
8 minutes for the light from the sun to travel that 93,000,000 miles odd which separates it
from our earth. Besides the fact that light takes time to travel, it can be shown that light
travels in the form of waves. We know that sound travels in waves; sound consists of waves
in the air, or water or wood or whatever medium we hear it through. If an electric bell be
put in a glass jar and the air be pumped out of the jar, the sound of the bell becomes feebler
and feebler until, when enough air has been taken out, we do not hear the bell at all. Sound
cannot travel in a vacuum. We continue to see the bell, however, so that evidently light can
travel in a vacuum. The invisible medium through which the waves of light travel is the ether,
and this ether permeates all space and all matter. Between us and the stars stretch vast regions
empty of all matter. But we see the stars; their light reaches us, even though it may take
centuries to do so. We conceive, then, that it is the universal ether which conveys that light.
All the energy which has reached the earth from the sun and which, stored for ages in our coal-fields,
is now used to propel our trains and steamships, to heat and light our cities, to perform all
the multifarious tasks of modern life, was conveyed by the ether. Without that universal carrier
of energy we should have nothing but a stagnant, lifeless world.

We have said that light consists of waves. The ether may be considered as resembling, in some
respects, a jelly. It can transmit vibrations. The waves of light are really excessively small
ripples, measuring from crest to crest. The distance from crest to crest of the ripples in
a pond is sometimes no more than an inch or two. This distance is enormously great compared
to the longest of the wave-lengths that constitute light. We say the longest, for the waves
of light differ in length; the colour depends upon the length of the light. Red light has the
longest waves and violet the shortest. The longest waves, the waves of deep-red light, are
seven two hundred and fifty thousandths of an inch in length (7/250,000 inch). This is nearly
twice the length of deep-violet light-waves, which are 1/67,000 inch. But light-waves, the
waves that affect the eye, are not the only waves carried by the ether. Waves too short to
affect the eye can affect the photographic plate, and we can discover in this way the existence
of waves only half the length of the deep-violet waves. Still shorter waves can be discovered,
until we come to those excessively minute rays, the X-rays.

Below the Limits of Visibility

But we can extend our investigations in the other direction; we find that the ether carries
many waves longer than light-waves. Special photographic emulsions can reveal the existence
of waves five times longer than violet-light waves. Extending below the limits of visibility
are waves we detect as heat-waves. Radiant heat, like the heat from a fire, is also a form
of wave-motion in the ether, but the waves our senses recognise as heat are longer than light-waves.
There are longer waves still, but our senses do not recognise them. But we can detect them
by our instruments. These are the waves used in wireless telegraphy, and their length may be,
in some cases, measured in miles. These waves are the so-called electro-magnetic waves. Light,
radiant heat, and electro-magnetic waves are all of the same nature; they differ only as regards
their wave-lengths.

LIGHT--VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE

If Light, then, consists of waves transmitted through the ether, what gives rise to the waves?
Whatever sets up such wonderfully rapid series of waves must be something with an enormous
vibration. We come back to the electron: all atoms of matter, as we have seen, are made up
of electrons revolving in a regular orbit round a nucleus. These electrons may be affected
by out-side influences, they may be agitated and their speed or vibration increased.

Electrons and Light

The particles even of a piece of cold iron are in a state of vibration. No nerves of ours are
able to feel and register the waves they emit, but your cold poker is really radiating, or
sending out a series of wave-movements, on every side. After what we saw about the nature of
matter, this will surprise none. Put your poker in the fire for a time. The particles of the
glowing coal, which are violently agitated, communicate some of their energy to the particles
of iron in the poker. They move to and fro more rapidly, and the waves which they create are
now able to affect your nerves and cause a sensation of heat. Put the poker again in the fire,
until its temperature rises to 500° C. It begins to glow with a dull red. Its particles are
now moving very violently, and the waves they send out are so short and rapid that they can
be picked up by the eye--we have visible light. They would still not affect a photographic
plate. Heat the iron further, and the crowds of electrons now send out waves of various lengths
which blend into white light. What is happening is the agitated electrons flying round in their
orbits at a speed of trillions of times a second. Make the iron "blue hot," and it pours out,
in addition to light, the invisible waves which alter the film on the photographic plate. And
beyond these there is a long range of still shorter waves, culminating in the X-rays, which
will pass between the atoms of flesh or stone.

Nearly two hundred and fifty years ago it was proved that light travelled at least 600,000
times faster than sound. Jupiter, as we saw, has moons, which circle round it. They pass behind
the body of the planet, and reappear at the other side. But it was noticed that, when Jupiter
is at its greatest distance from us, the reappearance of the moon from behind it is 16 minutes
and 36 seconds later than when the planet is nearest to us. Plainly this was because light
took so long to cover the additional distance. The distance was then imperfectly known, and
the speed of light was underrated. We now know the distance, and we easily get the velocity
of light.

No doubt it seems far more wonderful to discover this within the walls of a laboratory, but
it was done as long ago as 1850. A cogged wheel is so mounted that a ray of light passes between
two of the teeth and is reflected back from a mirror. Now, slight as is the fraction of a second
which light takes to travel that distance, it is possible to give such speed to the wheel that
the next tooth catches the ray of light on its return and cuts it off. The speed is increased
still further until the ray of light returns to the eye of the observer through the notch next
to the one by which it had passed to the mirror! The speed of the wheel was known, and it was
thus possible again to gather the velocity of light. If the shortest waves are 1/67,000 of
an inch in length, and light travels at 186,000 miles a second, any person can work out that
about 800 trillion waves enter the eye in a second when we see "violet."

Sorting out Light-waves

The waves sent out on every side by the energetic electrons become faintly visible to us when
they reach about 1/35,000 of an inch. Each distinct sensation of colour means a wave of different
length. When they are all mingled together, as in the light of the sun, we get white light.
When this white light passes through glass, the speed of the waves is lessened; and, if the
ray of light falls obliquely on a triangular piece of glass, the waves of different lengths
part company as they travel through it, and the light is spread out in a band of rainbow-colour.
The waves are sorted out according to their lengths in the "obstacle race" through the glass.
Anyone may see this for himself by holding up a wedge-shaped piece of crystal between the sunlight
and the eye; the prism separates the sunlight into its constituent colours, and these various
colours will be seen quite readily. Or the thing may be realised in another way. If the seven
colours are painted on a wheel as shown opposite page 280 (in the proportion shown), and the
wheel rapidly revolved on a pivot, the wheel will appear a dull white, the several colours
will not be seen. But omit one of the colours, then the wheel, when revolved, will not appear
white, but will give the impression of one colour, corresponding to what the union of six colours
gives. Another experiment will show that some bodies held up between the eye and a white light
will not permit all the rays to pass through, but will intercept some; a body that intercepts
all the seven rays except red will give the impression of red, or if all the rays except violet,
then violet will be the colour seen.

The Fate of the World

Professor Soddy has given an interesting picture of what might happen when the sun's light
and heat is no longer what it is. The human eye "has adapted itself through the ages to the
peculiarities of the sun's light, so as to make the most of that wave-length of which there
is most.... Let us indulge for a moment in these gloomy prognostications, as to the consequences
to this earth of the cooling of the sun with the lapse of ages, which used to be in vogue,
but which radio-activity has so rudely shaken. Picture the fate of the world when the sun has
become a dull red-hot ball, or even when it has cooled so far that it would no longer emit
light to us. That does not all mean that the world would be in inky darkness, and that the
sun would not emit light to the people then inhabiting this world, if any had survived and
could keep themselves from freezing. To such, if the eye continued to adapt itself to the changing
conditions, our blues and violets would be ultra-violet and invisible, but our dark heat would
be light and hot bodies would be luminous to them which would be dark to us."

§ 12

What the Blue "Sky" means

We saw in a previous chapter how the spectroscope splits up light-waves into their colours.
But nature is constantly splitting the light into its different-lengthed waves, its colours.
The rainbow, where dense moisture in the air acts as a spectroscope, is the most familiar example.
A piece of mother-of-pearl, or even a film of oil on the street or on water, has the same effect,
owing to the fine inequalities in its surface. The atmosphere all day long is sorting out the
waves. The blue "sky" overhead means that the fine particles in the upper atmosphere catch
the shorter waves, the blue waves, and scatter them. We can make a tubeful of blue sky in the
laboratory at any time. The beautiful pink-flush on the Alps at sunrise, the red glory that
lingers in the west at sunset, mean that, as the sun's rays must struggle through denser masses
of air when it is low on the horizon, the long red waves are sifted out from the other shafts.

Then there is the varied face of nature which, by absorbing some waves and reflecting others,
weaves its own beautiful robe of colour. Here and there is a black patch, which absorbs all
the light. White surfaces reflect the whole of it. What is reflected depends on the period
of vibration of the electrons in the particular kind of matter. Generally, as the electrons
receive the flood of trillions of waves, they absorb either the long or the medium or the short,
and they give us the wonderful colour-scheme of nature. In some cases the electrons continue
to radiate long after the sunlight has ceased to fall upon them. We get from them "black" or
invisible light, and we can take photographs by it. Other bodies, like glass, vibrate in unison
with the period of the light-waves and let them stream through.

Light without Heat

There are substances--"phosphorescent" things we call them--which give out a mysterious cold
light of their own. It is one of the problems of science, and one of profound practical interest.
If we could produce light without heat our "gas bill" would shrink amazingly. So much energy
is wasted in the production of heat-waves and ultra-violet waves which we do not want, that
90 per cent. or more of the power used in illumination is wasted. Would that the glow-worm,
or even the dead herring, would yield us its secret! Phosphorus is the one thing we know as
yet that suits the purpose, and--it smells! Indeed, our artificial light is not only extravagant
in cost, but often poor in colour. The unwary person often buys a garment by artificial light,
and is disgusted next morning to find in it a colour which is not wanted. The colour disclosed
by the sun was not in the waves of the artificial light.

Beyond the waves of violet light are the still shorter and more rapid waves--the "ultra-violet"
waves--which are precious to the photographer. As every amateur knows, his plate may safely
be exposed to light that comes through a red or an orange screen. Such a screen means "no thoroughfare"
for the blue and "beyond-blue" waves, and it is these which arrange the little grains of silver
on the plate. It is the same waves which supply the energy to the little green grains of matter
(chlorophyll) in the plant, preparing our food and timber for us, as will be seen later. The
tree struggles upward and spreads out its leaves fanwise to the blue sky to receive them. In
our coal-measures, the mighty dead forests of long ago, are vast stores of sunlight which we
are prodigally using up.

The X-rays are the extreme end, the highest octave, of the series of waves. Their power of
penetration implies that they are excessively minute, but even these have not held their secret
from the modern physicist. From a series of beautiful experiments, in which they were made
to pass amongst the atoms of a crystal, we learned their length. It is about the ten-millionth
of a millimetre, and a millimetre is about the 1/25 of an inch!

One of the most recent discoveries, made during a recent eclipse of the sun, is that light
is subject to gravitation. A ray of light from a star is bent out of its straight path when
it passes near the mass of the sun. Professor Eddington tells us that we have as much right
to speak of a pound of light as of a pound of sugar. Professor Eddington even calculates that
the earth receives 160 tons of light from the sun every year!

ENERGY: HOW ALL LIFE DEPENDS ON IT

As we have seen in an earlier chapter, one of the fundamental entities of the universe is matter.
A second, not less important, is called energy. Energy is indispensable if the world is to
continue to exist, since all phenomena, including life, depend on it. Just as it is humanly
impossible to create or to destroy a particle of matter, so is it impossible to create or to
destroy energy. This statement will be more readily understood when we have considered what
energy is.

Energy, like matter, is indestructible, and just as matter exists in various forms so does
energy. And we may add, just as we are ignorant of what the negative and positive particles
of electricity which constitute matter really are, so we are ignorant of the true nature of
energy. At the same time, energy is not so completely mysterious as it once was. It is another
of nature's mysteries which the advance of modern science has in some measure unveiled. It
was only during the nineteenth century that energy came to be known as something as distinct
and permanent as matter itself.

Forms of Energy

The existence of various forms of energy had been known, of course, for ages; there was the
energy of a falling stone, the energy produced by burning wood or coal or any other substance,
but the essential identity of all these forms of energy had not been suspected. The conception
of energy as something which, like matter, was constant in amount, which could not be created
nor destroyed, was one of the great scientific acquisitions of the past century.

It is not possible to enter deeply into this subject here. It is sufficient if we briefly outline
its salient aspects. Energy is recognised in two forms, kinetic and potential. The form of
energy which is most apparent to us is the energy of motion; for example, a rolling stone,
running water, a falling body, and so on. We call the energy of motion kinetic energy. Potential
energy is the energy a body has in virtue of its position--it is its capacity, in other words,
to acquire kinetic energy, as in the case of a stone resting on the edge of a cliff.

Energy may assume different forms; one kind of energy may be converted directly or indirectly
into some other form. The energy of burning coal, for example, is converted into heat, and
from heat energy we have mechanical energy, such as that manifested by the steam-engine. In
this way we can transfer energy from one body to another. There is the energy of the great
waterfalls of Niagara, for instance, which are used to supply the energy of huge electric power
stations.

What Heat is

An important fact about energy is, that all energy tends to take the form of heat energy. The
impact of a falling stone generates heat; a waterfall is hotter at the bottom than at the top--the
falling particles of water, on striking the ground, generate heat; and most chemical changes
are attended by heat changes. Energy may remain latent indefinitely in a lump of wood, but
in combustion it is liberated, and we have heat as a result. The atom of radium or of any other
radio-active substance, as it disintegrates, generates heat. "Every hour radium generates sufficient
heat to raise the temperature of its own weight of water, from the freezing point to the boiling
point." And what is heat? Heat is molecular motion. The molecules of every substance, as we
have seen on a previous page, are in a state of continual motion, and the more vigorous the
motion the hotter the body. As wood or coal burns, the invisible molecules of these substances
are violently agitated, and give rise to ether waves which our senses interpret as light and
heat. In this constant movement of the molecules, then, we have a manifestation of the energy
of motion and of heat.

That energy which disappears in one form reappears in another has been found to be universally
true. It was Joule who, by churning water, first showed that a measurable quantity of mechanical
energy could be transformed into a measurable quantity of heat energy. By causing an apparatus
to stir water vigorously, that apparatus being driven by falling weights or a rotating flywheel
or by any other mechanical means, the water became heated. A certain amount of mechanical energy
had been used up and a certain amount of heat had appeared. The relation between these two
things was found to be invariable. Every physical change in nature involves a transformation
of energy, but the total quantity of energy in the universe remains unaltered. This is the
great doctrine of the Conservation of Energy.

§ 13

Substitutes for Coal

Consider the source of nearly all the energy which is used in modern civilisation--coal. The
great forests of the Carboniferous epoch now exists as beds of coal. By the burning of coal--a
chemical transformation--the heat energy is produced on which at present our whole civilisation
depends. Whence is the energy locked up in the coal derived? From the sun. For millions of
years the energy of the sun's rays had gone to form the vast vegetation of the Carboniferous
era and had been transformed, by various subtle processes, into the potential energy that slumbers
in those immense fossilized forests.

The exhaustion of our coal deposits would mean, so far as our knowledge extends at present,
the end of the world's civilisation. There are other known sources of energy, it is true. There
is the energy of falling water; the great falls of Niagara are used to supply the energy of
huge electric power stations. Perhaps, also, something could be done to utilise the energy
of the tides--another instance of the energy of moving water. And attempts have been made to
utilise directly the energy of the sun's rays. But all these sources of energy are small compared
with the energy of coal. A suggestion was made at a recent British Association meeting that
deep borings might be sunk in order to utilise the internal heat of the earth, but this is
not, perhaps, a very practical proposal. By far the most effective substitutes for coal would
be found in the interior energy of the atom, a source of energy which, as we have seen, is
practically illimitable. If the immense electrical energy in the interior of the atom can ever
be liberated and controlled, then our steadily decreasing coal supply will no longer be the
bugbear it now is to all thoughtful men.

The stored-up energy of the great coal-fields can be used up, but we cannot replace it or create
fresh supplies. As we have seen, energy cannot be destroyed, but it can become unavailable.
Let us consider what this important fact means.

§ 14

Dissipation of Energy

Energy may become dissipated. Where does it go? since if it is indestructible it must still
exist. It is easier to ask the question than to give a final answer, and it is not possible
in this OUTLINE, where an advanced knowledge of physics is not assumed on the part of the reader,
to go fully into the somewhat difficult theories put forward by physicists and chemists. We
may raise the temperature, say, of iron, until it is white-hot. If we stop the process the
temperature of the iron will gradually settle down to the temperature of surrounding bodies.
As it does so, where does its previous energy go? In some measure it may pass to other bodies
in contact with the piece of iron, but ultimately the heat becomes radiated away in space where
we cannot follow it. It has been added to the vast reservoir of unavailable heat energy of
uniform temperature. It is sufficient here to say that if all bodies had a uniform temperature
we should experience no such thing as heat, because heat only travels from one body to another,
having the effect of cooling the one and warming the other. In time the two bodies acquire
the same temperature. The sum-total of the heat in any body is measured in terms of the kinetic
energy of its moving molecules.

There must come a time, so far as we can see at present, when, even if all the heat energy
of the universe is not radiated away into empty infinite space, yet a uniform temperature will
prevail. If one body is hotter than another it radiates heat to that body until both are at
the same temperature. Each body may still possess a considerable quantity of heat energy, which
it has absorbed, but that energy, so far as reactions between those two bodies are concerned,
is now unavailable. The same principle applies whatever number of bodies we consider. Before
heat energy can be utilised we must have bodies with different temperature. If the whole universe
were at some uniform temperature, then, although it might possess an enormous amount of heat
energy, this energy would be unavailable.

What a Uniform Temperature would mean

And what does this imply? It implies a great deal: for if all the energy in the world became
unavailable, the universe, as it now is, would cease to be. It is possible that, by the constant
interchange of heat radiations, the whole universe is tending to some uniform temperature,
in which case, although all molecular motion would not have ceased, it would have become unavailable.
In this sense it may be said that the universe is running down.

If all the molecules of a substance were brought to a standstill, that substance would be at
the absolute zero of temperature. There could be nothing colder. The temperature at which all
molecular motions would cease is known: it is -273° C. No body could possibly attain a lower
temperature than this: a lower temperature could not exist. Unless there exists in nature some
process, of which we know nothing at present, whereby energy is renewed, our solar system must
one day sink to this absolute zero of temperature. The sun, the earth, and every other body
in the universe is steadily radiating heat, and this radiation cannot go on for ever, because
heat continually tends to diffuse and to equalise temperatures.

But we can see, theoretically, that there is a way of evading this law. If the chaotic molecular
motions which constitute heat could be regulated, then the heat energy of a body could be utilised
directly. Some authorities think that some of the processes which go on in the living body
do not involve any waste energy, that the chemical energy of food is transformed directly into
work without any of it being dissipated as useless heat energy. It may be, therefore, that
man will finally discover some way of escape from the natural law that, while energy cannot
be destroyed, it has a tendency to become unavailable.

The primary reservoir of energy is the atom; it is the energy of the atom, the atom of elements
in the sun, the stars, the earth, from which nature draws for all her supply of energy. Shall
we ever discover how we can replenish the dwindling resources of energy, or find out how we
can call into being the at present unavailable energy which is stored up in uniform temperature?

    It looks as if our successors would witness an interesting race,
    between the progress of science on the one hand and the depletion of
    natural resources upon the other. The natural rate of flow of energy
    from its primary atomic reservoirs to the sea of waste heat energy
    of uniform temperature, allows life to proceed at a complete pace
    sternly regulated by the inexorable laws of supply and demand,
    which the biologists have recognised in their field as the struggle
    for existence.[5]

    [5] Matter and Energy, by Professor Soddy.

It is certain that energy is an actual entity just as much as matter, and that it cannot be
created or destroyed. Matter and ether are receptacles or vehicles of energy. As we have said,
what these entities really are in themselves we do not know. The question to which we await
an answer is: What is electricity? (light, magnetism, gravitation, etc.) are waves or strains
of some kind set up in the ether by these clusters of electrons. 

"Phil has the best mind of any girl I ever knew: she takes my breath away!" cried Nan.

"So! I knew you wouldn't fail me there!"

"We all realize it: we expect great things of her," added Nan.

Lois bent toward her with her winning manner. She drew the parasol
across her lap and clasped it in both hands.

"That is why I am appealing to you; that is what brought me here to see you--alone. I am leaving Phil
here with you because--because it is so much better for her to be with you than with me! You
have done my work for me--oh, we won't discuss that! I know it all. You must credit me with
some little understanding before we go further!"

Just where that "further" was to lead, Nan could not guess. She murmured something to the effect
that Mrs. Holton was far too kind.

"There is every reason why I should be kind," Lois retorted. "And this brings me to a rather
more serious matter, and one--one I am not broaching without reason. I want to speak of Tom!" she
flashed. The smile had left her face; her lovely eyes were very grave.

"There is nothing that we need say about Mr. Kirkwood," said Nan, reddening and stirring uneasily.

"Please
do not say that! This is an important moment in your life and mine. And I must speak to you
of Tom before I go away. We are not children--you and I. You are a woman and a very noble
one and--you must let me say it--I have been one of the worst. There's no finer man in the
world than Tom; I never knew that until I had flung him away. And it's only because of you
and Phil that he found himself again. I know it all as clearly as
though I had been here every day of all these years. You picked up
the broken pieces and made a man of him again--you and Phil. And you
very much more than Phil! I've come to tell you that I'm grateful
for that. He deserves well of the world. He loves you; he wants to
marry you. If I hadn't come back just when I did, you would have married
him."

She knelt beside Nan with lifted face. There were tears in
her eyes.

"Don't you see--don't you understand--that that is the
only way I can be happy? I'm not saying this for your sake--and only
half for Tom's. It's the old selfish me that is asking it," she ended,
smiling once more, though with brimming eyes.

Nan turned her head.

"I
can never do it! It's not fair for you to speak to me of him."

"Oh,
don't I know that! But I never in my life played fair! I want you
to promise me that you won't say no to him! He is started on the way
up and on once more: I want you to help him gain the top. If there is an ether, then,
since the earth is moving through it, there should be some way of detecting this motion. The
experiment has been tried, as we have said, but, although the method used was very sensitive,
no motion was discovered. It is Einstein who, by revolutionising our conceptions of space and
time, showed that no such motion ever could be discovered, whatever means were employed, and
that the usual notion of the ether must be abandoned. We shall explain this theory more fully
in a later section.

INFLUENCE OF THE TIDES: ORIGIN OF THE MOON: THE EARTH SLOWING DOWN

§ 16

Until comparatively recent times, until, in fact, the full dawn of modern science, the tides
ranked amongst the greatest of nature's mysteries. And, indeed, what agency could be invoked
to explain this mysteriously regular flux and reflux of the waters of the ocean? It is not
surprising that that steady, rhythmical rise and fall suggested to some imaginative minds the
breathing of a mighty animal. And even when man first became aware of the fact that this regular
movement was somehow associated with the moon, was he much nearer an explanation? What bond
could exist between the movements of that distant world and the diurnal variation of the waters
of the earth? It is reported that an ancient astronomer, despairing of ever resolving the mystery,
drowned himself in the sea.

The Earth Pulled by the Moon

But it was part of the merit of Newton's mighty theory of gravitation that it furnished an
explanation even of this age-old mystery. We can see, in broad outlines at any rate, that the
theory of universal attraction can be applied to this case. For the moon, Newton taught us,
pulls every particle of matter throughout the earth. If we imagine that part of the earth's
surface which comprises the Pacific Ocean, for instance, to be turned towards the moon, we
see that the moon's pull, acting on the loose and mobile water, would tend to heap it up into
a sort of mound. The whole earth is pulled by the moon, but the water is more free to obey
this pull than is the solid earth, although small tides are also caused in the earth's solid
crust. It can be shown also that a corresponding hump would tend to be produced on the other
side of the earth, owing, in this case, to the tendency of the water, being more loosely connected,
to lag behind the solid earth. If the earth's surface were entirely fluid the rotation of the
earth would give the impression that these two humps were continually travelling round the
world, once every day. At any given part of the earth's surface, therefore, there would be
two humps daily, i.e. two periods of high water. Such is the simplest possible outline of the
gravitational theory of the tides.

The actually observed phenomena are vastly more complicated, and the complete theory bears
very little resemblance to the simple form we have just outlined. Everyone who lives in the
neighbourhood of a port knows, for instance, that high water seldom coincides with the time
when the moon crosses the meridian. It may be several hours early or late. High water at London
Bridge, for instance, occurs about one and a half hours after the moon has passed the meridian,
while at Dublin high water occurs about one and a half hours before the moon crosses the meridian.
The actually observed phenomena, then, are far from simple; they have, nevertheless, been very
completely worked out, and the times of high water for every port in the world can now be prophesied
for a considerable time ahead.

The Action of Sun and Moon

It would be beyond our scope to attempt to explain the complete theory, but we may mention
one obvious factor which must be taken into account. Since the moon, by its gravitational attraction,
produces tides, we should expect that the sun, whose gravitational attraction is so much stronger,
should also produce tides and, we would suppose at first sight, more powerful tides than the
moon. But while it is true that the sun produces tides, it is not true that they are more powerful
than those produced by the moon. The sun's tide-producing power is, as a matter of fact, less
than half that of the moon. The reason of this is that distance plays an enormous rôle in the
production of tides. The mass of the sun is 26,000,000 times that of the moon; on the other
hand it is 386 times as far off as the moon. This greater distance more than counterbalances
its greater mass, and the result, as we have said, is that the moon is more than twice as powerful.
Sometimes the sun and moon act together, and we have what are called spring tides; sometimes
they act against one another, and we have neap tides. These effects are further complicated
by a number of other factors, and the tides, at various places, vary enormously. Thus at St.
Helena the sea rises and falls about three feet, whereas in the Bay of Fundy it rises and falls
more than fifty feet. But here, again, the reasons are complicated.

§ 17

Origin of the Moon

But there is another aspect of the tides which is of vastly greater interest and importance
than the theory we have just been discussing. In the hands of Sir George H. Darwin, the son
of Charles Darwin, the tides had been made to throw light on the evolution of our solar system.
In particular, they have illustrated the origin and development of the system formed by our
earth and moon. In 1585 Elizabeth formed an alliance with the Netherlands, and sent her favorite,
Leicester, there as governor-general, and Sir Philip Sidney as Governor of Flushing, which
with two other "cautionary towns" she took as pledges of Dutch loyalty. The motives for this action
are well stated in a paper drawn up by the English Privy Council in 1584, presenting a situation
interesting in its analogy to that which faced the United States when it entered the World War:

"The
conclusion of the whole was this: Although her Majesty should thereby enter into the war presently,
yet were she better to do it now, while she may make the same out of her realm, having the help
of the people of Holland, and before the King of Spain shall have consummated his conquest of
those countries, whereby he shall be so provoked by pride, solicited by the Pope, and tempted
by the Queen's own subjects, and shall be so strong by sea; and so free from all other actions
and quarrels--yea, shall be so formidable to all the rest of Christendom,
as that her Majesty shall no wise be able, with her own power, nor
with the aid of any other, neither by land nor sea, to withstand his
attempts, but shall be forced to give place to his insatiable malice,
which is most terrible to be thought of, but miserable to suffer."

These were the compelling reasons for England's entry into the war. The aid to Holland and the
execution of Mary, on the other hand, were sufficient to explain Philip's attempted invasion.
 It is the rotation of the earth which supplies the
energy of the tides, and, as a consequence, the tides must be slowing down the earth. The tides
act as a kind of brake on the earth's rotation. These masses of water, held back by the moon,
exert a kind of dragging effect on the rotating earth. Doubtless this effect, measured by our
ordinary standards, is very small; it is, however, continuous, and in the course of the millions
of years dealt with in astronomy, this small but constant effect may produce very considerable
results.

But there is another effect which can be shown to be a necessary mathematical consequence of
tidal action. It is the moon's action on the earth which produces the tides, but they also
react on the moon. The tides are slowing down the earth, and they are also driving the moon
farther and farther away. This result, strange as it may seem, does not permit of doubt, for
it is the result of an indubitable dynamical principle, which cannot be made clear without
a mathematical discussion. Some interesting consequences follow.

Since the earth is slowing down, it follows that it was once rotating faster. There was a period,
a long time ago, when the day comprised only twenty hours. Going farther back still we come
to a day of ten hours, until, inconceivable ages ago, the earth must have been rotating on
its axis in a period of from three to four hours.

At this point let us stop and inquire what was happening to the moon. We have seen that at
present the moon is getting farther and farther away. It follows, therefore, that when the
day was shorter the moon was nearer. As we go farther back in time we find the moon nearer
and nearer to an earth rotating faster and faster. When we reach the period we have already
mentioned, the period when the earth completed a revolution in three or four hours, we find
that the moon was so near as to be almost grazing the earth. This fact is very remarkable.
Everybody knows that there is a critical velocity for a rotating flywheel, a velocity beyond
which the flywheel would fly into pieces because the centrifugal force developed is so great
as to overcome the cohesion of the molecules of the flywheel. We have already likened our earth
to a flywheel, and we have traced its history back to the point where it was rotating with
immense velocity. We have also seen that, at that moment, the moon was barely separated from
the earth. The conclusion is irresistible. In an age more remote the earth did fly in pieces,
and one of those pieces is the moon. Such, in brief outline, is the tidal theory of the origin
of the earth-moon system.

The Day Becoming Longer

At the beginning, when the moon split off from the earth, it obviously must have shared the
earth's rotation. It flew round the earth in the same time that the earth rotated, that is
to say, the month and the day were of equal length. As the moon began to get farther from the
earth, the month, because the moon took longer to rotate round the earth, began to get correspondingly
longer. The day also became longer, because the earth was slowing down, taking longer to rotate
on its axis, but the month increased at a greater rate than the day. Presently the month became
equal to two days, then to three, and so on. It has been calculated that this process went
on until there were twenty-nine days in the month. After that the number of days in the month
began to decrease until it reached its present value or magnitude, and will continue to decrease
until once more the month and the day are equal. In that age the earth will be rotating very
slowly. The braking action of the tides will cause the earth always to keep the same face to
the moon; it will rotate on its axis in the same time that the moon turns round the earth. HISTORY
OF COMMERCE IN EUROPE, W. H. Gibbins, 1917. THE SEA BEGGARS, Dingman Versteg, 1901. SOME EXPLOITS
OF THE OLD DUTCH NAVY, Lieut. H. H. Frost, U. S. Naval Institute Proceedings, January, 1919.

CHAPTER
VIII

ENGLAND AND THE ARMADA
By reason of England's insularity, it is an easy matter to find instances
from even her early history of the salutary or fatal influence of
sea power. Romans, Saxons, Danes swept down upon England from the sea.

Surprising as it may seem, we already have an illustration of this possibility in the satellites
of Mars. The Martian day is about one half-hour longer than ours, but when the two minute satellites
of Mars were discovered it was noticed that the inner one of the two revolved round Mars in
about seven hours forty minutes. But such was the terror inspired by Greek fire that the Grand Vizier,
in spite of his enormous superiority in numbers, declined to close. Instead he withdrew his
dromons out of the Bosphorus and thereafter followed the less risky
policy of a blockade.


 CLERK-MAXWELL, JAMES, Matter and Motion.
 DANIELL, ALFRED, A Text-Book of the Principles of Physics.
 DARWIN, SIR G. H., The Tides.
 HOLMAN, Matter, Energy, Force and Work.
 KAPP, GISBERT, Electricity.
 KELVIN, LORD, Popular Lectures and Addresses. Vol. i. Constitution
   of Matter.
 LOCKYER, SIR NORMAN, Inorganic Evolution.
 LODGE, SIR OLIVER, Electrons and The Ether of Space.
 PERRIN, JEAN, Brownian Movement and Molecular Reality.
 SODDY, FREDERICK, Matter and Energy and The Interpretation of Radium.
 THOMPSON, SILVANUS P., Light, Visible and Invisible.
 THOMSON, SIR J. J., The Corpuscular Theory of Matter.