A HAZARD OF NEW FORTUNES

By William Dean Howells

PART THIRD

I.

The scheme of a banquet to celebrate the initial success of 'Every Other Week' expanded in
Fulkerson's fancy into a series. Instead of the publishing and editorial force, with certain
of the more representative artists and authors sitting down to a modest supper in Mrs. Leighton's
parlors, he conceived of a dinner at Delmonico's, with the principal literary and artistic,
people throughout the country as guests, and an inexhaustible hospitality to reporters and
correspondents, from whom paragraphs, prophetic and historic, would flow weeks before and after
the first of the series. He said the thing was a new departure in magazines; it amounted to
something in literature as radical as the American Revolution in politics: it was the idea
of self government in the arts; and it was this idea that had never yet been fully developed
in regard to it. That was what must be done in the speeches at the dinner, and the speeches
must be reported. Then it would go like wildfire. He asked March whether he thought Mr. Depew
could be got to come; Mark Twain, he was sure, would come; he was a literary man. They ought
to invite Mr. Evarts, and the Cardinal and the leading Protestant divines. His ambition stopped
at nothing, nothing but the question of expense; there he had to wait the return of the elder
Dryfoos from the West, and Dryfoos was still delayed at Moffitt, and Fulkerson openly confessed
that he was afraid he would stay there till his own enthusiasm escaped in other activities,
other plans.

Fulkerson was as little likely as possible to fall under a superstitious subjection to another
man; but March could not help seeing that in this possible measure Dryfoos was Fulkerson's
fetish. He did not revere him, March decided, because it was not in Fulkerson's nature to revere
anything; he could like and dislike, but he could not respect. Apparently, however, Dryfoos
daunted him somehow; and besides the homage which those who have not pay to those who have,
Fulkerson rendered Dryfoos the tribute of a feeling which March could only define as a sort
of bewilderment. As well as March could make out, this feeling was evoked by the spectacle
of Dryfoos's unfailing luck, which Fulkerson was fond of dazzling himself with. It perfectly
consisted with a keen sense of whatever was sordid and selfish in a man on whom his career
must have had its inevitable effect. He liked to philosophize the case with March, to recall
Dryfoos as he was when he first met him still somewhat in the sap, at Moffitt, and to study
the processes by which he imagined him to have dried into the hardened speculator, without
even the pretence to any advantage but his own in his ventures. He was aware of painting the
character too vividly, and he warned March not to accept it exactly in those tints, but to
subdue them and shade it for himself. He said that where his advantage was not concerned, there
was ever so much good in Dryfoos, and that if in some things he had grown inflexible, he had
expanded in others to the full measure of the vast scale on which he did business. It had seemed
a little odd to March that a man should put money into such an enterprise as 'Every Other Week'
and go off about other affairs, not only without any sign of anxiety, but without any sort
of interest. But Fulkerson said that was the splendid side of Dryfoos. He had a courage, a
magnanimity, that was equal to the strain of any such uncertainty. He had faced the music once
for all, when he asked Fulkerson what the thing would cost in the different degrees of potential
failure; and then he had gone off, leaving everything to Fulkerson and the younger Dryfoos,
with the instruction simply to go ahead and not bother him about it. Fulkerson called that
pretty tall for an old fellow who used to bewail the want of pigs and chickens to occupy his
mind. He alleged it as another proof of the versatility of the American mind, and of the grandeur
of institutions and opportunities that let every man grow to his full size, so that any man
in America could run the concern if necessary. He believed that old Dryfoos could step into
Bismarck's shoes and run the German Empire at ten days' notice, or about as long as it would
take him to go from New York to Berlin. But Bismarck would not know anything about Dryfoos's
plans till Dryfoos got ready to show his hand. Fulkerson himself did not pretend to say what
the old man had been up to since he went West. He was at Moffitt first, and then he was at
Chicago, and then he had gone out to Denver to look after some mines he had out there, and
a railroad or two; and now he was at Moffitt again. He was supposed to be closing up his affairs
there, but nobody could say.

Fulkerson told March the morning after Dryfoos returned that he had not only not pulled out
at Moffitt, but had gone in deeper, ten times deeper than ever. He was in a royal good-humor,
Fulkerson reported, and was going to drop into the office on his way up from the Street (March
understood Wall Street) that afternoon. He was tickled to death with 'Every Other Week' so
far as it had gone, and was anxious to pay his respects to the editor.

March accounted for some rhetoric in this, but let it flatter him, and prepared himself for
a meeting about which he could see that Fulkerson was only less nervous than he had shown himself
about the public reception of the first number. It gave March a disagreeable feeling of being
owned and of being about to be inspected by his proprietor; but he fell back upon such independence
as he could find in the thought of those two thousand dollars of income beyond the caprice
of his owner, and maintained an outward serenity.

He was a little ashamed afterward of the resolution it had cost him to do so. It was not a
question of Dryfoos's physical presence: that was rather effective than otherwise, and carried
a suggestion of moneyed indifference to convention in the gray business suit of provincial
cut, and the low, wide-brimmed hat of flexible black felt. He had a stick with an old-fashioned
top of buckhorn worn smooth and bright by the palm of his hand, which had not lost its character
in fat, and which had a history of former work in its enlarged knuckles, though it was now
as soft as March's, and must once have been small even for a man of Mr. Dryfoos's stature;
he was below the average size. But what struck March was the fact that Dryfoos seemed furtively
conscious of being a country person, and of being aware that in their meeting he was to be
tried by other tests than those which would have availed him as a shrewd speculator. He evidently
had some curiosity about March, as the first of his kind whom he bad encountered; some such
curiosity as the country school trustee feels and tries to hide in the presence of the new
schoolmaster. But the whole affair was, of course, on a higher plane; on one side Dryfoos was
much more a man of the world than March was, and he probably divined this at once, and rested
himself upon the fact in a measure. It seemed to be his preference that his son should introduce
them, for he came upstairs with Conrad, and they had fairly made acquaintance before Fulkerson
joined them.

Conrad offered to leave them at once, but his father made him stay. "I reckon Mr. March and
I haven't got anything so private to talk about that we want to keep it from the other partners.
Well, Mr. March, are you getting used to New York yet? It takes a little time."

"Oh yes. But not so much time as most places. Everybody belongs more or less in New York; nobody
has to belong here altogether."

"Yes, that is so. You can try it, and go away if you don't like it a good deal easier than
you could from a smaller place. Wouldn't make so much talk, would it?" He glanced at March
with a jocose light in his shrewd eyes. "That is the way I feel about it all the time: just
visiting. Now, it wouldn't be that way in Boston, I reckon?"

"You couldn't keep on visiting there your whole life," said March.

Dryfoos laughed, showing his lower teeth in a way that was at once simple and fierce. "Mr.
Fulkerson didn't hardly know as he could get you to leave. I suppose you got used to it there.
I never been in your city."

"I had got used to it; but it was hardly my city, except by marriage. My wife's a Bostonian."

"She's been a little homesick here, then," said Dryfoos, with a smile of the same quality as
his laugh.

"Less than I expected," said March. "Of course, she was very much attached to our old home."

"I guess my wife won't ever get used to New York," said Dryfoos, and he drew in his lower lip
with a sharp sigh. "But my girls like it; they're young. You never been out our way yet, Mr.
March? Out West?"

"Well, only for the purpose of being born, and brought up. I used to live in Crawfordsville,
and then Indianapolis."

"Indianapolis is bound to be a great place," said Dryfoos. "I remember now, Mr. Fulkerson told
me you was from our State." He went on to brag of the West, as if March were an Easterner and
had to be convinced. "You ought to see all that country. It's a great country."

"Oh yes," said March, "I understand that." He expected the praise of the great West to lead
up to some comment on 'Every Other Week'; and there was abundant suggestion of that topic in
the manuscripts, proofs of letter-press and illustrations, with advance copies of the latest
number strewn over his table.

But Dryfoos apparently kept himself from looking at these things. He rolled his head about
on his shoulders to take in the character of the room, and said to his son, "You didn't change
the woodwork, after all."

"No; the architect thought we had better let it be, unless we meant to change the whole place.
He liked its being old-fashioned."

"I hope you feel comfortable here, Mr. March," the old man said, bringing his eyes to bear
upon him again after their tour of inspection.

"Too comfortable for a working-man," said March, and he thought that this remark must bring
them to some talk about his work, but the proprietor only smiled again.

"I guess I sha'n't lose much on this house," he returned, as if musing aloud. "This down-town
property is coming up. Business is getting in on all these side streets. I thought I paid a
pretty good price for it, too." He went on to talk of real estate, and March began to feel
a certain resentment at his continued avoidance of the only topic in which they could really
have a common interest. "You live down this way somewhere, don't you?" the old man concluded.

"Yes. I wished to be near my work." March was vexed with himself for having recurred to it;
but afterward he was not sure but Dryfoos shared his own diffidence in the matter, and was
waiting for him to bring it openly into the talk. At times he seemed wary and masterful, and
then March felt that he was being examined and tested; at others so simple that March might
well have fancied that he needed encouragement, and desired it. He talked of his wife and daughters
in a way that invited March to say friendly things of his family, which appeared to give the
old man first an undue pleasure and then a final distrust. At moments he turned, with an effect
of finding relief in it, to his son and spoke to him across March of matters which he was unacquainted
with; he did not seem aware that this was rude, but the young man must have felt it so; he
always brought the conversation back, and once at some cost to himself when his father made
it personal.

"I want to make a regular New York business man out of that fellow," he said to March, pointing
at Conrad with his stick. "You s'pose I'm ever going to do it?"

"Well, I don't know," said March, trying to fall in with the joke. "Do you mean nothing but
a business man?"

The old man laughed at whatever latent meaning he fancied in this, and said: "You think he
would be a little too much for me there? Well, I've seen enough of 'em to know it don't always
take a large pattern of a man to do a large business. But I want him to get the business training,
and then if he wants to go into something else he knows what the world is, anyway. Heigh?"

"Oh yes!" March assented, with some compassion for the young man reddening patiently under
his father's comment.

Dryfoos went on as if his son were not in hearing. "Now that boy wanted to be a preacher. What
does a preacher know about the world he preaches against when he's been brought up a preacher?
He don't know so much as a bad little boy in his Sunday-school; he knows about as much as a
girl. I always told him, You be a man first, and then you be a preacher, if you want to. Heigh?"

"Precisely." March began to feel some compassion for himself in being witness of the young
fellow's discomfort under his father's homily.

"When we first come to New York, I told him, Now here's your chance to see the world on a big
scale. You know already what work and saving and steady habits and sense will bring a man,
to; you don't want to go round among the rich; you want to go among the poor, and see what
laziness and drink and dishonesty and foolishness will bring men to. And I guess he knows,
about as well as anybody; and if he ever goes to preaching he'll know what he's preaching about."
The old man smiled his fierce, simple smile, and in his sharp eyes March fancied contempt of
the ambition he had balked in his son. The present scene must have been one of many between
them, ending in meek submission on the part of the young man, whom his father, perhaps without
realizing his cruelty, treated as a child. March took it hard that he should be made to suffer
in the presence of a co-ordinate power like himself, and began to dislike the old man out of
proportion to his offence, which might have been mere want of taste, or an effect of mere embarrassment
before him. But evidently, whatever rebellion his daughters had carried through against him,
he had kept his dominion over this gentle spirit unbroken. March did not choose to make any
response, but to let him continue, if he would, entirely upon his own impulse.

II.

A silence followed, of rather painful length. It was broken by the cheery voice of Fulkerson,
sent before him to herald Fulkerson's cheery person. "Well, I suppose you've got the glorious
success of 'Every Other Week' down pretty cold in your talk by this time. I should have been
up sooner to join you, but I was nipping a man for the last page of the cover. I guess we'll
have to let the Muse have that for an advertisement instead of a poem the next time, March.
Well, the old gentleman given you boys your scolding?" The person of Fulkerson had got into
the room long before he reached this question, and had planted itself astride a chair. Fulkerson
looked over the chairback, now at March, and now at the elder Dryfoos as he spoke.

March answered him. "I guess we must have been waiting for you, Fulkerson. At any rate, we
hadn't got to the scolding yet."

"Why, I didn't suppose Mr. Dryfoos could 'a' held in so long. I understood he was awful mad
at the way the thing started off, and wanted to give you a piece of his mind, when he got at
you. I inferred as much from a remark that he made." March and Dryfoos looked foolish, as men
do when made the subject of this sort of merry misrepresentation.

"I reckon my scolding will keep awhile yet," said the old man, dryly.

"Well, then, I guess it's a good chance to give Mr. Dryfoos an idea of what we've really done--just
while we're resting, as Artemus Ward says. Heigh, March?"

"I will let you blow the trumpet, Fulkerson. I think it belongs strictly to the advertising
department," said March. He now distinctly resented the old man's failure to say anything to
him of the magazine; he made his inference that it was from a suspicion of his readiness to
presume upon a recognition of his share in the success, and he was determined to second no
sort of appeal for it.

"The advertising department is the heart and soul of every business," said Fulkerson, hardily,
"and I like to keep my hand in with a little practise on the trumpet in private. I don't believe
Mr. Dryfoos has got any idea of the extent of this thing. He's been out among those Rackensackens,
where we were all born, and he's read the notices in their seven by nine dailies, and he's
seen the thing selling on the cars, and he thinks he appreciates what's been done. But I should
just like to take him round in this little old metropolis awhile, and show him 'Every Other
Week' on the centre tables of the millionaires--the Vanderbilts and the Astors--and in the
homes of culture and refinement everywhere, and let him judge for himself. It's the talk of
the clubs and the dinner-tables; children cry for it; it's the Castoria of literature and the
Pearline of art, the 'Won't-be-happy-till-he-gets-it of every en lightened man, woman, and
child in this vast city. I knew we could capture the country; but, my goodness! I didn't expect
to have New York fall into our hands at a blow. But that's just exactly what New York has done.
Every Other Week supplies the long-felt want that's been grinding round in New York and keeping
it awake nights ever since the war. It's the culmination of all the high and ennobling ideals
of the past."

"How much," asked Dryfoos, "do you expect to get out of it the first year, if it keeps the
start it's got?"

"Comes right down to business, every time!" said Fulkerson, referring the characteristic to
March with a delighted glance. "Well, sir, if everything works right, and we get rain enough
to fill up the springs, and it isn't a grasshopper year, I expect to clear above all expenses
something in the neighborhood of twenty-five thousand dollars."

"Humph! And you are all going to work a year--editor, manager, publisher, artists, writers,
printers, and the rest of 'em--to clear twenty-five thousand dollars?--I made that much in
half a day in Moffitt once. I see it made in half a minute in Wall Street, sometimes." The
old man presented this aspect of the case with a good-natured contempt, which included Fulkerson
and his enthusiasm in an obvious liking.

His son suggested, "But when we make that money here, no one loses it."

"Can you prove that?" His father turned sharply upon him. "Whatever is won is lost. It's all
a game; it don't make any difference what you bet on. Business is business, and a business
man takes his risks with his eyes open."

"Ah, but the glory!" Fulkerson insinuated with impudent persiflage. "I hadn't got to the glory
yet, because it's hard to estimate it; but put the glory at the lowest figure, Mr. Dryfoos,
and add it to the twenty-five thousand, and you've got an annual income from 'Every Other Week'
of dollars enough to construct a silver railroad, double-track, from this office to the moon.
I don't mention any of the sister planets because I like to keep within bounds."

Dryfoos showed his lower teeth for pleasure in Fulkerson's fooling, and said, "That's what
I like about you, Mr. Fulkerson--you always keep within bounds."

"Well, I ain't a shrinking Boston violet, like March, here. More sunflower in my style of diffidence;
but I am modest, I don't deny it," said Fulkerson. "And I do hate to have a thing overstated."

"And the glory--you do really think there's something in the glory that pays?"

"Not a doubt of it! I shouldn't care for the paltry return in money," said Fulkerson, with
a burlesque of generous disdain, "if it wasn't for the glory along with it."

"And how should you feel about the glory, if there was no money along with it?"

"Well, sir, I'm happy to say we haven't come to that yet."

"Now, Conrad, here," said the old man, with a sort of pathetic rancor, "would rather have the
glory alone. I believe he don't even care much for your kind of glory, either, Mr. Fulkerson."

Fulkerson ran his little eyes curiously over Conrad's face and then March's, as if searching
for a trace there of something gone before which would enable him to reach Dryfoos's whole
meaning. He apparently resolved to launch himself upon conjecture. "Oh, well, we know how Conrad
feels about the things of this world, anyway. I should like to take 'em on the plane of another
sphere, too, sometimes; but I noticed a good while ago that this was the world I was born into,
and so I made up my mind that I would do pretty much what I saw the rest of the folks doing
here below. And I can't see but what Conrad runs the thing on business principles in his department,
and I guess you'll find it so if you look into it. I consider that we're a whole team and big
dog under the wagon with you to draw on for supplies, and March, here, at the head of the literary
business, and Conrad in the counting-room, and me to do the heavy lying in the advertising
part. Oh, and Beaton, of course, in the art. I 'most forgot Beaton--Hamlet with Hamlet left out."

Dryfoos looked across at his son. "Wasn't that the fellow's name that was there last night?"

"Yes," said Conrad.

The old man rose. "Well, I reckon I got to be going. You ready to go up-town, Conrad?"

"Well, not quite yet, father."

The old man shook hands with March, and went downstairs, followed by his son.

Fulkerson remained.

"He didn't jump at the chance you gave him to compliment us all round, Fulkerson," said March,
with a smile not wholly of pleasure.

Fulkerson asked, with as little joy in the grin he had on, "Didn't he say anything to you before
I came in?"

"Not a word."

"Dogged if I know what to make of it," sighed Fulkerson, "but I guess he's been having a talk
with Conrad that's soured on him. I reckon maybe he came back expecting to find that boy reconciled
to the glory of this world, and Conrad's showed himself just as set against it as ever."

"It might have been that," March admitted, pensively. "I fancied something of the kind myself
from words the old man let drop."

Fulkerson made him explain, and then he said:

"That's it, then; and it's all right. Conrad 'll come round in time; and all we've got to do
is to have patience with the old man till he does. I know he likes you." Fulkerson affirmed
this only interrogatively, and looked so anxiously to March for corroboration that March laughed.

"He dissembled his love," he said; but afterward, in describing to his wife his interview with
Mr. Dryfoos, he was less amused with this fact.

When she saw that he was a little cast down by it, she began to encourage him. "He's just a
common, ignorant man, and probably didn't know how to express himself. You may be perfectly
sure that he's delighted with the success of the magazine, and that he understands as well
as you do that he owes it all to you."

"Ah, I'm not so sure. I don't believe a man's any better for having made money so easily and
rapidly as Dryfoos has done, and I doubt if he's any wiser. I don't know just the point he's
reached in his evolution from grub to beetle, but I do know that so far as it's gone the process
must have involved a bewildering change of ideals and criterions. I guess he's come to despise
a great many things that he once respected, and that intellectual ability is among them--what
we call intellectual ability. He must have undergone a moral deterioration, an atrophy of the
generous instincts, and I don't see why it shouldn't have reached his mental make-up. He has
sharpened, but he has narrowed; his sagacity has turned into suspicion, his caution to meanness,
his courage to ferocity. That's the way I philosophize a man of Dryfoos's experience, and I
am not very proud when I realize that such a man and his experience are the ideal and ambition
of most Americans. I rather think they came pretty near being mine, once."

"No, dear, they never did," his wife protested.

"Well, they're not likely to be in the future. The Dryfoos feature of 'Every Other Week' is
thoroughly distasteful to me."

"Why, but he hasn't really got anything to do with it, has he, beyond furnishing the money?"

"That's the impression that Fulkerson has allowed us to get. But the man that holds the purse
holds the reins. He may let us guide the horse, but when he likes he can drive. If we don't
like his driving, then we can get down."

Mrs. March was less interested in this figure of speech than in the personal aspects involved.
"Then you think Mr. Fulkerson has deceived you?"

"Oh no!" said her husband, laughing. "But I think he has deceived himself, perhaps."

"How?" she pursued.

"He may have thought he was using Dryfoos, when Dryfoos was using him, and he may have supposed
he was not afraid of him when he was very much so. His courage hadn't been put to the test,
and courage is a matter of proof, like proficiency on the fiddle, you know: you can't tell
whether you've got it till you try."

"Nonsense! Do you mean that he would ever sacrifice you to Mr. Dryfoos?"

"I hope he may not be tempted. But I'd rather be taking the chances with Fulkerson alone than
with Fulkerson and Dryfoos to back him. Dryfoos seems, somehow, to take the poetry and the
pleasure out of the thing."

Mrs. March was a long time silent. Then she began, "Well, my dear, I never wanted to come to
New York--"

"Neither did I," March promptly put in.

"But now that we're here," she went on, "I'm not going to have you letting every little thing
discourage you. I don't see what there was in Mr. Dryfoos's manner to give you any anxiety.
He's just a common, stupid, inarticulate country person, and he didn't know how to express
himself, as I said in the beginning, and that's the reason he didn't say anything."

"Well, I don't deny you're right about it."

"It's dreadful," his wife continued, "to be mixed up with such a man and his family, but I
don't believe he'll ever meddle with your management, and, till he does, all you need do is
to have as little to do with him as possible, and go quietly on your own way."

"Oh, I shall go on quietly enough," said March. "I hope I sha'n't begin going stealthily."

"Well, my dear," said Mrs. March, "just let me know when you're tempted to do that. If ever
you sacrifice the smallest grain of your honesty or your self-respect to Mr. Dryfoos, or anybody
else, I will simply renounce you."

"In view of that I'm rather glad the management of 'Every Other Week' involves tastes and not
convictions," said March.

III.

That night Dryfoos was wakened from his after-dinner nap by the sound of gay talk and nervous
giggling in the drawing-room. The talk, which was Christine's, and the giggling, which was
Mela's, were intershot with the heavier tones of a man's voice; and Dryfoos lay awhile on the
leathern lounge in his library, trying to make out whether he knew the voice. His wife sat
in a deep chair before the fire, with her eyes on his face, waiting for him to wake.

"Who is that out there?" he asked, without opening his eyes.

"Indeed, indeed, I don't know, Jacob," his wife answered. "I reckon it's just some visitor
of the girls'."

"Was I snoring?"

"Not a bit. You was sleeping as quiet! I did hate to have 'em wake you, and I was just goin'
out to shoo them. They've been playin' something, and that made them laugh."

"I didn't know but I had snored," said the old man, sitting up.

"No," said his wife. Then she asked, wistfully, "Was you out at the old place, Jacob?"

"Yes."

"Did it look natural?"

"Yes; mostly. They're sinking the wells down in the woods pasture."

"And--the children's graves?"

"They haven't touched that part. But I reckon we got to have 'em moved to the cemetery. I bought
a lot."

The old woman began softly to weep. "It does seem too hard that they can't be let to rest in
peace, pore little things. I wanted you and me to lay there, too, when our time come, Jacob.
Just there, back o' the beehives and under them shoomakes--my, I can see the very place! And
I don't believe I'll ever feel at home anywheres else. I woon't know where I am when the trumpet
sounds. I have to think before I can tell where the east is in New York; and what if I should
git faced the wrong way when I raise? Jacob, I wonder you could sell it!" Her head shook, and
the firelight shone on her tears as she searched the folds of her dress for her pocket.

A peal of laughter came from the drawing-room, and then the sound of chords struck on the piano.

"Hush! Don't you cry, 'Liz'beth!" said Dryfoos. "Here; take my handkerchief. I've got a nice
lot in the cemetery, and I'm goin' to have a monument, with two lambs on it--like the one you
always liked so much. It ain't the fashion, any more, to have family buryin' grounds; they're
collectin' 'em into the cemeteries, all round."

"I reckon I got to bear it," said his wife, muffling her face in his handkerchief. "And I suppose
the Lord kin find me, wherever I am. But I always did want to lay just there. You mind how
we used to go out and set there, after milkin', and watch the sun go down, and talk about where
their angels was, and try to figger it out?"

"I remember, 'Liz'beth."

The man's voice in the drawing-room sang a snatch of French song, insolent, mocking, salient;
and then Christine's attempted the same strain, and another cry of laughter from Mela followed.

"Well, I always did expect to lay there. But I reckon it's all right. It won't be a great while,
now, anyway. Jacob, I don't believe I'm a-goin' to live very long. I know it don't agree with
me here."

"Oh, I guess it does, 'Liz'beth. You're just a little pulled down with the weather. It's coming
spring, and you feel it; but the doctor says you're all right. I stopped in, on the way up,
and he says so."

"I reckon he don't know everything," the old woman persisted: "I've been runnin' down ever
since we left Moffitt, and I didn't feel any too well there, even. It's a very strange thing,
Jacob, that the richer you git, the less you ain't able to stay where you want to, dead or alive."

"It's for the children we do it," said Dryfoos. "We got to give them their chance in the world."

"Oh, the world! They ought to bear the yoke in their youth, like we done. I know it's what
Coonrod would like to do."

Dryfoos got upon his feet. "If Coonrod 'll mind his own business, and do what I want him to,
he'll have yoke enough to bear." He moved from his wife, without further effort to comfort
her, and pottered heavily out into the dining-room. Beyond its obscurity stretched the glitter
of the deep drawing-room. His feet, in their broad; flat slippers, made no sound on the dense
carpet, and he came unseen upon the little group there near the piano. Mela perched upon the
stool with her back to the keys, and Beaton bent over Christine, who sat with a banjo in her
lap, letting him take her hands and put them in the right place on the instrument. Her face
was radiant with happiness, and Mela was watching her with foolish, unselfish pleasure in her
bliss.

There was nothing wrong in the affair to a man of Dryfoos's traditions and perceptions, and
if it had been at home in the farm sitting-room, or even in his parlor at Moffitt, he would
not have minded a young man's placing his daughter's hands on a banjo, or even holding them
there; it would have seemed a proper, attention from him if he was courting her. But here,
in such a house as this, with the daughter of a man who had made as much money as he had, he
did not know but it was a liberty. He felt the angry doubt of it which beset him in regard
to so many experiences of his changed life; he wanted to show his sense of it, if it was a
liberty, but he did not know how, and he did not know that it was so. Besides, he could not
help a touch of the pleasure in Christine's happiness which Mela showed; and he would have
gone back to the library, if he could, without being discovered.

But Beaton had seen him, and Dryfoos, with a nonchalant nod to the young man, came forward.
"What you got there, Christine?"

"A banjo," said the girl, blushing in her father's presence.

Mela gurgled. "Mr. Beaton is learnun' her the first position."

Beaton was not embarrassed. He was in evening dress, and his face, pointed with its brown beard,
showed extremely handsome above the expanse of his broad, white shirt-front. He gave back as
nonchalant a nod as he had got, and, without further greeting to Dryfoos, he said to Christine:
"No, no. You must keep your hand and arm so." He held them in position. "There! Now strike
with your right hand. See?"

"I don't believe I can ever learn," said the girl, with a fond upward look at him.

"Oh yes, you can," said Beaton.

They both ignored Dryfoos in the little play of protests which followed, and he said, half
jocosely, half suspiciously, "And is the banjo the fashion, now?" He remembered it as the emblem
of low-down show business, and associated it with end-men and blackened faces and grotesque
shirt-collars.

"It's all the rage," Mela shouted, in answer for all. "Everybody plays it. Mr. Beaton borrowed
this from a lady friend of his."

"Humph! Pity I got you a piano, then," said Dryfoos. "A banjo would have been cheaper."

Beaton so far admitted him to the conversation as to seem reminded of the piano by his mentioning
it. He said to Mela, "Oh, won't you just strike those chords?" and as Mela wheeled about and
beat the keys he took the banjo from Christine and sat down with it. "This way!" He strummed
it, and murmured the tune Dryfoos had heard him singing from the library, while he kept his
beautiful eyes floating on Christine's. "You try that, now; it's very simple."

"Where is Mrs. Mandel?" Dryfoos demanded, trying to assert himself.

Neither of the girls seemed to have heard him at first in the chatter they broke into over
what Beaton proposed. Then Mela said, absently, "Oh, she had to go out to see one of her friends
that's sick," and she struck the piano keys. "Come; try it, Chris!"

Dryfoos turned about unheeded and went back to the library. He would have liked to put Beaton
out of his house, and in his heart he burned against him as a contumacious hand; he would have
liked to discharge him from the art department of 'Every Other Week' at once. But he was aware
of not having treated Beaton with much ceremony, and if the young man had returned his behavior
in kind, with an electrical response to his own feeling, had he any right to complain? After
all, there was no harm in his teaching Christine the banjo.

His wife still sat looking into the fire. "I can't see," she said, "as we've got a bit more
comfort of our lives, Jacob, because we've got such piles and piles of money. I wisht to gracious
we was back on the farm this minute. I wisht you had held out ag'inst the childern about sellin'
it; 'twould 'a' bin the best thing fur 'em, I say. I believe in my soul they'll git spoiled
here in New York. I kin see a change in 'em a'ready--in the girls."

Dryfoos stretched himself on the lounge again. "I can't see as Coonrod is much comfort, either.
Why ain't he here with his sisters? What does all that work of his on the East Side amount
to? It seems as if he done it to cross me, as much as anything." Dryfoos complained to his
wife on the basis of mere affectional habit, which in married life often survives the sense
of intellectual equality. He did not expect her to reason with him, but there was help in her
listening, and though she could only soothe his fretfulness with soft answers which were often
wide of the purpose, he still went to her for solace. "Here, I've gone into this newspaper
business, or whatever it is, on his account, and he don't seem any more satisfied than ever.
I can see he hain't got his heart in it."

"The pore boy tries; I know he does, Jacob; and he wants to please you. But he give up a good
deal when he give up bein' a preacher; I s'pose we ought to remember that."

"A preacher!" sneered Dryfoos. "I reckon bein' a preacher wouldn't satisfy him now. He had
the impudence to tell me this afternoon that he would like to be a priest; and he threw it
up to me that he never could be because I'd kept him from studyin'."

"He don't mean a Catholic priest--not a Roman one, Jacob," the old woman explained, wistfully.
"He's told me all about it. They ain't the kind o' Catholics we been used to; some sort of
'Piscopalians; and they do a heap o' good amongst the poor folks over there. He says we ain't
got any idea how folks lives in them tenement houses, hundreds of 'em in one house, and whole
families in a room; and it burns in his heart to help 'em like them Fathers, as he calls 'em,
that gives their lives to it. He can't be a Father, he says, because he can't git the eddication
now; but he can be a Brother; and I can't find a word to say ag'inst it, when it gits to talkin',
Jacob."

"I ain't saying anything against his priests, 'Liz'beth," said Dryfoos. "They're all well enough
in their way; they've given up their lives to it, and it's a matter of business with them,
like any other. But what I'm talking about now is Coonrod. I don't object to his doin' all
the charity he wants to, and the Lord knows I've never been stingy with him about it. He might
have all the money he wants, to give round any way he pleases."

"That's what I told him once, but he says money ain't the thing--or not the only thing you
got to give to them poor folks. You got to give your time and your knowledge and your love--I
don't know what all you got to give yourself, if you expect to help 'em. That's what Coonrod says."

"Well, I can tell him that charity begins at home," said Dryfoos, sitting up in his impatience.
"And he'd better give himself to us a little--to his old father and mother. And his sisters.
What's he doin' goin' off there to his meetings, and I don't know what all, an' leavin' them
here alone?"

"Why, ain't Mr. Beaton with 'em?" asked the old woman. "I thought I heared his voice."

"Mr. Beaton! Of course he is! And who's Mr. Beaton, anyway?"

"Why, ain't he one of the men in Coonrod's office? I thought I heared--"

"Yes, he is! But who is he? What's he doing round here? Is he makin' up to Christine?"

"I reckon he is. From Mely's talk, she's about crazy over the fellow. Don't you like him, Jacob?"

"I don't know him, or what he is. He hasn't got any manners. Who brought him here? How'd he
come to come, in the first place?"

"Mr. Fulkerson brung him, I believe," said the old woman, patiently.

"Fulkerson!" Dryfoos snorted. "Where's Mrs. Mandel, I should like to know? He brought her,
too. Does she go traipsin' off this way every evening?"

"No, she seems to be here pretty regular most o' the time. I don't know how we could ever git
along without her, Jacob; she seems to know just what to do, and the girls would be ten times
as outbreakin' without her. I hope you ain't thinkin' o' turnin' her off, Jacob?"

Dryfoos did not think it necessary to answer such a question. "It's all Fulkerson, Fulkerson,
Fulkerson. It seems to me that Fulkerson about runs this family. He brought Mrs. Mandel, and
he brought that Beaton, and he brought that Boston fellow! I guess I give him a dose, though;
and I'll learn Fulkerson that he can't have everything his own way. I don't want anybody to
help me spend my money. I made it, and I can manage it. I guess Mr. Fulkerson can bear a little
watching now. He's been travelling pretty free, and he's got the notion he's driving, maybe.
I'm a-going to look after that book a little myself."

"You'll kill yourself, Jacob," said his wife, "tryin' to do so many things. And what is it
all fur? I don't see as we're better off, any, for all the money. It's just as much care as
it used to be when we was all there on the farm together. I wisht we could go back, Ja--"

"We can't go back!" shouted the old man, fiercely. "There's no farm any more to go back to.
The fields is full of gas-wells and oil-wells and hell-holes generally; the house is tore down,
and the barn's goin'--"

"The barn!" gasped the old woman. "Oh, my!"

"If I was to give all I'm worth this minute, we couldn't go back to the farm, any more than
them girls in there could go back and be little children. I don't say we're any better off,
for the money. I've got more of it now than I ever had; and there's no end to the luck; it
pours in. But I feel like I was tied hand and foot. I don't know which way to move; I don't
know what's best to do about anything. The money don't seem to buy anything but more and more
care and trouble. We got a big house that we ain't at home in; and we got a lot of hired girls
round under our feet that hinder and don't help. Our children don't mind us, and we got no
friends or neighbors. But it had to be. I couldn't help but sell the farm, and we can't go
back to it, for it ain't there. So don't you say anything more about it, 'Liz'beth."

"Pore Jacob!" said his wife. "Well, I woon't, dear."

IV

It was clear to Beaton that Dryfoos distrusted him; and the fact heightened his pleasure in
Christine's liking for him. He was as sure of this as he was of the other, though he was not
so sure of any reason for his pleasure in it. She had her charm; the charm of wildness to which
a certain wildness in himself responded; and there were times when his fancy contrived a common
future for them, which would have a prosperity forced from the old fellow's love of the girl.
Beaton liked the idea of this compulsion better than he liked the idea of the money; there
was something a little repulsive in that; he imagined himself rejecting it; he almost wished
he was enough in love with the girl to marry her without it; that would be fine. He was taken
with her in a certain' measure, in a certain way; the question was in what measure, in what way.

It was partly to escape from this question that he hurried down-town, and decided to spend
with the Leightons the hour remaining on his hands before it was time to go to the reception
for which he was dressed. It seemed to him important that he should see Alma Leighton. After
all, it was her charm that was most abiding with him; perhaps it was to be final. He found
himself very happy in his present relations with her. She had dropped that barrier of pretences
and ironical surprise. It seemed to him that they had gone back to the old ground of common
artistic interest which he had found so pleasant the summer before. Apparently she and her
mother had both forgiven his neglect of them in the first months of their stay in New York;
he was sure that Mrs. Leighton liked him as well as ever, and, if there was still something
a little provisional in Alma's manner at times, it was something that piqued more than it discouraged;
it made him curious, not anxious.

He found the young ladies with Fulkerson when he rang. He seemed to be amusing them both, and
they were both amused beyond the merit of so small a pleasantry, Beaton thought, when Fulkerson
said: "Introduce myself, Mr. Beaton: Mr. Fulkerson of 'Every Other Week.' Think I've met you
at our place." The girls laughed, and Alma explained that her mother was not very well, and
would be sorry not to see him. Then she turned, as he felt, perversely, and went on talking
with Fulkerson and left him to Miss Woodburn.

She finally recognized his disappointment: "Ah don't often get a chance at you, Mr. Beaton,
and Ah'm just goin' to toak yo' to death. Yo' have been Soath yo'self, and yo' know ho' we
do toak."

"I've survived to say yes," Beaton admitted.

"Oh, now, do you think we toak so much mo' than you do in the No'th?" the young lady deprecated.

"I don't know. I only know you can't talk too much for me. I should like to hear you say Soath
and house and about for the rest of my life."

"That's what Ah call raght personal, Mr. Beaton. Now Ah'm goin' to be personal, too." Miss
Woodburn flung out over her lap the square of cloth she was embroidering, and asked him: "Don't
you think that's beautiful? Now, as an awtust--a great awtust?"

"As a great awtust, yes," said Beaton, mimicking her accent. "If I were less than great I might
have something to say about the arrangement of colors. You're as bold and original as Nature."

"Really? Oh, now, do tell me yo' favo'ite colo', Mr. Beaton."

"My favorite color? Bless my soul, why should I prefer any? Is blue good, or red wicked? Do
people have favorite colors?" Beaton found himself suddenly interested.

"Of co'se they do," answered the girl. "Don't awtusts?"

"I never heard of one that had--consciously." Cree a
slip by one of those cities of the Arabian Nights, where everything has remained motionless and
slept through the work of enchantment.

In the early years of the revolution that silence was occasionally
livened up with nice entertainment.

The officers ran the streets in rental cars, firing their guns. Carriages were to shoot up a
few others. Subject to have some fun! ...

Now, with election preparations, had no shots, but people got in their homes sooner than ever before,
feeling that a revolution was about to emerge.

The few pedestrians were passing, Chapultepec to the large square and large square to Chapultepec,
the carriage of general air breaking as well as an arrow, as if they had hurry to get somewhere.
"There goes Castillejo!" They said with respect and fear. And if dared to insult someone with
your thought, was the stranger, the miserable Spaniard Maltrana,
sitting in the place of honor.

Castillejo always preferred the front. A sometimes clutched the steering wheel, others stood
beside his driver, a fierce-eyed indiazo smirk and driving the vehicle with a natural authority,
as if the motor datase of time of Montezuma.

I have never believed much in the fidelity of these as one night I
tried refuse to accompany the general on his evening stroll.

It is true that not seemed Castillejo same. Travel was a cap and a thick coat, which half covered
her face neck.

Had in aggressive eyes shine. His breath smelled of alcohol, extraordinary
circumstances, as the general is sober.

I could not excuse myself with my work. It was eleven, and Castillejo had expected him to finish
my article.

- Suba - I ordered harshly, as if sending your horde-division.

And I got to see me alone in the bottom of the car, as he went beside his driver.

I still feel pride and panic, remembering how confused I was sensing
what was about to happen.

I repented to inspire much interest to Castillejo. This barbarian was going to do something
terrible and wanted me to witness it. I needed my excitement as a round of applause.

I began to think of the engineer, then Olga and I was guessing all the acts of my protector
a few minutes early. Almost was an enjoyable sport for me to see how reality folding went to my induction.

The
car left the lighted streets, as I had expected.

Then, crossing paths silent and dark, went into a neighborhood of new buildings. We went to
the house Mount Olga. But what was the general interest in their
bitterness mingle love?

...

He stopped the vehicle on a copudos avenue of ash trees and wide sidewalks. The reverberations
were not as numerous as in the center of the capital.

The foliage of the trees extended a double mass of shade along the street, leaving three bands
of twilight: a between, and beside the other two houses.

The coach, to stand still, turned off their headlights, the same as a ship anchor and want to stay unnoticed.

Two
men with big straw hats came into the carriage, two guys went towards perverse, that I had
never seen. But also guessed. They were among the general waiting
"Just a little word."

To suppress Iban undoubtedly engineer.

Taboada poor would certainly, at that time speaking to their hopes and Olga their hopes, not
knowing that death awaited him in the street.

- You must look at it as sacred person - I heard the general quietly
-.

Only If escape! ...

It upset the whole edifice of assumptions raised by my induction. If Taboada should be sacred
to those men, what could they do with it?

Repeatedly looked to where he knew he was the house of Olga, but I could not to see her, then
I hid the trees.

The general left wheel, changing places with his chauffeur. The ability of this inspired him, certainly
more confident that their own ability. They talked in low voices, while the Indian stroked the keys
and levers of the machine with grunts of satisfaction.

I do not understand car, but guessed at that wonderful body carriage going to faithfully obey the evil
spirit of their drivers. He looked dead, without any beat that challenge their inner life, but even
a slight hand movement to instantly shiver all over, like a horse
you want to throw a crazy race.

- Be prepared to know something pretty,
Maltranita - Castillejo said quietly, without turning head -.

You will witness a game ever.

But what need had this demon general to make me see things "exquisite »?...

It took five minutes or an hour, I do not know well. In such cases there is no time.

Suddenly I heard a hoarse sound of a drunken dispute. The two men sombreron were quarreling
under the trees.

Another little man came, a little beyond the shadow cast by the ash, as if to cross the street,
going to the opposite side.

My acuity returned to break divining the mystery with bright knives. Vi (without seeing in reality)
the door of the house of Olga opening for an outlet to the engineer.

This hesitated a bit, feeling that the door had closed behind him,
while, few steps away, two men, two 'bare', began to discuss in a
threatening, like to fight.

Mal meeting! Taboada was taking a hand back, looking for the gun, inseparable companion of all
Mexican life. Then, anxious to avoid the danger, instead of to continue along the sidewalk, crossed
the avenue to continue their journey through the side ....

I could
not think anymore.

I was shaking violently from head to foot by the brutal start the car, I thought thrown to the
top, as if the coach, after rolling on the ground few moments, rises through the atmosphere.

Lost
from the moment the normality of my senses, not regain it until the
next day.

Indeterminate and everything seemed unreal, like episodes of a dream.

I saw he was trying to go back, dodging the car suddenly left the shadow. But the car is sideways
to catch up on their retreat. Then tried to move as before, and the machine pursuer changed
direction again, marching directly to meet them.

All this was very rapid, almost instantaneous, succeeding images with a speed the melting into
each other. Just remember the grotesque and horrible jump, a jump
shot, who gave the victim to disappear under the car with open arms.

The vehicle was lifted like a boat on a small wave.

But this wave was solid, and hardness appeared to crack.

I looked behind me instinctively. A black shadow, a kind of larva, was lying on the pavement. She
twisted with painful contractions, as well as a reptile party in two. Groans and insults out of this
human pack trying to rise above his arms, broken legs dragging.

- Gross! ... I have killed!

But I stopped him instantly.

Appeared before me the opposite end of the avenue. The car had to turn, so easily, which fell
on its side, beaten by the sudden turnover.

Slipped again in search of the fallen, and he saw him coming, and did not cry. Perhaps the fear
silenced him, maybe he imagined the unhappy returning the vehicle
to give help, and fell silent, repented of his previous exclamations.

Now the tide was harder, more violent. The car got up as if it were to tip over, and there was
a crack barrel breaking, bursting at once staves and hoops. Still turned the vehicle several
times, with the horrible ease of agile mechanism, always passing
through the same place.

How many were the twists? ... I do not know. The obstacle encountered by wheel was getting softer,
less violent and had not pitched crackle of dry wood.

The next day all the newspapers talked about the accidental death
of poor Taboada when was heading to his home.

The event gave subject for declamation against the barbarity of the
motorists to go full speed through the streets, killing the peaceful
bystander.

The newspaper did our eulogy to the engineer, stating that "had to
recognize the political enemy nobly in a man of talent, unfortunately
to a great patriot disoriented.

"

And nothing else .... A few days nobody thought of the unhappy.

Other events of concern to the nation. Generals revolted candidates, convinced that would not
show up legally. Many felt it necessary to betray the government to follow once again the country's
customs. The president was assassinated, and I, as a first step, I escaped to the United States.
Time would have to return when the storm clears, for serving new masters.

Castillejo was taken prisoner, and is still in jail.

His generalship him worthy comrades still do not know how many political processes, but the
worst thing is that recently have started to charge him for the murder of the engineer.

No longer believes in the automobile accident. It appears that there were many who witnessed
what happened from their windows ajar wisely. Maybe I just saw one, and others speak to please
to the victors. The lonely night on the streets of Mexico! ... Behind each shutter are eyes
that see only when it suits them, silent mouths who speak only when the time is right.

You think perhaps I could go back, safely .... In reality, nothing I mean in that case, and I
still shudder to remember the fright he gave me the damn general.

       

But again, you can be sure of it. I know my old friends. Castillejo is Mexican and his accusers
as well. I am only a foreigner, a Spanish, a Spaniard, and all would
eventually agree to say that was the guiding Maltrana car.

Noto also causes them to you some satisfaction to the spirit of justice that show the new rulers
to persecute Castillejo for his crime.

I am amazed at their innocence. But if any of those generals have ordered dozens of equally
atrocious crimes! ...

It is not justice, revenge, and further that this is envy, bitterness at the superiority of
others.

Castillejo to hate because they inspire admiration. Speak of him as a painter new way of expressing
light, as the writers of the original images found by a colleague.

What most irritates them is that they may not be used without the
procedure of car scandal.

He has lost all novelty. And to each of them would have wanted both to be the first! ...

UN BESO

This happened in early September, days before the Battle of the Marne, when the invasion German
spread across France, reaching the outskirts of Paris.

The lighting was beginning to be scarce, for fear of the "Taubes" who had made his first appearances.
Cafes and restaurants closed their doors shortly after sunset, to
avoid gatherings of idle crowd, commenting, criticizing and unworthy.

The night walker no was a chair across the city, but in spite of this, the crowd was in boulevards
until dawn, waiting without knowing why, going from one extreme to another in search news,
fighting for banks, which in ordinary time are empty.

Several human flows came to be lost in the mass parked between the Magdalena and Republic Square.
They were refugees from the northern provinces, fleeing before the advance of the enemy, seeking
refuge in the capital.

Trains arrived overflowing with bunches of people.

People are held outside the cars, was installed on roofs, climbing locomotive, days invested these train
journey to save a space usually within hours. Remained motionless in lay-bys of the seasons,
giving way to military convoys. And when Finally, tired ground, half suffocated by the heat and
crowding, they entered the Fugitive in Paris, at midnight or at dawn, not knowing where to
go, roamed the Street and had just set up camp on a sidewalk, as if they were in the desert.

*
* * * *

The one in the morning. I hasten to sit in a vacuum hot still gives me a bank of the boulevard,
passing other competitors who also want.

Walk took four hours of continuing into the night caliginosa. Pass over the rooftops sleeves
white reflectors, light rail ebony sky. I contemplate with satisfaction a privileged, to the crowd
disinherited that slips into the shadows glancing greedy bank. The
rest makes me feel the weight of previous fatigue.

Recognize that if the Hulan appeared suddenly trotting through the center of the street, I
would move.

One leg transmits its heat to me through a thin faldamenta summer.

I look at my neighbor girl that keep coming to the boulevard by custom,
but not hopeless, because time is not for trifles.

You snub nose, eyes, slightly oblique, and crowned by a graceful Hociquito hat four francs nineties.
The small body, agile and thin, is wrapped in a dress from manufacturing to hundreds of stores
to standardize with cheap chic Paris to the poor. Below hover skirt pezuñitas a dusty velvet. Smile
with a visible effort, while frowning eyebrows.

One can guess that it is a Women acid, which "make stories" to the friends, a loving squid species,
which spread around the ink of his bitter temper.

Talk to a respectable matron who becomes tearful fire station to his son, being welded. Next to it
is a fourteen year old daughter, looking at the neighbor with curious
eyes and admiring. Those in the rest of the bench with his head down
doze or daydream gazing at the sky.

The bourgeoisie, to talk to the
girl rewards a solemn Madame acid. A month ago would left the seat,
in spite of his fatigue, to avoid such a neighborhood. But now ...!
The concern has made us all well educated and tolerant. Paris is a
ship in distress, and passengers forget the worries and quarrels of
the days of calm, to look for fraternally.

I keep pretending to be
distracted by their conversation. The mother is pessimistic. War Damn!
It seems things go wrong. We are going to kill his child is almost
sure of it, and her eyes moistened with a premature despair. The enemies
are close, they are going to enter Paris 'As before ».... But the
young aggressive sulking quietly optimistic.

- No, come, Madame ....
And if they come, I do not want to see him, I feel like, I could not.
I cast before the Seine .... But it had better be me at my window,
and the first entering the street .... I will send

And lists all
objects that use private plans to use as projectiles. It vibrates
absurdly heroic resolution glorious fools who protest to be shot.

Something
happens on the sidewalk that stops these purposes desperate. Marriage
progresses slowly old: two little beings, wrinkled, trembling, stopping
a moment, breathe avidly, whine and try to go forward. She, dressed
in black with a hood of feathers eaten away by moths, it shows the
most spirited. It is lean and dark, its members, thin and gnarled,
twisted branches appear. It passes from hand to hand a suitcase pulled
with unbearable heaviness, sinking down upon the ground.

Despite
his fatigue, try help the man, who is a kind of mummy. His head sparse
hairs seem larger still moving on a neck cartilage, which arise ligaments
with hard relief. Both are extreme old age, seem to have escaped from
a grave. I haunt the packets try to drag, walk unsteadily, like the
ant pushing a top grain to his stature. In this overwhelming fatigue
is a new guess execution, that of going dressed in the clothes stored
for many years for large ceremonies life: her silk skirt hard and
crispy, the position of the winter coat and overcoat.

The old man
dropped the bundle she carries in her arms, then collapses on this
seat improvised.

- I can not .... I'm going to die.

Whines like
a little boy. His poor head plucked bird is agitated with the hiccups
that precedes to tears.

- Courage, my man .... Maybe we're not far.
An effort!

The old lady wants to show strong and contain her tears.
One can imagine that in the house left behind him was her leadership,
the will, the word vehement. His right hand scaly, leaving the other
hand all the weight of the bag, pat the cheeks of the old. Is a maternal
gesture to instill courage, maybe love is a compliment to be repeated
after a hiatus of half a century. Who knows! The war has raised so
many things that seemed asleep forever! ...

I imagine the plight
of those two things that amount to hundreds seventy years. Are Philemon
and Baucis, who just saw his wizened idyll shattered by the invasion.
They look of former inhabitants of the city that have gone to spend
the rest of his life in the countryside allowing himself to be covered
by the fossils rough and rustic life healthy. Perhaps they small shopkeepers,
perhaps earned him his retirement in an office. They never know what to do with
their money, but they find out that people buy pictures, at one point. They shut your things
up in their houses where nobody comes, and after a while they overeat themselves--they don't
know what, else to do--and die of apoplexy, and leave your pictures to a gallery, and then
they see the light. It's slow, but it's pretty sure. Well, I see Beaton isn't going to move
on, as he ought to do; and so I must. He always was an unconventional creature."

Wetmore went away, but Beaton remained, and he outstayed several other people who came up to
speak to Miss Vance. She was interested in everybody, and she liked the talk of these clever
literary, artistic, clerical, even theatrical people, and she liked the sort of court with
which they recognized her fashion as well as her cleverness; it was very pleasant to be treated
intellectually as if she were one of themselves, and socially as if she was not habitually
the same, but a sort of guest in Bohemia, a distinguished stranger. If it was Arcadia rather
than Bohemia, still she felt her quality of distinguished stranger. The flattery of it touched
her fancy, and not her vanity; she had very little vanity. Beaton's devotion made the same
sort of appeal; it was not so much that she liked him as she liked being the object of his
admiration. She was a girl of genuine sympathies, intellectual rather than sentimental. In
fact, she was an intellectual person, whom qualities of the heart saved from being disagreeable,
as they saved her on the other hand from being worldly or cruel in her fashionableness. She
had read a great many books, and had ideas about them, quite courageous and original ideas;
she knew about pictures--she had been in Wetmore's class; she was fond of music; she was willing
to understand even politics; in Boston she might have been agnostic, but in New York she was
sincerely religious; she was very accomplished; and perhaps it was her goodness that prevented
her feeling what was not best in Beaton.

"Do you think," she said, after the retreat of one of the comers and goers left her alone with
him again, "that those young ladies would like me to call on them?"

"Those young ladies?" Beaton echoed. "Miss Leighton and--"

"No; I have been there with my aunt's cards already."

"Oh yes," said Beaton, as if he had known of it; he admired the pluck and pride with which
Alma had refrained from ever mentioning the fact to him, and had kept her mother from mentioning
it, which must have been difficult.

"I mean the Miss Dryfooses. It seems really barbarous, if nobody goes near them. We do all
kinds of things, and help all kinds of people in some ways, but we let strangers remain strangers
unless they know how to make their way among us."

"The Dryfooses certainly wouldn't know how to make their way among you," said Beaton, with
a sort of dreamy absence in his tone.

Miss Vance went on, speaking out the process of reasoning in her mind, rather than any conclusions
she had reached. "We defend ourselves by trying to believe that they must have friends of their
own, or that they would think us patronizing, and wouldn't like being made the objects of social
charity; but they needn't really suppose anything of the kind."

"I don't imagine they would," said Beaton. "I think they'd be only too happy to have you come.
But you wouldn't know what to do with each other, indeed, Miss Vance."

"Perhaps we shall like each other," said the girl, bravely, "and then we shall know. What Church
are they of?"

"I don't believe they're of any," said Beaton. "The mother was brought up a Dunkard."

"A Dunkard?"

Beaton told what he knew of the primitive sect, with its early Christian polity, its literal
interpretation of Christ's ethics, and its quaint ceremonial of foot-washing; he made something
picturesque of that. "The father is a Mammon-worshipper, pure and simple. I suppose the young
ladies go to church, but I don't know where. They haven't tried to convert me."

"I'll tell them not to despair--after I've converted them," said Miss Vance. "Will you let
me use you as a 'point d'appui', Mr. Beaton?"

"Any way you like. If you're really going to see them, perhaps I'd better make a confession.
I left your banjo with them, after I got it put in order."

"How very nice! Then we have a common interest already."

"Do you mean the banjo, or--"

"The banjo, decidedly. Which of them plays?"

"Neither. But the eldest heard that the banjo was 'all the rage,' as the youngest says. Perhaps
you can persuade them that good works are the rage, too."

Beaton had no very lively belief that Margaret would go to see the Dryfooses; he did so few
of the things he proposed that he went upon the theory that others must be as faithless. Still,
he had a cruel amusement in figuring the possible encounter between Margaret Vance, with her
intellectual elegance, her eager sympathies and generous ideals, and those girls with their
rude past, their false and distorted perspective, their sordid and hungry selfishness, and
their faith in the omnipotence of their father's wealth wounded by their experience of its
present social impotence. At the bottom of his heart he sympathized with them rather than with
her; he was more like them.

People had ceased coming, and some of them were going. Miss Vance said she must go, too, and
she was about to rise, when the host came up with March; Beaton turned away.

"Miss Vance, I want to introduce Mr. March, the editor of 'Every Other Week.' You oughtn't
to be restricted to the art department. We literary fellows think that arm of the service gets
too much of the glory nowadays." His banter was for Beaton, but he was already beyond ear-shot,
and the host went on:

Mr. March can talk with you about your favorite Boston. He's just turned his back on it."

"Oh, I hope not!" said Miss Vance. "I can't imagine anybody voluntarily leaving Boston."

"I don't say he's so bad as that," said the host, committing March to her. "He came to New
York because he couldn't help it--like the rest of us. I never know whether that's a compliment
to New York or not."

They talked Boston a little while, without finding that they had common acquaintance there;
Miss Vance must have concluded that society was much larger in Boston than she had supposed
from her visits there, or else that March did not know many people in it. But she was not a
girl to care much for the inferences that might be drawn from such conclusions; she rather
prided herself upon despising them; and she gave herself to the pleasure of being talked to
as if she were of March's own age. In the glow of her sympathetic beauty and elegance he talked
his best, and tried to amuse her with his jokes, which he had the art of tingeing with a little
seriousness on one side. He made her laugh; and he flattered her by making her think; in her
turn she charmed him so much by enjoying what he said that he began to brag of his wife, as
a good husband always does when another woman charms him; and she asked, Oh was Mrs. March
there; and would he introduce her?

She asked Mrs. March for her address, and whether she had a day; and she said she would come
to see her, if she would let her. Mrs. March could not be so enthusiastic about her as March
was, but as they walked home together they talked the girl over, and agreed about her beauty
and her amiability. Mrs. March said she seemed very unspoiled for a person who must have been
so much spoiled. They tried to analyze her charm, and they succeeded in formulating it as a
combination of intellectual fashionableness and worldly innocence. "I think," said Mrs. March,
"that city girls, brought up as she must have been, are often the most innocent of all. They
never imagine the wickedness of the world, and if they marry happily they go through life as
innocent as children. Everything combines to keep them so; the very hollowness of society shields
them. They are the loveliest of the human race. But perhaps the rest have to pay too much for
them."

"For such an exquisite creature as Miss Vance," said March, "we couldn't pay too much."

A wild laughing cry suddenly broke upon the air at the street-crossing in front of them. A
girl's voice called out: "Run, run, Jen! The copper is after you." A woman's figure rushed
stumbling across the way and into the shadow of the houses, pursued by a burly policeman.

"Ah, but if that's part of the price?"

They went along fallen from the gay spirit of their talk into a silence which he broke with
a sigh. "Can that poor wretch and the radiant girl we left yonder really belong to the same
system of things? How impossible each makes the other seem!"

VI.

Mrs. Horn believed in the world and in society and its unwritten constitution devoutly, and
she tolerated her niece's benevolent activities as she tolerated her aesthetic sympathies because
these things, however oddly, were tolerated--even encouraged--by society; and they gave Margaret
a charm. They made her originality interesting. Mrs. Horn did not intend that they should ever
go so far as to make her troublesome; and it was with a sense of this abeyant authority of
her aunt's that the girl asked her approval of her proposed call upon the Dryfooses. She explained
as well as she could the social destitution of these opulent people, and she had of course
to name Beaton as the source of her knowledge concerning them.

"Did Mr. Beaton suggest your calling on them?"

"No; he rather discouraged it."

"And why do you think you ought to go in this particular instance? New York is full of people
who don't know anybody."

Margaret laughed. "I suppose it's like any other charity: you reach the cases you know of.
The others you say you can't help, and you try to ignore them."

"It's very romantic," said Mrs. Horn. "I hope you've counted the cost; all the possible consequences."

Margaret knew that her aunt had in mind their common experience with the Leightons, whom, to
give their common conscience peace, she had called upon with her aunt's cards and excuses,
and an invitation for her Thursdays, somewhat too late to make the visit seem a welcome to
New York. She was so coldly received, not so much for herself as in her quality of envoy, that
her aunt experienced all the comfort which vicarious penance brings. She did not perhaps consider
sufficiently her niece's guiltlessness in the expiation. Margaret was not with her at St. Barnaby
in the fatal fortnight she passed there, and never saw the Leightons till she went to call
upon them. She never complained: the strain of asceticism, which mysteriously exists in us
all, and makes us put peas, boiled or unboiled, in our shoes, gave her patience with the snub
which the Leightons presented her for her aunt. But now she said, with this in mind: "Nothing
seems simpler than to get rid of people if you don't want them. You merely have to let them alone."

"It isn't so pleasant, letting them alone," said Mrs. Horn.

"Or having them let you alone," said Margaret; for neither Mrs. Leighton nor Alma had ever
come to enjoy the belated hospitality of Mrs. Horn's Thursdays.

"Yes, or having them let you alone," Mrs. Horn courageously consented. "And all that I ask
you, Margaret, is to be sure that you really want to know these people."

"I don't," said the girl, seriously, "in the usual way."

"Then the question is whether you do in the un usual way. They will build a great deal upon
you," said Mrs. Horn, realizing how much the Leightons must have built upon her, and how much
out of proportion to her desert they must now dislike her; for she seemed to have had them
on her mind from the time they came, and had always meant to recognize any reasonable claim
they had upon her.

"It seems very odd, very sad," Margaret returned, "that you never could act unselfishly in
society affairs. If I wished to go and see those girls just to do them a pleasure, and perhaps
because if they're strange and lonely, I might do them good, even--it would be impossible."

"Quite," said her aunt. "Such a thing would be quixotic. Society doesn't rest upon any such
basis. It can't; it would go to pieces, if people acted from unselfish motives."

"Then it's a painted savage!" said the girl. "All its favors are really bargains. It's gifts
are for gifts back again."

"Yes, that is true," said Mrs. Horn, with no more sense of wrong in the fact than the political
economist has in the fact that wages are the measure of necessity and not of merit. "You get
what you pay for. It's a matter of business." She satisfied herself with this formula, which
she did not invent, as fully as if it were a reason; but she did not dislike her niece's revolt
against it. That was part of Margaret's originality, which pleased her aunt in proportion to
her own conventionality; she was really a timid person, and she liked the show of courage which
Margaret's magnanimity often reflected upon her. She had through her a repute, with people
who did not know her well, for intellectual and moral qualities; she was supposed to be literary
and charitable; she almost had opinions and ideals, but really fell short of their possession.
She thought that she set bounds to the girl's originality because she recognized them. Margaret
understood this better than her aunt, and knew that she had consulted her about going to see
the Dryfooses out of deference, and with no expectation of luminous instruction. She was used
to being a law to herself, but she knew what she might and might not do, so that she was rather
a by-law. She was the kind of girl that might have fancies for artists and poets, but might
end by marrying a prosperous broker, and leavening a vast lump of moneyed and fashionable life
with her culture, generosity, and good-will. The intellectual interests were first with her,
but she might be equal to sacrificing them; she had the best heart, but she might know how
to harden it; if she was eccentric, her social orbit was defined; comets themselves traverse
space on fixed lines. She was like every one else, a congeries of contradictions and inconsistencies,
but obedient to the general expectation of what a girl of her position must and must not finally
be. Provisionally, she was very much what she liked to be.

VII

Margaret Vance tried to give herself some reason for going to call upon the Dryfooses, but
she could find none better than the wish to do a kind thing. This seemed queerer and less and
less sufficient as she examined it, and she even admitted a little curiosity as a harmless
element in her motive, without being very well satisfied with it. She tried to add a slight
sense of social duty, and then she decided to have no motive at all, but simply to pay her
visit as she would to any other eligible strangers she saw fit to call upon. She perceived
that she must be very careful not to let them see that any other impulse had governed her;
she determined, if possible, to let them patronize her; to be very modest and sincere and diffident,
and, above all, not to play a part. This was easy, compared with the choice of a manner that
should convey to them the fact that she was not playing a part. When the hesitating Irish serving-man
had acknowledged that the ladies were at home, and had taken her card to them, she sat waiting
for them in the drawing-room. Her study of its appointments, with their impersonal costliness,
gave her no suggestion how to proceed; the two sisters were upon her before she had really
decided, and she rose to meet them with the conviction that she was going to play a part for
want of some chosen means of not doing so. She found herself, before she knew it, making her
banjo a property in the little comedy, and professing so much pleasure in the fact that Miss
Dryfoos was taking it up; she had herself been so much interested by it. Anything, she said,
was a relief from the piano; and then, between the guitar and the banjo, one must really choose
the banjo, unless one wanted to devote one's whole natural life to the violin. Of course, there
was the mandolin; but Margaret asked if they did not feel that the bit of shell you struck
it with interposed a distance between you and the real soul of the instrument; and then it
did have such a faint, mosquitoy little tone! She made much of the question, which they left
her to debate alone while they gazed solemnly at her till she characterized the tone of the
mandolin, when Mela broke into a large, coarse laugh.

"Well, that's just what it does sound like," she explained defiantly to her sister. "I always
feel like it was going to settle somewhere, and I want to hit myself a slap before it begins
to bite. I don't see what ever brought such a thing into fashion."

Margaret had not expected to be so powerfully seconded, and she asked, after gathering herself
together, "And you are both learning the banjo?" "My, no!" said Mela, "I've gone through enough
with the piano. Christine is learnun' it."

"I'm so glad you are making my banjo useful at the outset, Miss Dryfoos." Both girls stared
at her, but found it hard to cope with the fact that this was the lady friend whose banjo Beaton
had lent them. "Mr. Beaton mentioned that he had left it here. I hope you'll keep it as long
as you find it useful."

At this amiable speech even Christine could not help thanking her. "Of course," she said, "I
expect to get another, right off. Mr. Beaton is going to choose it for me."

"You are very fortunate. If you haven't a teacher yet I should so like to recommend mine."

Mela broke out in her laugh again. "Oh, I guess Christine's pretty well suited with the one
she's got," she said, with insinuation. Her sister gave her a frowning glance, and Margaret
did not tempt her to explain.

"Then that's much better," she said. "I have a kind of superstition in such matters; I don't
like to make a second choice. In a shop I like to take the first thing of the kind I'm looking
for, and even if I choose further I come back to the original."

"How funny!" said Mela. "Well, now, I'm just the other way. I always take the last thing, after
I've picked over all the rest. My luck always seems to be at the bottom of the heap. Now, Christine,
she's more like you. I believe she could walk right up blindfolded and put her hand on the
thing she wants every time."

"I'm like father," said Christine, softened a little by the celebration of her peculiarity.
"He says the reason so many people don't get what they want is that they don't want it bad
enough. Now, when I want a thing, it seems to me that I want it all through."

"Well, that's just like father, too," said Mela. "That's the way he done when he got that eighty-acre
piece next to Moffitt that he kept when he sold the farm, and that's got some of the best gas-wells
on it now that there is anywhere." She addressed the explanation to her sister, to the exclusion
of Margaret, who, nevertheless, listened with a smiling face and a resolutely polite air of
being a party to the conversation. Mela rewarded her amiability by saying to her, finally,
"You've never been in the natural-gas country, have you?"

"Oh no! And I should so much like to see it!" said Margaret, with a fervor that was partly,
voluntary.

"Would you? Well, we're kind of sick of it, but I suppose it would strike a stranger."

"I never got tired of looking at the big wells when they lit them up," said Christine. "It
seems as if the world was on fire."

"Yes, and when you see the surface-gas burnun' down in the woods, like it used to by our spring-house-so
still, and never spreadun' any, just like a bed of some kind of wild flowers when you ketch
sight of it a piece off."

They began to tell of the wonders of their strange land in an antiphony of reminiscences and
descriptions; they unconsciously imputed a merit to themselves from the number and violence
of the wells on their father's property; they bragged of the high civilization of Moffitt,
which they compared to its advantage with that of New York. They became excited by Margaret's
interest in natural gas, and forgot to be suspicious and envious.

She said, as she rose, "Oh, how much I should like to see it all!" Then she made a little pause,
and added:

"I'm so sorry my aunt's Thursdays are over; she never has them after Lent, but we're to have
some people Tuesday evening at a little concert which a musical friend is going to give with
some other artists. There won't be any banjos, I'm afraid, but there'll be some very good singing,
and my aunt would be so glad if you could come with your mother."

She put down her aunt's card on the table near her, while Mela gurgled, as if it were the best
joke: "Oh, my! Mother never goes anywhere; you couldn't get her out for love or money." But
she was herself overwhelmed with a simple joy at Margaret's politeness, and showed it in a
sensuous way, like a child, as if she had been tickled. She came closer to Margaret and seemed
about to fawn physically upon her.

"Ain't she just as lovely as she can live?" she demanded of her sister when Margaret was gone.

"I don't know," said Christine. "I guess she wanted to know who Mr. Beaton had been lending
her banjo to."

"Pshaw! Do you suppose she's in love with him?" asked Mela, and then she broke into her hoarse
laugh at the look her sister gave her. "Well, don't eat me, Christine! I wonder who she is,
anyway? I'm goun' to git it out of Mr. Beaton the next time he calls. I guess she's somebody.
Mrs. Mandel can tell. I wish that old friend of hers would hurry up and git well--or something.
But I guess we appeared about as well as she did. I could see she was afraid of you, Christine.
I reckon it's gittun' around a little about father; and when it does I don't believe we shall
want for callers. Say, are you goun'? To that concert of theirs?"

"I don't know. Not till I know who they are first."

"Well, we've got to hump ourselves if we're goun' to find out before Tuesday."

As she went home Margaret felt wrought in her that most incredible of the miracles, which,
nevertheless, any one may make his experience. She felt kindly to these girls because she had
tried to make them happy, and she hoped that in the interest she had shown there had been none
of the poison of flattery. She was aware that this was a risk she ran in such an attempt to
do good. If she had escaped this effect she was willing to leave the rest with Providence.

VIII.

The notion that a girl of Margaret Vance's traditions would naturally form of girls like Christine
and Mela Dryfoos would be that they were abashed in the presence of the new conditions of their
lives, and that they must receive the advance she had made them with a certain grateful humility.
However they received it, she had made it upon principle, from a romantic conception of duty;
but this was the way she imagined they would receive it, because she thought that she would
have done so if she had been as ignorant and unbred as they. Her error was in arguing their
attitude from her own temperament, and endowing them, for the purposes of argument, with her
perspective. They had not the means, intellectual or moral, of feeling as she fancied. If they
had remained at home on the farm where they were born, Christine would have grown up that embodiment
of impassioned suspicion which we find oftenest in the narrowest spheres, and Mela would always
have been a good-natured simpleton; but they would never have doubted their equality with the
wisest and the finest. As it was, they had not learned enough at school to doubt it, and the
splendor of their father's success in making money had blinded them forever to any possible
difference against them. They had no question of themselves in the social abeyance to which
they had been left in New York. They had been surprised, mystified; it was not what they had
expected; there must be some mistake.

They were the victims of an accident, which would be repaired as soon as the fact of their
father's wealth had got around. They had been steadfast in their faith, through all their disappointment,
that they were not only better than most people by virtue of his money, but as good as any;
and they took Margaret's visit, so far as they, investigated its motive, for a sign that at
last it was beginning to get around; of course, a thing could not get around in New York so
quick as it could in a small place. They were confirmed in their belief by the sensation of
Mrs. Mandel when she returned to duty that afternoon, and they consulted her about going to
Mrs. Horn's musicale. If she had felt any doubt at the name for there were Horns and Horns--the
address on the card put the matter beyond question; and she tried to make her charges understand
what a precious chance had befallen them. She did not succeed; they had not the premises, the
experience, for a sufficient impression; and she undid her work in part by the effort to explain
that Mrs. Horn's standing was independent of money; that though she was positively rich, she
was comparatively poor. Christine inferred that Miss Vance had called because she wished to
be the first to get in with them since it had begun to get around. This view commended itself
to Mela, too, but without warping her from her opinion that Miss Vance was all the same too
sweet for anything. She had not so vivid a consciousness of her father's money as Christine
had; but she reposed perhaps all the more confidently upon its power. She was far from thinking
meanly of any one who thought highly of her for it; that seemed so natural a result as to be
amiable, even admirable; she was willing that any such person should get all the good there
was in such an attitude toward her.

They discussed the matter that night at dinner before their father and mother, who mostly sat
silent at their meals; the father frowning absently over his plate, with his head close to
it, and making play into his mouth with the back of his knife (he had got so far toward the
use of his fork as to despise those who still ate from the edge of their knives), and the mother
partly missing hers at times in the nervous tremor that shook her face from side to side.

After a while the subject of Mela's hoarse babble and of Christine's high-pitched, thin, sharp
forays of assertion and denial in the field which her sister's voice seemed to cover, made
its way into the old man's consciousness, and he perceived that they were talking with Mrs.
Mandel about it, and that his wife was from time to time offering an irrelevant and mistaken
comment. He agreed with Christine, and silently took her view of the affair some time before
he made any sign of having listened. There had been a time in his life when other things besides
his money seemed admirable to him. He had once respected himself for the hard-headed, practical
common sense which first gave him standing among his country neighbors; which made him supervisor,
school trustee, justice of the peace, county commissioner, secretary of the Moffitt County
Agricultural Society. In those days he had served the public with disinterested zeal and proud
ability; he used to write to the Lake Shore Farmer on agricultural topics; he took part in
opposing, through the Moffitt papers, the legislative waste of the people's money; on the question
of selling a local canal to the railroad company, which killed that fine old State work, and
let the dry ditch grow up to grass, he might have gone to the Legislature, but he contented
himself with defeating the Moffitt member who had voted for the job. If he opposed some measures
for the general good, like high schools and school libraries, it was because he lacked perspective,
in his intense individualism, and suspected all expense of being spendthrift. He believed in
good district schools, and he had a fondness, crude but genuine, for some kinds of reading--history,
and forensics of an elementary sort.

With his good head for figures he doubted doctors and despised preachers; he thought lawyers
were all rascals, but he respected them for their ability; he was not himself litigious, but
he enjoyed the intellectual encounters of a difficult lawsuit, and he often attended a sitting
of the fall term of court, when he went to town, for the pleasure of hearing the speeches.
He was a good citizen, and a good husband. As a good father, he was rather severe with his
children, and used to whip them, especially the gentle Conrad, who somehow crossed him most,
till the twins died. After that he never struck any of them; and from the sight of a blow dealt
a horse he turned as if sick. It was a long time before he lifted himself up from his sorrow,
and then the will of the man seemed to have been breached through his affections. He let the
girls do as they pleased--the twins had been girls; he let them go away to school, and got
them a piano. It was they who made him sell the farm. If Conrad had only had their spirit he
could have made him keep it, he felt; and he resented the want of support he might have found
in a less yielding spirit than his son's.

His moral decay began with his perception of the opportunity of making money quickly and abundantly,
which offered itself to him after he sold his farm. He awoke to it slowly, from a desolation
in which he tasted the last bitter of homesickness, the utter misery of idleness and listlessness.
When he broke down and cried for the hard-working, wholesome life he had lost, he was near
the end of this season of despair, but he was also near the end of what was best in himself.
He devolved upon a meaner ideal than that of conservative good citizenship, which had been
his chief moral experience: the money he had already made without effort and without merit
bred its unholy self-love in him; he began to honor money, especially money that had been won
suddenly and in large sums; for money that had been earned painfully, slowly, and in little
amounts, he had only pity and contempt. The poison of that ambition to go somewhere and be
somebody which the local speculators had instilled into him began to work in the vanity which
had succeeded his somewhat scornful self-respect; he rejected Europe as the proper field for
his expansion; he rejected Washington; he preferred New York, whither the men who have made
money and do not yet know that money has made them, all instinctively turn. He came where he
could watch his money breed more money, and bring greater increase of its kind in an hour of
luck than the toil of hundreds of men could earn in a year. He called it speculation, stocks,
the Street; and his pride, his faith in himself, mounted with his luck. He expected, when he
had sated his greed, to begin to spend, and he had formulated an intention to build a great
house, to add another to the palaces of the country-bred millionaires who have come to adorn
the great city. In the mean time he made little account of the things that occupied his children,
except to fret at the ungrateful indifference of his son to the interests that could alone
make a man of him. He did not know whether his daughters were in society or not; with people
coming and going in the house he would have supposed they must be so, no matter who the people
were; in some vague way he felt that he had hired society in Mrs. Mandel, at so much a year.
He never met a superior himself except now and then a man of twenty or thirty millions to his
one or two, and then he felt his soul creep within him, without a sense of social inferiority;
it was a question of financial inferiority; and though Dryfoos's soul bowed itself and crawled,
it was with a gambler's admiration of wonderful luck. Other men said these many-millioned millionaires
were smart, and got their money by sharp practices to which lesser men could not attain; but
Dryfoos believed that he could compass the same ends, by the same means, with the same chances;
he respected their money, not them.

When he now heard Mrs. Mandel and his daughters talking of that person, whoever she was, that
Mrs. Mandel seemed to think had honored his girls by coming to see them, his curiosity was
pricked as much as his pride was galled.

"Well, anyway," said Mela, "I don't care whether Christine's goon' or not; I am. And you got
to go with me, Mrs. Mandel."

"Well, there's a little difficulty," said Mrs. Mandel, with her unfailing dignity and politeness.
"I haven't been asked, you know."

"Then what are we goun' to do?" demanded Mela, almost crossly. She was physically too amiable,
she felt too well corporeally, ever to be quite cross. "She might 'a' knowed--well known--we
couldn't 'a' come alone, in New York. I don't see why, we couldn't. I don't call it much of
an invitation."

"I suppose she thought you could come with your mother," Mrs. Mandel suggested.

"She didn't say anything about mother: Did she, Christine? Or, yes, she did, too. And I told
her she couldn't git mother out. Don't you remember?"

"I didn't pay much attention," said Christine. "I wasn't certain we wanted to go."

"I reckon you wasn't goun' to let her see that we cared much," said Mela, half reproachful,
half proud of this attitude of Christine. "Well, I don't see but what we got to stay at home."
She laughed at this lame conclusion of the matter.

"Perhaps Mr. Conrad--you could very properly take him without an express invitation--" Mrs.
Mandel began.

Conrad looked up in alarm and protest. "I--I don't think I could go that evening--"

"What's the reason?" his father broke in, harshly. "You're not such a sheep that you're afraid
to go into company with your sisters? Or are you too good to go with them?"

"If it's to be anything like that night when them hussies come out and danced that way," said
Mrs. Dryfoos, "I don't blame Coonrod for not wantun' to go. I never saw the beat of it."

Mela sent a yelling laugh across the table to her mother. "Well, I wish Miss Vance could 'a'
heard that! Why, mother, did you think it like the ballet?"

"Well, I didn't know, Mely, child," said the old woman. "I didn't know what it was like. I
hain't never been to one, and you can't be too keerful where you go, in a place like New York."

"What's the reason you can't go?" Dryfoos ignored the passage between his wife and daughter
in making this demand of his son, with a sour face.

"I have an engagement that night--it's one of our meetings."

"I reckon you can let your meeting go for one night," said Dryfoos. "It can't be so important
as all that, that you must disappoint your sisters."

"I don't like to disappoint those poor creatures. They depend so much upon the meetings--"

"I reckon they can stand it for one night," said the old man. He added, "The poor ye have with
you always."

"That's so, Coonrod," said his mother. "It's the Saviour's own words."

"Yes, mother. But they're not meant just as father used them."

"How do you know how they were meant? Or how I used them?" cried the father. "Now you just
make your plans to go with the girls, Tuesday night. They can't go alone, and Mrs. Mandel can't
go with them."

"Pshaw!" said Mela. "We don't want to take Conrad away from his meetun', do we, Chris?"

"I don't know," said Christine, in her high, fine voice. "They could get along without him
for one night, as father says."

"Well, I'm not a-goun' to take him," said Mela. "Now, Mrs. Mandel, just think out some other
way. Say! What's the reason we couldn't get somebody else to take us just as well? Ain't that
rulable?"

"It would be allowable--"

"Allowable, I mean," Mela corrected herself.

"But it might look a little significant, unless it was some old family friend."

"Well, let's get Mr. Fulkerson to take us. He's the oldest family friend we got."

"I won't go with Mr. Fulkerson," said Christine, serenely.

"Why, I'm sure, Christine," her mother pleaded, "Mr. Fulkerson is a very good young man, and
very nice appearun'."

Mela shouted, "He's ten times as pleasant as that old Mr. Beaton of Christine's!"

Christine made no effort to break the constraint that fell upon the table at this sally, but
her father said: "Christine is right, Mela. It wouldn't do for you to go with any other young
man. Conrad will go with you."

"I'm not certain I want to go, yet," said Christine.

"Well, settle that among yourselves. But if you want to go, your brother will go with you."

"Of course, Coonrod 'll go, if his sisters wants him to," the old woman pleaded. "I reckon
it ain't agoun' to be anything very bad; and if it is, Coonrod, why you can just git right
up and come out."

"It will be all right, mother. And I will go, of course."

"There, now, I knowed you would, Coonrod. Now, fawther!" This appeal was to make the old man
say something in recognition of Conrad's sacrifice.

"You'll always find," he said, "that it's those of your own household that have the first claim
on you."

"That's so, Coonrod," urged his mother. "It's Bible truth. Your fawther ain't a perfesser,
but he always did read his Bible. Search the Scriptures. That's what it means."

"Laws!" cried Mely, "a body can see, easy enough from mother, where Conrad's wantun' to be
a preacher comes from. I should 'a' thought she'd 'a' wanted to been one herself."

"Let your women keep silence in the churches," said the old woman, solemnly.

"There you go again, mother! I guess if you was to say that to some of the lady ministers nowadays,
you'd git yourself into trouble." Mela looked round for approval, and gurgled out a hoarse laugh.

IX.

The Dryfooses went late to Mrs. Horn's musicale, in spite of Mrs. Mandel's advice. Christine
made the delay, both because she wished to show Miss Vance that she was (not) anxious, and
because she had some vague notion of the distinction of arriving late at any sort of entertainment.
Mrs. Mandel insisted upon the difference between this musicale and an ordinary reception; but
Christine rather fancied disturbing a company that had got seated, and perhaps making people
rise and stand, while she found her way to her place, as she had seen them do for a tardy comer
at the theatre.

Mela, whom she did not admit to her reasons or feelings always, followed her with the servile
admiration she had for all that Christine did; and she took on trust as somehow successful
the result of Christine's obstinacy, when they were allowed to stand against the wall at the
back of the room through the whole of the long piece begun just before they came in. There
had been no one to receive them; a few people, in the rear rows of chairs near them, turned
their heads to glance at them, and then looked away again. Mela had her misgivings; but at
the end of the piece Miss Vance came up to them at once, and then Mela knew that she had her
eyes on them all the time, and that Christine must have been right. Christine said nothing
about their coming late, and so Mela did not make any excuse, and Miss Vance seemed to expect
none. She glanced with a sort of surprise at Conrad, when Christine introduced him; Mela did
not know whether she liked their bringing him, till she shook hands with him, and said: "Oh,
I am very glad indeed! Mr. Dryfoos and I have met before." Without explaining where or when,
she led them to her aunt and presented them, and then said, "I'm going to put you with some
friends of yours," and quickly seated them next the Marches. Mela liked that well enough; she
thought she might have some joking with Mr. March, for all his wife was so stiff; but the look
which Christine wore seemed to forbid, provisionally at least, any such recreation. On her
part, Christine was cool with the Marches. It went through her mind that they must have told
Miss Vance they knew her; and perhaps they had boasted of her intimacy. She relaxed a little
toward them when she saw Beaton leaning against the wall at the end of the row next Mrs. March.
Then she conjectured that he might have told Miss Vance of her acquaintance with the Marches,
and she bent forward and nodded to Mrs. March across Conrad, Mela, and Mr. March. She conceived
of him as a sort of hand of her father's, but she was willing to take them at their apparent
social valuation for the time. She leaned back in her chair, and did not look up at Beaton
after the first furtive glance, though she felt his eyes on her.

The music began again almost at once, before Mela had time to make Conrad tell her where Miss
Vance had met him before. She would not have minded interrupting the music; but every one else
seemed so attentive, even Christine, that she had not the courage. The concert went onto an
end without realizing for her the ideal of pleasure which one ought to find. in society. She
was not exacting, but it seemed to her there were very few young men, and when the music was
over, and their opportunity came to be sociable, they were not very sociable. They were not
introduced, for one thing; but it appeared to Mela that they might have got introduced, if
they had any sense; she saw them looking at her, and she was glad she had dressed so much;
she was dressed more than any other lady there, and either because she was the most dressed
of any person there, or because it had got around who her father was, she felt that she had
made an impression on the young men. In her satisfaction with this, and from her good nature,
she was contented to be served with her refreshments after the concert by Mr. March, and to
remain joking with him. She was at her ease; she let her hoarse voice out in her largest laugh;
she accused him, to the admiration of those near, of getting her into a perfect gale. It appeared
to her, in her own pleasure, her mission to illustrate to the rather subdued people about her
what a good time really was, so that they could have it if they wanted it. Her joy was crowned
when March modestly professed himself unworthy to monopolize her, and explained how selfish
he felt in talking to a young lady when there were so many young men dying to do so.

"Oh, pshaw, dyun', yes!" cried Mela, tasting the irony. "I guess I see them!"

He asked if he might really introduce a friend of his to her, and she said, Well, yes, if he
thought he could live to get to her; and March brought up a man whom he thought very young
and Mela thought very old. He was a contributor to 'Every Other Week,' and so March knew him;
he believed himself a student of human nature in behalf of literature, and he now set about
studying Mela. He tempted her to express her opinion on all points, and he laughed so amiably
at the boldness and humorous vigor of her ideas that she was delighted with him. She asked
him if he was a New-Yorker by birth; and she told him she pitied him, when he said he had never
been West. She professed herself perfectly sick of New York, and urged him to go to Moffitt
if he wanted to see a real live town. He wondered if it would do to put her into literature
just as she was, with all her slang and brag, but he decided that he would have to subdue her
a great deal: he did not see how he could reconcile the facts of her conversation with the
facts of her appearance: her beauty, her splendor of dress, her apparent right to be where
she was. These things perplexed him; he was afraid the great American novel, if true, must
be incredible. Mela said he ought to hear her sister go on about New York when they first came;
but she reckoned that Christine was getting so she could put up with it a little better, now.
She looked significantly across the room to the place where Christine was now talking with
Beaton; and the student of human nature asked, Was she here? and, Would she introduce him?
Mela said she would, the first chance she got; and she added, They would be much pleased to
have him call. She felt herself to be having a beautiful time, and she got directly upon such
intimate terms with the student of human nature that she laughed with him about some peculiarities
of his, such as his going so far about to ask things he wanted to know from her; she said she
never did believe in beating about the bush much. She had noticed the same thing in Miss Vance
when she came to call that day; and when the young man owned that he came rather a good deal
to Mrs. Horn's house, she asked him, Well, what sort of a girl was Miss Vance, anyway, and
where did he suppose she had met her brother? The student of human nature could not say as
to this, and as to Miss Vance he judged it safest to treat of the non-society side of her character,
her activity in charity, her special devotion to the work among the poor on the East Side,
which she personally engaged in.

"Oh, that's where Conrad goes, too!" Mela interrupted. "I'll bet anything that's where she
met him. I wisht I could tell Christine! But I suppose she would want to kill me, if I was
to speak to her now."

The student of human nature said, politely, "Oh, shall I take you to her?"

Mela answered, "I guess you better not!" with a laugh so significant that he could not help
his inferences concerning both Christine's absorption in the person she was talking with and
the habitual violence of her temper. He made note of how Mela helplessly spoke of all her family
by their names, as if he were already intimate with them; he fancied that if he could get that
in skillfully, it would be a valuable color in his study; the English lord whom she should
astonish with it began to form himself out of the dramatic nebulosity in his mind, and to whirl
on a definite orbit in American society. But he was puzzled to decide whether Mela's willingness
to take him into her confidence on short notice was typical or personal: the trait of a daughter
of the natural-gas millionaire, or a foible of her own.

Beaton talked with Christine the greater part of the evening that was left after the concert.
He was very grave, and took the tone of a fatherly friend; he spoke guardedly of the people
present, and moderated the severity of some of Christine's judgments of their looks and costumes.
He did this out of a sort of unreasoned allegiance to Margaret, whom he was in the mood of
wishing to please by being very kind and good, as she always was. At all times got
up at four o'clock to pray Matins and prayer for the dying, becoming to bed until nine o'clock, he
heard Mass, prayed by his chaplain, at noon Angelus before lunch, morning devotional readings,
eve, five wounds, receiving visits honest and drive away, before eating a bit of meditation in the
chapel, and after dinner another rosary, litany, and recommendation of the soul: a nine-thirty
he went to bed. Dance and meetings, nothing, very little theater, and only one works whose
morale had been questioned. Twice a week confessed and received Holy Communion every Sunday.

A maid, farewell to the house because the rigor of fasting did blaspheme God and steal on Fridays
during Lent Steak remains stiff, spread by the news very curious neighborhood, according to which
the Countess of Astorgüela showed determination to rescue it with penance worldliness of his
past life. Much boasted to his humble and careless person, but the said the maiden, quedábanla
remains the most refined coquetry, but she tried hide. Her feet wore silk stockings, girded her
waist satin corset, was rich in perfume the bathroom, took care of hard hands and clothing
even if it were a show of humility, white clothes looked very spent on decorations, linens, and creatures:
in plain clothes and wool, used to hide expensive petticoat trimmed with lace. The girl that
belied, In addition, certain excesses of piety attributed to the lady: his acts of penance consisted
not to take anything, even if it wished, after hours, to abstain from a tasty snack, choose
for a short time, seat uncomfortable and even a few minutes to be placed on cross arms, but was false,
according to the sinful servant, that the Countess will use hair shirt under the corset satin
and that she had a habit of voluntary hassle away by China in the shoes before on the contrary,
wore exquisitely, and to sleep on Friday with a sliver between sheets, or to make crosses on
the floor with his tongue. On the other hand, emphasizing the remains of coquetry, the Countess,
alone in her boudoir and bedroom, unfolded itself care and dedication that only see women when
used, but honestly, in the sweet service of love. So, judging by the Countess of Astorgüela,
the same was be a great lady by disappointment thrown into the arms of religion, a hypocrite
high range, or both at once.

His face was ripped from a painting by Mengs or Van Loo.

A beautiful blonde hair, starting to gray, the headband was used, the face was expressive, almost
picaresque funny mouth, slender waist and feet guys. That should be the ladies of the court
of Versailles, which offset the power that they lacked the force of elegance and wit. Age Countess
was a mystery, for her sad, deceitful to others, but still remained charms that deploy when the
evening came to ask for advice some devoted friends and, like her, willing to defend sacred interests.

Such
was the Countess of Astorgüela connected to the higher clergy, or conquest of the nobility, influential
in the minds of some old-fashioned noble and eager to win over all
who excel in the service of tradition and piety that inspired great
desire Tirso desire to know just knew the brave zeal he showed in
the famous sermon.

She He wrote very well, his own hand, and on letterhead with his shield:

"The Countess of the Royal Astorgüela respectfully salutes Chaplain Don Tirso Resmilla, begging
you to please visit entrust a good deed. "

     (And down the date and time of the appointment, with the address
     of the house.)
     

Tirso pleasantly surprised, consulted with the priest who gave the
sermon if you should attend the call, and the response fueled his
impatience.

- Do not let you go, mate, that lady is a powerhouse.

Thus at the appointed time came to the house of the Countess, who
received him in a spacious seriously cabinet adorned and furnished
where returns were very sternly accusing details elegant women.

 You become so absorbed in such
work that you think nothing else is worth while. But I'm glad Mr. Dryfoos could come with you;
I'm so glad you could all come; I knew you would enjoy the music. Do sit down--"

"No," said Christine, bluntly; "we must be going. Mela!" she called out, "come!"

The last group about Mrs. Horn looked round, but Christine advanced upon them undismayed, and
took the hand Mrs. Horn promptly gave her. "Well, I must bid you good-night."

"Oh, good-night," murmured the elder lady. "So very kind of you to come."

"I've had the best kind of a time," said Mela, cordially. "I hain't laughed so much, I don't
know when."

"Oh, I'm glad you enjoyed it," said Mrs. Horn, in the same polite murmur she had used with
Christine; but she said nothing to either sister about any future meeting.

They were apparently not troubled. Mela said over her shoulder to the student of human nature,
"The next time I see you I'll give it to you for what you said about Moffitt."

Margaret made some entreating paces after them, but she did not succeed in covering the retreat
of the sisters against critical conjecture. She could only say to Conrad, as if recurring to
the subject, "I hope we can get our friends to play for us some night. I know it isn't any
real help, but such things take the poor creatures out of themselves for the time being, don't
you think?"

"Oh yes," he answered. "They're good in that way." He turned back hesitatingly to Mrs. Horn,
and said, with a blush, "I thank you for a happy evening."

"Oh, I am very glad," she replied, in her murmur.

One of the old friends of the house arched her eyebrows in saying good-night, and offered the
two young men remaining seats home in her carriage. Beaton gloomily refused, and she kept herself
from asking the student of human nature, till she had got him into her carriage, "What is Moffitt,
and what did you say about it?"

"Now you see, Margaret," said Mrs. Horn, with bated triumph, when the people were all gone.

"Yes, I see," the girl consented. "From one point of view, of course it's been a failure. I
don't think we've given Miss Dryfoos a pleasure, but perhaps nobody could. And at least we've
given her the opportunity of enjoying herself."

"Such people," said Mrs. Horn, philosophically, "people with their money, must of course be
received sooner or later. You can't keep them out. Only, I believe I would rather let some
one else begin with them. The Leightons didn't come?"

"I sent them cards. I couldn't call again."

Mrs. Horn sighed a little. "I suppose Mr. Dryfoos is one of your fellow-philanthropists?"

"He's one of the workers," said Margaret. "I met him several times at the Hall, but I only
knew his first name. I think he's a great friend of Father Benedict; he seems devoted to the
work. Don't you think he looks good?"

"Very," said Mrs. Horn, with a color of censure in her assent. "The younger girl seemed more
amiable than her sister. But what manners!"

"Dreadful!" said Margaret, with knit brows, and a pursed mouth of humorous suffering. "But
she appeared to feel very much at home."

"Oh, as to that, neither of them was much abashed. Do you suppose Mr. Beaton gave the other
one some hints for that quaint dress of hers? I don't imagine that black and lace is her own
invention. She seems to have some sort of strange fascination for him."

"She's very picturesque," Margaret explained. "And artists see points in people that the rest
of us don't."

"Could it be her money?" Mrs. Horn insinuated. "He must be very poor."

"But he isn't base," retorted the girl, with a generous indignation that made her aunt smile.

"Oh no; but if he fancies her so picturesque, it doesn't follow that he would object to her
being rich."

"It would with a man like Mr. Beaton!"

"You are an idealist, Margaret. I suppose your Mr. March has some disinterested motive in paying
court to Miss Mela--Pamela, I suppose, is her name. He talked to her longer than her literature
would have lasted."

"He seems a very kind person," said Margaret.

"And Mr. Dryfoos pays his salary?"

"I don't know anything about that. But that wouldn't make any difference with him."

Mrs. Horn laughed out at this security; but she was not displeased by the nobleness which it
came from. She liked Margaret to be high-minded, and was really not distressed by any good
that was in her.

The Marches walked home, both because it was not far, and because they must spare in carriage
hire at any rate. As soon as they were out of the house, she applied a point of conscience to him.

"I don't see how you could talk to that girl so long, Basil, and make her laugh so."

"Why, there seemed no one else to do it, till I thought of Kendricks."

"Yes, but I kept thinking, Now he's pleasant to her because he thinks it's to his interest.
If she had no relation to 'Every Other Week,' he wouldn't waste his time on her."

"Isabel," March complained, "I wish you wouldn't think of me in he, him, and his; I never personalize
you in my thoughts: you remain always a vague unindividualized essence, not quite without form
and void, but nounless and pronounless. I call that a much more beautiful mental attitude toward
the object of one's affections. But if you must he and him and his me in your thoughts, I wish
you'd have more kindly thoughts of me."

"Do you deny that it's true, Basil?"

"Do you believe that it's true, Isabel?"

"No matter. But could you excuse it if it were?"

"Ah, I see you'd have been capable of it in my, place, and you're ashamed."

"Yes," sighed the wife, "I'm afraid that I should. But tell me that you wouldn't, Basil!"

"I can tell you that I wasn't. But I suppose that in a real exigency, I could truckle to the
proprietary Dryfooses as well as you."

"Oh no; you mustn't, dear! I'm a woman, and I'm dreadfully afraid. Account must be taken
to the living.

Old was seen in the solitude of the road and black ice.

The reverbs, to encapuchonados due to air strikes, only served, in
his brief radio light, to give greater intensity to the general gloom.

While leaving, accompanied by his step repeating the same words, as if they were a litany:

- The life you live. The living things need .... Woe to him who dies!

The dead are fleeing faster than the living ....

All abandoned to the dead. Even in the cinema room felt the same ingratitude. That night there
was only a dozen people. The public of this district was cinematographer
tired of the adventures of the persecuted Alsatian.

Everyone knew her story.

The old took his seat with the majesty of a monarch who does give a representation to himself.
Appearing his grandson, he spoke softly, gently.

- Good night, little
me.

All you leave, everyone will forget. Life is like .... But Fear not your grandmother will never
leave you.

Here I have every night .... Every night!

IV
The news began to circulate after noon, vague and indecisive.

"Peace!
Just make peace! "

But many times he had said this himself, without
seeing it done then, that the old did not believe the news.

By mid-afternoon
everyone was convinced it was true. The government announced an armistice
requested by the enemy.

The greengrocer was suddenly enveloped and
carried away by an avalanche of people who seemed roll toward the
center of Paris. She was frantic with joy and all, screaming like
everyone else.

Until the arrival of the night lived a life of dreams,
thought unlikely to follow Adventures of a nightmare. I dare say the material
works up faster now, and in a season or two you won't know the Dryfooses from the other plutocrats.
THEY will--a little better than they do now; they'll see a difference, but nothing radical,
nothing painful. People who get up in the world by service to others--through letters, or art,
or science--may have their modest little misgivings as to their social value, but people that
rise by money--especially if their gains are sudden--never have. And that's the kind of people
that form our nobility; there's no use pretending that we haven't a nobility; we might as well
pretend we haven't first-class cars in the presence of a vestibuled Pullman. Those girls had
no more doubt of their right to be there than if they had been duchesses: we thought it was
very nice of Miss Vance to come and ask us, but they didn't; they weren't afraid, or the least
embarrassed; they were perfectly natural--like born aristocrats. And you may be sure that if
the plutocracy that now owns the country ever sees fit to take on the outward signs of an aristocracy--titles,
and arms, and ancestors--it won't falter from any inherent question of its worth. Money prizes
and honors itself, and if there is anything it hasn't got, it believes it can buy it."

"Well, Basil," said his wife, "I hope you won't get infected with Lindau's ideas of rich people.
Some of them are very good and kind."

"Who denies that? Not even Lindau himself. It's all right. And the great thing is that the
evening's enjoyment is over. I've got my society smile off, and I'm radiantly happy. Go on
with your little pessimistic diatribes, Isabel; you can't spoil my pleasure."

"I could see," said Mela, as she and Christine drove home together, "that she was as jealous
as she could be, all the time you was talkun' to Mr. Beaton. She pretended to be talkun' to
Conrad, but she kep' her eye on you pretty close, I can tell you. I bet she just got us there
to see how him and you would act together. And I reckon she was satisfied. He's dead gone on
you, Chris."

Christine listened with a dreamy pleasure to the flatteries with which Mela plied her in the
hope of some return in kind, and not at all because she felt spitefully toward Miss Vance,
or in anywise wished her ill. "Who was that fellow with you so long?" asked Christine. "I suppose
you turned yourself inside out to him, like you always do."

Mela was transported by the cruel ingratitude. "It's a lie! I didn't tell him a single thing."

Conrad walked home, choosing to do so because he did not wish to hear his sisters' talk of
the evening, and because there was a tumult in his spirit which he wished to let have its way.
In his life with its single purpose, defeated by stronger wills than his own, and now struggling
partially to fulfil itself in acts of devotion to others, the thought of women had entered
scarcely more than in that of a child. His ideals were of a virginal vagueness; faces, voices,
gestures had filled his fancy at times, but almost passionately; and the sensation that he
now indulged was a kind of worship, ardent, but reverent and exalted. The brutal experiences
of the world make us forget that there are such natures in it, and that they seem to come up
out of the lowly earth as well as down from the high heaven. In the heart of this man well
on toward thirty there had never been left the stain of a base thought; not that suggestion
and conjecture had not visited him, but that he had not entertained them, or in any-wise made
them his. In a Catholic age and country, he would have been one of those monks who are sainted
after death for the angelic purity of their lives, and whose names are invoked by believers
in moments of trial, like San Luigi Gonzaga. As he now walked along thinking, with a lover's
beatified smile on his face, of how Margaret Vance had spoken and looked, he dramatized scenes
in which he approved himself to her by acts of goodness and unselfishness, and died to please
her for the sake of others. During your
absence I've seen the clean, sweet and hardworking he is. I'm sure he would care well. For
one thing, I say, that amount would give you everything I could, and thereafter, what shall
agree under what I had. All the time he was poignantly sensible
of her grace, her elegance, her style; they seemed to intoxicate him; some tones of her voice
thrilled through his nerves, and some looks turned his brain with a delicious, swooning sense
of her beauty; her refinement bewildered him. But all this did not admit the idea of possession,
even of aspiration. At the most his worship only set her beyond the love of other men as far
as beyond his own.

PG EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

    Affectional habit
    Brag of his wife, as a good husband always does
    But when we make that money here, no one loses it
    Courage hadn't been put to the test
    Family buryin' grounds
    Homage which those who have not pay to those who have
    Hurry up and git well--or something
    Made money and do not yet know that money has made them
    Society: All its favors are really bargains
    Wages are the measure of necessity and not of merit
    Without realizing his cruelty, treated as a child

