She was eleven years old, just Martha's age, and Betty was two years younger. Fresh from her
life in London, where there always were so many lessons to be learned and so little "fun" of
any kind, this beautiful country home was a sort of paradise to her. To have no one to scold
her, no lessons to learn, no tiresome straight walks with her governess, and above all, to
have two playfellows always ready to join in pleasures and games! Kitty was an only child,
and her life was often dull for want of companionship. Everything went on very well at first,
for there was so much to do and see that there was no time for disputes. True, Kitty commanded
as much as ever, and had a way of setting people to rights which was distinctly trying; but
she and Betty did not come to any open disagreement until she had been at Holmwood for nearly
a week. Nevertheless there had been many small occasions on which Betty had felt fretted and
irritated; for Kitty, without the least intending it, seemed often to choose just the wrong
thing to say and do.

And then she always wished to do exactly the same as Martha and herself, and that was so tiresome.

For instance, all the children were very fond of dear Miss Grey. But now it was always Kitty
who must sit next to her, Kitty who rushed to supply her with roses to wear and strawberries
to eat, Kitty who kissed her repeatedly at the most awkward moments. Martha and Betty, who
naturally felt that Miss Grey was their own dear Miss Grey, could hardly get near her at all,
and Betty resented this very much. In fact, she gradually got to dwell so entirely on these
annoyances that she could not think of Kitty's good qualities at all, and was quite unable
to remember that she was generous and affectionate, and that her faults, though tiresome, were
partly the result of a longing to be loved.

At last, the clouds having gathered, the storm came.

One morning, almost as soon as she got up, Betty felt that every single thing Kitty did or
said was silly. It did not occur to her that perhaps she was a little bit cross herself, which
was the real explanation.

After breakfast they all three went down to the pond, and, dividing the water into shares,
began to fish for frogs and newts.

"In a minute," said Betty to herself as she watched Kitty, "she'll say Martha and I have the
best places."

It happened just so.

"I say," said Kitty, throwing down her net and coming close up to Betty, "I've got the worst
place of all, there's nothing to catch in this part!"

"You haven't tried long enough," said Martha.

"Let's change," was Kitty's next suggestion as she stood looking eagerly over Betty's shoulder.

"All right," said Betty moodily, and she went round to the part of the pond Kitty had left,
where she almost immediately caught two tadpoles and a newt.

"Look there!" she cried, holding up her net triumphantly.

"Oh!" screamed Kitty, "you are lucky. Do let me try," and she rushed up to Betty's side and
seized hold of the net. But this was too much. Betty let go of the handle and said indignantly,
"I shan't fish any more. You're so unfair; you always are!" And she walked away in a rage.
"Kitty is more tiresome than ever," she said to herself. "She spoils everything. I wish she
would go away!"

All that day she preserved an attitude of dignified sulkiness in spite of Kitty's frequent
attempts to make it up. When she came and threw her arm round her, Betty shook it off impatiently.

That evening the three little girls were in the woods with dear Miss Grey and baby Susie, who
was just three years old. Betty was walking a little behind the others with her eyes fixed
on the ground. It was damp and mossy, and there was a thick growth of ferns and underwood at
the side of the path. Suddenly she saw something move quickly through this, and disappear down
a hole. She stopped and moved aside the ferns and moss. What do you think she saw sitting comfortably
in the hole and staring at her with its moist bright eyes?

A large speckled toad!

"Look, look, Miss Grey!" she cried, and everyone gathered round to see what she had found.
Even Susie peered into the hole, and poked a bit of fern gently at the toad, which sat there
gazing quietly at them.

"What a jolly little home he's made for himself!" said Martha. "All soft and moist, and just
exactly to fit him."

"He can't see out much," said Betty as she put back the moss gently over the top.

"I don't think he wants to," said Miss Grey. "He is quite satisfied, like many other people
who live in holes."

The children ran on through the wood, except Betty, who kept back and took hold of Miss Grey's
hand.

"What do you mean about living in holes?" she asked presently.

"Well, you know, we all live in holes of one kind or another. Some are rough and some smooth,
some fit us exactly, and some don't fit us at all. Some are softly lined with all sorts of
comforts, and some are full of pricks and troubles. And it is always very difficult to see
out of them."

"Why?" asked Betty.

"Because, like the toad's hole we saw just now, our own lives are so near us and surround us
so closely, that it is only by making an effort that we can get out of them and understand
other people's lives at all. The only thing that can really make us do that is sympathy."

"What does that mean?"

"It is that which makes us able to put ourselves in thought into other people's holes, and
feel what it is like to live there. When we do that it makes us remember to be patient and
gentle with our friends and companions, for if they live in uncomfortable holes it must be
difficult for them to be unselfish and amiable. If we had their troubles and vexations we might
not be half so pleasant as they are."

Betty was silent.

"Do you think Martha's hole and mine is nicer than Kitty's?" she said at last.

"Well, I think in some ways it may be. At any rate you know Kitty has no sisters to play with,
and very little of this country life you all enjoy so much. While her holiday lasts I should
try to make it as pleasant as possible for her, if I were you."

"I do," said Betty, "generally. Only sometimes she makes me feel so cross."

At this moment up rushed Kitty, and elbowed Betty away from Miss Grey's side.

"You've had her long enough!" she shouted. "It's my turn now!"

And Betty was thinking so much about the toad in the hole, that she did not even frown.