The disappointment of the travellers in the midst of this darkness may be imagined. All observation
of the lunar disc was prevented. The constellations alone were visible, and it must be acknowledged
that no astronomers, neither Faye, Chacornac, nor the Secchi, had ever been in such favourable
conditions to observe them.

In fact, nothing could equal the splendour of this starry world, bathed in limpid ether. Diamonds
set in the celestial vault threw out superb flames. One look could take in the firmament from
the Southern Cross to the North Star, those two constellations which will in 12,000 years,
on account of the succession of equinoxes, resign their rôles of polar stars, the one to Canopus
in the southern hemisphere, the other to Wega in the northern. Imagination lost itself in this
sublime infinitude, amidst which the projectile was moving like a new star created by the hand
of man. From natural causes these constellations shone with a soft lustre; they did not twinkle
because there was no atmosphere to intervene with its strata unequally dense, and of different
degrees of humidity, which causes this scintillation.

The travellers long watched the constellated firmament, upon which the vast screen of the moon
made an enormous black hole. But a painful sensation at length drew them from their contemplation.
This was an intense cold, which soon covered the glasses of the port-lights with a thick coating
of ice. The sun no longer warmed the projectile with his rays, and it gradually lost the heat
stored up in its walls. This heat was by radiation rapidly evaporated into space, and a considerable
lowering of the temperature was the result. The interior humidity was changed into ice by contact
with the window-panes, and prevented all observation.

Nicholl, consulting the thermometer, said that it had fallen to 17° (centigrade) below zero
(1° Fahr). Therefore, notwithstanding every reason for being economical, Barbicane was obliged
to seek heat as well as light from gas. The low temperature of the bullet was no longer bearable.
Its occupants would have been frozen to death.

"We will not complain about the monotony of the journey," said Michel Ardan. "What variety
we have had, in temperature at all events! At times we have been blinded with light, and saturated
with heat like the Indians of the Pampas! Now we are plunged into profound darkness amidst
boreal cold, like the Esquimaux of the pole! No, indeed! We have no right to complain, and
Nature has done many things in our honour!"

"But," asked Nicholl, "what is the exterior temperature?"

"Precisely that of planetary space," answered Barbicane.

"Then," resumed Michel Ardan, "would not this be an opportunity for making that experiment
we could not attempt when we were bathed in the solar rays?"

"Now or never," answered Barbicane, "for we are usefully situated in order to verify the temperature
of space, and see whether the calculations of Fourier or Pouillet are correct."

"Any way it is cold enough," said Michel. "Look at the interior humidity condensing on the
port-lights. If this fall continues the vapour of our respiration will fall around us in snow."

"Let us get a thermometer," said Barbicane.

It will be readily seen that an ordinary thermometer would have given no result under the circumstances
in which it was going to be exposed. The mercury would have frozen in its cup, for it does
not keep liquid below 44° below zero. But Barbicane had provided himself with a spirit thermometer,
on the Walferdin system, which gives the minima of excessively low temperature.

Before beginning the experiment this instrument was compared with an ordinary thermometer,
and Barbicane prepared to employ it.

"How shall we manage it?" asked Nicholl.

"Nothing is easier," answered Michel Ardan, who was never at a loss. "Open the port-light rapidly,
throw out the instrument; it will follow the projectile with exemplary docility; a quarter
of an hour after take it in."

"With your hand?" asked Barbicane.

"With my hand," answered Michel.

"Well, then, my friend, do not try it," said Barbicane, "for the hand you draw back will be
only a stump, frozen and deformed by the frightful cold." 

And all the people of the country that were left submitted to King
Edward, and sought his peace and protection.

After this, the same year, before Martinmas, went King Edward with the West-Saxon army to Colchester;
and repaired and renewed the town, where it was broken down before. And much people turned to him,
both in East-Anglia and in Essex, that were before under the power
of the Danes.

And all the army in East-Anglia swore union with him; that they would
all that he would, and would protect all that he protected, either
by sea or land.

And the army that belonged to Cambridge chose him separately for their lord and protector, and
confirmed the same with oaths, as he had advised.
 The window was only
open one second, and yet that one second was enough to allow the interior of the projectile
to become frightfully cold.

"Mille diables!" cried Michel Ardan, "it is cold enough here to freeze white bears!"

Barbicane let half-an-hour go by, more than sufficient time to allow the instrument to descend
to the level of the temperature of space. The thermometer was then rapidly drawn in.

Barbicane calculated the quantity of mercury spilt into the little phial soldered to the lower
part of the instrument, and said--

"One hundred and forty degrees centigrade below zero!" (218° Fahr.)

M. Pouillet was right, not Fourier. Such was the frightful temperature of sidereal space! Such
perhaps that of the lunar continents when the orb of night loses by radiation all the heat
which she absorbs during the fifteen days of sunshine.

CHAPTER XV.

HYPERBOLA OR PARABOLA.

Our readers will probably be astonished that Barbicane and his companions were so little occupied
with the future in store for them in their metal prison, carried along in the infinitude of
ether. Instead of asking themselves where they were going, they lost their time in making experiments,
just as if they had been comfortably installed in their own studies.

It might be answered that men so strong-minded were above such considerations, that such little
things did not make them uneasy, and that they had something else to do than to think about
their future.

The truth is that they were not masters of their projectile--that they could neither stop it
nor alter its direction. A seaman can direct the head of his ship as he pleases; an aëronaut
can give his balloon vertical movement. They, on the contrary, had no authority over their
vehicle. No manoeuvre was possible to them. Hence their not troubling themselves, or "let things
go" state of mind.

Where were they at that moment, 8 a.m. during that day called upon earth the sixth of December?
Certainly in the neighbourhood of the moon, and even near enough for her to appear like a vast
black screen upon the firmament. As to the distance which separated them, it was impossible
to estimate it. The projectile, kept up by inexplicable forces, has grazed the north pole of
the satellite at less than twenty-five miles' distance. But had that distance increased or
diminished since they had been in the cone of shadow? There was no landmark by which to estimate
either the direction or the velocity of the projectile. Perhaps it was going rapidly away from
the disc and would soon leave the pure shadow. Perhaps, on the contrary, it was approaching
it, and would before long strike against some elevated peak in the invisible atmosphere, which
would have terminated the journey, doubtless to the detriment of the travellers.

A discussion began upon this subject, and Michel Ardan, always rich in explanations, gave out
the opinion that the bullet, restrained by lunar attraction, would end by falling on the moon
like an aërolite on to the surface of the terrestrial globe.

"In the first place," answered Barbicane, "all aërolites do not fall upon the surface of the
earth; only a small proportion do so. Therefore, if we are aërolites it does not necessarily
follow that we shall fall upon the moon."

"Still," answered Michel, "if we get near enough--"

"Error," replied Barbicane. "Have you not seen shooting stars by thousands in the sky at certain
epochs?"

"Yes."

"Well, those stars, or rather corpuscles, only shine by rubbing against the atmospheric strata.
Now, if they pass through the atmosphere, they pass at less than 16 miles from our globe, and
yet they rarely fall. It is the same with our projectile. It may approach very near the moon,
and yet not fall upon it."

"But then," asked Michel, "I am curious to know how our vehicle would behave in space."

"I only see two hypotheses," answered Barbicane, after some minutes' reflection.

"What are they?"

"The projectile has the choice between two mathematical curves, and it will follow the one
or the other according to the velocity with which it is animated, and which I cannot now estimate."

"Yes, it will either describe a parabola or an hyperbola."

"Yes," answered Barbicane, "with some speed it will describe a parabola, and with greater speed
an hyperbola."

"I like those grand words!" exclaimed Michel Ardan. "I know at once what you mean. And what
is your parabola, if you please?"

"My friend," answered the captain, "a parabola is a conic section arising from cutting a cone
by a plane parallel to one of its sides."

"Oh!" said Michel in a satisfied tone.

"It is about the same trajectory that the bomb of a howitzer describes."

"Just so. And an hyperbola?" asked Michel.

"It is a curve formed by a section of a cone when the cutting plane makes a greater angle with
the base than the side of the cone makes."

"Is it possible?" exclaimed Michel Ardan in the most serious tone, as if he had been informed
of a grave event. "Then remember this, Captain Nicholl, what I like in your definition of the
hyperbola--I was going to say of the hyperhumbug--is that it is still less easy to understand
than the word you pretend to define."

Nicholl and Barbicane paid no attention to Michel Ardan's jokes. They had launched into a scientific
discussion. They were eager about what curve the projectile would take. One was for the hyperbola,
the other for the parabola. They gave each other reasons bristling with x's. Their arguments
were presented in a language which made Michel Ardan jump. The discussion was lively, and neither
of the adversaries would sacrifice his curve of predilection.

This scientific dispute was prolonged until Michel Ardan became impatient, and said--

"I say, Messrs. Cosine, do leave off throwing your hyperbolas and parabolas at one's head.
I want to know the only interesting thing about the business. We shall follow one or other
of your curves. Very well. But where will they take us to?"

"Nowhere," answered Nicholl.

"How nowhere?"

"Evidently they are unfinished curves, prolonged indefinitely!"

"Ah, savants! What does it matter about hyperbola or parabola if they both carry us indefinitely
into space?"

Barbicane and Nicholl could not help laughing. They cared for art for its own sake. Never had
more useless question been discussed at a more inopportune moment. The fatal truth was that
the projectile, whether hyperbolically or parabolically carried along, would never strike against
either the earth or the moon.

What would become of these bold travellers in the most immediate future? If they did not die
of hunger or thirst, they would in a few days, when gas failed them, die for want of air, if
the cold had not killed them first!

Still, although it was so important to economise gas, the excessive lowness of the surrounding
temperature forced them to consume a certain quantity. They could not do without either its
light or heat. Happily the caloric developed by the Reiset and Regnault apparatus slightly
elevated the temperature of the projectile, and without spending much they could raise it to
a bearable degree.

In the meantime observation through the port-lights had become very difficult. The steam inside
the bullet condensed upon the panes and froze immediately. They were obliged to destroy the
opacity of the glass by constant rubbing. However, they could record several phenomena of the
highest interest.

In fact, if the invisible disc had any atmosphere, the shooting stars would be seen passing
through it. If the projectile itself passed through the fluid strata, might it not hear some
noise echoed--a storm, for instance, an avalanche, or a volcano in activity? Should they not
see the intense fulgurations of a burning mountain? Such facts, carefully recorded, would have
singularly elucidated the obscure question of the lunar constitution. Thus Barbicane and Nicholl,
standing like astronomers at their port-lights, watched with scrupulous patience.

But until then the disc remained mute and dark. It did not answer the multifarious interrogations
of these ardent minds.

This provoked from Michel a reflection that seemed correct enough.

"If ever we recommence our journey, we shall do well to choose the epoch when the moon is new."

"True," answered Nicholl, "that circumstance would have been more favourable. I agree that
the moon, bathed in sunlight, would not be visible during the passage, but on the other hand
the earth would be full. And if we are dragged round the moon like we are now, we should at
least have the advantage of seeing the invisible disc magnificently lighted up."

"Well said, Nicholl," replied Michel Ardan. "What do you think about it, Barbicane?"

"I think this," answered the grave president: "if ever we recommence this journey, we shall
start at the same epoch, and under the same circumstances. Suppose we had reached our goal,
would it not have been better to find the continents in full daylight instead of dark night?
Would not our first installation have been made under better circumstances? Yes, evidently.
As to the invisible side, we could have visited that in our exploring expeditions on the lunar
globe. So, therefore, the time of the full moon was well chosen. But we ought to have reached
our goal, and in order to have reached it we ought not to have deviated from our road."

"There is no answer to make to that," said Michel Ardan. "Yet we have passed a fine opportunity
for seeing the moon! Who knows whether the inhabitants of the other planets are not more advanced
than the savants of the earth on the subject of their satellites?"

The following answer might easily have been given to Michel Ardan's remark:--Yes, other satellites,
on account of their greater proximity, have made the study of them easier. The inhabitants
of Saturn, Jupiter, and Uranus, if they exist, have been able to establish communication with
their moons much more easily. The four satellites of Jupiter gravitate at a distance of 108,260
leagues, 172,200 leagues, 274,700 leagues, and 480,130 leagues. But these distances are reckoned
from the centre of the planet, and by taking away the radius, which is 17,000 to 18,000 leagues,
it will be seen that the first satellite is at a much less distance from the surface of Jupiter
than the moon is from the centre of the earth. Of the eight moons of Saturn, four are near.
Diana is 84,600 leagues off; Thetys, 62,966 leagues; Enceladus, 48,191 leagues; and lastly,
Mimas is at an average distance of 34,500 leagues only. Of the eighteen satellites of Uranus,
the first, Ariel, is only 51,520 leagues from the planet.

Therefore, upon the surface of those three stars, an experiment analogous to that of President
Barbicane would have presented less difficulties. If, therefore, their inhabitants have attempted
the enterprise, they have, perhaps, acquainted themselves with the constitution of the half
of the disc which their satellite hides eternally from their eyes. But if they have never left
their planet, they do not know more about them than the astronomers of the earth.

In the meantime the bullet was describing in the darkness that incalculable trajectory which
no landmark allowed them to find out. Was its direction altered either under the influence
of lunar attraction or under the action of some unknown orb? Barbicane could not tell. But
a change had taken place in the relative position of the vehicle, and Barbicane became aware
of it about 4 a.m.

The change consisted in this, that the bottom of the projectile was turned towards the surface
of the moon, and kept itself perpendicular with its axis. The attraction or gravitation had
caused this modification. The heaviest part of the bullet inclined towards the invisible disc
exactly as if it had fallen towards it.

Was it falling then? Were the travellers at last about to reach their desired goal? No. And
the observation of one landmark, inexplicable in itself, demonstrated to Barbicane that his
projectile was not nearing the moon, and that it was following an almost concentric curve.

This was a flash of light which Nicholl signalised all at once on the limit of the horizon
formed by the black disc. This point could not be mistaken for a star. It was a reddish flame,
which grew gradually larger--an incontestable proof that the projectile was getting nearer
it, and not falling normally upon the surface of the satellite.

"A volcano! It is a volcano in activity!" exclaimed Nicholl--"an eruption of the interior fires
of the moon. That world, then, is not quite extinguished."

"Yes, an eruption!" answered Barbicane, who studied the phenomenon carefully through his night-glass.
"What should it be if not a volcano?"

"But then," said Michel Ardan, "air is necessary to feed that combustion, therefore there is
some atmosphere on that part of the moon."

"Perhaps so," answered Barbicane, "but not necessarily. A volcano, by the decomposition of
certain matters, can furnish itself with oxygen, and so throw up flames into the void. It seems
to me, too, that that deflagration has the intensity and brilliancy of objects the combustion
of which is produced in pure oxygen. We must not be in a hurry to affirm the existence of a
lunar atmosphere."

The burning mountain was situated at the 45th degree of south latitude on the invisible part
of the disc. But to the great disappointment of Barbicane the curve that the projectile described
dragged it away from the point signalised by the eruption, therefore he could not exactly determine
its nature. Half-an-hour after it had first been seen this luminous point disappeared on the
horizon. Still the authentication of this phenomenon was a considerable fact in selenographic
studies. It proved that all heat had not yet disappeared from the interior of this globe, and
where heat exists, who may affirm that the vegetable kingdom, or even the animal kingdom itself,
has not until now resisted the destructive influences? The existence of this volcano in eruption,
indisputably established by earthly savants, was favourable to the theory of the habitability
of the moon.

Barbicane became absorbed in reflection. He forgot himself in a mute reverie, filled with the
mysterious destinies of the lunar world. He was trying to connect the facts observed up till
then, when a fresh incident recalled him suddenly to the reality.

This incident was more than a cosmic phenomenon; it was a threatening danger, the consequences
of which might be disastrous.

Suddenly in the midst of the ether, in the profound darkness, an enormous mass had appeared.
It was like a moon, but a burning moon of almost unbearable brilliancy, outlined as it was
on the total obscurity of space. This mass, of a circular form, threw such light that it filled
the projectile. The faces of Barbicane, Nicholl, and Michel Ardan, bathed in its white waves,
looked spectral, livid, blafard, like the appearance produced by the artificial light of alcohol
impregnated with salt.

"The devil!" cried Michel Ardan. "How hideous we are! Whatever is that wretched moon?"

"It is a bolis," answered Barbicane.

"A bolis, on fire, in the void?"

"Yes."

This globe of fire was indeed a bolis. Barbicane was not mistaken. But if these cosmic meteors,
seen from the earth, present an inferior light to that of the moon, here, in the dark ether,
they shone magnificently. These wandering bodies carry in themselves the principle of their
own incandescence. The surrounding air is not necessary to the deflagration. And, indeed, if
certain of these bodies pass through our atmosphere at two or three leagues from the earth,
others describe their trajectory at a distance the atmosphere cannot reach. Some of these meteors
are from one to two miles wide, and move at a speed of forty miles a second, following an inverse
direction from the movement of the earth.

This shooting star suddenly appeared in the darkness at a distance of at least 100 leagues,
and measured, according to Barbicane's estimate, a diameter of 2,000 metres. It moved with
the speed of about thirty leagues a minute. It cut across the route of the projectile, and
would reach it in a few minutes. As it approached it grew larger in an enormous proportion.

If possible, let the situation of the travellers be imagined! It is impossible to describe
it. In spite of their courage, their sang-froid, their carelessness of danger, they were mute,
motionless, with stiffened limbs, a prey to fearful terror. Their projectile, the course of
which they could not alter, was running straight on to this burning mass, more intense than
the open mouth of a furnace. They seemed to be rushing towards an abyss of fire.

Barbicane seized the hands of his two companions, and all three looked through their half-closed
eyelids at the red-hot asteroid. If they still thought at all, they must have given themselves
up as lost!

Two minutes after the sudden appearance of the bolis, two centuries of agony, the projectile
seemed about to strike against it, when the ball of fire burst like a bomb, but without making
any noise in the void, where sound, which is only the agitation of the strata of air, could
not be made.

Nicholl uttered a cry. His companions and he rushed to the port-lights.

What a spectacle! What pen could describe it, what palette would be rich enough in colours
to reproduce its magnificence?

It was like the opening of a crater, or the spreading of an immense fire. Thousands of luminous
fragments lit up space with their fires. Every size, colour, and shade were there. There were
yellow, red, green, grey, a crown of multi-coloured fireworks. There only remained of the enormous
and terrible globe pieces carried in all directions, each an asteroid in its turn, some shining
like swords, some surrounded by white vapour, others leaving behind them a trail of cosmic dust.

These incandescent blocks crossed each other, knocked against each other, and were scattered
into smaller fragments, of which some struck the projectile. Its left window was even cracked
by the violent shock. It seemed to be floating in a shower of bullets, of which the least could
annihilate it in an instant.

The light which saturated the ether was of incomparable intensity, for these asteroids dispersed
it in every direction. At a certain moment it was so bright that Michel dragged Barbicane and
Nicholl to the window, exclaiming--

"The invisible moon is at last visible!"

And all three, across the illumination, saw for a few seconds that mysterious disc which the
eye of man perceived for the first time.

What did they distinguish across that distance which they could not estimate? Long bands across
the disc, veritable clouds formed in a very restricted atmospheric medium, from which emerged
not only all the mountains, but every relief of middling importance, amphitheatres, yawning
craters, such as exist on the visible face. Then immense tracts, no longer arid plains, but
veritable seas, oceans which reflected in their liquid mirror all the dazzling magic of the
fires of space. Lastly, on the surface of the continents, vast dark masses, such as immense
forests would resemble under the rapid illumination of a flash of lightning.

Was it an illusion, an error of the eyes, an optical deception? Could they give a scientific
affirmation to that observation so superficially obtained? Dared they pronounce upon the question
of its habitability after so slight a glimpse of the invisible disc?

By degrees the fulgurations of space gradually died out, its accidental brilliancy lessened,
the asteroids fled away by their different trajectories, and went out in the distance. The
ether resumed its habitual darkness; the stars, for one moment eclipsed, shone in the firmament,
and the disc, of which scarcely a glimpse had been caught, was lost in the impenetrable night.

CHAPTER XVI.

THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE.

The projectile had just escaped a terrible danger, a danger quite unforeseen. Who would have
imagined such a meeting of asteroids? These wandering bodies might prove serious perils to
the travellers. They were to them like so many rocks in the sea of ether, which, less fortunate
than navigators, they could not avoid. But did these adventurers of space complain? No, as
Nature had given them the splendid spectacle of a cosmic meteor shining by formidable expansion,
as this incomparable display of fireworks, which no Ruggieri could imitate, had lighted for
a few seconds the invisible nimbus of the moon. During that rapid peep, continents, seas, and
forests had appeared to them. Then the atmosphere did give there its life-giving particles?
Questions still not solved, eternally asked by American curiosity.

It was then 3.30 p.m. The bullet was still describing its curve round the moon. Had its route
again been modified by the meteor? It was to be feared. The projectile ought, however to describe
a curve imperturbably determined by the laws of mechanics. Barbicane inclined to the opinion
that this curve would be a parabola and not an hyperbola. However, if the parabola was admitted,
the bullet ought soon to come out of the cone of shadow thrown into the space on the opposite
side to the sun. This cone, in fact, is very narrow, the angular diameter of the moon is so
small compared to the diameter of the orb of day. Until now the projectile had moved in profound
darkness. Whatever its speed had been--and it could not have been slight--its period of occultation
continued. That fact was evident, but perhaps that would not have been the case in a rigidly
parabolical course. This was a fresh problem which tormented Barbicane's brain, veritably imprisoned
as it was in a web of the unknown which he could not disentangle.

Neither of the travellers thought of taking a minute's rest. Each watched for some unexpected
incident which should throw a new light on their uranographic studies. About five o'clock Michel
distributed to them, by way of dinner, some morsels of bread and cold meat, which were rapidly
absorbed, whilst no one thought of leaving the port-light, the panes of which were becoming
incrusted under the condensation of vapour.

About 5.45 p.m., Nicholl, armed with his telescope, signalised upon the southern border of
the moon, and in the direction followed by the projectile, a few brilliant points outlined
against the dark screen of the sky. They looked like a succession of sharp peaks with profiles
in a tremulous line. They were rather brilliant. The terminal line of the moon looks the same
when she is in one of her octants.

They could not be mistaken. There was no longer any question of a simple meteor, of which that
luminous line had neither the colour nor the mobility, nor of a volcano in eruption. Barbicane
did not hesitate to declare what it was.

"The sun!" he exclaimed.

"What! the sun!" answered Nicholl and Michel Ardan.

"Yes, my friends, it is the radiant orb itself, lighting up the summit of the mountains situated
on the southern border of the moon. We are evidently approaching the South Pole!"

"After having passed the North Pole," answered Michel. "Then we have been all round our satellite."

"Yes, friend Michel."

"Then we have no more hyperbolas, no more parabolas, no more open curves to fear!"

"No, but a closed curve."

"Which is called--"

"An ellipsis. Instead of being lost in the interplanetary spaces it is possible that the projectile
will describe an elliptical orbit round the moon."

"Really!"

"And that it will become its satellite."

"Moon of the moon," exclaimed Michel Ardan.

"Only I must tell you, my worthy friend, that we are none the less lost men on that account!"

"No, but in another and much pleasanter way!" answered the careless Frenchman, with his most
amiable smile.

President Barbicane was right. By describing this elliptical orbit the projectile was going
to gravitate eternally round the moon like a sub-satellite. It was a new star added to the
solar world, a microcosm peopled by three inhabitants, whom want of air would kill before long.
Barbicane, therefore, could not rejoice at the position imposed on the bullet by the double
influence of the centripetal and centrifugal forces. His companions and he were again going
to see the visible face of the disc. Perhaps their existence would last long enough for them
to perceive for the last time the full earth superbly lighted up by the rays of the sun! Perhaps
they might throw a last adieu to the globe they were never more to see again! Then their projectile
would be nothing but an extinct mass, dead like those inert asteroids which circulate in the
ether. A single consolation remained to them: it was that of seeing the darkness and returning
to light, it was that of again entering the zones bathed by solar irradiation!

In the meantime the mountains recognised by Barbicane stood out more and more from the dark
mass. They were Mounts Doerfel and Leibnitz, which stand on the southern circumpolar region
of the moon.

All the mountains of the visible hemisphere have been measured with perfect exactitude. This
perfection will, no doubt, seem astonishing, and yet the hypsometric methods are rigorous.
The altitude of the lunar mountains may be no less exactly determined than that of the mountains
of the earth.

The method generally employed is that of measuring the shadow thrown by the mountains, whilst
taking into account the altitude of the sun at the moment of observation. This method also
allows the calculating of the depth of craters and cavities on the moon. Galileo used it, and
since Messrs. Boeer and Moedler have employed it with the greatest success.

Another method, called the tangent radii, may also be used for measuring lunar reliefs. It
is applied at the moment when the mountains form luminous points on the line of separation
between light and darkness which shine on the dark part of the disc. These luminous points
are produced by the solar rays above those which determine the limit of the phase. Therefore
the measure of the dark interval which the luminous point and the luminous part of the phase
leave between them gives exactly the height of the point. But it will be seen that this method
can only be applied to the mountains near the line of separation of darkness and light.

A third method consists in measuring the profile of the lunar mountains outlined on the background
by means of a micrometer; but it is only applicable to the heights near the border of the orb.

In any case it will be remarked that this measurement of shadows, intervals, or profiles can
only be made when the solar rays strike the moon obliquely in relation to the observer. When
they strike her directly--in a word, when she is full--all shadow is imperiously banished from
her disc, and observation is no longer possible.

Galileo, after recognising the existence of the lunar mountains, was the first to employ the
method of calculating their heights by the shadows they throw. He attributed to them, as it
has already been shown, an average of 9,000 yards. Hevelius singularly reduced these figures,
which Riccioli, on the contrary, doubled. All these measures were exaggerated. Herschel, with
his more perfect instruments, approached nearer the hypsometric truth. But it must be finally
sought in the accounts of modern observers.

Messrs. Boeer and Moedler, the most perfect selenographers in the whole world, have measured
1,095 lunar mountains. It results from their calculations that 6 of these mountains rise above
5,800 metres, and 22 above 4,800. The highest summit of the moon measures 7,603 metres; it
is, therefore, inferior to those of the earth, of which some are 1,000 yards higher. But one
remark must be made. If the respective volumes of the two orbs are compared the lunar mountains
are relatively higher than the terrestrial. The lunar ones form 1/70 of the diameter of the
moon, and the terrestrial only form 1/140 of the diameter of the earth. For a terrestrial mountain
to attain the relative proportions of a lunar mountain, its perpendicular height ought to be
6-1/2 leagues. Now the highest is not four miles.

Thus, then, to proceed by comparison, the chain of the Himalayas counts three peaks higher
than the lunar ones, Mount Everest, Kunchinjuga, and Dwalagiri. Mounts Doerfel and Leibnitz,
on the moon, are as high as Jewahir in the same chain. Newton, Casatus, Curtius, Short, Tycho,
Clavius, Blancanus, Endymion, the principal summits of Caucasus and the Apennines, are higher
than Mont Blanc. The mountains equal to Mont Blanc are Moret, Theophylus, and Catharnia; to
Mount Rosa, Piccolomini, Werner, and Harpalus; to Mount Cervin, Macrobus, Eratosthenes, Albateque,
and Delambre; to the Peak of Teneriffe, Bacon, Cysatus, Philolaus, and the Alps; to Mount Perdu,
in the Pyrenees, Roemer and Boguslawski; to Etna, Hercules, Atlas, and Furnerius.

Such are the points of comparison that allow the appreciation of the altitude of lunar mountains.
Now the trajectory followed by the projectile dragged it precisely towards that mountainous
region of the southern hemisphere where rise the finest specimens of lunar orography.

CHAPTER XVII.

TYCHO.

At 6 p.m. the projectile passed the South Pole at less than thirty miles, a distance equal
to that already reached at the North Pole. The elliptical curve was, therefore, being rigorously
described.

At that moment the travellers re-entered the beneficent sunshine. They saw once more the stars
moving slowly from east to west. The radiant orb was saluted with a triple hurrah. With its
light came also its heat, which soon pierced the middle walls. The windows resumed their accustomed
transparency. Their "layer of ice" melted as if by enchantment. The gas was immediately extinguished
by way of economy. The air apparatus alone was to consume its habitual quantity.

"Ah!" said Nicholl, "sunshine is good! How impatiently after their long nights the Selenites
must await the reappearance of the orb of day!"

"Yes," answered Michel Ardan, "imbibing, as it were, the brilliant ether, light and heat, all
life is in them."

At that moment the bottom of the projectile moved slightly from the lunar surface in order
to describe a rather long elliptical orbit. From that point, if the earth had been full, Barbicane
and his friends could have seen it again. But, drowned in the sun's irradiation, it remained
absolutely invisible. Another spectacle attracted their eyes, presented by the southern region
of the moon, brought by the telescopes to within half-a-mile. They left the port-lights no
more, and noted all the details of the strange continent.

Mounts Doerfel and Leibnitz formed two separate groups stretching nearly to the South Pole;
the former group extends from the Pole to the 84th parallel on the eastern part of the orb;
the second, starting from the eastern border, stretches from the 65th degree of latitude to
the Pole.

On their capriciously-formed ridge appeared dazzling sheets of light like those signalised
by Father Secchi. With more certainty than the illustrious Roman astronomer, Barbicane was
enabled to establish their nature.

"It is snow," cried he.

"Snow?" echoed Nicholl.

"Yes, Nicholl, snow, the surface of which is profoundly frozen. Look how it reflects the luminous
rays. Cooled lava would not give so intense a reflection. Therefore there is water and air
upon the moon, as little as you like, but the fact can no longer be contested."

No, it could not be, and if ever Barbicane saw the earth again his notes would testify to this
fact, important in selenographic observations.

These Mounts Doerfel and Leibnitz arose in the midst of plains of moderate extent, bounded
by an indefinite succession of amphitheatres and circular ramparts. These two chains are the
only ones which are met with in the region of amphitheatres. Relatively they are not very broken,
and only throw out here and there some sharp peaks, the highest of which measures 7,603 metres.

The projectile hung high above all this, and the relief disappeared in the intense brilliancy
of the disc.

Then reappeared to the eyes of the travellers that original aspect of the lunar landscapes,
raw in tone, without gradation of colours, only white and black, for diffused light was wanting.
Still the sight of this desolate world was very curious on account of its very strangeness.
They were moving above this chaotic region as if carried along by the breath of a tempest,
seeing the summits fly under their feet, looking down the cavities, climbing the ramparts,
sounding the mysterious holes. But there was no trace of vegetation, no appearance of cities,
nothing but stratifications, lava streams, polished like immense mirrors, which reflect the
solar rays with unbearable brilliancy. There was no appearance of a living world, everything
of a dead one, where the avalanches rolling from the summit of the mountains rushed noiselessly.
They had plenty of movement, but noise was wanting still.

Barbicane established the fact, by reiterated observation, that the reliefs on the borders
of the disc, although they had been acted upon by different forces to those of the central
region, presented a uniform conformation. There was the same circular aggregation, the same
accidents of ground. Still it might be supposed that their arrangements were not completely
analogous. In the centre the still malleable crust of the moon suffered the double attraction
of the moon and the earth acting in inverse ways according to a radius prolonged from one to
the other. On the borders of the disc, on the contrary, the lunar attraction has been, thus
to say, perpendicular with the terrestrial attraction. It seems, therefore, that the reliefs
on the soil produced under these conditions ought to have taken a different form. Yet they
had not, therefore the moon had found in herself alone the principle of her formation and constitution.
She owed nothing to foreign influences, which justified the remarkable proposition of Arago's,
"No action exterior to the moon has contributed to the production of her relief."

However that may be in its actual condition, this world was the image of death without it being
possible to say that life had ever animated it.

Michel Ardan, however, thought he recognised a heap of ruins, to which he drew Barbicane's
attention. It was situated in about the 80th parallel and 30° longitude. This heap of stones,
pretty regularly made, was in the shape of a vast fortress, overlooking one of those long furrows
which served as river-beds in ante-historical times. Not far off rose to a height of 5,646
metres the circular mountain called Short, equal to the Asiatic Caucasus. Michel Ardan, with
his habitual ardour, maintained "the evidences" of his fortress. Below he perceived the dismantled
ramparts of a town; here the arch of a portico, still intact; there two or three columns lying
on their side; farther on a succession of archpieces, which must have supported the conduct
of an aqueduct; in another part the sunken pillars of a gigantic bridge run into the thickest
part of the furrow. He distinguished all that, but with so much imagination in his eyes, through
a telescope so fanciful, that his observation cannot be relied upon. And yet who would affirm,
who would dare to say, that the amiable fellow had not really seen what his two companions
would not see?

The moments were too precious to be sacrificed to an idle discussion. The Selenite city, whether
real or pretended, had disappeared in the distance. The projectile began to get farther away
from the lunar disc, and the details of the ground began to be lost in a confused jumble. The
reliefs, amphitheatres, craters, and plains alone remained, and still showed their boundary-lines
distinctly.

At that moment there stretched to the left one of the finest amphitheatres in lunar orography.
It was Newton, which Barbicane easily recognised by referring to the Mappa Selenographica.

Newton is situated in exactly 77° south lat. and 16° east long. It forms a circular crater,
the ramparts of which, 7,264 metres high, seemed to be inaccessible.

Barbicane made his companions notice that the height of that mountain above the surrounding
plain was far from being equal to the depth of its crater. This enormous hole was beyond all
measurement, and made a gloomy abyss, the bottom of which the sun's rays could never reach.
There, according to Humboldt, utter darkness reigns, which the light of the sun and the earth
could not break. The mythologists would have made it with justice hell's mouth.

"Newton," said Barbicane, "is the most perfect type of the circular mountains, of which the
earth possesses no specimen. They prove that the formation of the moon by cooling was due to
violent causes, for whilst under the influence of interior fire the reliefs were thrown up
to considerable heights, the bottom dropped in, and became lower than the lunar level."

"I do not say no," answered Michel Ardan.

A few minutes after having passed Newton the projectile stood directly over the circular mountain
of Moret. It also passed rather high above the summits of Blancanus, and about 7.30 p.m. it
reached the amphitheatre of Clavius.

This circle, one of the most remarkable on the disc, is situated in south lat. 58° and east
long. 15°. Its height is estimated at 7,091 metres. The travellers at a distance of 200 miles,
reduced to two by the telescopes, could admire the arrangement of this vast crater.

"The terrestrial volcanoes," said Barbicane, "are only molehills compared to the volcanoes
of the moon. Measuring the ancient craters formed by the first eruptions of Vesuvius and Etna,
they are found to be scarcely 6,000 metres wide. In France the circle of the Cantal measures
five miles; at Ceylon the circle of the island is forty miles, and is considered the largest
on the globe. What are these diameters compared to that of Clavius, which we are over in this
moment?"

"What is its width?" asked Nicholl.

"About seventy miles," answered Barbicane. "This amphitheatre is certainly the largest on the
moon, but many are fifty miles wide!"

"Ah, my friends," exclaimed Michel Ardan, "can you imagine what this peaceful orb of night
was once like? when these craters vomited torrents of lava and stones, with clouds of smoke
and sheets of flame? What a prodigious spectacle formerly, and now what a falling off! This
moon is now only the meagre case of fireworks, of which the rockets, serpents, suns, and wheels,
after going off magnificently, only leave torn pieces of cardboard. Who can tell the cause,
reason, or justification of such cataclysms?"

Barbicane did not listen to Michel Ardan. He was contemplating those ramparts of Clavius, formed
of wide mountains several leagues thick. At the bottom of its immense cavity lay hundreds of
small extinct craters, making the soil like a sieve, and overlooked by a peak more than 15,000
feet high.

The plain around had a desolate aspect. Nothing so arid as these reliefs, nothing so sad as
these ruins of mountains, if so they may be called, as those heaps of peaks and mountains encumbering
the ground! The satellite seemed to have been blown up in this place.

The projectile still went on, and the chaos was still the same. Circles, craters, and mountains
succeeded each other incessantly. No more plains or seas--an interminable Switzerland or Norway.
Lastly, in the centre of the creviced region at its culminating point, the most splendid mountain
of the lunar disc, the dazzling Tycho, to which posterity still gives the name of the illustrious
Danish astronomer.

Whilst observing the full moon in a cloudless sky, there is no one who has not remarked this
brilliant point on the southern hemisphere. Michel Ardan, to qualify it, employed all the metaphors
his imagination could furnish him with. To him Tycho was an ardent focus of light, a centre
of irradiation, a crater vomiting flames! It was the axle of a fiery wheel, a sea-star encircling
the disc with its silver tentacles, an immense eye darting fire, a nimbo made for Pluto's head!
It was a star hurled by the hand of the Creator, and fallen upon the lunar surface!

Tycho forms such a luminous concentration that the inhabitants of the earth can see it without
a telescope, although they are at a distance of 100,000 leagues. It will, therefore, be readily
imagined what its intensity must have been in the eyes of observers placed at fifty leagues only.

Across this pure ether its brilliancy was so unbearable that Barbicane and his friends were
obliged to blacken the object-glasses of their telescopes with gas-smoke in order to support
it. Then, mute, hardly emitting a few admirative interjections, they looked and contemplated.
All their sentiments, all their impressions were concentrated in their eyes, as life, under
violent emotion, is concentrated in the heart.

Tycho belongs to the system of radiating mountains, like Aristarchus and Copernicus. But it
testified the most completely of all to the terrible volcanic action to which the formation
of the moon is due.

Tycho is situated in south lat. 43° and east long. 12°. Its centre is occupied by a crater
more than forty miles wide. It affects a slightly elliptical form, and is inclosed by circular
ramparts, which on the east and west overlook the exterior plain from a height of 5,000 metres.
It is an aggregation of Mont Blancs, placed round a common centre, and crowned with shining rays.

Photography itself could never represent what this incomparable mountain, with all its projections
converging to it and its interior excrescences, is really like. In fact, it is during the full
moon that Tycho is seen in all its splendour. Then all shadows disappear, the foreshortenings
of perspective disappear, and all proofs come out white--an unfortunate circumstance, for this
strange region would have been curious to reproduce with photographic exactitude. It is only
an agglomeration of holes, craters, circles, a vertiginous network of crests. It will be understood,
therefore, that the bubblings of this central eruption have kept their first forms. Crystallised
by cooling, they have stereotyped the aspect which the moon formerly presented under the influence
of Plutonic forces.

The distance which separated the travellers from the circular summits of Tycho was not so great
that the travellers could not survey its principal details. Even upon the embankment which
forms the ramparts of Tycho, the mountains hanging to the interior and exterior slopes rose
in stories like gigantic terraces. They appeared to be higher by 300 or 400 feet on the west
than on the east. No system of terrestrial castrametation could equal these natural fortifications.
A town built at the bottom of this circular cavity would have been utterly inaccessible.

Inaccessible and marvellously extended over this ground of picturesque relief! Nature had not
left the bottom of this crater flat and empty. It possessed a special orography, a mountain
system which made it a world apart. The travellers clearly distinguished the cones, central
hills, remarkable movements of the ground, naturally disposed for the reception of masterpieces
of Selenite architecture. There was the place for a temple, here for a forum, there the foundations
of a palace, there the plateau of a citadel, the whole overlooked by a central mountain 1,500
feet high--a vast circuit which would have held ancient Rome ten times over.

"Ah!" exclaimed Michel Ardan, made enthusiastic by the sight, "what grand towns could be built
in this circle of mountains! A tranquil city, a peaceful refuge, away from all human cares!
How all misanthropes could live there, all haters of humanity, all those disgusted with social
life!"

"All! It would be too small for them!" replied Barbicane simply.

CHAPTER XVIII.

GRAVE QUESTIONS.

In the meantime the projectile had passed the neighbourhood of Tycho. Barbicane and his two
friends then observed, with the most scrupulous attention, those brilliant radii which the
celebrated mountain disperses so curiously on every horizon.

What was this radiating aureole? What geological phenomenon had caused those ardent beams?
This question justly occupied Barbicane. Under his eyes, in every direction, ran luminous furrows,
with raised banks and concave middle, some ten miles, others more than twenty miles wide. These
shining trails ran in certain places at least 300 leagues from Tycho, and seemed to cover,
especially towards the east, north-east, and north, half the southern hemisphere. One of these
furrows stretched as far as the amphitheatre of Neander, situated on the 40th meridian. Another
went rounding off through the Sea of Nectar and broke against the chain of the Pyrenees after
a run of 400 leagues; others towards the west covered with a luminous network the Sea of Clouds
and the Sea of Humours.

What was the origin of these shining rays running equally over plains and reliefs, however
high? They all started from a common centre, the crater of Tycho. They emanated from it.

Herschel attributed their brilliant aspect to ancient streams of lava congealed by the cold,
an opinion which has not been generally received. Other astronomers have seen in these inexplicable
rays a kind of moraines, ranges of erratic blocks thrown out at the epoch of the formation
of Tycho.

"And why should it not be so?" asked Nicholl of Barbicane, who rejected these different opinions
at the same time that he related them.

"Because the regularity of these luminous lines, and the violence necessary to send them to
such a distance, are inexplicable.

"Par bleu!" replied Michel Ardan. "I can easily explain to myself the origin of these rays."

"Indeed," said Barbicane.

"Yes," resumed Michel. "Why should they not be the cracks caused by the shock of a bullet or
a stone upon a pane of glass?"

"Good," replied Barbicane, smiling; "and what hand would be powerful enough to hurl the stone
that would produce such a shock?"

"A hand is not necessary," answered Michel, who would not give in; "and as to the stone, let
us say it is a comet."

"Ah! comets?" exclaimed Barbicane; "those much-abused comets! My worthy Michel, your explanation
is not bad, but your comet is not wanted. The shock might have come from the interior of the
planet. A violent contraction of the lunar crust whilst cooling was enough to make that gigantic
crack."

"Contraction let it be--something like a lunar colic," answered Michel Ardan.

"Besides," added Barbicane, "that is also the opinion of an English savant, Nasmyth, and it
seems to me to explain the radiation of these mountains sufficiently."

"That Nasmyth was no fool!" answered Michel.

The travellers, who could never weary of such a spectacle, long admired the splendours of Tycho.
Their projectile, bathed in that double irradiation of the sun and moon, must have appeared
like a globe of fire. They had, therefore, suddenly passed from considerable cold to intense
heat. Nature was thus preparing them to become Selenites.

To become Selenites! That idea again brought up the question of the habitability of the moon.
After what they had seen, could the travellers solve it? Could they conclude for or against?
Michel Ardan asked his two friends to give utterance to their opinion, and asked them outright
if they thought that humanity and animality were represented in the lunar world.

"I think we cannot answer," said Barbicane, "but in my opinion the question ought not to be
stated in that form. I ask to be allowed to state it differently."

"State it as you like," answered Michel.

"This is it," resumed Barbicane. "The problem is double, and requires a double solution. Is
the moon habitable? Has it been inhabited?"

"Right," said Nicholl. "Let us first see if the moon is habitable."

"To tell the truth, I know nothing about it," replied Michel.

"And I answer in the negative," said Barbicane. "In her actual state, with her certainly very
slight atmosphere, her seas mostly dried up, her insufficient water, her restricted vegetation,
her abrupt alternations of heat and cold, her nights and days 354 hours long, the moon does
not appear habitable to me, nor propitious to the development of the animal kingdom, nor sufficient
for the needs of existence such as we understand it." 

((A.D. 981. This year came first the seven ships, and ravaged Southampton.))

A.D. 982. In this year came up in Dorsetshire three ships of the pirates, and plundered in Portland.
The same year London was burned.

In the same year also died two aldermen, Ethelmer in Hampshire, and
Edwin in Sussex.

Ethelmer's body lieth in Winchester, at New-minster, and Edwin's in the minster at Abingdon.
The same year died two abbesses in Dorsetshire; Herelufa at Shaftsbury, and Wulfwina at Wareham.
The same year went Otho, emperor of the Romans, into Greece; and there met he a great army of
the Saracens, who came up from the sea, and would have proceeded forthwith to plunder the Christian
folk; but the emperor fought with them. And there was much slaughter made on either side,
but the emperor gained the field of battle. He was there, however, much harassed, ere he returned
thence; and as he went homeward, his brother's son died, who was also called Otho; and he was
the son of Leodulf Atheling. This Leodulf was the son of Otho the Elder and of the daughter
of King Edward.

A.D. 983. This year died Alderman Alfere, and Alfric succeeded to
the same eldership; and Pope Benedict also died.

A.D. 984. This year died the benevolent Bishop of Winchester, Athelwold, father of monks; and
the consecration of the following bishop, Elfheah, who by another name was called Godwin, was
on the fourteenth day before the calends of November; and he took
his seat on the episcopal bench on the mass-day of the two apostles
Simon and Jude, at Winchester.

A.D. 985. This year was Alderman Alfric driven out of the land; and in the same year was Edwin
consecrated abbot of the minster at Abingdon.

A.D. 986. This year the king invaded the bishopric of Rochester; and this year came first the
great murrain of cattle in England.

A.D. 987. This year was the port of Watchet plundered.

A.D. 988.

This year was Goda, the thane of Devonshire, slain; and a great number with him: and Dunstan,
the holy archbishop, departed this life, and sought a heavenly one. Bishop Ethelgar succeeded
him in the archbishopric; but he lived only a little while after, namely, one year and three
months.

A.D. 989. This year died Abbot Edwin, and Abbot Wulfgar succeeded to the abbacy. Siric was
this year invested archbishop, and went afterwards to Rome after his pall.

A.D. 991. This year was Ipswich plundered; and very soon afterwards was Alderman Britnoth (47)
slain at Maidon. In this same year it was resolved that tribute should be given, for the first
time, to the Danes, for the great terror they occasioned by the sea-coast. That was first 10,000
pounds. The first who advised this measure was Archbishop Siric.

A.D. 992. This year the blessed Archbishop Oswald departed this life, and sought a heavenly
one; and in the same year died Alderman Ethelwin. Then the king and all his council resolved,
that all the ships that were of any account should be gathered together
at London; and the king committed the lead of the land-force to Alderman
Elfric, and Earl Thorod, and Bishop Elfstan, and Bishop Escwy; that
they should try if they could anywhere without entrap the enemy.

Then sent Alderman Elfric, and gave warning to the enemy; and on
the night preceding the day of battle he sculked away from the army,
to his great disgrace.

The enemy then escaped; except the crew of one ship, who were slain
on the spot.

Then met the enemy the ships from East-Anglia, and from London; and there a great slaughter was made,
and they took the ship in which was the alderman, all armed and rigged. Then, after the death of
Archbishop Oswald, succeeded Aldulf, Abbot of Peterborough, to the sees of York and of Worcester;
and Kenulf to the abbacy of Peterborough.

((A.D. 992. This year Oswald the blessed archbishop died, and Abbot Eadulf succeeded to York
and to Worcester.

And this year the king and all his witan decreed that all the ships
which were worth anything should be gathered together at London, in
order that they might try if they could anywhere betrap the army from
without. But Aelfric the ealdorman, one of those in whom the king
had most confidence, directed the army to be warned; and in the night,
as they should on the morrow have joined battle, the selfsame Aelfric
fled from the forces; and then the army escaped.))

A.D. 993. This
year came Anlaf with three and ninety ships to Staines, which he plundered
without, and went thence to Sandwich. Thence to Ipswich, which he
laid waste; and so to Maidon, where Alderman Britnoth came against
him with his force, and fought with him; and there they slew the alderman,
and gained the field of battle; whereupon peace was made with him,
and the king received him afterwards at episcopal hands by the advice
of Siric, Bishop of Canterbury, and Elfeah of Winchester.

"But I believe that at the epoch when the moon was inhabited the nights and days did not last
354 hours!"

"Why so?" asked Nicholl quickly.

"Because it is very probable that then the moon's movement of rotation on her axis was not
equal to her movement of revolution, an equality which puts every point of the lunar disc under
the action of the solar rays for fifteen days."

"Agreed," answered Nicholl; "but why should not these movements have been equal, since they
are so actually?"

"Because that equality has only been determined by terrestrial attraction. Now, how do we know
that this attraction was powerful enough to influence the movements of the moon at the epoch
the earth was still fluid?"

"True," replied Nicholl; "and who can say that the moon has always been the earth's satellite?"

"And who can say," exclaimed Michel Ardan, "that the moon did not exist before the earth?"

Imagination began to wander in the indefinite field of hypotheses. Barbicane wished to hold
them in.

"Those," said he, "are speculations too high, problems really insoluble. Do not let us enter
into them. Let us only admit the insufficiency of primordial attraction, and then by the inequality
of rotation and revolution days and nights could succeed each other upon the moon as they do
upon the earth. Besides, even under those conditions life was possible."

"Then," asked Michel Ardan, "humanity has quite disappeared from the moon?"

"Yes," answered Barbicane, "after having, doubtless, existed for thousands of centuries. Then
gradually the atmosphere becoming rarefied, the disc will again be uninhabitable like the terrestrial
globe will one day become by cooling."

"By cooling?"

"Certainly," answered Barbicane. "As the interior fires became extinguished the incandescent
matter was concentrated and the lunar disc became cool. By degrees the consequences of this
phenomenon came about--the disappearance of organic beings and the disappearance of vegetation.
Soon the atmosphere became rarefied, and was probably drawn away by terrestrial attraction;
the breathable air disappeared, and so did water by evaporation. At that epoch the moon became
uninhabitable, and was no longer inhabited. It was a dead world like it is to-day."

"And you say that the like fate is reserved for the earth?"

"Very probably."

"But when?"

"When the cooling of its crust will have made it uninhabitable."

"Has the time it will take our unfortunate globe to melt been calculated?"

"Certainly."

"And you know the reason?"

"Perfectly."

"Then tell us, sulky savant--you make me boil with impatience."

"Well, my worthy Michel," answered Barbicane tranquilly, "it is well known what diminution
of temperature the earth suffers in the lapse of a century. Now, according to certain calculations,
that average temperature will be brought down to zero after a period of 400,000 years!"

"Four hundred thousand years!" exclaimed Michel. "Ah! I breathe again! I was really frightened.
I imagined from listening to you that we had only fifty thousand years to live!"

Barbicane and Nicholl could not help laughing at their companion's uneasiness. Then Nicholl,
who wanted to have done with it, reminded them of the second question to be settled.

"Has the moon been inhabited?" he asked.

The answer was unanimously in the affirmative.

During this discussion, fruitful in somewhat hazardous theories, although it resumed the general
ideas of science on the subject, the projectile had run rapidly towards the lunar equator,
at the same time that it went farther away from the lunar disc. It had passed the circle of
Willem, and the 40th parallel, at a distance of 400 miles. Then leaving Pitatus to the right,
on the 30th degree, it went along the south of the Sea of Clouds, of which it had already approached
the north. Different amphitheatres appeared confusedly under the white light of the full moon--Bouillaud,
Purbach, almost square with a central crater, then Arzachel, whose interior mountain shone
with indefinable brilliancy.

At last, as the projectile went farther and farther away, the details faded from the travellers'
eyes, the mountains were confounded in the distance, and all that remained of the marvellous,
fantastical, and wonderful satellite of the earth was the imperishable remembrance.

CHAPTER XIX.

A STRUGGLE WITH THE IMPOSSIBLE.

For some time Barbicane and his companions, mute and pensive, looked at this world, which they
had only seen from a distance, like Moses saw Canaan, and from which they were going away for
ever. The position of the projectile relatively to the moon was modified, and now its lower
end was turned towards the earth.

This change, verified by Barbicane, surprised him greatly. If the bullet was going to gravitate
round the satellite in an elliptical orbit, why was not its heaviest part turned towards it
like the moon to the earth? There again was an obscure point.

By watching the progress of the projectile they could see that it was following away from the
moon an analogous curve to that by which it approached her. It was, therefore, describing a
very long ellipsis which would probably extend to the point of equal attraction, where the
influences of the earth and her satellite are neutralised.

Such was the conclusion which Barbicane correctly drew from the facts observed, a conviction
which his two friends shared with him.

Questions immediately began to shower upon him.

"What will become of us after we have reached the neutral point?" asked Michel Ardan.

"That is unknown!" answered Barbicane.

"But we can make suppositions, I suppose?"

"We can make two," answered Barbicane. "Either the velocity of the projectile will then be
insufficient, and it will remain entirely motionless on that line of double attraction--"

"I would rather have the other supposition, whatever it is," replied Michel.

"Or the velocity will be sufficient," resumed Barbicane, "and it will continue its elliptical
orbit, and gravitate eternally round the orb of night."

"Not very consoling that revolution," said Michel, "to become the humble servants of a moon
whom we are in the habit of considering our servant. And is that the future that awaits us?"

Neither Barbicane nor Nicholl answered.

"Why do you not answer?" asked the impatient Michel.

"There is nothing to answer," said Nicholl.

"Can nothing be done?"

"No," answered Barbicane. "Do you pretend to struggle with the impossible?"

"Why not? Ought a Frenchman and two Americans to recoil at such a word?"

"But what do you want to do?"

"Command the motion that is carrying us along!"

"Command it?"

"Yes," resumed Michel, getting animated, "stop it or modify it; use it for the accomplishment
of our plans."

"And how, pray?"

"That is your business! If artillerymen are not masters of their bullets they are no longer
artillerymen. If the projectile commands the gunner, the gunner ought to be rammed instead
into the cannon! Fine savants, truly! who don't know now what to do after having induced me--"

"Induced!" cried Barbicane and Nicholl. "Induced! What do you mean by that?"

"No recriminations!" said Michel. "I do not complain. The journey pleases me. The bullet suits
me. But let us do all that is humanly possible to fall somewhere, if only upon the moon."

"We should only be too glad, my worthy Michel," answered Barbicane, "but we have no means of
doing it."

"Can we not modify the motion of the projectile?"

"No."

"Nor diminish its speed?"

"No."

"Not even by lightening it like they lighten an overloaded ship?"

"What can we throw out?" answered Nicholl. "We have no ballast on board. And besides, it seems
to me that a lightened projectile would go on more quickly."

"Less quickly," said Michel.

"More quickly," replied Nicholl.

"Neither more nor less quickly," answered Barbicane, wishing to make his two friends agree,
"for we are moving in the void where we cannot take specific weight into account."

"Very well," exclaimed Michel Ardan in a determined tone; "there is only one thing to do."

"What is that?" asked Nicholl.

"Have breakfast," imperturbably answered the audacious Frenchman, who always brought that solution
to the greatest difficulties.

In fact, though that operation would have no influence on the direction of the projectile,
it might be attempted without risk, and even successfully from the point of view of the stomach.
Decidedly the amiable Michel had only good ideas.

They breakfasted, therefore, at 2 a.m., but the hour was not of much consequence. Michel served
up his habitual menu, crowned by an amiable bottle out of his secret cellar. If ideas did not
come into their heads the Chambertin of 1863 must be despaired of.

The meal over, observations began again.

The objects they had thrown out of the projectile still followed it at the same invariable
distance. It was evident that the bullet in its movement of translation round the moon had
not passed through any atmosphere, for the specific weight of these objects would have modified
their respective distances.

There was nothing to see on the side of the terrestrial globe. The earth was only a day old,
having been new at midnight the day before, and two days having to go by before her crescent,
disengaged from the solar rays, could serve as a clock to the Selenites, as in her movement
of rotation each of her points always passes the same meridian of the moon every twenty-four hours.

The spectacle was a different one on the side of the moon; the orb was shining in all its splendour
amidst innumerable constellations, the rays of which could not trouble its purity. Upon the
disc the plains again wore the sombre tint which is seen from the earth. The rest of the nimbus
was shining, and amidst the general blaze Tycho stood out like a sun.

Barbicane could not manage any way to appreciate the velocity of the projectile, but reasoning
demonstrated that this speed must be uniformly diminishing in conformity with the laws of rational
mechanics.

In fact, it being admitted that the bullet would describe an orbit round the moon, that orbit
must necessarily be elliptical. Science proves that it must be thus. No mobile circulation
round any body is an exception to that law. All the orbits described in space are elliptical,
those of satellites round their planets, those of planets around their sun, that of the sun
round the unknown orb that serves as its central pivot. Why should the projectile of the Gun
Club escape that natural arrangement?

Now in elliptical orbits attracting bodies always occupy one of the foci of the ellipsis. The
satellite is, therefore, nearer the body round which it gravitates at one moment than it is
at another. When the earth is nearest the sun she is at her perihelion, and at her aphelion
when most distant. The moon is nearest the earth at her perigee, and most distant at her apogee.
To employ analogous expressions which enrich the language of astronomers, if the projectile
remained a satellite of the moon, it ought to be said that it is in its "aposelene" at its
most distant point, and at its "periselene" at its nearest.

In the latter case the projectile ought to attain its maximum of speed, in the latter its minimum.
Now it was evidently going towards its "aposelene," and Barbicane was right in thinking its
speed would decrease up to that point, and gradually increase when it would again draw near
the moon. That speed even would be absolutely nil if the point was coexistent with that of
attraction.

Barbicane studied the consequences of these different situations; he was trying what he could
make of them when he was suddenly interrupted by a cry from Michel Ardan.

"I'faith!" cried Michel, "what fools we are!"

"I don't say we are not," answered Barbicane; "but why?"

"Because we have some very simple means of slackening the speed that is taking us away from
the moon, and we do not use them."

"And what are those means?"

"That of utilising the force of recoil in our rockets."

"Ah, why not?" said Nicholl.

"We have not yet utilised that force, it is true," said Barbicane, "but we shall do so."

"When?" asked Michel.

"When the time comes. Remark, my friends, that in the position now occupied by the projectile,
a position still oblique to the lunar disc, our rockets, by altering its direction, might take
it farther away instead of nearer to the moon. Now I suppose it is the moon you want to reach?"

"Essentially," answered Michel.

"Wait, then. Through some inexplicable influence the projectile has a tendency to let its lower
end fall towards the earth. It is probable that at the point of equal attraction its conical
summit will be rigorously directed towards the moon. At that moment it may be hoped that its
speed will be nil. That will be the time to act, and under the effort of our rockets we can,
perhaps, provoke a direct fall upon the surface of the lunar disc."

"Bravo!" said Michel.

"We have not done it yet, and we could not do it as we passed the neutral point, because the
projectile was still animated with too much velocity."

"Well reasoned out," said Nicholl.

"We must wait patiently," said Barbicane, "and put every chance on our side; then, after having
despaired so long, I again begin to think we shall reach our goal."

This conclusion provoked hurrahs from Michel Ardan. No one of these daring madmen remembered
the question they had all answered in the negative--No, the moon is not inhabited! No, the
moon is probably not inhabitable! And yet they were going to do all they could to reach it.

One question only now remained to be solved: at what precise moment would the projectile reach
that point of equal attraction where the travellers would play their last card?

In order to calculate that moment to within some seconds Barbicane had only to have recourse
to his travelling notes, and to take the different altitudes from lunar parallels. Thus the
time employed in going over the distance between the neutral point and the South Pole must
be equal to the distance which separates the South Pole from the neutral point. The hours representing
the time it took were carefully noted down, and the calculation became easy.

Barbicane found that this point would be reached by the projectile at 1 a.m. on the 8th of
December. It was then 3 a.m. on the 7th of December. Therefore, if nothing intervened, the
projectile would reach the neutral point in twenty-two hours.

The rockets had been put in their places to slacken the fall of the bullet upon the moon, and
now the bold fellows were going to use them to provoke an exactly contrary effect. However
that may be, they were ready, and there was nothing to do but await the moment for setting
fire to them.

"As there is nothing to do," said Nicholl, "I have a proposition to make."

"What is that?" asked Barbicane.

"I propose we go to sleep."

"That is a nice idea!" exclaimed Michel Ardan.

"It is forty hours since we have closed our eyes," said Nicholl. "A few hours' sleep would
set us up again."

"Never!" replied Michel.

"Good," said Nicholl; "every man to his humour--mine is to sleep."

And lying down on a divan, Nicholl was soon snoring like a forty-eight pound bullet.

"Nicholl is a sensible man," said Barbicane soon. "I shall imitate him."

A few minutes after he was joining his bass to the captain's baritone.

"Decidedly," said Michel Ardan, when he found himself alone, "these practical people sometimes
do have opportune ideas."

And stretching out his long legs, and folding his long arms under his head, Michel went to
sleep too.

But this slumber could neither be durable nor peaceful. Too many preoccupations filled the
minds of these three men, and a few hours after, at about 7 a.m., they all three awoke at once.

The projectile was still moving away from the moon, inclining its conical summit more and more
towards her. This phenomenon was inexplicable at present, but it fortunately aided the designs
of Barbicane.

Another seventeen hours and the time for action would have come.

That day seemed long. However bold they might be, the travellers felt much anxiety at the approach
of the minute that was to decide everything, either their fall upon the moon or their imprisonment
in an immutable orbit. They therefore counted the hours, which went too slowly for them, Barbicane
and Nicholl obstinately plunged in calculations, Michel walking up and down the narrow space
between the walls contemplating with longing eye the impassible moon.

Sometimes thoughts of the earth passed through their minds. They saw again their friends of
the Gun Club, and the dearest of them all, J.T. Maston. At that moment the honourable secretary
must have been occupying his post on the Rocky Mountains. If he should perceive the projectile
upon the mirror of his gigantic telescope what would he think? After having seen it disappear
behind the south pole of the moon, they would see it reappear at the north! It was, therefore,
the satellite of a satellite! Had J.T. Maston sent that unexpected announcement into the world?
Was this to be the dénouement of the great enterprise?

Meanwhile the day passed without incident. Terrestrial midnight came. The 8th of December was
about to commence. Another hour and the point of equal attraction would be reached. What velocity
then animated the projectile? They could form no estimate; but no error could vitiate Barbicane's
calculations. At 1 a.m. that velocity ought to be and would be nil.

Besides, another phenomenon would mark the stopping point of the projectile on the neutral
line. In that spot the two attractions, terrestrial and lunar, would be annihilated. Objects
would not weigh anything. This singular fact, which had so curiously surprised Barbicane and
his companions before, must again come about under identical circumstances. It was at that
precise moment they must act.

The conical summit of the bullet had already sensibly turned towards the lunar disc. The projectile
was just right for utilising all the recoil produced by setting fire to the apparatus. Chance
was therefore in the travellers' favour. If the velocity of the projectile were to be absolutely
annihilated upon the neutral point, a given motion, however slight, towards the moon would
determine its fall.

"Five minutes to one," said Nicholl.

"Everything is ready," answered Michel Ardan, directing his match towards the flame of the gas.

"Wait!" said Barbicane, chronometer in hand.

At that moment weight had no effect. The travellers felt its complete disappearance in themselves.
They were near the neutral point if they had not reached it.

"One o'clock!" said Barbicane.

Michel Ardan put his match to a contrivance that put all the fuses into instantaneous communication.
No detonation was heard outside, where air was wanting, but through the port-lights Barbicane
saw the prolonged flame, which was immediately extinguished.

The projectile had a slight shock which was very sensibly felt in the interior.

The three friends looked, listened, without speaking, hardly breathing. The beating of their
hearts might have been heard in the absolute silence.

"Are we falling?" asked Michel Ardan at last.

"No," answered Nicholl; "for the bottom of the projectile has not turned towards the lunar disc!"

At that moment Barbicane left his window and turned towards his two companions. He was frightfully
pale, his forehead wrinkled, his lips contracted.

"We are falling!" said he.

"Ah!" cried Michel Ardan, "upon the moon?"

"Upon the earth!" answered Barbicane.

"The devil!" cried Michel Ardan; and he added philosophically, "when we entered the bullet
we did not think it would be so difficult to get out of it again."

In fact, the frightful fall had begun. The velocity kept by the projectile had sent it beyond
the neutral point. The explosion of the fuses had not stopped it. That velocity which had carried
the projectile beyond the neutral line as it went was destined to do the same upon its return.
The law of physics condemned it, in its elliptical orbit, to pass by every point it had already
passed.

It was a terrible fall from a height of 78,000 leagues, and which no springs could deaden.
According to the laws of ballistics the projectile would strike the earth with a velocity equal
to that which animated it as it left the Columbiad--a velocity of "16,000 metres in the last
second!"

And in order to give some figures for comparison it has been calculated that an object thrown
from the towers of Notre Dame, the altitude of which is only 200 feet, would reach the pavement
with a velocity of 120 leagues an hour. Here the projectile would strike the earth with a velocity
of 57,600 leagues an hour.

"We are lost men," said Nicholl coldly.

"Well, if we die," answered Barbicane, with a sort of religious enthusiasm, "the result of
our journey will be magnificently enlarged! God will tell us His own secret! In the other life
the soul will need neither machines nor engines in order to know! It will be identified with
eternal wisdom!"

"True," replied Michel Ardan: "the other world may well console us for that trifling orb called
the moon!"

Barbicane crossed his arms upon his chest with a movement of sublime resignation.

"God's will be done!" he said.

CHAPTER XX.

THE SOUNDINGS OF THE SUSQUEHANNA.

Well, lieutenant, and what about those soundings?"

"I think the operation is almost over, sir. But who would have expected to find such a depth
so near land, at 100 leagues only from the American coast?"

"Yes, Bronsfield, there is a great depression," said Captain Blomsberry. "There exists a submarine
valley here, hollowed out by Humboldt's current, which runs along the coasts of America to
the Straits of Magellan."

"Those great depths," said the lieutenant, "are not favourable for the laying of telegraph
cables. A smooth plateau is the best, like the one the American cable lies on between Valentia
and Newfoundland."

"I agree with you, Bronsfield. And, may it please you, lieutenant, where are we now?"

"Sir," answered Bronsfield, "we have at this moment 21,500 feet of line out, and the bullet
at the end of the line has not yet touched the bottom, for the sounding-lead would have come
up again."

"Brook's apparatus is an ingenious one," said Captain Blomsberry. "It allows us to obtain very
correct soundings."

"Touched!" cried at that moment one of the forecastle-men who was superintending the operation.

The captain and lieutenant went on to the forecastle-deck.

"What depth are we in?" asked the captain.

"Twenty-one thousand seven hundred and sixty-two feet," answered the lieutenant, writing it
down in his pocket-book.

"Very well, Bronsfield," said the captain, "I will go and mark the result on my chart. Now
have the sounding-line brought in--that is a work of several hours. Meanwhile the engineer
shall have his fires lighted, and we shall be ready to start as soon as you have done. It is
10 p.m., and with your permission, lieutenant, I shall turn in."

"Certainly, sir, certainly!" answered Lieutenant Bronsfield amiably.

The captain of the Susquehanna, a worthy man if ever there was one, the very humble servant
of his officers, went to his cabin, took his brandy-and-water with many expressions of satisfaction
to the steward, got into bed, not before complimenting his servant on the way he made beds,
and sank into peaceful slumber.

It was then 10 p.m. The eleventh day of the month of December was going to end in a magnificent
night.

The Susquehanna, a corvette of 500 horse power, of the United States Navy, was taking soundings
in the Pacific at about a hundred leagues from the American coast, abreast of that long peninsula
on the coast of New Mexico.

The wind had gradually fallen. There was not the slightest movement in the air. The colours
of the corvette hung from the mast motionless and inert.

The captain, Jonathan Blomsberry, cousin-german to Colonel Blomsberry, one of the Gun Club
members who had married a Horschbidden, the captain's aunt and daughter of an honourable Kentucky
merchant--Captain Blomsberry could not have wished for better weather to execute the delicate
operation of sounding. His corvette had felt nothing of that great tempest which swept away
the clouds heaped up on the Rocky Mountains, and allowed the course of the famous projectile
to be observed. All was going on well, and he did not forget to thank Heaven with all the fervour
of a Presbyterian.

The series of soundings executed by the Susquehanna were intended for finding out the most
favourable bottoms for the establishment of a submarine cable between the Hawaiian Islands
and the American coast.

It was a vast project set on foot by a powerful company. Its director, the intelligent Cyrus
Field, meant even to cover all the islands of Oceania with a vast electric network--an immense
enterprise worthy of American genius.

It was to the corvette Susquehanna that the first operations of sounding had been entrusted.
During the night from the 11th to the 12th of December she was exactly in north lat. 27° 7'
and 41° 37' long., west from the Washington meridian.

The moon, then in her last quarter, began to show herself above the horizon.

After Captain Blomsberry's departure, Lieutenant Bronsfield and a few officers were together
on the poop. As the moon appeared their thoughts turned towards that orb which the eyes of
a whole hemisphere were then contemplating. The best marine glasses could not have discovered
the projectile wandering round the demi-globe, and yet they were all pointed at the shining
disc which millions of eyes were looking at in the same moment.

"They started ten days ago," then said Lieutenant Bronsfield. "What can have become of them?"

"They have arrived, sir," exclaimed a young midshipman, "and they are doing what all travellers
do in a new country, they are looking about them."

"I am certain of it as you say so, my young friend," answered Lieutenant Bronsfield, smiling.

"Still," said another officer, "their arrival cannot be doubted. The projectile must have reached
the moon at the moment she was full, at midnight on the 5th. We are now at the 11th of December;
that makes six days. Now in six times twenty-four hours, with no darkness, they have had time
to get comfortably settled. It seems to me that I see our brave countrymen encamped at the
bottom of a valley, on the borders of a Selenite stream, near the projectile, half buried by
its fall, amidst volcanic remains, Captain Nicholl beginning his levelling operations, President
Barbicane putting his travelling notes in order, Michel Ardan performing the lunar solitudes
with his Londrès cigar--"

"Oh, it must be so; it is so!" exclaimed the young midshipman, enthusiastic at the ideal description
of his superior.

"I should like to believe it," answered Lieutenant Bronsfield, who was seldom carried away.
"Unfortunately direct news from the lunar world will always be wanting."

"Excuse me, sir," said the midshipman, "but cannot President Barbicane write?"

A roar of laughter greeted this answer.

"Not letters," answered the young man quickly. "The post-office has nothing to do with that."

"Perhaps you mean the telegraph-office?" said one of the officers ironically.

"Nor that either," answered the midshipman, who would not give in. "But it is very easy to
establish graphic communication with the earth."

"And how, pray?"

"By means of the telescope on Long's Peak. You know that it brings the moon to within two leagues
only of the Rocky Mountains, and that it allows them to see objects having nine feet of diameter
on her surface. Well, our industrious friends will construct a gigantic alphabet! They will
write words 600 feet long, and sentences a league long, and then they can send up news!"

The young midshipman, who certainly had some imagination was loudly applauded. Lieutenant Bronsfield
himself was convinced that the idea could have been carried out. He added that by sending luminous
rays, grouped by means of parabolical mirrors, direct communications could also be established--in
fact, these rays would be as visible on the surface of Venus or Mars as the planet Neptune
is from the earth. He ended by saying that the brilliant points already observed on the nearest
planets might be signals made to the earth. But he said, that though by these means they could
have news from the lunar world, they could not send any from the terrestrial world unless the
Selenites have at their disposition instruments with which to make distant observations.

"That is evident," answered one of the officers, "but what has become of the travellers? What
have they done? What have they seen? That is what interests us. Besides, if the experiment
has succeeded, which I do not doubt, it will be done again. The Columbiad is still walled up
in the soil of Florida. It is, therefore, now only a question of powder and shot, and every
time the moon passes the zenith we can send it a cargo of visitors."

"It is evident," answered Lieutenant Bronsfield, "that J.T. Maston will go and join his friends
one of these days."

"If he will have me," exclaimed the midshipman, "I am ready to go with him."

"Oh, there will be plenty of amateurs, and if they are allowed to go, half the inhabitants
of the earth will soon have emigrated to the moon!"

This conversation between the officers of the Susquehanna was kept up till about 1 a.m. It
would be impossible to transcribe the overwhelming systems and theories which were emitted
by these audacious minds. Since Barbicane's attempt it seemed that nothing was impossible to
Americans. They had already formed the project of sending, not another commission of savants,
but a whole colony, and a whole army of infantry, artillery, and cavalry to conquer the lunar
world.

At 1 a.m. the sounding-line was not all hauled in. Ten thousand feet remained out, which would
take several more hours to bring in. According to the commander's orders the fires had been
lighted, and the pressure was going up already. The Susquehanna might have started at once.

At that very moment--it was 1.17 a.m.--Lieutenant Bronsfield was about to leave his watch to
turn in when his attention was attracted by a distant and quite unexpected hissing sound.

His comrades and he at first thought that the hissing came from an escape of steam, but upon
lifting up his head he found that it was high up in the air.

They had not time to question each other before the hissing became of frightful intensity,
and suddenly to their dazzled eyes appeared an enormous bolis, inflamed by the rapidity of
its course, by its friction against the atmospheric strata.

This ignited mass grew huger as it came nearer, and fell with the noise of thunder upon the
bowsprit of the corvette, which it smashed off close to the stem, and vanished in the waves.

A few feet nearer and the Susquehanna would have gone down with all on board.

At that moment Captain Blomsberry appeared half-clothed, and rushing in the forecastle, where
his officers had preceded him--

"With your permission, gentlemen, what has happened?" he asked.

And the midshipman, making himself the mouthpiece of them all, cried out--

"Commander, it is 'they' come back again."

CHAPTER XXI.

J.T. MASTON CALLED IN.

Emotion was great on board the Susquehanna. Officers and sailors forgot the terrible danger
they had just been in--the danger of being crushed and sunk. They only thought of the catastrophe
which terminated the journey. Thus, therefore, the moat audacious enterprise of ancient and
modern times lost the life of the bold adventurers who had attempted it.

"It is 'they' come back," the young midshipman had said, and they had all understood. No one
doubted that the bolis was the projectile of the Gun Club. Opinions were divided about the
fate of the travellers.

"They are dead!" said one.

"They are alive," answered the other. "The water is deep here, and the shock has been deadened."

"But they will have no air, and will die suffocated!"

"Burnt!" answered the other. "Their projectile was only an incandescent mass as it crossed
the atmosphere."

"What does it matter?" was answered unanimously, "living or dead they must be brought up from
there."

Meanwhile Captain Blomsberry had called his officers together, and with their permission he
held a council. Something must be done immediately. The most immediate was to haul up the projectile--a
difficult operation, but not an impossible one. But the corvette wanted the necessary engines,
which would have to be powerful and precise. It was, therefore, resolved to put into the nearest
port, and to send word to the Gun Club about the fall of the bullet.

This determination was taken unanimously. The choice of a port was discussed. The neighbouring
coast had no harbour on the 27th degree of latitude. Higher up, above the peninsula of Monterey,
was the important town which has given its name to it. But, seated on the confines of a veritable
desert, it had no telegraphic communication with the interior, and electricity alone could
spread the important news quickly enough.

Some degrees above lay the bay of San Francisco. Through the capital of the Gold Country communication
with the centre of the Union would be easy. By putting all steam on, the Susquehanna, in less
than two days, could reach the port of San Francisco. She must, therefore, start at once.

The fires were heaped up, and they could set sail immediately. Two thousand fathoms of sounding
still remained in the water. Captain Blomsberry would not lose precious time in hauling it
in, and resolved to cut the line.

"We will fix the end to a buoy," said he, "and the buoy will indicate the exact point where
the projectile fell."

"Besides," answered Lieutenant Bronsfield, "we have our exact bearings: north lat. 27° 7',
and west long. 41° 37'."

"Very well, Mr. Bronsfield," answered the captain; "with your permission, have the line cut."

A strong buoy, reinforced by a couple of spars, was thrown out on to the surface of the ocean.
The end of the line was solidly struck beneath, and only submitted to the ebb and flow of the
surges, so that it would not drift much.

At that moment the engineer came to warn the captain that he had put the pressure on, and they
could start. The captain thanked him for his excellent communication. Then he gave N.N.E. as
the route. The corvette was put about, and made for the bay of San Francisco with all steam
on. It was then 3 a.m.

Two hundred leagues to get over was not much for a quick vessel like the Susquehanna. It got
over that distance in thirty-six hours, and on the 14th of December, at 1.27 p.m., she would
enter the bay of San Francisco.

At the sight of this vessel of the national navy arriving with all speed on, her bowsprit gone,
and her mainmast propped up, public curiosity was singularly excited. A compact crowd was soon
assembled on the quays awaiting the landing.

After weighing anchor Captain Blomsberry and Lieutenant Bronsfield got down into an eight-oared
boat which carried them rapidly to the land.

They jumped out on the quay.

"The telegraph-office?" they asked, without answering one of the thousand questions that were
showered upon them.

The port inspector guided them himself to the telegraph-office, amidst an immense crowd of
curious people.

Blomsberry and Bronsfield went into the office whilst the crowd crushed against the door.

A few minutes later one message was sent in four different directions:--1st, to the Secretary
of the Navy, Washington; 2nd, to the Vice-President of the Gun Club, Baltimore; 3rd, to the
Honourable J.T. Maston, Long's Peak, Rocky Mountains; 4th, to the Sub-Director of the Cambridge
Observatory, Massachusetts.

It ran as follows:--

"In north lat. And I give the two parts of Whittlesey-mere, with waters and with wears and fens;
and so through Meerlade along to the water that is called Nen; and
so eastward to Kingsdelf.

And I will that there be a market in the town itself, and that no other be betwixt Stamford
and Huntingdon. And I will that thus be given the toll;--first, from Whittlesey-mere to the
king's toll of Norman-cross hundred; then backward again from Whittlesey-mere
through Meerlade along to the Nen, and as that river runs to Crowland;
and from Crowland to Must, and from Must to Kingsdelf and to Whittlesey-mere.

And I will that all the freedom, and all the privileges, that my predecessors
gave, should remain; and I write and confirm this with the rood-token
of Christ."

(+)--Then answered Dunstan, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and said: "I grant, that all the
things that here are given and spoken, and all the things that thy
predecessors and mine have given, shall remain firm; and whosoever
breaketh it, then give I him God's curse, and that of all saints,
and of all hooded heads, and mine, unless he come to repentance.

And I give expressly to St. Peter my mass-hackle, and my stole, and my reef, to serve Christ." "I Oswald,
Archbishop of York, confirm all these words through the holy rood
on which Christ was crucified."

(+) "I Bishop Athelwold bless all that maintain this, and I excommunicate all that break it, unless
they come to repentance."--Here was Bishop Ellstan, Bishop Athulf, and Abbot Eskwy, and Abbot
Osgar, and Abbot Ethelgar, and Alderman Elfere; Alderman Ethelwin, Britnoth and Oslac aldermen,
and many other rich men; and all confirmed it and subscribed it with the cross of Christ. (+)
This was done in the year after our Lord's Nativity 972, the sixteenth
year of this king.

Then bought the Abbot Aldulf lands rich and many, and much endowed
the minster withal; and was there until Oswald, Archbishop of York,
was dead; and then he was chosen to be archbishop.

Soon after another abbot was chosen of the same monastery, whose name was Kenulf, who was afterwards
Bishop of Winchester. He first made the wall about the minster, and gave it then the name of
Peterborough, which before was Medhamsted. He was there till he was appointed Bishop of Winchester,
when another abbot was chosen of the same monastery, whose name was Elfsy, who continued abbot fifty
winters afterwards.


However that might be, it was unanimously decided in the Gun Club that Blomsberry's brother
Bilsby and Major Elphinstone should start at once for San Francisco and give their advice about
the means of dragging up the projectile from the depths of the ocean.

These men started without losing an instant, and the railway which was soon to cross the whole
of Central America took them to St. Louis, where rapid mail-coaches awaited them.

Almost at the same moment that the Secretary of the Navy, the Vice-President of the Gun Club,
and the Sub-Director of the Observatory received the telegram from San Francisco, the Honourable
J.T. Maston felt the most violent emotion of his whole existence--an emotion not even equalled
by that he had experienced when his celebrated cannon was blown up, and which, like it, nearly
cost him his life.

It will be remembered that the Secretary of the Gun Club had started some minutes after the
projectile--and almost as quickly--for the station of Long's Peak in the Rocky Mountains. The
learned J. Belfast, Director of the Cambridge Observatory, accompanied him. Arrived at the
station the two friends had summarily installed themselves, and no longer left the summit of
their enormous telescope.

We know that this gigantic instrument had been set up on the reflecting system, called "front
view" by the English. This arrangement only gave one reflection of objects, and consequently
made the view much clearer. The result was that J.T. Maston and Belfast, whilst observing,
were stationed in the upper part of the instrument instead of in the lower. They reached it
by a twisted staircase, a masterpiece of lightness, and below them lay the metal, well terminated
by the metallic mirror, 280 feet deep.

Now it was upon the narrow platform placed round the telescope that the two savants passed
their existence, cursing the daylight which hid the moon from their eyes, and the clouds which
obstinately veiled her at night.

Who can depict their delight when, after waiting several days, during the night of December
5th they perceived the vehicle that was carrying their friends through space? To that delight
succeeded deep disappointment when, trusting to incomplete observations, they sent out with
their first telegram to the world the erroneous affirmation that the projectile had become
a satellite of the moon gravitating in an immutable orbit.

After that instant the bullet disappeared behind the invisible disc of the moon. But when it
ought to have reappeared on the invisible disc the impatience of J.T. Maston and his no less
impatient companion may be imagined. At every minute of the night they thought they should
see the projectile again, and they did not see it. Hence between them arose endless discussions
and violent disputes, Belfast affirming that the projectile was not visible, J.T. Maston affirming
that any one but a blind man could see it.

"It is the bullet!" repeated J.T. Maston.

"No!" answered Belfast, "it is an avalanche falling from a lunar mountain!"

"Well, then, we shall see it to-morrow."

"No, it will be seen no more. It is carried away into space."

"We shall see it, I tell you."

"No, we shall not."

And while these interjections were being showered like hail, the well-known irritability of
the Secretary of the Gun Club constituted a permanent danger to the director, Belfast.

Their existence together would soon have become impossible, but an unexpected event cut short
these eternal discussions.

During the night between the 14th and 15th of December the two irreconcilable friends were
occupied in observing the lunar disc. J.T. Maston was, as usual, saying strong things to the
learned Belfast, who was getting angry too. The Secretary of the Gun Club declared for the
thousandth time that he had just perceived the projectile, adding even that Michel Ardan's
face had appeared at one of the port-lights. He was emphasising his arguments by a series of
gestures which his redoubtable hook rendered dangerous.

At that moment Belfast's servant appeared upon the platform--it was 10 p.m.--and gave him a
telegram. It was the message from the Commander of the Susquehanna.

Belfast tore the envelope, read the inclosure, and uttered a cry.

"What is it?" said J.T. Maston.

"It's the bullet!"

"What of that?"

"It has fallen upon the earth!"

Another cry; this time a howl answered him.

He turned towards J.T. Maston. The unfortunate fellow, leaning imprudently over the metal tube,
had disappeared down the immense telescope--a fall of 280 feet! Belfast, distracted, rushed
towards the orifice of the reflector.

He breathed again. J.T. Maston's steel hook had caught in one of the props which maintained
the platform of the telescope. He was uttering formidable cries.

Belfast called. Help came, and the imprudent secretary was hoisted up, not without trouble.

He reappeared unhurt at the upper orifice.

"Suppose I had broken the mirror?" said he.

"You would have paid for it," answered Belfast severely.

"And where has the infernal bullet fallen?" asked J.T. Maston.

"Into the Pacific."

"Let us start at once."

A quarter of an hour afterwards the two learned friends were descending the slope of the Rocky
Mountains, and two days afterwards they reached San Francisco at the same time as their friends
of the Gun Club, having killed five horses on the road.

Elphinstone, Blomsberry, and Bilsby rushed up to them upon their arrival.

"What is to be done?" they exclaimed.

"The bullet must be fished up," answered J.T. Maston, "and as soon as possible!"

CHAPTER XXII.

PICKED UP.

The very spot where the projectile had disappeared under the waves was exactly known. The instruments
for seizing it and bringing it to the surface of the ocean were still wanting. They had to
be invented and then manufactured. American engineers could not be embarrassed by such a trifle.
The grappling-irons once established and steam helping, they were assured of raising the projectile,
notwithstanding its weight, which diminished the density of the liquid amidst which it was plunged.

But it was not enough to fish up the bullet. It was necessary to act promptly in the interest
of the travellers. No one doubted that they were still living.

"Yes," repeated J.T. Maston incessantly, whose confidence inspired everybody, "our friends
are clever fellows, and they cannot have fallen like imbeciles. They are alive, alive and well,
but we must make haste in order to find them so. He had no anxiety about provisions and water.
They had enough for a long time! But air!--air would soon fail them. Then they must make haste!"

And they did make haste. They prepared the Susquehanna for her new destination. Her powerful
engines were arranged to be used for the hauling machines. The aluminium projectile only weighed
19,250 lbs., a much less weight than that of the transatlantic cable, which was picked up under
similar circumstances. The only difficulty lay in the smooth sides of the cylindro-conical
bullet, which made it difficult to grapple.

With that end in view the engineer Murchison, summoned to San Francisco, caused enormous grappling-irons
to be fitted upon an automatical system which would not let the projectile go again if they
succeeded in seizing it with their powerful pincers. He also had some diving-dresses prepared,
which, by their impermeable and resisting texture, allowed divers to survey the bottom of the
sea. He likewise embarked on board the Susquehanna apparatuses for compressed air, very ingeniously
contrived. They were veritable rooms, with port-lights in them, and which, by introducing the
water into certain compartments, could be sunk to great depths. These apparatuses were already
at San Francisco, where they had been used in the construction of a submarine dyke. This was
fortunate, for there would not have been time to make them.

Yet notwithstanding the perfection of the apparatus, notwithstanding the ingenuity of the savants
who were to use them, the success of the operation was anything but assured. Fishing up a bullet
from 20,000 feet under water must be an uncertain operation. And even if the bullet should
again be brought to the surface, how had the travellers borne the terrible shock that even
20,000 feet of water would not sufficiently deaden?

In short, everything must be done quickly. J.T. Maston hurried on his workmen day and night.
He was ready either to buckle on the diver's dress or to try the air-apparatus in order to
find his courageous friends.

Still, notwithstanding the diligence with which the different machines were got ready, notwithstanding
the considerable sums which were placed at the disposition of the Gun Club by the Government
of the Union, five long days (five centuries) went by before the preparations were completed.
During that time public opinion was excited to the highest point. Telegrams were incessantly
exchanged all over the world through the electric wires and cables. The saving of Barbicane,
Nicholl, and Michel Ardan became an international business. All the nations that had subscribed
to the enterprise of the Gun Club were equally interested in the safety of the travellers.

At last the grappling-chains, air-chambers, and automatic grappling-irons were embarked on
board the Susquehanna. J.T. Maston, the engineer Murchison, and the Gun Club delegates already
occupied their cabins. There was nothing to do but to start.

On the 21st of December, at 8 p.m., the corvette set sail on a calm sea with a rather cold
north-east wind blowing. All the population of San Francisco crowded on to the quays, mute
and anxious, reserving its hurrahs for the return.

The steam was put on to its maximum of tension, and the screw of the Susquehanna carried it
rapidly out of the bay.

It would be useless to relate the conversations on board amongst the officers, sailors, and
passengers. All these men had but one thought. Their hearts all beat with the same emotion.
What were Barbicane and his companions doing whilst they were hastening to their succour? What
had become of them? Had they been able to attempt some audacious manoeuvre to recover their
liberty? No one could say. The truth is that any attempt would have failed. Sunk to nearly
two leagues under the ocean, their metal prison would defy any effort of its prisoners.

On the 23rd of December, at 8 a.m., after a rapid passage, the Susquehanna ought to be on the
scene of the disaster. They were obliged to wait till twelve o'clock to take their exact bearings.
The buoy fastened on to the sounding-line had not yet been seen.

At noon Captain Blomsberry, helped by his officers, who controlled the observation, made his
point in presence of the delegates of the Gun Club. That was an anxious moment. The Susquehanna
was found to be at some minutes west of the very spot where the projectile had disappeared
under the waves.

The direction of the corvette was therefore given in view of reaching the precise spot.

At 12.47 p.m. the buoy was sighted. It was in perfect order, and did not seem to have drifted far.

"At last!" exclaimed J.T. Maston.

"Shall we begin?" asked Captain Blomsberry.

"Without losing a second," answered J.T. Maston.

Every precaution was taken to keep the corvette perfectly motionless.

Before trying to grapple the projectile, the engineer, Murchison, wished to find out its exact
position on the sea-bottom. The submarine apparatus destined for this search received their
provision of air. The handling of these engines is not without danger, for at 20,000 feet below
the surface of the water and under such great pressure they are exposed to ruptures the consequences
of which would be terrible.

J.T. Maston, the commander's brother, and the engineer Murchison, without a thought of these
dangers, took their places in the air-chambers. The commander, on his foot-bridge, presided
over the operation, ready to stop or haul in his chains at the least signal. The screw had
been taken off, and all the force of the machines upon the windlass would soon have brought
up the apparatus on board.

The descent began at 1.25 p.m., and the chamber, dragged down by its reservoirs filled with
water, disappeared under the surface of the ocean.

The emotion of the officers and sailors on board was now divided between the prisoners in the
projectile and the prisoners of the submarine apparatus. These latter forgot themselves, and,
glued to the panes of the port-lights, they attentively observed the liquid masses they were
passing through.

The descent was rapid. At 2.17 p.m. J.T. Maston and his companions had reached the bottom of
the Pacific; but they saw nothing except the arid desert which neither marine flora nor fauna
any longer animated. By the light of their lamps, furnished with powerful reflectors, they
could observe the dark layers of water in a rather large radius, but the projectile remained
invisible in their eyes.

The impatience of these bold divers could hardly be described. Their apparatus being in electric
communication with the corvette, they made a signal agreed upon, and the Susquehanna carried
their chamber over a mile of space at one yard from the soil.

They thus explored all the submarine plain, deceived at every instant by optical delusions
which cut them to the heart. Here a rock, there a swelling of the ground, looked to them like
the much-sought-for projectile; then they would soon find out their error and despair again.

"Where are they? Where can they be?" cried J.T. Maston.

And the poor man called aloud to Nicholl, Barbicane, and Michel Ardan, as if his unfortunate
friends could have heard him through that impenetrable medium!

The search went on under those conditions until the vitiated state of the air in the apparatus
forced the divers to go up again.

The hauling in was begun at 6 p.m., and was not terminated before midnight.

"We will try again to-morrow," said J.T. Maston as he stepped on to the deck of the corvette.

"Yes," answered Captain Blomsberry.

"And in another place."

"Yes."

J.T. Maston did not yet doubt of his ultimate success, but his companions, who were no longer
intoxicated with the animation of the first few hours, already took in all the difficulties
of the enterprise. What seemed easy at San Francisco in open ocean appeared almost impossible.
The chances of success diminished in a large proportion, and it was to chance alone that the
finding of the projectile had to be left. 

And then his two sons succeeded to the kingdom; Ethelbald to the kingdom of the West-Saxons, and Ethelbert
to the kingdom of the Kentish-men, and of the East-Saxons, and of Surrey, and of the South-Saxons.
And he reigned five years.))

A.D. 860.

All that day was passed in a fruitless search. The bed of the sea was a desert. The day of
the 25th brought no result, neither did that of the 26th.

It was disheartening. They thought of the unfortunate men shut up for twenty-six days in the
projectile. Perhaps they were all feeling the first symptoms of suffocation, even if they had
escaped the dangers of their fall. The air was getting exhausted, and doubtless with the air
their courage and spirits.

"The air very likely, but their courage never," said J.T. Maston.

On the 28th, after two days' search, all hope was lost. This bullet was an atom in the immensity
of the sea! They must give up the hope of finding it.

Still J.T. Maston would not hear about leaving. He would not abandon the place without having
at least found the tomb of his friends. But Captain Blomsberry could not stay on obstinately,
and notwithstanding the opposition of the worthy secretary, he was obliged to give orders to
set sail.

On the 29th of December, at 9 a.m., the Susquehanna, heading north-east, began to return to
the bay of San Francisco.

It was 10 a.m. The corvette was leaving slowly and as if with regret the scene of the catastrophe,
when the sailor at the masthead, who was on the look-out, called out all at once--

"A buoy on the lee bow!"

The officers looked in the direction indicated. They saw through their telescopes the object
signalled, which did look like one of those buoys used for marking the openings of bays or
rivers; but, unlike them, a flag floating in the wind surmounted a cone which emerged five
or six feet. This buoy shone in the sunshine as if made of plates of silver.

The commander, Blomsberry, J.T. Maston, and the delegates of the Gun Club ascended the foot-bridge
and examined the object thus drifting on the waves.

All looked with feverish anxiety, but in silence. ((A.D. 1030. This year came King Olave again
into Norway, and the people gathered against him, and fought against
him; and he was there slain.))

A.D. 1031.

This year returned King Knute; and as soon as he came to England
he gave to Christ's church in Canterbury the haven of Sandwich, and
all the rights that arise therefrom, on either side of the haven;
so that when the tide is highest and fullest, and there be a ship
floating as near the land as possible, and there be a man standing
upon the ship with a taper-axe in his hand, whithersoever the large
taper-axe might be thrown out of the ship, throughout all that land
the ministers of Christ's church should enjoy their rights.



"Speak, can't you?"

"It is, imbeciles," shouted the terrible secretary, "it is the bullet only weighs 19,250 lbs!"

"Well?"

"And it displaces 28 tons, or 56,000 lbs., consequently it floats!"

Ah! how that worthy man did underline the verb "to float!" And it was the truth! All, yes!
all these savants had forgotten this fundamental law, that in consequence of its specific lightness
the projectile, after having been dragged by its fall to the greatest depths of the ocean,
had naturally returned to the surface; and now it was floating tranquilly whichever way the
wind carried them.

The boats had been lowered. J.T. Maston and his friends rushed into them. The excitement was
at its highest point. All hearts palpitated whilst the boats rowed towards the projectile.
What did it contain--the living or the dead? The living. Yes! unless death had struck down
Barbicane and his companions since they had hoisted the flag!

Profound silence reigned in the boats. All hearts stopped beating. Eyes no longer performed
their office. One of the port-lights of the projectile was opened. Some pieces of glass remaining
in the frame proved that it had been broken. This port-light was situated actually five feet
above water.

A boat drew alongside--that of J.T. Maston. He rushed to the broken window.

At that moment the joyful and clear voice of Michel Ardan was heard exclaiming in the accents
of victory--"Double blank, Barbicane, double blank!"

Barbicane, Michel Ardan, and Nicholl were playing at dominoes.

CHAPTER XXIII.

THE END.

It will be remembered that immense sympathy accompanied the three travellers upon their departure.
If the beginning of their enterprise had caused such excitement in the old and new world, what
enthusiasm must welcome their return! Would not those millions of spectators who had invaded
the Floridian peninsula rush to meet the sublime adventurers? Would those legions of foreigners
from all points of the globe, now in America, leave the Union without seeing Barbicane, Nicholl,
and Michel Ardan once more? No, and the ardent passion of the public would worthily respond
to the grandeur of the enterprise. Human beings who had left the terrestrial spheroid, who
had returned after their strange journey into celestial space, could not fail to be received
like the prophet Elijah when he returned to the earth. To see them first, to hear them afterwards,
was the general desire.

This desire was to be very promptly realised by almost all the inhabitants of the Union.

Barbicane, Michel Ardan, Nicholl, and the delegates of the Gun Club returned without delay
to Baltimore, and were there received with indescribable enthusiasm. The president's travelling
notes were ready to be given up for publicity. The New York Herald bought this manuscript at
a price which is not yet known, but which must have been enormous. In fact, during the publication
of the Journey to the Moon they printed 5,000,000 copies of that newspaper. Three days after
the travellers' return to the earth the least details of their expedition were known. The only
thing remaining to be done was to see the heroes of this superhuman enterprise.

The exploration of Barbicane and his friends around the moon had allowed them to control the
different theories about the terrestrial satellite. These savants had observed it de visu and
under quite peculiar circumstances. It was now known which systems were to be rejected, which
admitted, upon the formation of this orb, its origin, and its inhabitability. Its past, present,
and future had given up their secrets. What could be objected to conscientious observations
made at less than forty miles from that curious mountain of Tycho, the strangest mountain system
of lunar orography? What answers could be made to savants who had looked into the dark depths
of the amphitheatre of Pluto? Who could contradict these audacious men whom the hazards of
their enterprise had carried over the invisible disc of the moon, which no human eye had ever
seen before? It was now their prerogative to impose the limits of that selenographic science
which had built up the lunar world like Cuvier did the skeleton of a fossil, and to say, "The
moon was this, a world inhabitable and inhabited anterior to the earth! The moon is this, a
world now uninhabitable and uninhabited!"

In order to welcome the return of the most illustrious of its members and his two companions,
the Gun Club thought of giving them a banquet; but a banquet worthy of them, worthy of the
American people, and under such circumstances that all the inhabitants of the Union could take
a direct part in it.

All the termini of the railroads in the State were joined together by movable rails. Then,
in all the stations hung with the same flags, decorated with the same ornaments, were spread
tables uniformly dressed. At a certain time, severely calculated upon electric clocks which
beat the seconds at the same instant, the inhabitants were invited to take their places at
the same banquet.

During four days, from the 5th to the 9th of January, the trains were suspended like they are
on Sundays upon the railways of the Union, and all the lines were free.

One locomotive alone, a very fast engine, dragging a state saloon, had the right of circulating,
during these four days, upon the railways of the United States.

This locomotive, conducted by a stoker and a mechanic, carried, by a great favour, the Honourable
J.T. Maston, Secretary of the Gun Club.

The saloon was reserved for President Barbicane, Captain Nicholl, and Michel Ardan.

The train left the station of Baltimore upon the whistle of the engine-driver amidst the hurrahs
and all the admiring interjections of the American language. It went at the speed of eighty
leagues an hour. But what was that speed compared to the one with which the three heroes had
left the Columbiad?

Thus they went from one town to another, finding the population in crowds upon their passage
saluting them with the same acclamations, and showering upon them the same "bravoes." They
thus travelled over the east of the Union through Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Massachusetts,
Vermont, Maine, and New Brunswick; north and west through New York, Ohio, Michigan, and Wisconsin;
south through Illinois, Missouri, Arkansas, Texas, and Louisiana; south-east through Alabama
and Florida, Georgia, and the Carolinas; they visited the centre through Tennessee, Kentucky,
Virginia, and Indiana; then after the station of Washington they re-entered Baltimore, and
during four days they could imagine that the United States of America, seated at one immense
banquet, saluted them simultaneously with the same hurrahs.

This apotheosis was worthy of these heroes, whom fable would have placed in the ranks of demigods.

And now would this attempt, without precedent in the annals of travels, have any practical
result? Would direct communication ever be established with the moon? Would a service of navigation
ever be founded across space for the solar world? Will people ever go from planet to planet,
from Jupiter to Mercury, and later on from one star to another, from the Polar star to Sirius,
would a method of locomotion allow of visiting the suns which swarm in the firmament?

No answer can be given to these questions, but knowing the audacious ingenuity of the Anglo-Saxon
race, no one will be astonished that the Americans tried to turn President Barbicane's experiment
to account.

Thus some time after the return of the travellers the public received with marked favour the
advertisement of a Joint-Stock Company (Limited), with a capital of a hundred million dollars,
divided into a hundred thousand shares of a thousand dollars each, under the name of National
Company for Interstellar Communication--President, Barbicane; Vice-President, Captain Nicholl;
Secretary, J.T. Maston; Director, Michel Ardan--and as it is customary in America to foresee
everything in business, even bankruptcy, the Honourable Harry Trollope, Commissary Judge, and
Francis Dayton were appointed beforehand assignees.

THE END.