Apropos of this letter of Turgenieff's, I should like to say that my father was sincerely annoyed,
when he heard applied to himself the epithet "great writer of the land of Russia," which was
taken from this letter.

He always hated cliches, and he regarded this one as quite absurd.

"Why not 'writer of the land'? I never heard before that a man could be the writer of a land.
People get attached to some nonsensical expression, and go on repeating it in season and out
of season."

I have given extracts above from Turgenieff's letters, which show the invariable consistency
with which he lauded my father's literary talents. Unfortunately, I cannot say the same of
my father's attitude toward Turgenieff.

In this, too, the want of dispassionateness in his nature revealed itself. Personal relations
prevented him from being objective.

In 1867, apropos of Turgenieff's "Smoke," which had just appeared, he wrote to Fet:

There is hardly any love of anything in "Smoke" and hardly any poetry. The only thing it shows
love for is light and playful adultery, and for that reason the poetry of the story is repulsive.
... I am timid in expressing this opinion, because I cannot form a sober judgment about an
author whose personality I dislike.

In 1865, before the final breach with Turgenieff, he wrote, again to Fet: "I do not like 'Enough'!"
A personal subjective treatment is never good unless it is full of life and passion; but the
subjectivity in this case is full of lifeless suffering.

In the autumn of 1883, after Turgenieff's death, when the family had gone into Moscow for the
winter, my father stayed at Yasnaya Polyana alone, with Agafya Mikhailovna, and set earnestly
about reading through all Turgenieff's works.

This is what he wrote to my mother at the time:

I am always thinking about Turgenieff. I am intensely fond of him, and sorry for him, and do
nothing but read him. I live entirely with him. I shall certainly give a lecture on him, or
write it to be read; tell Yuryef.

"Enough"--read it; it is perfectly charming.

Unfortunately, my father's intended lecture on Turgenieff never came off. The Government forbade
him to pay this last tribute to his dead friend, with whom he had quarreled all his life only
because he could not be indifferent to him.

                    (To be continued)

REMINISCENCES OF TOLSTOY (Part III.)

BY HIS SON, COUNT ILYA TOLSTOY

TRANSLATED BY GEORGE CALDERON

AT this point I shall turn back and try to trace the influence which my father had on my upbringing,
and I shall recall as well as I can the impressions that he left on my mind in my childhood,
and later in the melancholy days of my early manhood, which happened to coincide with the radical
change in his whole philosophy of life.

In 1852, tired of life in the Caucasus and remembering his old home at Yasnaya Polyana, he
wrote to his aunt, Tatyana Alexandrovna:

After some years, I shall find myself, neither very young nor very old, back at Yasnaya Polyana
again: my affairs will all be in order; I shall have no anxieties for the future and no troubles
in the present.

You also will be living at Yasnaya. You will be getting a little old, but you will be healthy
and vigorous. We shall lead the life we led in the old days; I shall work in the mornings,
but we shall meet and see each other almost all day.

We shall dine together in the evening. I shall read you something that interests you. Then
we shall talk: I shall tell you about my life in the Caucasus; you will give me reminiscences
of my father and mother; you will tell me some of those "terrible stories" to which we used
to listen in the old days with frightened eyes and open mouths.

We shall talk about the people that we loved and who are no more.

You will cry, and I, too; but our tears will be refreshing, tranquilizing tears. We shall talk
about my brothers, who will visit us from time to time, and about dear Masha, who will also
spend several months every year at Yasnaya, which she loves, with all her children.

We shall have no acquaintances; no one will come in to bore us with gossip.

It is a wonderful dream; but that is not all that I let myself dream of.

 I shall be married.  My wife will be gentle, kind, and
affectionate; she will love you as I do; we shall have children who will
call you granny; you will live in the big house, in the same room on the
top floor where my grandmother lived before.

The whole house will be run on the same lines as it was in my father's time, and we shall begin
the same life over again, but with a change of roles.

You will take my grandmother's place, but you will be better still than she was; I shall take
my father's place, though I can never hope to be worthy of the honor.

My wife will take my mother's place, and the children ours.

Masha will fill the part of both my aunts, except for their sorrow; and there will even be
Gasha there to take the place of Prashovya Ilyinitchna.

The only thing lacking will be some one to take the part you played in the life of our family.
We shall never find such a noble and loving heart as yours. There is no one to succeed you.

There will be three new faces that will appear among us from time to time: my brothers, especially
one who will often be with us, Nikolenka, who will be an old bachelor, bald, retired, always
the same kindly, noble fellow.

Just ten years after this letter, my father married, and almost all his dreams were realized,
just as he had wished. Only the big house, with his grandmother's room, was missing, and his
brother Nikolenka, with the dirty hands, for he died two years before, in 1860. In his family
life my father witnessed a repetition of the life of his parents, and in us children he sought
to find a repetition of himself and his brothers. We were brought up as regular gentlefolk,
proud of our social position and holding aloof from all the outer world. Everything that was
not us was below us, and therefore unworthy of imitation. I knew that my father felt very earnestly
about the chastity of young people; I knew how much strength he laid on purity. An early marriage
seemed to me the best solution of the difficult question that must harass every thoughtful
boy when he attains to man's estate.

Two or three years later, when I was eighteen and we were living in Moscow, I fell in love
with a young lady I knew, my present wife, and went almost every Saturday to her father's house.

My father knew, but said nothing. One day when he was going out for a walk I asked if I might
go with him. As I very seldom went for walks with him in Moscow, he guessed that I wanted to
have a serious talk with him about something, and after walking some distance in silence, evidently
feeling that I was shy about it and did not like to break the ice, he suddenly began:

"You seem to go pretty often to the F----s'."

I said that I was very fond of the eldest daughter.

"Oh, do you want to marry her?"

"Yes."

"Is she a good girl? Well, mind you don't make a mistake, and don't be false to her," he said
with a curious gentleness and thoughtfulness.

I left him at once and ran back home, delighted, along the Arbat. I was glad that I had told
him the truth, and his affectionate and cautious way of taking it strengthened my affection
both for him, to whom I was boundlessly grateful for his cordiality, and for her, whom I loved
still more warmly from that moment, and to whom I resolved still more fervently never to be untrue.

My father's tactfulness toward us amounted almost to timidity. There were certain questions
which he could never bring himself to touch on for fear of causing us pain. I shall never forget
how once in Moscow I found him sitting writing at the table in my room when I dashed in suddenly
to change my clothes.

My bed stood behind a screen, which hid him from me.

When he heard my footsteps he said, without looking round:

"Is that you, Ilya?"

"Yes, it's I."

"Are you alone? Shut the door. There's no one to hear us, and we can't see each other, so we
shall not feel ashamed. Tell me, did you ever have anything to do with women?"

When I said no, I suddenly heard him break out sobbing, like a little child.

I sobbed and cried, too, and for a long time we stayed weeping tears of joy, with the screen
between us, and we were neither of us ashamed, but both so joyful that I look on that moment
as one of the happiest in my whole life.

No arguments or homilies could ever have effected what the emotion I experienced at that moment
did. Such tears as those shed by a father of sixty can never be forgotten even in moments of
the strongest temptation.

My father observed my inward life most attentively between the ages of sixteen and twenty,
noted all my doubts and hesitations, encouraged me in my good impulses, and often found fault
with me for inconsistency.

I still have some of his letters written at that time. Here are two:

I had just written you, my dear friend Ilya, a letter that was true to my own feelings, but,
I am afraid, unjust, and I am not sending it. I said unpleasant things in it, but I have no
right to do so. I do not know you as I should like to and as I ought to know you. That is my
fault. And I wish to remedy it. I know much in you that I do not like, but I do not know everything.
As for your proposed journey home, I think that in your position of student, not only student
of a gymnase, but at the age of study, it is better to gad about as little as possible; moreover,
all useless expenditure of money that you can easily refrain from is immoral, in my opinion,
and in yours, too, if you only consider it. If you come, I shall be glad for my own sake, so
long as you are not inseparable from G----.

Do as you think best. But you must work, both with your head, thinking and reading, and with
your heart; that is, find out for yourself what is really good and what is bad, although it
seems to be good. I kiss you.

                                                       L. T.

Dear Friend Ilya:

There is always somebody or something that prevents me from answering your two letters, which
are important and dear to me, especially the last. It was no part of wisdom to let the books
of the cunning Sibyl become rarer and knowledge poorer by neglecting to secure all that was obtainable
when she made her first or even her second offer.
ALEXANDER VAN MILLINGEN.

ROBERT COLLEGE, CONSTANTINOPLE.

Even supposing that S---- A---- demands too much of you, [19] there is no harm in waiting;
especially from the point of view of fortifying your opinions, your faith. That is the one
important thing. If you don't, it is a fearful disaster to put off from one shore and not reach
the other.

