"Not long after that letters came to the club asking for Karl's address. They were from Engels,
of whom I had never heard before. I would not give the address until we found out that Engels
was a true friend and comrade. We were all afraid, you see, lest some enemy wanted to hurt
Karl. It was good, though, that I could send the address to Engels, for I believe that he sent
some money to help Karl out of a very hard struggle. If we had known that he was in trouble
we, his friends in Cologne, would have sent money to help, but Karl was too proud I suppose
to let his trouble be known to us.

III

"It was in the winter of 1847 that I saw him again, in London. For months all the workingmen's
societies had been agitated over the question of forming an international association with
a regular programme, which Karl had been invited to draw up. A congress was to be held in London
for the purpose of considering Karl's programme and I was sent by the Cologne comrades as a
delegate. All the members 'chipped in' to pay my expenses, and I was very happy to go--happy
because I should see him again.

"So I was present at the rooms of the Arbeiterbildungsverein, in Great Windmill Street, when
Karl read the declaration of principles and programme he had prepared. That was the Communist
Manifesto, you know."

"What! were you really present when that immortal declaration of the independence of our class
was read, Hans?"

"Aye, lad, I was present during all the ten days the congress lasted. Never, never shall I
forget how our Karl read that declaration. Like a man inspired he was. I, who have heard Bernstein
and Niemann and many another great actor declaim the lines of famous classics, never heard
such wonderful declamation as his. We all sat spellbound and still as death while he read.
Tears of joy trickled down my cheeks, and not mine alone. When he finished reading there was
the wildest cheering. I lost control of myself and kissed him on both cheeks, again and again.
He liked not that, for he was always ashamed to have a fuss made over him.

"But Karl--he always insisted that I should call him 'Karl,' as in boyhood days--had shown
us that day his inner self; bared the secret of his heart, you might say. The workers of all
countries must unite--only just that, unite! And that night, after the long session of the
congress, when he took me away with Engels and a few other friends--I remember that Karl Pfander
was one--he could speak of little else: the workers must be united somehow, and whoever proposed
further divisions instead of unity must be treated as a traitor.

"Some there were who had not his patience. Few men have, my lad, for his was the patience of
a god. They wanted 'action,' 'action,' 'action,' and some of them pretended that Karl was just
a plain coward, afraid of action. There was one little delegate, a Frenchman, who tried to
get me to vote against the 'coward Marx'--me that had known Karl since we were little shavers
together, and that knew him to be fearless and lion-hearted. I just picked the creature up
and shook him like a terrier shakes a rat and he squealed bitterly. I don't think he called
Karl a coward again during the congress.

"Of course, Karl had courage enough for anything. But he was too wise to imagine that any good
could come from a few thousand untrained workingmen, armed with all sorts of implements, dangerous
most to themselves, challenging the trained hosts of capitalist troops. That was the old idea
of 'Revolution,' you know, and it took more courage to advocate the long road of patience than
it would take to join in a silly riot. And Karl showed them that, too, by his calm look and
scornful treatment of their cry for 'action.' The way he silenced the noisy followers of Wilhelm
Weitling--who was not a bad fellow, mind--was simply wonderful to see. Oh, he was a born leader
of men, was Karl.

"When the congress was all over, I meant to stay a few days in London to see the great city.
Barbara had a sister living over in Dean street and so it would cost me nothing to stay. But
Karl came to me and begged me to go back by way of Brussels. He and Engels were returning there
at once, and would like to have me go with them. I didn't want to go at first, but when Karl
said that there were some messages he wanted me to take back to Cologne, why, of course, I went.

"Ach, what a glorious time we had on that journey to Brussels! Sometimes Karl and Engels would
talk seriously about the great cause, and I just listened and kept my mouth shut while my ears
were wide open. At other times they would throw off their seriousness as a man throws off a
coat, and then they would tell stories and sing songs, and of course I joined in. People say--people
that never knew the real Karl--that he was gloomy and sad, that he couldn't smile. I suppose
that is because they never saw the simple Karl that I knew and loved, but only Marx, the great
leader and teacher, with a thousand heavy problems burdening his mind. But the Marx that I
knew--my friend Karl--was human, boy, very human. He could sing a song, tell a good story,
and enjoy a joke, even at his own expense."

A smile lit up the face of the Young Comrade. "I'm so glad of that, Hans," he said. "I've always
been told that he was a sad man, without a sense of humor; that he was never known to unbend
from his stiff gravity. But you say that he was not so; that he could laugh and joke and sing:
I like him better so."

Old Hans seemed not to hear the words of the Young Comrade, though he was silent while they
were spoken. A faint smile played around his lips, and the far-away expression of his eyes
told that the smile belonged to the memory of other days. It was dark now in the little shop;
only the flickering light of the fitful fire in the tiny grate enabled the Young Comrade to
see his friend.

It was the Young Comrade who broke the silence at last: "Tell me more, Hans, for I am still
hungry to learn about him."

The old man nodded and turned to put some chips upon the fire in the grate. Then he continued:

"It was about the last of February, 1848, that we got the first copies of the Communist Manifesto
at Cologne. Only a day or two before that we had news of the outbreak of the Revolution in
Paris. I have still my copy of the Manifesto which Karl sent me from Paris.

"You see, he had been expelled from Brussels by order of the Government. Prussia had requested
this, so Karl wrote me, and he was arrested and ordered to leave Belgium at once. So he went
at once to Paris. Only a week before that the Provisional Government had sent him an official
invitation to come back to the city from which Guizot had expelled him. It was like a conqueror
that he went, you may imagine.

"Boy, you can never understand what we felt in those days. Things are not so any more. We all
thought that the day of our victory was surely nigh. Karl had made us believe that when things
started in France the proletariat of all Europe would awaken: 'When the Gallican cock crows
the German workers will rise,' he used to say. And now the cock's crowing had been heard! The
Revolution was successful in France--so we thought--and the people were planting trees of liberty
along the boulevards.

"Here in England, too, the Spirit of the Revolution was abroad with her flaming torch. The
Chartists had come together, and every day we expected to hear that the monarchy had been overthrown
and a Social Republic established. Of course, we knew that Chartism was a 'bread and butter
question' at the bottom, and that the Chartists' cause was ours.

"Well, now that we had heard the Gallican cock, we wanted to get things started in Germany,
too. Every night we held meetings at the club in Cologne to discuss the situation. Some of
us wanted to begin war at once. You see, the Revolution was in our blood like strong wine:
we were drunk with the spirit, lad.

"When Karl wrote that we must wait, that we must have patience, there was great disappointment.
We thought that we should begin at once, and there were some who said that Karl was afraid,
but I knew that they were wrong, and told them so. There was a fierce discussion at the meeting
one night over a letter which I had received from Karl, and which he wanted me to read to the
members.

"George Herwegh was in Paris, so the letter said, and was trying hard to raise a legion of
German workingmen to march into the Fatherland and begin the fight. This, Karl said, was a
terrible mistake. It was useless, to begin with, for what could such a legion of tailors and
cigarmakers and weavers do against the Prussian army? It was plain that the legion would be
annihilated. Besides, it would hurt the cause in another way by taking out of Paris thousands
of good revolutionists who were needed there.

"'Tell the comrades,' he wrote, 'that it is not a question of cowardice or fear, but of wisdom.
It takes more courage to live for the long struggle than to go out and be shot.' He wanted
the comrades to wait patiently and to do all they could to persuade their friends in Paris
not to follow Herwegh's advice. Most of the Germans in Paris followed Karl's advice, but a
few followed Herwegh and marched into Baden later on, to be scattered by the regular troops
as chaff is scattered by the wind.

"The German comrades in Paris sent us a special manifesto, which Karl wrote, and we were asked
to distribute it among the working people. That would be a good way to educate the workers,
Karl wrote to our committee, but I tell you it seemed a very small thing to do in those trying
times, and it didn't satisfy the comrades who were demanding more radical revolutionary action.
Why, even I seemed to forget Karl's advice for a little while.

"On the 13th of March--you'll remember that was the day on which more than a hundred thousand
Chartists gathered on Kennington Common--the revolution broke out in Vienna. Then things began
to move in Cologne, too. As soon as the news came from Vienna, August von Willich, who had
been an artillery officer, led a big mob right into the Cologne Council Chamber. I was in the
mob and shouted as loud as anybody. We demanded that the authorities should send a petition
to the King, in the name of the city, demanding freedom and constitutional government.

"And then on the 18th, the same day that saw the people of Berlin fighting behind barricades
in the streets--a great multitude of us Cologne men marched through the streets, led by Professor
Gottfried Kinkel, singing the Marseillaise and carrying the forbidden flag of revolution, the
black, red and gold tricolor."

"And where was he--Marx--during all this time?" asked the Young Comrade.

"In Paris with Engels. We thought it strange that he should be holding aloof from the great
struggle, and even I began to lose faith in him. He had told us that the crowing of the Gallican
cock would be the sign for the revolution to begin, yet he was silent. It was not till later
that I learned from his own lips that he saw from the start that the revolution would be crushed;
that the workers opportunity would not come until later.

IV

"He told me that when he came to Cologne with Engels. That was either the last of April or
the beginning of May, I forget which. My wife rushed in one evening and said that she had seen
Karl going up the street. I had heard that he was expected, but thought it would not be for
several days. So when Barbara said that she had seen him on the street, I put on my things
in a big hurry and rushed off to the club. There was a meeting that night, and I felt pretty
sure that Karl would get there.

"When the meeting was more than half through, I heard a noise in the back of the hall and turned
to see Karl and Engels making their way to the platform. There was another man with them, a
young fellow, very slender and about five feet six in height, handsome as Apollo and dressed
like a regular dandy. I had never seen this young man before, but from what I had heard and
read I knew that it must be Ferdinand Lassalle.

"They both spoke at the meeting. Lassalle's speech was full of fire and poetry, but Karl spoke
very quietly and slowly. Lassalle was like a great actor declaiming, Karl was like a teacher
explaining the rules of arithmetic to a lot of schoolboys."

"And did you meet Lassalle, too?" asked the Young Comrade in awed tones.

"Aye, that night and many times after that. Karl greeted me warmly and introduced me to Lassalle.
Then we went out for a drink of lager beer--just us four--Karl, Lassalle, Engels and me. They
told me that they had come to start another paper in the place of the one that had been suppressed
five years before. Money had been promised to start it, Karl was to be the chief editor and
Engels his assistant. The new paper was to be called the Neue Rhenische Zeitung and Freiligrath,
George Weerth, Lassalle, and many others, were to write for it. So we drank a toast to the
health and prosperity of the new paper.

"Well, the paper came out all right, and it was not long before Karl's attacks upon the government
brought trouble upon it. The middle class stockholders felt that he was too radical, and when
he took the part of the French workers, after the terrible defeat of June, they wanted to get
rid of their chief editor. There was no taming a man like Karl.

"One day I went down to the office with a notice for a committee of which I was a member, and
Karl introduced me to Michael Bakunin, the great Russian Anarchist leader. Karl never got along
very well with Bakunin and there was generally war going on between them.

"Did you ever hear of Robert Blum, my lad? Ever read the wonderful verses Freiligrath wrote
about him? I suppose not. Well, Blum was a moderate Democrat, a sort of Liberal who belonged
to the Frankfort National Assembly. When the insurrection of October, 1848, broke out in Vienna
Blum was sent there by the National Assembly, the so-called 'parliament of the people.'

"He assumed command of the revolutionary forces and was captured and taken prisoner by the
Austrian army and ordered to be shot. I remember well the night of the ninth of February when
the atrocious deed was committed. We had a great public meeting. The hall was crowded to suffocation.
I looked for Karl, but he was nowhere to be seen. He was a very busy man, you see, and had
to write a great deal for his paper at night.

"It was getting on for ten o'clock when Karl appeared in the hall and made his way in silence
to the platform. Some of the comrades applauded him, but he raised his hand to silence them.
We saw then that he held a telegram in his hand, and that his face was as pale as death itself.
We knew that something terrible had happened, and a great hush fell over the meeting. Not a
sound could be heard until Karl began to read.

"The telegram was very brief and very terrible. Robert Blum had been shot to death in Vienna,
according to martial law, it said. Karl read it with solemn voice, and I thought that I could
see the murder taking place right there in the hall before my eyes. I suppose everybody felt
just like that, for there was perfect silence--the kind of silence that is painful--for a few
seconds. Then we all broke out in a perfect roar of fury and cheers for the Revolution.

"I tried to speak to Karl after the meeting, but he brushed me aside and hurried away. His
face was terrible to behold. He was the Revolution itself in human shape. As I looked at him
I knew that he would live to avenge poor Blum.