The most sacred deposit of Divine Revelation has been committed by Jesus Christ to the custody
of the Church, and century after century she has guarded it with the utmost jealousy and fidelity. It
was, I admit, a trifle shabby. You have used me generously. I am delighted to have found occasion
to repay you; but as for that brother of yours, I am death on him. I shall never rest till I have
taken his life."

"'"I beg you to do no such thing," I said.

"'"I will sink his vessel
and send him to the bottom of the sea," she insisted.

"'After much
endeavour I managed to appease her wrath, and in the twinkling of
an eye, before you could say "Ali Baba!" she had transported me back
to my own house. Without respect of persons, without regard to temporal consequences, without either
hesitancy or ambiguity, he speaks "as one having power" (Matt. vii. 29). And while, on the
one hand, every true Catholic throughout the world, who hears his voice, is intimately conscious
that he is hearing the voice of Christ Himself, "who heareth you, heareth Me" (Luke x. 16);
so, on the other hand, every true Catholic likewise knows that all who refuse to obey his ruling,
and who despise his warnings, are despising and disobeying Christ Himself. "Who despises you,
despises Me" (Luke x. 16). Thus, the Sovereign Pontiff, as the infallible source of religious
truth, becomes at the same time the strong bond of religious unity: for, just as error divides
men from one another, so truth always and necessarily draws them together. In this way the
Pope becomes the connecting link which unites over 250,000,000 of men: and the foundation stone
(or petros--Peter) of the mystical building erected by God-incarnate ("Upon this rock will
I build My Church," Matt. xvi. 18). He is the foundation, that is to say, which supports it,
and keeps its various parts together, in one harmonious and symmetrical whole, and against
which the angry surges rise, and the muddy waves of error for ever beat, yet ever beat in vain:
for "the gates of hell [Satan and his hosts] shall not prevail against it". Who doubts this
denies the most formal and unmistakable promises of the Eternal Son of God, and makes of Him
a liar.

Our non-Catholic friends close their eyes to these patent facts, and--with great peril to their
salvation--refuse to see even the obvious. As the Jews of old were so blinded by their prejudice,
jealousy and hatred of Him, whom they contemptuously styled "the Son of the Carpenter," that
they steadily refused to consider the justice of His claims, and could not (or would not?)
bring themselves to understand how clearly the Scriptures bore witness to His divinity, and
how marvellously the prophecies and predictions (the words of which they accepted), were fulfilled
in His Divine Person; so now Protestants steadily refuse to consider the claims of Her whom
they contemptuously style "the Romish Church," and are so prejudiced and full of suspicion,
if not of hate, that they too cannot bring themselves to understand how She, like her Divine
Founder, bears upon her immortal brow the distinctive and unmistakable impress of her supernatural
origin and destiny. The Incarnate Son of God, who never asks, nor can ask in vain, implored
His Heavenly Father, that all His followers might be one, and why? In order that this marvellous
unity might ever be fixed as a seal of authenticity to His Church, and be to all men a permanent
sign and proof of her genuineness. Unity, then, is undeniably the test and sign-manual attached
by Christ to His Bride, the Church; the presence or absence of which must (if there be any
truth in God) determine the genuineness or the falsity of every claimant.

Now, this mark is nowhere found outside the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church, whose
centre is in Rome.

Other Churches not merely do not possess unity. They do not possess so much as the requisite
machinery to produce it, nor even the means of preserving it, if produced.

With us, on the contrary, it flows as naturally and as directly from the recognised Supremacy
and Infallibility of the Vicar of Christ as light flows from the sun. It is so manifest that
it would seem only the blind can fail to see it: so that one is sometimes puzzled to know how
to excuse educated Protestants from the damnable sin of vincible ignorance. Thus, the faithful
throughout the entire world are in constant communication with their respective pastors; the
pastors, in their turn, are in direct communication with their respective Bishops, and the
Bishops, dispersed throughout the length and breadth of Christendom, are in close and direct
communication with the one Supreme and Infallible Ruler, whom the Lord has placed over all
His possessions; who has been promised immunity from error; and whose special duty and office
is to "confirm his brethren" (Luke xxii. 32). By this most simple, yet most practical and effective
expedient, the very least and humblest catechumen in China or Australia is as truly in touch
with the central authority at the Vatican, and as completely under its direction in matters
of faith and morals, as the crowned heads of Spain or Austria, or as the Archbishops of Paris
or Malines. Certainly Digitus Dei est hic: the finger of God is here. The simple fact is, there
is always something about the works of God which clearly differentiate them from the products
of man, however close may be the mere external and surface resemblance. A thousand artists
may carve a thousand acorns, so cunningly coloured, and so admirably contrived as to be practically
indistinguishable from the genuine fruit of the oak. Each of these thousand artists may present
me with his manufactured acorn, and may assure me of its genuineness. And, alas! I may be quite
deceived and taken in; yes, but only for a time. When I plant them in the soil, together with
the genuine acorn, and give them time to develop, the fraud is detected, and the truth revealed.
For the real seed proves its worth. How? In the simplest way possible, that is to say, by actually
doing what it was destined and created to do. That is, by growing and developing into a majestic
oak, while the false and human imitations fall to pieces, belie all one's hopes, and are found
to produce neither branch nor leaf nor fruit.

This is but an illustration of what may be observed equally in the spiritual order, although
there it is attended by more disastrous consequences. Thus we find hundreds of Churches proclaiming
themselves to be foundations of God, which Time, the old Justice who tries all such offenders,
soon proves, most unmistakably, to be nothing but the contrivances of man. They may bear a
certain external resemblance to the true Church, planted by the Divine Husbandman, but like
the man-made acorns, they deceive all our expectations, and are wholly unable to redeem their
promises, or to live up to their pretensions. 

He rose and paced about the room. At this moment his door opened, and the familiar figure of Mrs.
JOGGINS appeared.

"Beg your pardon, Sir," she said, hesitatingly, "I thought you called."

"No, Mrs. JOGGINS," said the Dean. "I did not call. Are you not rather late in College? Is it
usual for you to stay--" Here the Dean stopped abruptly. He rubbed his eyes, and clung to his
book-shelf for support. His hair stood on end, and his knees shook. In fact he expressed terror
in a thoroughly orthodox manner, for he had suddenly become aware that there was in the face of
Mrs. JOGGINS a strange radiance, and that two gossamer wings had
suddenly appeared on her back in place of the substantial shawl she
was wont to wear.

We might give many instances of this, and quote from many sources, but let the following extract
from London's leading journal serve as an example. It is no other paper than the Times, which
makes the following admission on occasion of the Vatican Council which opened in 1869: "Seven
hundred Bishops, more or less, representing all Christendom, were seen gathered round one altar
and one throne, partaking of the same Divine Mystery, and rendering homage, by turns, to the
same spiritual authority and power. As they put on their mitres, or took them off, and as they
came to the steps of the altar, or the foot of the common spiritual Father, it was IMPOSSIBLE
not to feel the UNITY and the power of the Church which they represented" (16th Dec., 1869).
Here, then, is the most influential journal certainly of Great Britain, perhaps of the world,
proclaiming to its readers far and wide, not simply that the Roman Catholic Church is one,
but that her oneness is of such a sterling quality, and of so pronounced a character that it
is impossible--mark the word, impossible!--not to feel it. Yet men ask where the Church of
God is to be found. They ask for a sign, and lo! when God gives them one they cannot see it,
nor interpret it, nor make anything out of it: and prefer to linger on in what Newman calls
"the cities of confusion," than find peace and security in "the communion of Rome, which is
that Church which the Apostles set up at Pentecost, which alone has 'the adoption of sons,
and the glory and the covenants and the revealed law, and the service of God and the promises,'
and in which the Anglican [or any other Protestant] communion, whatever it merits and demerits,
whatever the great excellence of individuals in it, has, as such, no part". But this is a digression.
Let us return to our subject.

The incontestable value and immense practical importance of the Papal prerogative of infallibility
have been rendered abundantly manifest ever since its solemn definition nearly forty years
ago. In fact, although the enormous increase of the population of the world has not rendered
the position of the Sovereign Pontiff any easier, yet he is better fitted and equipped since
the definition to cope promptly and effectually with errors and heresies as they arise than
he was before. We do not mean that his prerogative of infallibility is invoked upon every trivial
occasion--one does not call for a Nasmyth hammer to break a nut--but it is always there, in
reserve, and may be used, on occasion, even without summoning an Ecumenical Council, and this
is a matter of some consequence. For, though time may bring many changes into the life of man,
and may improve his physical condition and surroundings, and add enormously to his comfort,
health, and general corporal well-being, it is found to produce no corresponding effect upon
his corrupt and fallen nature, which asserts itself as vigorously now, after nearly two thousand
years of Christianity, as in the past. Pride and self still sway men's hearts. The spirit of
independence and self-assertion and egotism, in spite of all efforts at repression, continue
to stalk abroad. And human nature, even to-day, is almost as impatient of restraint, and as
unwilling to bear the yoke of obedience, as in the time when Gregory resisted Henry of Germany,
or when Pius VII. excommunicated Napoleon. If, even in the Apostolic age, when the number of
the faithful was small and concentrated, there were, nevertheless, men of unsound views--"wolves
in sheep's clothing"--amongst the flock of Christ, how much more likely is this to be the case
now. If the Apostle St. Paul felt called upon to warn his own beloved disciples against those
"who would not endure sound doctrine," and who "heaped to themselves teachers, having itching
ears," and who even "closed their ears to the truth, in order to listen to fables" (2 Tim.
iv. 1-5), surely we may reasonably expect to find, even in our own generation, many who have
fallen, or who are in danger of falling under the pernicious influence of false teachers, and
who are being seduced and led astray by the plausible, but utterly fallacious, reasoning of
proud and worldly spirits. It would be easy to name several, but they are too well known already
to need further advertising here.

Then, she has adversaries without, as well as within. They were all smoking, and suddenly the
Dean became aware that he too had a lighted cigar in his mouth, and was puffing at it. At the same
moment he discovered that he was wearing a disgracefully battered college-cap, and a brilliant
"blazer," lately invented by a rowdy set as the badge of their dining Club. He shuddered, but
it was useless. He put his hand in his coat-pocket. It contained a bottle of champagne.

The Undergraduates now formed a procession and began to defile past
him. And, what makes matters worse, the falsest and
most mischievous allegations are often accompanied by professions of friendship and consideration,
and set forth in learned treatises, with an elegance of language and an elevation of style
calculated to deceive the simple and to misguide the unwary. It is Father W. Faber who remarks
that, "there is not a new philosophy nor a freshly named science but what deems, in the ignorance
of its raw beginnings, that it will either explode the Church as false or set her aside as
doting" (Bl. Sac. Prologue). Indeed the world is always striving to withdraw men and women
from their allegiance to the Church, through appeals to its superior judgment and more enlightened
experience; and philosophy and history and even theology are all pressed into the service,
and falsified and misrepresented in such a manner as to give colour to its complaints and accusations
against the Bride of Christ, who, it is seriously urged, "should make concessions and compromises
with the modern world, in order to purchase the right to live and to dwell within it". What
is the consequence? Let the late Cardinal Archbishop and the Bishops of England answer. "Many
Catholics," they write in their joint pastoral, "are consequently in danger of forfeiting not
only their faith, but even their independence, by taking for granted as venerable and true
the halting and disputable judgment of some men of letters or of science which may represent
no more than the wave of some popular feeling, or the views of some fashionable or dogmatising
school. The bold assertions of men of science are received with awe and bated breath, the criticisms
of an intellectual group of savants are quoted as though they were rules for a holy life, while
the mind of the Church and her guidance are barely spoken of with ordinary patience."

In a world such as this, with the agents of evil ever active and threatening, with error strewn
as thorns about our path at every step, and with polished and seductive voices whispering doubt
and suggesting rebellion and disobedience to men, already too prone to disloyalty, and arguing
as cunningly as Satan, of old, argued with Eve; in such a world, who, we may well ask, does
not see the pressing need as well as the inestimable advantages and security afforded by a
living, vigilant, responsible and supreme authority, where all who seek, may find an answer
to their doubts, and a strength and a firm support in their weakness?

And as surely as the need exists, so surely has God's watchful providence supplied it, in the
person of the Supreme Pontiff, the venerable Vicar of Christ on earth. He is authorised and
commissioned by Christ Himself "to feed" with sound doctrine, both "the lambs and the sheep";
and faithfully has he discharged that duty. Would that our unfortunate countrymen, tossed about
by every wind of doctrine, and torn by endless divisions, could be persuaded to set aside pride
and prejudice, and to accept the true principle of religious unity and peace established by
God. Then England would become again, what she was for over a thousand years, viz.: "the most
faithful daughter of the Church of Rome, and of His Holiness, the one Sovereign Pontiff and
Vicar of Christ upon earth," as our Catholic forefathers were wont to describe her.

CHAPTER IV.

THE CHURCH AND THE SECTS.

A natural tendency is apparent in all men to differ among themselves, even concerning subjects
which are simple and easily understood; while, on more difficult and complicated issues, this
tendency is, of course, very much more pronounced. Hence, the well-known proverb: "Quot homines,
tot sententiæ"--there are as many opinions as there are men.

Now, if this is found to be the case in politics, literature, art, music, and indeed in everything
else, except perhaps pure mathematics, it is found to be yet more universally the case in questions
of religion, since religion is a subject so much more sublime, abstruse, and incomprehensible
than others, and so full of supernatural and mysterious truths, with which no merely human
tribunal has any competency to deal. Then, let me ask, what chance has a man of arriving at
a right decision on the most important of all questions--questions concerning his own eternal
salvation--who is thrown into the midst of a world where there is no uniformity of view on
spiritual matters, where every variety of opinion is expressed and defended, and where every
conceivable form of worship has its fervent supporters and followers.

Or, leaving all others out of account, may we not well ask how the vast multitudes even of
Catholics, scattered throughout such a world as this, are to maintain "the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace" (Eph. iv. 3), to preserve the tenets of their creed intact, and to discriminate
accurately and readily between the teaching of God, and the fallacious doctrines of men? In
dealing with anxious and angry disputants there is little use to appeal, as Protestants do,
to the authority of teachers who have nothing more to commend them than a learning and an intelligence
but little better than that of their disciples. Where man differs from man each will prefer
his own view, and claim that his personal opinion is as deserving of respect and as likely
to be right as his adversary's--which is practically what obtains among non-Catholics at the
present day. Indeed, the only superhuman and infallible authority on earth recognised by them
is the Bible; and that, alas! has proved a block of stumbling and not a bond of union, since,
in the hands of unscrupulous men, it may be made to prove absolutely anything. The most sacred
and fundamental truths, even such as the sublime doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, the Divinity
of Christ, and the Atonement, have all, at one time or another, been vehemently denied on the
authority of the Bible! The Anglican Bishop Colenso, in writing to the Times, could quote eleven
texts of Scripture to prove that prayer ought not to be offered to Our Divine Lord! yet, it
made no difference. He was allowed to go on teaching just as before! But suddenly a change came
over him. One night whilst we slept he threw us overboard into the sea. My wife turned out to be a
fairy, and, as you may imagine, she was not born to be drowned. As for me I was, so to speak,
on my way to be as dead as a herring, when she seized me and transported me to an isle. When it
was day the fairy said to me, "You see, my husband, that in saving your life I have not badly
recompensed you. I am, as you doubtless begin to suspect, a fairy.
 It is beyond dispute that the Bible, without
an infallible Teacher to explain its true meaning, will be of no use whatsoever as a bond of unity.

If the unity, promised by God-incarnate, is to be secured, the present circumstances of the
case, as well as the actual experience of many centuries, prove three conditions to be absolutely
necessary, viz.: a teacher who is firstly ever living and accessible; secondly, who can and
will speak clearly and without ambiguity; and thirdly, and most essential of all, whose decisions
are authoritative and decisive. One, in a word, who can pass sentence and close a controversy,
and whose verdict will be honoured and accepted as final by all Catholics without hesitation.
These three requisites are found in the person of the infallible Head of the Catholic Church,
but nowhere else.

Experience shows that where, in religion, there is nothing but mere human learning to guide,
however great such learning may be, there will always be room left for some differences of
opinion. In such controversies even the learned and the well read will not all arrange themselves
on one side; but will espouse, some one view, and some another. We find this to be the case
everywhere. And, since the Church of England offers us as striking and as ready an example
as any other, we cannot do better than invoke it as both a warning and a witness.

Though her adherents are but a small fraction, compared with ourselves, and though they are
socially and politically far more homogeneous than we Catholics, who are gathered from all
the nations of the earth, yet even they, in the absence of any universally recognised and infallible
head, are split up into a hundred fragments.

So that, even on the most essential points of doctrine, there is absolutely no true unanimity.
This is so undeniable that Anglican Bishops themselves are found lamenting and wringing their
hands over their "unhappy divisions". Still, we wish to be perfectly just, so, in illustration
of our contention, we will select, not one of those innumerable minor points which it would
be easy to bring forward, but some really crucial point of doctrine, the importance of which
no man in his senses will have the hardihood to deny. Let us say, for instance, the doctrine
of the Holy Eucharist. Can we conceive anything that a devout Christian would be more anxious
to ascertain than whether Our Divine Lord and Saviour be really and personally and substantially
present under the appearance of bread, or no! Picture to yourselves, then, a fervent worshipper
entering an Anglican church, where they are said "to reserve," and kneeling before the Tabernacle.
Just watch the poor unfortunate man utterly and hopelessly unable to decide whether he is prostrating
and pouring out his soul before a mere memorial, a simple piece of common bread, or before
the Infinite Creator of the Universe, the dread King of kings, and Lord of lords, in Whose
presence the very angels veil their faces, and the strong pillars of heaven tremble! Imagine
a Church where such a state of things is possible! Yet, we have it on the authority of an Anglican
Bishop--and I know not where we shall find a higher authority--that this is indeed the case;
as may be gathered from the following words, taken from a "charge" by the late Bishop Ryle,
which are surely clear enough: "One section of our (i.e., Anglican) clergy," says the Bishop,
"maintains that the Lord's Supper is a sacrifice, and another maintains with equal firmness
that it is not.... One section maintains that there is a real objective presence of Christ's
Body and Blood under the forms of the consecrated bread and wine. The other maintains that
there is no real presence whatsoever, except in the hearts of the believing communicant."[5]
Was such a state of pitiable helplessness ever seen or heard or dreamed of anywhere! And yet
this church, please to observe, is supposed to be a body sent by God to teach. Heaven preserve
us from such a teacher. As a further illustration of the utter incompetency of the Establishment
to perform this primary duty, we may call to mind the strikingly instructive correspondence
that was published some years ago between his Grace Archbishop Sumner and Mr. Maskell, who
very naturally and very rightly sought direction from his Ordinary concerning certain points
of doctrine, of which he was in doubt.

"You ask me," writes the Archbishop to Mr. Maskell, "whether you are to conclude that you ought
not to teach, and have not the authority of the [Anglican] Church to teach any of the doctrines
spoken of in your five former questions, in the dogmatical terms there stated."

Here, then, we have a perfectly fair and straightforward question, deserving an equally clear
and straightforward answer: and such as would be given at once if addressed by any Catholic
enquirer to his Bishop. But how does the Anglican Archbishop proceed to calm and comfort this
helpless, agitated soul, groping painfully in the dark? What is his Grace's reply? He cannot
refer the matter to a Sovereign Pontiff, for no Pontiff in the Anglican Church is possessed
of any sovereignty whatsoever. In fact the Archbishop himself has to "verily testify and declare
that His Majesty the King is the only supreme Governor in spiritual and ecclesiastical things
as well as temporal," etc.[6] Nor dare he solve these troublesome doubts himself: for he is
no more infallible than his questioner. Then what does he do? Practically nothing. He throws
the whole burden back upon poor Mr. Maskell, and leaves him to struggle with his doubts as
best he may. Thus; though the Church of God was established to "teach all nations," and must
still be teaching all nations if she exist at all; the Church of England seems unable to teach
one nation, or even one man.

But to continue. The Archbishop begins by putting Mr. Maskell a question. "Are they (i.e.,
the doctrines about which he is seeking information) contained in the Word of God? St. Paul
says, 'Preach the Word'.... Now whether the doctrines concerning which you inquire are contained
in the Word of God, and can be proved thereby, you have the same means of discovering for yourself
as I have, and I have no special authority to declare."

Did any one ever witness such an exhibition of ineptitude and spiritual asthenia? We can conceive
a man rejecting all revelation. It is possible even to conceive a man denying the Divinity
of Christ. But we know nothing that would ever enable us even to conceive that Infinite Wisdom
and Infinite Power had established a Church which cannot teach, or had sent an ambassador utterly
unable to deliver His message. There is no use for such Church as that. Total silence is better
than incoherent speech. What is the consequence? The consequence is that in the Anglican community
endless variations and differences exist and flourish side by side, not alone in matters where
differences are comparatively of little account, but in even the most momentous and fundamental
doctrines, such as the necessity of Baptism, the power of Absolution, the nature of the Holy
Eucharist, the effects of the sacrament of Holy Orders, and so forth. Were it not for the iron
hand of the State, which grasps her firmly, and binds her mutually repellent elements together,
she must have fallen to pieces long ago. Now, we must beg our readers to consider well, that
from the very terms of the institution such a deplorable state of things as we have been contemplating
is absolutely impossible and unthinkable in the Church (1) which God-incarnate founded, for
the express purpose of handing down His doctrine, pure and undefiled to the end of time; and
(2) with which He promised to abide for ever; and (3) which the Holy Ghost Himself, speaking
through St. Paul, declared to be "the pillar and ground of truth" (1. Tim. iii. 15). Nevertheless,
if the Catholic Church, numbering over 250,000,000 of persons, is not to fall into the sad
plight that has overtaken all the small churches that have gone out from her, she must not
only desire unity, as, no doubt, all the sects desire it, but she must have been provided by
her all-wise Founder with what none of them even profess to possess, viz., some simple, workable,
and effective means of securing it. How long he lay he knew not. When he came to himself it was
broad daylight, and he was walking through the Great Court hand in hand with Mrs. JOGGINS.

"See," she said, "there is Dr. GORGIAS," and sure enough there stood the redoubtable Master
in the centre of one of the grass-plots in a bright red dressing-gown and slippers, with an embroidered
smoking-cap upon his head. He was engaged in distributing crumbs to a congregation of sparrows
and thrushes and redbreasts. That any one can
fail to understand the meaning of these inspired words; that any one can give them any application
save that which they receive in the Catholic Church, is but another illustration of the extraordinary
power of prejudice and pride to blind the reason and to darken the understanding.

Without this final Court of Appeal, set up by the wisdom of God, the Church would disintegrate
and fall into pieces to-morrow. To remove from the Church of Christ the infallibility of the
Pope would be like removing the hub from the wheel, the key-stone from the arch, the trunk
from the tree, the foundation from the house. For, in each case the result must mean confusion.
If such a result could ever have been doubted in the past, it can surely be doubted no longer.
The sad experience of the past three hundred years speaks more eloquently than any words; and
its verdict is conclusive. It proves two things beyond dispute. The first is, that even the
largest and most heterogeneous body of men may be easily united and kept together, if they
can all be brought to recognise and obey one supreme authority; and the second is, that, even
a small and homogeneous body of men will soon divide and split up into sections, if they cannot
be brought to recognise such an authority.

Further, any one looking out over the face of Christendom, with an unprejudiced eye, for the
realisation of that unity which Christ promised to affix to his Church as an infallible sign
of authenticity, will find it in the Catholic Communion, but certainly nowhere else--least
of all in the Church of England.

"What," asks a well-known writer in unfeigned astonishment, "what opinion is not held within
the Established Church? Were not Dr. Wilberforce and Dr. Colenso, Dr. Hamilton and Dr. Baring
equally Bishops of the Church of England? Were not Dr. Pusey and Mr. Jowett at the same time
her professors; Father Ignatius and Mr. Bellew her ministers; Archdeacon Denison and Dr. M'Neile
her distinguished ornaments and preachers? Yet their religions differed almost as widely as
Buddhism from Calvinism, or the philosophy of Aristotle from that of Martin Tupper." If a Catholic
priest were to teach a single heretical doctrine, he would be at once cashiered, and turned
out of the Church. But "if an Anglican minister must resign because his opinions are at variance
with some other Anglican minister, every soul of them would have to retire, from the Archbishop
of Canterbury down to the last licentiate of Durham or St. Bees".

As surely as infallibility is the essential prerogative of a divinely constituted Teaching
Church, so surely can it exist only in that institution which alone has always claimed it,
both as her gift by promise and the sole explanation of her triumphs and her perpetuity. It
would be the idlest of dreams to search for it in a fractional part of a modern community,
like the Church of England, which had always disowned and scoffed at it, and which could account
for its own existence ONLY on the plea that the Promises of God had signally failed, and that
it alone was able to correct the failure.

Men ask for some sign, by which they may recognise the true Church of God and discriminate
it readily from all spurious imitations. God, in His mercy, offers them a sign--namely UNITY.
Yet they hesitate and hold back, and refuse to guide their tempest-tossed barques by its unerring
light into the one Haven of Salvation.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 5: See Charge, etc., dated November, 1893.]

[Footnote 6: Ang. Ministry, by Hutton, p. 504.]

CHAPTER V.

THE POPE'S INFALLIBLE AUTHORITY.

1. The Church of God can be but one; because God is truth: and, truth can be but one. The world
may, and (as a matter of fact) does abound in false Churches, just as it abounds in false deities;
but, this is rendered possible only because they are false. Two or more true Churches involve
a contradiction in terms. Such a condition of things is as intrinsically absurd, and as unthinkable,
as two or more true Gods--as well talk of two or more multiplication tables! No! There can
be but "One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism". If several Churches all teach the true doctrine
of Christ, unmixed with error, they must all agree, and, consequently, be virtually one and
the self same. I realised all my property, took my brother into partnership, stocked our vessel exclusively
with Home Rule goods, and set out on our voyage.

"'We arrived safely, did a great stroke of business with our wares, bought those of the country,
and set forth on our return voyage. Just as we were ready to re-embark I met on the seashore
a lady, not at all bad looking, but very meanly dressed. She approached
me, kissed my hand, begged me to take her for my wife, and conduct
her to my home across the sea. It is common-sense. Christ promised unity in promising
truth; since truth is one. Is Christ divided? asks St. Paul. No! Then neither is His Church.

2. How was His truth to be maintained and securely developed, century after century, pure and
untainted, and free from all admixture of error? Humanly speaking, the thing was impossible.
Then what superhuman guarantee did He offer? What was to be our security? Nothing less than
the abiding presence of the Holy Ghost Himself.

Surely, then, we need not be anxious after that! Listen, and remember it is to God you are
listening. "The Spirit of Truth shall abide with you for ever" (John xiv. 17). Non-Catholics
do not seem in the least to realise what those words mean, or that it is God Himself who promises.
But, to continue; what is the purpose of this extraordinary and enduring presence? Why is it
given? What is it for? Well, for the express purpose of hindering divisions and sects. In order
to lead, not to mislead us. How do we know? Because God said so: "He shall guide you into all
truth" (John xvi. 13). And this truth, thus permanently secured, was to draw all together into
one body. In fact, we have it on Divine authority, that the Church of Christ was to be as truly
a single organic whole, in which every part is subject to one head, as is a living human body.
The similitude is not of man's choosing, but is inspired by the Holy Spirit Himself. (1 Cor. xii.).

What can be clearer, what more explicit? Now, if the Spirit of Truth, that is to say, the Holy
Ghost, is really with the Church (as God promised He always would be), and if He is always
present for the express purpose of "guiding her into all truth" (as God promised would be the
case), surely this guidance must be a great reality, and not the mere sham that it is everywhere
found to be, outside the Catholic Church.

