My position at Corinth, with a nominal command and yet no command, became so unbearable that
I asked permission of Halleck to remove my headquarters to Memphis.  I had repeatedly asked,
between the fall of Donelson and the evacuation of Corinth, to be relieved from duty under
Halleck; but all my applications were refused until the occupation of the town.  I then obtained
permission to leave the department, but General Sherman happened to call on me as I was about
starting and urged me so strongly not to think of going, that I concluded to remain.  My application
to be permitted to remove my headquarters to Memphis was, however, approved, and on the 21st
of June I started for that point with my staff and a cavalry escort of only a part of one company.
There was a detachment of two or three companies going some twenty-five miles west to be stationed
as a guard to the railroad.  I went under cover of this escort to the end of their march, and
the next morning proceeded to La Grange with no convoy but the few cavalry men I had with me.

From La Grange to Memphis the distance is forty-seven miles. There were no troops stationed
between these two points, except a small force guarding a working party which was engaged in
repairing the railroad. Not knowing where this party would be found I halted at La Grange.
General Hurlbut was in command there at the time and had his headquarters tents pitched on
the lawn of a very commodious country house.  The proprietor was at home and, learning of my
arrival, he invited General Hurlbut and me to dine with him.  I accepted the invitation and
spent a very pleasant afternoon with my host, who was a thorough Southern gentleman fully convinced
of the justice of secession. After dinner, seated in the capacious porch, he entertained me
with a recital of the services he was rendering the cause.  He was too old to be in the ranks
himself--he must have been quite seventy then--but his means enabled him to be useful in other
ways.  In ordinary times the homestead where he was now living produced the bread and meat
to supply the slaves on his main plantation, in the low-lands of Mississippi.  Now he raised
food and forage on both places, and thought he would have that year a surplus sufficient to
feed three hundred families of poor men who had gone into the war and left their families dependent
upon the "patriotism" of those better off.  The crops around me looked fine, and I had at the
moment an idea that about the time they were ready to be gathered the "Yankee" troops would
be in the neighborhood and harvest them for the benefit of those engaged in the suppression
of the rebellion instead of its support.  I felt, however, the greatest respect for the candor
of my host and for his zeal in a cause he thoroughly believed in, though our views were as
wide apart as it is possible to conceive.

The 23d of June, 1862, on the road from La Grange to Memphis was very warm, even for that latitude
and season.  With my staff and small escort I started at an early hour, and before noon we
arrived within twenty miles of Memphis.  At this point I saw a very comfortable-looking white-haired
gentleman seated at the front of his house, a little distance from the road.  I let my staff
and escort ride ahead while I halted and, for an excuse, asked for a glass of water.  I was
invited at once to dismount and come in.  I found my host very genial and communicative, and
staid longer than I had intended, until the lady of the house announced dinner and asked me
to join them.  The host, however, was not pressing, so that I declined the invitation and,
mounting my horse, rode on.

About a mile west from where I had been stopping a road comes up from the southeast, joining
that from La Grange to Memphis.  A mile west of this junction I found my staff and escort halted
and enjoying the shade of forest trees on the lawn of a house located several hundred feet
back from the road, their horses hitched to the fence along the line of the road.  I, too,
stopped and we remained there until the cool of the afternoon, and then rode into Memphis.

The gentleman with whom I had stopped twenty miles from Memphis was a Mr. De Loche, a man loyal
to the Union.  He had not pressed me to tarry longer with him because in the early part of
my visit a neighbor, a Dr. Smith, had called and, on being presented to me, backed off the
porch as if something had hit him.  Mr. De Loche knew that the rebel General Jackson was in
that neighborhood with a detachment of cavalry.  His neighbor was as earnest in the southern
cause as was Mr. De Loche in that of the Union.  The exact location of Jackson was entirely
unknown to Mr. De Loche; but he was sure that his neighbor would know it and would give information
of my presence, and this made my stay unpleasant to him after the call of Dr. Smith.

I have stated that a detachment of troops was engaged in guarding workmen who were repairing
the railroad east of Memphis.  On the day I entered Memphis, Jackson captured a small herd
of beef cattle which had been sent east for the troops so engaged.  The drovers were not enlisted
men and he released them.  A day or two after one of these drovers came to my headquarters
and, relating the circumstances of his capture, said Jackson was very much disappointed that
he had not captured me; that he was six or seven miles south of the Memphis and Charleston
railroad when he learned that I was stopping at the house of Mr. De Loche, and had ridden with
his command to the junction of the road he was on with that from La Grange and Memphis, where
he learned that I had passed three-quarters of an hour before.  He thought it would be useless
to pursue with jaded horses a well-mounted party with so much of a start. Had he gone three-quarters
of a mile farther he would have found me with my party quietly resting under the shade of trees
and without even arms in our hands with which to defend ourselves.

General Jackson of course did not communicate his disappointment at not capturing me to a prisoner,
a young drover; but from the talk among the soldiers the facts related were learned.  A day
or two later Mr. De Loche called on me in Memphis to apologize for his apparent incivility
in not insisting on my staying for dinner.  He said that his wife accused him of marked discourtesy,
but that, after the call of his neighbor, he had felt restless until I got away.  I never met
General Jackson before the war, nor during it, but have met him since at his very comfortable
summer home at Manitou Springs, Colorado.  I reminded him of the above incident, and this drew
from him the response that he was thankful now he had not captured me.  I certainly was very
thankful too.

My occupation of Memphis as district headquarters did not last long. The period, however, was
marked by a few incidents which were novel to me.  Up to that time I had not occupied any place
in the South where the citizens were at home in any great numbers.  Dover was within the fortifications
at Fort Donelson, and, as far as I remember, every citizen was gone.  There were no people
living at Pittsburg landing, and but very few at Corinth.  Memphis, however, was a populous
city, and there were many of the citizens remaining there who were not only thoroughly impressed
with the justice of their cause, but who thought that even the "Yankee soldiery" must entertain
the same views if they could only be induced to make an honest confession.  It took hours of
my time every day to listen to complaints and requests.  The latter were generally reasonable,
and if so they were granted; but the complaints were not always, or even often, well founded.
Two instances will mark the general character.  First:  the officer who commanded at Memphis
immediately after the city fell into the hands of the National troops had ordered one of the
churches of the city to be opened to the soldiers.  Army chaplains were authorized to occupy
the pulpit.  Second: at the beginning of the war the Confederate Congress had passed a law
confiscating all property of "alien enemies" at the South, including the debts of Southerners
to Northern men.  In consequence of this law, when Memphis was occupied the provost-marshal
had forcibly collected all the evidences he could obtain of such debts.

Almost the first complaints made to me were these two outrages.  The gentleman who made the
complaints informed me first of his own high standing as a lawyer, a citizen and a Christian.
He was a deacon in the church which had been defiled by the occupation of Union troops, and
by a Union chaplain filling the pulpit.  He did not use the word "defile," but he expressed
the idea very clearly.  He asked that the church be restored to the former congregation.  I
told him that no order had been issued prohibiting the congregation attending the church. 
He said of course the congregation could not hear a Northern clergyman who differed so radically
with them on questions of government.  I told him the troops would continue to occupy that
church for the present, and that they would not be called upon to hear disloyal sentiments
proclaimed from the pulpit.  This closed the argument on the first point.

Then came the second.  The complainant said that he wanted the papers restored to him which
had been surrendered to the provost-marshal under protest; he was a lawyer, and before the
establishment of the "Confederate States Government" had been the attorney for a number of
large business houses at the North; that "his government" had confiscated all debts due "alien
enemies," and appointed commissioners, or officers, to collect such debts and pay them over
to the "government":  but in his case, owing to his high standing, he had been permitted to
hold these claims for collection, the responsible officials knowing that he would account to
the "government" for every dollar received. He said that his "government," when it came in
possession of all its territory, would hold him personally responsible for the claims he had
surrendered to the provost-marshal.  His impudence was so sublime that I was rather amused
than indignant.  I told him, however, that if he would remain in Memphis I did not believe
the Confederate government would ever molest him.  He left, no doubt, as much amazed at my
assurance as I was at the brazenness of his request.

On the 11th of July General Halleck received telegraphic orders appointing him to the command
of all the armies, with headquarters in Washington.  His instructions pressed him to proceed
to his new field of duty with as little delay as was consistent with the safety and interests
of his previous command.  I was next in rank, and he telegraphed me the same day to report
at department headquarters at Corinth.  I was not informed by the dispatch that my chief had
been ordered to a different field and did not know whether to move my headquarters or not.
I telegraphed asking if I was to take my staff with me, and received word in reply:  "This
place will be your headquarters.  You can judge for yourself."  I left Memphis for my new field
without delay, and reached Corinth on the 15th of the month. General Halleck remained until
the 17th of July; but he was very uncommunicative, and gave me no information as to what I
had been called to Corinth for.

When General Halleck left to assume the duties of general-in-chief I remained in command of
the district of West Tennessee.  Practically I became a department commander, because no one
was assigned to that position over me and I made my reports direct to the general-in-chief;
but I was not assigned to the position of department commander until the 25th of October. 
General Halleck while commanding the Department of the Mississippi had had control as far east
as a line drawn from Chattanooga north.  My district only embraced West Tennessee and Kentucky
west of the Cumberland River.  Buell, with the Army of the Ohio, had, as previously stated,
been ordered east towards Chattanooga, with instructions to repair the Memphis and Charleston
railroad as he advanced.  Troops had been sent north by Halleck along the line of the Mobile
and Ohio railroad to put it in repair as far as Columbus.  Other troops were stationed on the
railroad from Jackson, Tennessee, to Grand Junction, and still others on the road west to Memphis.

The remainder of the magnificent army of 120,000 men which entered Corinth on the 30th of May
had now become so scattered that I was put entirely on the defensive in a territory whose population
was hostile to the Union.  One of the first things I had to do was to construct fortifications
at Corinth better suited to the garrison that could be spared to man them.  The structures
that had been built during the months of May and June were left as monuments to the skill of
the engineer, and others were constructed in a few days, plainer in design but suited to the
command available to defend them.

I disposed the troops belonging to the district in conformity with the situation as rapidly
as possible.  The forces at Donelson, Clarksville and Nashville, with those at Corinth and
along the railroad eastward, I regarded as sufficient for protection against any attack from
the west. The Mobile and Ohio railroad was guarded from Rienzi, south of Corinth, to Columbus;
and the Mississippi Central railroad from Jackson, Tennessee, to Bolivar.  Grand Junction and
La Grange on the Memphis railroad were abandoned.

South of the Army of the Tennessee, and confronting it, was Van Dorn, with a sufficient force
to organize a movable army of thirty-five to forty thousand men, after being reinforced by
Price from Missouri.  This movable force could be thrown against either Corinth, Bolivar or
Memphis; and the best that could be done in such event would be to weaken the points not threatened
in order to reinforce the one that was. Nothing could be gained on the National side by attacking
elsewhere, because the territory already occupied was as much as the force present could guard.
The enemy also had cavalry operating in our rear, making it necessary to guard every point
of the railroad back to Columbus, on the security of which we were dependent for all our supplies.
Headquarters were connected by telegraph with all points of the command except Memphis and
the Mississippi below Columbus.  With these points communication was had by the railroad to
Columbus, then down the river by boat.  To reinforce Memphis would take three or four days,
and to get an order there for troops to move elsewhere would have taken at least two days.
Memphis therefore was practically isolated from the balance of the command.  But it was in
Sherman's hands.  Then too the troops were well intrenched and the gunboats made a valuable
auxiliary.

During the two months after the departure of General Halleck there was much fighting between
small bodies of the contending armies, but these encounters were dwarfed by the magnitude of
the main battles so as to be now almost forgotten except by those engaged in them.  Some of
them, however, estimated by the losses on both sides in killed and wounded, were equal in hard
fighting to most of the battles of the Mexican war which attracted so much of the attention
of the public when they occurred.  About the 23d of July Colonel Ross, commanding at Bolivar,
was threatened by a large force of the enemy so that he had to be reinforced from Jackson and
Corinth.  On the 27th there was skirmishing on the Hatchie River, eight miles from Bolivar.
On the 30th I learned from Colonel P. H. Sheridan, who had been far to the south, that Bragg
in person was at Rome, Georgia, with his troops moving by rail (by way of Mobile) to Chattanooga
and his wagon train marching overland to join him at Rome.  Price was at this time at Holly
Springs, Mississippi, with a large force, and occupied Grand Junction as an outpost.  I proposed
to the general-in-chief to be permitted to drive him away, but was informed that, while I had
to judge for myself, the best use to make of my troops WAS NOT TO SCATTER THEM, but hold them
ready to reinforce Buell.

The movement of Bragg himself with his wagon trains to Chattanooga across country, while his
troops were transported over a long round-about road to the same destination, without need
of guards except when in my immediate front, demonstrates the advantage which troops enjoy
while acting in a country where the people are friendly.  Buell was marching through a hostile
region and had to have his communications thoroughly guarded back to a base of supplies.  More
men were required the farther the National troops penetrated into the enemy's country.  I,
with an army sufficiently powerful to have destroyed Bragg, was purely on the defensive and
accomplishing no more than to hold a force far inferior to my own.

On the 2d of August I was ordered from Washington to live upon the country, on the resources
of citizens hostile to the government, so far as practicable.  I was also directed to "handle
rebels within our lines without gloves," to imprison them, or to expel them from their homes
and from our lines.  I do not recollect having arrested and confined a citizen (not a soldier)
during the entire rebellion.  I am aware that a great many were sent to northern prisons, particularly
to Joliet, Illinois, by some of my subordinates with the statement that it was my order.  I
had all such released the moment I learned of their arrest; and finally sent a staff officer
north to release every prisoner who was said to be confined by my order.  There were many citizens
at home who deserved punishment because they were soldiers when an opportunity was afforded
to inflict an injury to the National cause.  This class was not of the kind that were apt to
get arrested, and I deemed it better that a few guilty men should escape than that a great
many innocent ones should suffer.

On the 14th of August I was ordered to send two more divisions to Buell. They were sent the
same day by way of Decatur.  On the 22d Colonel Rodney Mason surrendered Clarksville with six
companies of his regiment.

Colonel Mason was one of the officers who had led their regiments off the field at almost the
first fire of the rebels at Shiloh.  He was by nature and education a gentleman, and was terribly
mortified at his action when the battle was over.  He came to me with tears in his eyes and
begged to be allowed to have another trial.  I felt great sympathy for him and sent him, with
his regiment, to garrison Clarksville and Donelson.  He selected Clarksville for his headquarters,
no doubt because he regarded it as the post of danger, it being nearer the enemy. But when
he was summoned to surrender by a band of guerillas, his constitutional weakness overcame him.
He inquired the number of men the enemy had, and receiving a response indicating a force greater
than his own he said if he could be satisfied of that fact he would surrender. Arrangements
were made for him to count the guerillas, and having satisfied himself that the enemy had the
greater force he surrendered and informed his subordinate at Donelson of the fact, advising
him to do the same.  The guerillas paroled their prisoners and moved upon Donelson, but the
officer in command at that point marched out to meet them and drove them away.

Among other embarrassments, at the time of which I now write, was the fact that the government
wanted to get out all the cotton possible from the South and directed me to give every facility
toward that end.  Pay in gold was authorized, and stations on the Mississippi River and on
the railroad in our possession had to be designated where cotton would be received.  This opened
to the enemy not only the means of converting cotton into money, which had a value all over
the world and which they so much needed, but it afforded them means of obtaining accurate and
intelligent information in regard to our position and strength.  It was also demoralizing to
the troops.  Citizens obtaining permits from the treasury department had to be protected within
our lines and given facilities to get out cotton by which they realized enormous profits. Men
who had enlisted to fight the battles of their country did not like to be engaged in protecting
a traffic which went to the support of an enemy they had to fight, and the profits of which
went to men who shared none of their dangers.

On the 30th of August Colonel M. D. Leggett, near Bolivar, with the 20th and 29th Ohio volunteer
infantry, was attacked by a force supposed to be about 4,000 strong.  The enemy was driven
away with a loss of more than one hundred men.  On the 1st of September the bridge guard at
Medon was attacked by guerillas. The guard held the position until reinforced, when the enemy
were routed leaving about fifty of their number on the field dead or wounded, our loss being
only two killed and fifteen wounded.  On the same day Colonel Dennis, with a force of less
than 500 infantry and two pieces of artillery, met the cavalry of the enemy in strong force,
a few miles west of Medon, and drove them away with great loss.  Our troops buried 179 of the
enemy's dead, left upon the field. Afterwards it was found that all the houses in the vicinity
of the battlefield were turned into hospitals for the wounded.  Our loss, as reported at the
time, was forty-five killed and wounded.  On the 2d of September I was ordered to send more
reinforcements to Buell.  Jackson and Bolivar were yet threatened, but I sent the reinforcements.
On the 4th I received direct orders to send Granger's division also to Louisville, Kentucky.

General Buell had left Corinth about the 10th of June to march upon Chattanooga; Bragg, who
had superseded Beauregard in command, sent one division from Tupelo on the 27th of June for
the same place.  This gave Buell about seventeen days' start. If he had not been required to
repair the railroad as he advanced, the march could have been made in eighteen days at the
outside, and Chattanooga must have been reached by the National forces before the rebels could
have possibly got there.  The road between Nashville and Chattanooga could easily have been
put in repair by other troops, so that communication with the North would have been opened
in a short time after the occupation of the place by the National troops.  If Buell had been
permitted to move in the first instance, with the whole of the Army of the Ohio and that portion
of the Army of the Mississippi afterwards sent to him, he could have thrown four divisions
from his own command along the line of road to repair and guard it.

Granger's division was promptly sent on the 4th of September.  I was at the station at Corinth
when the troops reached that point, and found General P. H. Sheridan with them.  I expressed
surprise at seeing him and said that I had not expected him to go.  He showed decided disappointment
at the prospect of being detained.  I felt a little nettled at his desire to get away and did
not detain him.

Sheridan was a first lieutenant in the regiment in which I had served eleven years, the 4th
infantry, and stationed on the Pacific coast when the war broke out.  He was promoted to a
captaincy in May, 1861, and before the close of the year managed in some way, I do not know
how, to get East.  He went to Missouri.  Halleck had known him as a very successful young officer
in managing campaigns against the Indians on the Pacific coast, and appointed him acting-quartermaster
in south-west Missouri.  There was no difficulty in getting supplies forward while Sheridan
served in that capacity; but he got into difficulty with his immediate superiors because of
his stringent rules for preventing the use of public transportation for private purposes. 
He asked to be relieved from further duty in the capacity in which he was engaged and his request
was granted. When General Halleck took the field in April, 1862, Sheridan was assigned to duty
on his staff.  During the advance on Corinth a vacancy occurred in the colonelcy of the 2d
Michigan cavalry. Governor Blair, of Michigan, telegraphed General Halleck asking him to suggest
the name of a professional soldier for the vacancy, saying he would appoint a good man without
reference to his State. On Tuesday, February 22, 1831, a violent detonation was suddenly heard in the
coal mine of Bois-Monzil, belonging to M. Robinot. The waters from the old works rushed impetuously
along the new galleries. "The waters, the waters!" such was the cry that resounded from the affrighted
workmen throughout the mine. Only ten miners out of twenty-six were able to reach the entrance.
One of them brought off in his arms, a boy eleven years old, whom he thus saved from sudden death;
another impelled by the air and the water, to a considerable distance, could scarcely credit his
escape from such imminent danger; a third rushed forward with his
sack full of coals on his shoulders, which, in his fright, he had
never thought of throwing down.

The disastrous news, that sixteen workmen had perished in the mine
of M. Robinot, was soon circulated in the town of St. Etienne.

It was regarded as one of those fatal and deplorable events unfortunately, too common in that
neighborhood, and on the ensuing Thursday it was no longer talked of. Politics, and the state
of parties in Paris, exclusively occupied the public attention.

The engineers of the mines, however, and some of their pupils, who, on the first alarm, had hastened
to the spot, still remained there, continuing their indefatigable endeavors to discover the
miners who were missing. Nothing that mechanical science, manual labor, and perseverance, prompted
by humanity, could perform, was left undone.

Thirty hours had already elapsed since the fatal accident, when two workmen announced the discovery
of a jacket and some provisions belonging to the miners. The engineers immediately essayed to penetrate
into the galleries where these objects had been found, which they accomplished with much difficulty,
by crawling on their hands and feet. In vain they repeatedly called aloud; no voice, save the echo
of their own, answered from those narrow and gloomy vaults. It then occurred to them to strike
with their pickaxes against the roof of the mine. Still the same
uncheering silence!

Listen! yes! the sounds are answered by similar blows! Every heart beats, every pulse quickens,
every breath is contracted; yet, perhaps, it is but an illusion of their wishes--or, perhaps,
some deceitful echo. They again strike the vaulted roof. There is no longer any doubt. The same
number of strokes is returned. No words can paint the varied feelings that pervaded every heart.
It was (to use the expression of a person present) a veritable delirium of joy, of fear, and of
hope.

Without losing an instant, the engineers ordered a hole to be bored in the direction of the galleries,
where the miners were presumed to be; at the same time, they directed, on another point, the formation
of an inclined well, for the purpose of communicating with them.

Two of the engineer's pupils were now dispatched to the mayor of St. Etienne, to procure a couple
of fire pumps, which they conducted back to the mine, accompanied by two firemen. In the ardor
of youthful humanity, these young men imagined that the deliverance of the miners was but the
affair of a few hours; and, wishing to prepare an "agreeable surprise" for the friends of
the supposed victims, they gave strict injunctions at the mayoralty to keep the object of their
expedition a profound secret.

Notwithstanding the untiring efforts made to place these pumps in the mine, it was found impossible.
Either they were upon a plane too much inclined to admit of their playing with facility, or
the water was too muddy to be received up the pipes; they were therefore
abandoned.

In the meantime, the attempts made to reach the miners by sounding or by the inclined well,
seemed to present insurmountable difficulties. The distance to them was unknown; the sound of their
blows on the roof, far from offering a certain criterion, or, at least, a probable one, seemed
each time to excite fresh doubts; in short, the rock which it was
necessary to pierce, was equally hard and thick, and the gunpowder
unceasingly used to perforate it, made but a hopeless progress.

The consequent anxiety that reigned in the mine may be easily conceived. Each of the party,
in his turn, offered his suggestions, sometimes of hope, sometimes of apprehension; and the whole
felt oppressed by that vague suspense, which is, perhaps, more painful to support than the direst
certainty. The strokes of the unfortunate miners continued to reply to theirs, which added to
their agitation, from the fear of not being able to afford them effectual help. They almost
thought that in such a painful moment their situation was more distressing than those they
sought to save, as the latter were, at any rate, sustained by hope.

While most of the party were thus perplexed by a crowd of disquieting ideas, produced by the
distressing nature of the event itself, and by their protracted stay in a mine where the few solitary
lamps scarcely rendered "darkness visible," the workmen continued their labors with redoubled ardor;
some of them were hewing to pieces blocks of the rock, which fell slowly and with much difficulty;
others were actively employed in boring the hole before named, while some of the engineers'
apprentices sought to discover new galleries, either by creeping on "all fours," or by penetrating
through perilous and narrow crevices and clefts of the rock.

In the midst of their corporeal and mental labors, their attention was suddenly excited from another
painful source. The wives of the hapless miners had heard that all hope was not extinct. They
hastened to the spot; with heart-rending cries and through tears
alternately of despair and hope, they exclaimed, "Are they all there?"

"Where is the father of my children? Is he among them, or has he been swallowed up by the waters?"

At
the bottom of the mine, close to the water-reservoir, a consultation was held on the plan to
be pursued. Engineers, pupils, workmen, all agreed that the only prospect of success consisted in
exhausting the water, which was already sensibly diminished, by the working of the steam-pump;
the other pumps produced little or no effect, notwithstanding the vigorous efforts employed to render
them serviceable. It was then proposed remedying the failure of these pumps by une chaine a
bras, viz, by forming a line, and passing buckets from one to the other; this method was adopted,
and several of the pupils proceeded with all speed to St. Etienne. It was midnight. The generale
was beat in two quarters of the town only. The Hotel de Ville was assigned as the place of rendezvous.
On the first alarm, a great number of persons hurried to the town-hall,
imagining a fire had broken out, but, on ascertaining the real cause,
several of them returned home, apparently unmoved.

Yet these same persons, whose supposed apathy had excited both surprise and indignation, quickly
reappeared on the scene, dressed in the uniform of the National Guard. So powerful is the magic
influence of organized masses, marching under the orders of a chief, and stimulated by l'esprit
de corps.

It was truly admirable to see with what address and rapidity the three or four hundred men, who
had hastened to Bois-Monzil, passed and repassed the buckets, by forming a chain to the bottom
of the mine.

But their generous efforts became too fatiguing to last long. Imagine a subterranean vault,
badly lighted, where they were obliged to maintain themselves in a rapid descent in a stooping
posture, to avoid striking their heads against the roof of the vault, and, most of the time,
up to the middle in the water, which was dripping from every side; some idea may then be formed of
their painful situation. They were relieved from this laborious duty by the Garde Nationale
of St. Etienne, whose zeal and enthusiasm exceeded all praise. But a more precious reinforcement
was at hand; the workmen from the adjacent mines now arrived in great numbers. From their
skill and experience every thing might be expected; if they failed there was no further hope.

The chaine a bras was again renewed by companies of the National Guard, relieved every two hours,
who, at respective distances, held the lights, and under whose orders they acted. It was a cheering
spectacle to behold citizens of all ranks engaged in one of the noblest offices of humanity,
under the direction of poor colliers.

The immense advantages of the organization of the National Guard, were never more strikingly
exemplified than on this occasion. Without them, there would have been no means or possibility
of uniting together an entire population; of leading the people from a distance of more than
three miles, night and day, so as to insure a regular and continued service; all would have
been trouble and confusion. With them, on the contrary, every thing was ready, and in motion,
at the voice of a single chief; and the whole was conducted with such precision and regularity
as had never on similar occasions, been witnessed before.

The road from St. Etienne to Bois-Monzil, exhibited a scene of the most animated kind. In the midst
of the motley and moving multitude, the National Guards were seen hurrying to and fro; chasseurs,
grenadiers, cavalry and artillery-men, all clothed in their rich new costume, as on a field day.
Some of the crowd were singing a la Parisienne, others were lamenting,
praying, hoping, despairing, and, by "fits and starts," abandoning
themselves to those opposite extravagances of sentiment so peculiarly
characteristic of a French population.

When night drew her sable curtains around, the picturesque of the scene was still more heightened.
Fresh bands of miners, conducted by their respective chiefs, coming in from every side; their
sooty visages lighted up by glaring torches; National Guards arriving from different parts of the
country, to join their comrades of St. Etienne; farmers and peasants, on horseback and afoot,
hastening to offer their humane aid; sentinels posted--muskets piled--watch-fires blazing,
and, in short, the tout ensemble rendered the approaches of Bois-Monzil like a bivouac on
the eve of an expected battle; happily, however, the object of these brave men was to preserve
life and not to destroy it.

On Saturday, the chaine a bras was discontinued, as the engineers had brought the pumps effectually
to work. Suddenly a cry of joy was echoed from mouth to mouth, "They are saved! they are saved!
six of them are freed from their subterraneous prison!" shouted a person at the entrance of
the mine. The rumor was instantly repeated along the crowd, and a horseman set off at full
speed for St. Etienne, with the gratifying news; another followed, and confirmed the report of
his predecessor. The whole town was in motion, and all classes seemed to partake of the general
joy, with a feeling as if each had been individually interested. In the exuberance of their
delight they were already deliberating on the subject of a fete, to celebrate the happy event,
when a third horsemen arrived. The multitude thronged round him, expecting a more ample confirmation
of the welcome tidings. But their joy was soon turned to sorrow, when they were informed that
nothing had yet been discovered, save the dead bodies of two unfortunate men, who, together
had left eleven children to lament their untimely fate.

On Sunday, the workmen continued their labor with equal zeal and uncertainty as before. A sort
of inquietude and hopelessness, however, occasionally pervaded their
minds, which may be easily accounted for, from the hitherto fruitless
result of their fatiguing researches.

Discussions now took place on what was to be done; differences of opinion arose on the various
plans proposed, and, in the meantime, the sounds of the hapless victims from the recesses of the
rocky cavern continued to be distinctly audible. Every moment the embarrassment and difficulties
of the workmen increased. The flinty rock seemed to grow more impenetrable; their tools either broke,
or became so fixed in the stone, that it was frequently impossible to regain them. The water filtered
from all parts, through the narrow gallery they were perforating, and they even began to apprehend
another irruption.

Such was the state of things on Monday morning, when, at four o'clock, an astounding noise was
heard, which re-echoed throughout the Whole extent of the mine.

A general panic seized on every one; it was thought that the waters had forced a new issue.
A rapid and confused flight took place; but, luckily, their fears were soon allayed on perceiving
that it was only an immense mass of rock, detached from the mine, which had fallen into a draining-well.
This false alarm, however, operated in a discouraging manner, on the minds of the workmen; and
it required some management to bring them back to their respective
stations, and to revive that ardor and constancy, which they had hitherto
so nobly displayed.

They had scarcely renewed their endeavors to bore through the rock, when suddenly one of them
felt the instrument drawn from his hands, by the poor imprisoned miners. It was, indeed, to
them, the instrument of deliverance from their cruel situation. Singular to relate, their
first request was neither for food nor drink, but for light, as if they were more eager to
make use of their eyes, than to satisfy the pressing wants of appetite! It was now ascertained
that eight of the sufferers still survived; and this time an authentic account of the happy
discovery was dispatched to St. Etienne, where it excited the most
enthusiastic demonstrations of sympathy and gladness.

But there is no pleasure unmixed with alloy; no general happiness unaccompanied by particular exceptions.
Among the workmen, was the father of one of the men who had disappeared in the mine. His paternal
feelings seemed to have endowed him with superhuman strength. Night and day he never quitted his
work but for a few minutes to return to it with redoubled ardor; one sole, absorbing thought occupied
his whole soul; the idea that his son, his only son, was with those who were heard from within.
In vain he was solicited to retire; in vain they strove to force him from labors too fatiguing
for his age. "My son is among them," said he, "I hear him; nothing shall prevent my hastening
his release;" and, from time to time, he called on his son, in accents
that tore the hearts of the bystanders.

It was from his hand that the instrument had been drawn. His first question was "my child?" Like
Apelles, let me throw a vail over a father's grief. His Antoine was no more, he had been drowned.

For
four days several medical men were constantly on the spot, to contribute all the succors that
humanity, skill, and science could afford. It was they who introduced through the hole, broth
and soup, by means of long, tin tubes, which had been carefully prepared beforehand. The poor
captives distributed it with the most scrupulous attention, first to the oldest and weakest of
their companions; for, notwithstanding their dreadful situation, the spirit of concord and
charity had never ceased for a single moment to preside among them. The man who was appointed
by the others to communicate with, and answer the questions of their deliverers, displayed,
in all his replies, a gayety quite in keeping with the French character. On being asked what
day he thought it was, and on being informed that it was Monday, instead of Sunday, as he had supposed,
"Ah!" said he, "I ought to have known that, as we yesterday indulged ourselves freely in drinking--water."
Strange that a man should have the heart to joke, who had been thus "cabin'd, cribb'd, confin'd,"
during five days, destitute of food, deprived of air, agitated by suspense, and in jeopardy of
perishing by the most horrible of all deaths!

There still remained full sixteen feet of solid rock between the two anxious parties; but the
workmen's labors were now, if possible, redoubled by the certainty of complete success. At
intervals, light nourishment in regulated quantities, continued to be passed to the miners;
this, however they soon rejected, expressing but one desire, that their friends would make haste.
Their strength began to fail them; their respiration became more and more difficult; their utterance
grew feebler and fainter; and toward six o'clock in the evening,
the last words that could be distinguished, were--"Brothers make haste!"

The

general anxiety was now wound up to the highest pitch; it was, perhaps, the most trying crisis
yet experienced since the commencement of their benevolent labors; at length the moment of deliverance
was, all at once, announced, and at ten o'clock it was accomplished. One by one, they appeared,
like specters, gliding along the gallery which had just been completed; their weak and agitated
forms supported by the engineers, on whom they cast their feeble eyes, filled with astonishment,
yet beaming with gratitude. Accompanied by the doctors, they all with one single exception, ascended
to the entrance of the mine, without aid; such was their eagerness to inhale the pure air of liberty.
From the mouth of the mine to the temporary residence allotted them, the whole way was illuminated.
The engineers, pupils, and the workmen, with the National Guard under
arms, were drawn up in two lines to form a passage; and thus, in the
midst of a religious silence, did these poor fellows traverse an attentive
and sympathizing crowd, who, as they passed along, inclined their
heads, as a sort of respect and honor to their sufferings.

Such are the affecting particulars of an event, during the whole of which, every kind of business
was suspended at St. Etienne; an event which exhibited the entire population of a large town,
forming, as it were, but one heart, entertaining but one thought, imbued with one feeling,
for the god-like purpose of saving the lives of eight poor, obscure individuals. Christians, men
of all countries, whenever and wherever suffering humanity claims your aid--"Go ye and do
likewise!"

SHIP TOWED TO LAND BY BULLOCKS.

A few years since the ship Ariadne, freighted principally with live cattle, started on a voyage
from Quebec, bound to Halifax. A gale came on, which continued to increase in fury, until it became
a perfect hurricane. The ship was dismasted, and when the mainmast fell, three poor fellows were
crushed to death. A little before sunset, on the second day of the gale, the appalling cry
of "Breakers ahead!" was raised. All eyes were instinctively turned in one direction; and,
about a mile off, the sea was as a boiling caldron. Toward the breakers the hull was now drifting,
unmanageable, every moment threatened with destruction.

For about half an hour, there was intense anxiety, and an agony of suspense on board. At length
she entered the breakers. A large wave raised her, and she struck heavily on the rocks as the
waves receded; it was evident, from constant striking upon the bottom, that the vessel must
soon go to pieces; and the sea made a clean break over her, about half of the length from
the stern. The officers and crew were huddled together upon the deck forward, intent upon devising
means of escape; at last the captain thought of a plan, which, though
novel, proved successful.

He fastened ropes to the horns of several bullocks, and drove them into the sea, their strong,
instinctive love of life impelled them forward, and several of them reached the shore. The ropes
were fastened by some men, who had assembled for the relief of those on the vessel, and after
much exertion and danger all on board were rescued from their perilous situation, and landed in safety.

DESTRUCTION
OF A SHIP BY A WHALE.

The following thrilling account of the destruction of the whale ship
Ann Alexander, Captain John S. Deblois, of New Bedford, by a large
sperm whale, is from the lips of the captain himself.

A similar circumstance has never been known to occur but once in the whole history of whale-fishing,
and that was the destruction of the ship Essex, some twenty or twenty-five years ago, and which
many of our readers fully remember. We proceed to the narrative as furnished by Captain Deblois,
and which is fully authenticated by nine of the crew, in a protest under the seal of the United States
Consul, Alexander Ruden, Jr., at Paita.

The ship Ann Alexander, Captain J.S. Deblois, sailed from New Bedford, Mass., June 1st, 1850,
for a cruise in the South Pacific for sperm whale.

Having taken about five hundred barrels of oil in the Atlantic, the ship proceeded on her voyage
to the Pacific. Nothing of unusual interest occurred until when passing Cape Horn, one of the men,
named Jackson Walker, of Newport, N.H., was lost overboard in a storm. Reaching the Pacific,
she came up the coast and stopped at Valdivia, on the coast of Chili, for fresh provisions, and
the 31st of May last, she called at Paita for the purpose of shipping
a man.

The vessel proceeded on her return voyage to the South Pacific.

On the 20th of August last she reached what is well known to all whalers, as the "Off-shore ground,"
in latitude five degrees fifty minutes south, longitude one hundred and twenty degrees west. In
the morning of that day, at about nine o'clock, whales were discovered in the neighborhood,
and about noon, the same day, they succeeded in making fast to one. Two boats had gone after
the whales--the larboard and the starboard, the former commanded by the first mate, the latter
by Captain Deblois.

The whale which they had struck, was harpooned by the larboard boat. After running some time,
the whale turned upon the boat, and rushing at it with tremendous violence lifted open its enormous
jaws, and taking the boat in, actually crushed it into fragments as small as a common chair!
Captain Deblois immediately struck for the scene of the disaster with the starboard boat,
and succeeded, against all expectation, in rescuing the whole of the crew of the boat--nine
in number!

There were now eighteen men in the starboard boat, consisting of the captain, the first mate,
and the crews of both boats.

The frightful disaster had been witnessed from the ship, and the waste boat was called into
readiness, and sent to their relief. The distance from the ship was about six miles. As soon
as the waste boat arrived, the crews were divided, and it was determined to pursue the same whale,
and make another attack upon him. Accordingly they separated, and proceeded at some distance from
each other, as is usual on such occasions, after the whale.

In a short time, they came up to him, and prepared to give him battle. The waste boat, commanded
by the first mate, was in advance. As soon as the whale perceived the demonstration being made
upon him, he turned his course, suddenly, and making a tremendous dash at this boat, seized
it with his wide-spread jaws, and crushed it to atoms, allowing the
men barely time to escape his vengeance, by throwing themselves into
the ocean.

Captain Deblois, again seeing the perilous condition of
his men, at the risk of meeting the same fate, directed his boat to
hasten to their rescue, and in a short time succeeded in saving them
all from a death little less horrible than that from which they had
twice as narrowly escaped. He then ordered the boat to put for the
ship as speedily as possible; and no sooner had the order been given,
than they discovered the monster of the deep making toward them with
his jaws widely extended. Fortunately, the monster came up and passed
them at a short distance. The boat then made her way to the ship and
they all got on board in safety.

After reaching the ship a boat was
dispatched for the oars of the demolished boats, and it was determined
to pursue the whale with the ship. As soon as the boat returned with
the oars, sail was set, and the ship proceeded after the whale. In
a short time she overtook him, and a lance was thrown into his head.
The ship passed on by him, and immediately after they discovered that
the whale was making for the ship.  My entire command was no more than
was necessary to hold these lines, and hardly that if kept on the defensive.  By moving against
the enemy and into his unsubdued, or not yet captured, territory, driving their army before
us, these lines would nearly hold themselves; thus affording a large force for field operations.
My moving force at that time was about 30,000 men, and I estimated the enemy confronting me,
under Pemberton, at about the same number.  General McPherson commanded my left wing and General
C. S. Hamilton the centre, while Sherman was at Memphis with the right wing.  Pemberton was
fortified at the Tallahatchie, but occupied Holly Springs and Grand Junction on the Mississippi
Central railroad.  On the 8th we occupied Grand Junction and La Grange, throwing a considerable
force seven or eight miles south, along the line of the railroad.  The road from Bolivar forward
was repaired and put in running order as the troops advanced.

Up to this time it had been regarded as an axiom in war that large bodies of troops must operate
from a base of supplies which they always covered and guarded in all forward movements.  There
was delay therefore in repairing the road back, and in gathering and forwarding supplies to
the front.

By my orders, and in accordance with previous instructions from Washington, all the forage
within reach was collected under the supervision of the chief quartermaster and the provisions
under the chief commissary, receipts being given when there was any one to take them; the supplies
in any event to be accounted for as government stores.  The stock was bountiful, but still
it gave me no idea of the possibility of supplying a moving column in an enemy's country from
the country itself.

It was at this point, probably, where the first idea of a "Freedman's Bureau" took its origin.
Orders of the government prohibited the expulsion of the negroes from the protection of the
army, when they came in voluntarily.  Humanity forbade allowing them to starve.  With such
an army of them, of all ages and both sexes, as had congregated about Grand Junction, amounting
to many thousands, it was impossible to advance. There was no special authority for feeding
them unless they were employed as teamsters, cooks and pioneers with the army; but only able-bodied
young men were suitable for such work.  This labor would support but a very limited percentage
of them.  The plantations were all deserted; the cotton and corn were ripe: men, women and
children above ten years of age could be employed in saving these crops.  To do this work with
contrabands, or to have it done, organization under a competent chief was necessary.  On inquiring
for such a man Chaplain Eaton, now and for many years the very able United States Commissioner
of Education, was suggested.  He proved as efficient in that field as he has since done in
his present one.  I gave him all the assistants and guards he called for.  We together fixed
the prices to be paid for the negro labor, whether rendered to the government or to individuals.
The cotton was to be picked from abandoned plantations, the laborers to receive the stipulated
price (my recollection is twelve and a half cents per pound for picking and ginning) from the
quartermaster, he shipping the cotton north to be sold for the benefit of the government. Citizens
remaining on their plantations were allowed the privilege of having their crops saved by freedmen
on the same terms.

At once the freedmen became self-sustaining.  The money was not paid to them directly, but
was expended judiciously and for their benefit.  They gave me no trouble afterwards.

Later the freedmen were engaged in cutting wood along the Mississippi River to supply the large
number of steamers on that stream.  A good price was paid for chopping wood used for the supply
of government steamers (steamers chartered and which the government had to supply with fuel).
Those supplying their own fuel paid a much higher price.  In this way a fund was created not
only sufficient to feed and clothe all, old and young, male and female, but to build them comfortable
cabins, hospitals for the sick, and to supply them with many comforts they had never known before.

At this stage of the campaign against Vicksburg I was very much disturbed by newspaper rumors
that General McClernand was to have a separate and independent command within mine, to operate
against Vicksburg by way of the Mississippi River.  Two commanders on the same field are always
one too many, and in this case I did not think the general selected had either the experience
or the qualifications to fit him for so important a position.  I feared for the safety of the
troops intrusted to him, especially as he was to raise new levies, raw troops, to execute so
important a trust.  But on the 12th I received a dispatch from General Halleck saying that
I had command of all the troops sent to my department and authorizing me to fight the enemy
where I pleased. The next day my cavalry was in Holly Springs, and the enemy fell back south
of the Tallahatchie.

Holly Springs I selected for my depot of supplies and munitions of war, all of which at that
time came by rail from Columbus, Kentucky, except the few stores collected about La Grange
and Grand Junction.  This was a long line (increasing in length as we moved south) to maintain
in an enemy's country.  On the 15th of November, while I was still at Holly Springs, I sent
word to Sherman to meet me at Columbus.  We were but forty-seven miles apart, yet the most
expeditious way for us to meet was for me to take the rail to Columbus and Sherman a steamer
for the same place.  At that meeting, besides talking over my general plans I gave him his
orders to join me with two divisions and to march them down the Mississippi Central railroad
if he could. Sherman, who was always prompt, was up by the 29th to Cottage Hill, ten miles
north of Oxford. He brought three divisions with him, leaving a garrison of only four regiments
of infantry, a couple of pieces of artillery and a small detachment of cavalry. Further reinforcements
he knew were on their way from the north to Memphis.  About this time General Halleck ordered
troops from Helena, Arkansas (territory west of the Mississippi was not under my command then)
to cut the road in Pemberton's rear.  The expedition was under Generals Hovey and C. C. Washburn
and was successful so far as reaching the railroad was concerned, but the damage done was very
slight and was soon repaired.

The Tallahatchie, which confronted me, was very high, the railroad bridge destroyed and Pemberton
strongly fortified on the south side.  A crossing would have been impossible in the presence
of an enemy.  I sent the cavalry higher up the stream and they secured a crossing.  This caused
the enemy to evacuate their position, which was possibly accelerated by the expedition of Hovey
and Washburn.  The enemy was followed as far south as Oxford by the main body of troops, and
some seventeen miles farther by McPherson's command.  Here the pursuit was halted to repair
the railroad from the Tallahatchie northward, in order to bring up supplies.  The piles on
which the railroad bridge rested had been left standing.  The work of constructing a roadway
for the troops was but a short matter, and, later, rails were laid for cars.

During the delay at Oxford in repairing railroads I learned that an expedition down the Mississippi
now was inevitable and, desiring to have a competent commander in charge, I ordered Sherman
on the 8th of December back to Memphis to take charge. The following were his orders:

Headquarters 13th Army Corps, Department of the Tennessee. OXFORD, MISSISSIPPI, December 8,1862.

U. S. GRANT, Major-General.

This idea had presented itself to my mind earlier, for on the 3d of December I asked Halleck
if it would not be well to hold the enemy south of the Yallabusha and move a force from Helena
and Memphis on Vicksburg. On the 5th again I suggested, from Oxford, to Halleck that if the
Helena troops were at my command I though it would be possible to take them and the Memphis
forces south of the mouth of the Yazoo River, and thus secure Vicksburg and the State of Mississippi.
Halleck on the same day, the 5th of December, directed me not to attempt to hold the country
south of the Tallahatchie, but to collect 25,000 troops at Memphis by the 20th for the Vicksburg
expedition.  I sent Sherman with two divisions at once, informed the general-in-chief of the
fact, and asked whether I should command the expedition down the river myself or send Sherman.
I was authorized to do as I though best for the accomplishment of the great object in view.
I sent Sherman and so informed General Halleck.

As stated, my action in sending Sherman back was expedited by a desire to get him in command
of the forces separated from my direct supervision.  I feared that delay might bring McClernand,
who was his senior and who had authority from the President and Secretary of War to exercise
that particular command,--and independently.  I doubted McClernand's fitness; and I had good
reason to believe that in forestalling him I was by no means giving offence to those whose
authority to command was above both him and me.

Neither my orders to General Sherman, nor the correspondence between us or between General
Halleck and myself, contemplated at the time my going further south than the Yallabusha. Pemberton's
force in my front was the main part of the garrison of Vicksburg, as the force with me was
the defence of the territory held by us in West Tennessee and Kentucky.  I hoped to hold Pemberton
in my front while Sherman should get in his rear and into Vicksburg.  The further north the
enemy could be held the better.

It was understood, however, between General Sherman and myself that our movements were to be
co-operative; if Pemberton could not be held away from Vicksburg I was to follow him; but at
that time it was not expected to abandon the railroad north of the Yallabusha.  With that point
as a secondary base of supplies, the possibility of moving down the Yazoo until communications
could be opened with the Mississippi was contemplated.

It was my intention, and so understood by Sherman and his command, that if the enemy should
fall back I would follow him even to the gates of Vicksburg.  I intended in such an event to
hold the road to Grenada on the Yallabusha and cut loose from there, expecting to establish
a new base of supplies on the Yazoo, or at Vicksburg itself, with Grenada to fall back upon
in case of failure.  It should be remembered that at the time I speak of it had not been demonstrated
that an army could operate in an enemy's territory depending upon the country for supplies.
A halt was called at Oxford with the advance seventeen miles south of there, to bring up the
road to the latter point and to bring supplies of food, forage and munitions to the front.

On the 18th of December I received orders from Washington to divide my command into four army
corps, with General McClernand to command one of them and to be assigned to that part of the
army which was to operate down the Mississippi.  This interfered with my plans, but probably
resulted in my ultimately taking the command in person.  McClernand was at that time in Springfield,
Illinois.  The order was obeyed without any delay.  Dispatches were sent to him the same day
in conformity.

On the 20th General Van Dorn appeared at Holly Springs, my secondary base of supplies, captured
the garrison of 1,500 men commanded by Colonel Murphy, of the 8th Wisconsin regiment, and destroyed
all our munitions of war, food and forage.  The capture was a disgraceful one to the officer
commanding but not to the troops under him.  At the same time Forrest got on our line of railroad
between Jackson, Tennessee, and Columbus, Kentucky, doing much damage to it.  This cut me off
from all communication with the north for more than a week, and it was more than two weeks
before rations or forage could be issued from stores obtained in the regular way.  This demonstrated
the impossibility of maintaining so long a line of road over which to draw supplies for an
army moving in an enemy's country.  I determined, therefore, to abandon my campaign into the
interior with Columbus as a base, and returned to La Grange and Grand Junction destroying the
road to my front and repairing the road to Memphis, making the Mississippi river the line over
which to draw supplies.  Pemberton was falling back at the same time.

The moment I received the news of Van Dorn's success I sent the cavalry at the front back to
drive him from the country.  He had start enough to move north destroying the railroad in many
places, and to attack several small garrisons intrenched as guards to the railroad.  All these
he found warned of his coming and prepared to receive him.  Van Dorn did not succeed in capturing
a single garrison except the one at Holly Springs, which was larger than all the others attacked
by him put together.  Murphy was also warned of Van Dorn's approach, but made no preparations
to meet him.  He did not even notify his command.

Colonel Murphy was the officer who, two months before, had evacuated Iuka on the approach of
the enemy.  General Rosecrans denounced him for the act and desired to have him tried and punished.
I sustained the colonel at the time because his command was a small one compared with that
of the enemy--not one-tenth as large--and I thought he had done well to get away without falling
into their hands.  His leaving large stores to fall into Price's possession I looked upon as
an oversight and excused it on the ground of inexperience in military matters. He should, however,
have destroyed them.  This last surrender demonstrated to my mind that Rosecrans' judgment
of Murphy's conduct at Iuka was correct. The surrender of Holly Springs was most reprehensible
and showed either the disloyalty of Colonel Murphy to the cause which he professed to serve,
or gross cowardice.

After the war was over I read from the diary of a lady who accompanied General Pemberton in
his retreat from the Tallahatchie, that the retreat was almost a panic.  The roads were bad
and it was difficult to move the artillery and trains.  Why there should have been a panic
I do not see. No expedition had yet started down the Mississippi River.  Had I known the demoralized
condition of the enemy, or the fact that central Mississippi abounded so in all army supplies,
I would have been in pursuit of Pemberton while his cavalry was destroying the roads in my rear.

After sending cavalry to drive Van Dorn away, my next order was to dispatch all the wagons
we had, under proper escort, to collect and bring in all supplies of forage and food from a
region of fifteen miles east and west of the road from our front back to Grand Junction, leaving
two months' supplies for the families of those whose stores were taken. I was amazed at the
quantity of supplies the country afforded.  It showed that we could have subsisted off the
country for two months instead of two weeks without going beyond the limits designated.  This
taught me a lesson which was taken advantage of later in the campaign when our army lived twenty
days with the issue of only five days' rations by the commissary.  Our loss of supplies was
great at Holly Springs, but it was more than compensated for by those taken from the country
and by the lesson taught.

The news of the capture of Holly Springs and the destruction of our supplies caused much rejoicing
among the people remaining in Oxford. They came with broad smiles on their faces, indicating
intense joy, to ask what I was going to do now without anything for my soldiers to eat. I told
them that I was not disturbed; that I had already sent troops and wagons to collect all the
food and forage they could find for fifteen miles on each side of the road.  Countenances soon
changed, and so did the inquiry.  The next was, "What are WE to do?"  My response was that
we had endeavored to feed ourselves from our own northern resources while visiting them; but
their friends in gray had been uncivil enough to destroy what we had brought along, and it
could not be expected that men, with arms in their hands, would starve in the midst of plenty.
I advised them to emigrate east, or west, fifteen miles and assist in eating up what we left.

CHAPTER XXXI.

This interruption in my communications north--I was really cut off from communication with
a great part of my own command during this time --resulted in Sherman's moving from Memphis
before McClernand could arrive, for my dispatch of the 18th did not reach McClernand.  Pemberton
got back to Vicksburg before Sherman got there.  The rebel positions were on a bluff on the
Yazoo River, some miles above its mouth.  The waters were high so that the bottoms were generally
overflowed, leaving only narrow causeways of dry land between points of debarkation and the
high bluffs.  These were fortified and defended at all points.  The rebel position was impregnable
against any force that could be brought against its front.  Sherman could not use one-fourth
of his force.  His efforts to capture the city, or the high ground north of it, were necessarily
unavailing.

Sherman's attack was very unfortunate, but I had no opportunity of communicating with him after
the destruction of the road and telegraph to my rear on the 20th.  He did not know but what
I was in the rear of the enemy and depending on him to open a new base of supplies for the
troops with me.  I had, before he started from Memphis, directed him to take with him a few
small steamers suitable for the navigation of the Yazoo, not knowing but that I might want
them to supply me after cutting loose from my base at Grenada.

On the 23d I removed my headquarters back to Holly Springs.  The troops were drawn back gradually,
but without haste or confusion, finding supplies abundant and no enemy following.  The road
was not damaged south of Holly Springs by Van Dorn, at least not to an extent to cause any
delay.  As I had resolved to move headquarters to Memphis, and to repair the road to that point,
I remained at Holly Springs until this work was completed.

On the 10th of January, the work on the road from Holly Springs to Grand Junction and thence
to Memphis being completed, I moved my headquarters to the latter place.  During the campaign
here described, the losses (mostly captures) were about equal, crediting the rebels with their
Holly Springs capture, which they could not hold.

When Sherman started on his expedition down the river he had 20,000 men, taken from Memphis,
and was reinforced by 12,000 more at Helena, Arkansas.  The troops on the west bank of the
river had previously been assigned to my command.  McClernand having received the orders for
his assignment reached the mouth of the Yazoo on the 2d of January, and immediately assumed
command of all the troops with Sherman, being a part of his own corps, the 13th, and all of
Sherman's, the 15th.  Sherman, and Admiral Porter with the fleet, had withdrawn from the Yazoo.
After consultation they decided that neither the army nor navy could render service to the
cause where they were, and learning that I had withdrawn from the interior of Mississippi,
they determined to return to the Arkansas River and to attack Arkansas Post, about fifty miles
up that stream and garrisoned by about five or six thousand men.  Sherman had learned of the
existence of this force through a man who had been captured by the enemy with a steamer loaded
with ammunition and other supplies intended for his command.  The man had made his escape.
McClernand approved this move reluctantly, as Sherman says.  No obstacle was encountered until
the gunboats and transports were within range of the fort.  After three days' bombardment by
the navy an assault was made by the troops and marines, resulting in the capture of the place,
and in taking 5,000 prisoners and 17 guns.  I was at first disposed to disapprove of this move
as an unnecessary side movement having no especial bearing upon the work before us; but when
the result was understood I regarded it as very important.  Five thousand Confederate troops
left in the rear might have caused us much trouble and loss of property while navigating the
Mississippi.

Immediately after the reduction of Arkansas Post and the capture of the garrison, McClernand
returned with his entire force to Napoleon, at the mouth of the Arkansas River.  From here
I received messages from both Sherman and Admiral Porter, urging me to come and take command
in person, and expressing their distrust of McClernand's ability and fitness for so important
and intricate an expedition.

On the 17th I visited McClernand and his command at Napoleon. It was here made evident to me
that both the army and navy were so distrustful of McClernand's fitness to command that, while
they would do all they could to insure success, this distrust was an element of weakness. 
It would have been criminal to send troops under these circumstances into such danger.  By
this time I had received authority to relieve McClernand, or to assign any person else to the
command of the river expedition, or to assume command in person.  I felt great embarrassment
about McClernand.  He was the senior major-general after myself within the department.  It
would not do, with his rank and ambition, to assign a junior over him.  Nothing was left, therefore,
but to assume the command myself.  I would have been glad to put Sherman in command, to give
him an opportunity to accomplish what he had failed in the December before; but there seemed
no other way out of the difficulty, for he was junior to McClernand.  Sherman's failure needs
no apology.

On the 20th I ordered General McClernand with the entire command, to Young's Point and Milliken's
Bend, while I returned to Memphis to make all the necessary preparation for leaving the territory
behind me secure.  General Hurlbut with the 16th corps was left in command.  The Memphis and
Charleston railroad was held, while the Mississippi Central was given up.  Columbus was the
only point between Cairo and Memphis, on the river, left with a garrison.  All the troops and
guns from the posts on the abandoned railroad and river were sent to the front.

On the 29th of January I arrived at Young's Point and assumed command the following day.  General
McClernand took exception in a most characteristic way--for him.  His correspondence with me
on the subject was more in the nature of a reprimand than a protest. It was highly insubordinate,
but I overlooked it, as I believed, for the good of the service.  General McClernand was a
politician of very considerable prominence in his State; he was a member of Congress when the
secession war broke out; he belonged to that political party which furnished all the opposition
there was to a vigorous prosecution of the war for saving the Union; there was no delay in
his declaring himself for the Union at all hazards, and there was no uncertain sound in his
declaration of where he stood in the contest before the country.  He also gave up his seat
in Congress to take the field in defence of the principles he had proclaimed.

The real work of the campaign and siege of Vicksburg now began.  The problem was to secure
a footing upon dry ground on the east side of the river from which the troops could operate
against Vicksburg.  The Mississippi River, from Cairo south, runs through a rich alluvial valley
of many miles in width, bound on the east by land running from eighty up to two or more hundred
feet above the river.  On the west side the highest land, except in a few places, is but little
above the highest water.  Through this valley the river meanders in the most tortuous way,
varying in direction to all points of the compass.  At places it runs to the very foot of the
bluffs. After leaving Memphis, there are no such highlands coming to the water's edge on the
east shore until Vicksburg is reached.

The intervening land is cut up by bayous filled from the river in high water--many of them
navigable for steamers.  All of them would be, except for overhanging trees, narrowness and
tortuous course, making it impossible to turn the bends with vessels of any considerable length.
Marching across this country in the face of an enemy was impossible; navigating it proved equally
impracticable.  The strategical way according to the rule, therefore, would have been to go
back to Memphis; establish that as a base of supplies; fortify it so that the storehouses could
be held by a small garrison, and move from there along the line of railroad, repairing as we
advanced, to the Yallabusha, or to Jackson, Mississippi.  At this time the North had become
very much discouraged. Many strong Union men believed that the war must prove a failure.  The
elections of 1862 had gone against the party which was for the prosecution of the war to save
the Union if it took the last man and the last dollar.  Voluntary enlistments had ceased throughout
the greater part of the North, and the draft had been resorted to to fill up our ranks.  It
was my judgment at the time that to make a backward movement as long as that from Vicksburg
to Memphis, would be interpreted, by many of those yet full of hope for the preservation of
the Union, as a defeat, and that the draft would be resisted, desertions ensue and the power
to capture and punish deserters lost. There was nothing left to be done but to go FORWARD TO
A DECISIVE VICTORY.  This was in my mind from the moment I took command in person at Young's Point.

The winter of 1862-3 was a noted one for continuous high water in the Mississippi and for heavy
rains along the lower river. To get dry land, or rather land above the water, to encamp the
troops upon, took many miles of river front.  We had to occupy the levees and the ground immediately
behind.  This was so limited that one corps, the 17th, under General McPherson, was at Lake
Providence, seventy miles above Vicksburg.

It was in January the troops took their position opposite Vicksburg. The water was very high
and the rains were incessant.  There seemed no possibility of a land movement before the end
of March or later, and it would not do to lie idle all this time.  The effect would be demoralizing
to the troops and injurious to their health.  Friends in the North would have grown more and
more discouraged, and enemies in the same section more and more insolent in their gibes and
denunciation of the cause and those engaged in it.

I always admired the South, as bad as I thought their cause, for the boldness with which they
silenced all opposition and all croaking, by press or by individuals, within their control.
War at all times, whether a civil war between sections of a common country or between nations,
ought to be avoided, if possible with honor.  But, once entered into, it is too much for human
nature to tolerate an enemy within their ranks to give aid and comfort to the armies of the
opposing section or nation.

Vicksburg, as stated before, is on the first high land coming to the river's edge, below that
on which Memphis stands.  The bluff, or high land, follows the left bank of the Yazoo for some
distance and continues in a southerly direction to the Mississippi River, thence it runs along
the Mississippi to Warrenton, six miles below.  The Yazoo River leaves the high land a short
distance below Haines' Bluff and empties into the Mississippi nine miles above Vicksburg. 
Vicksburg is built on this high land where the Mississippi washes the base of the hill.  Haines'
Bluff, eleven miles from Vicksburg, on the Yazoo River, was strongly fortified. The whole distance
from there to Vicksburg and thence to Warrenton was also intrenched, with batteries at suitable
distances and rifle-pits connecting them.

From Young's Point the Mississippi turns in a north-easterly direction to a point just above
the city, when it again turns and runs south-westerly, leaving vessels, which might attempt
to run the blockade, exposed to the fire of batteries six miles below the city before they
were in range of the upper batteries.  Since then the river has made a cut-off, leaving what
was the peninsula in front of the city, an island. North of the Yazoo was all a marsh, heavily
timbered, cut up with bayous, and much overflowed.  A front attack was therefore impossible,
and was never contemplated; certainly not by me. The problem then became, how to secure a landing
on high ground east of the Mississippi without an apparent retreat.  Then commenced a series
of experiments to consume time, and to divert the attention of the enemy, of my troops and
of the public generally.  I, myself, never felt great confidence that any of the experiments
resorted to would prove successful. Nevertheless I was always prepared to take advantage of
them in case they did.

In 1862 General Thomas Williams had come up from New Orleans and cut a ditch ten or twelve
feet wide and about as deep, straight across from Young's Point to the river below.  The distance
across was a little over a mile.  It was Williams' expectation that when the river rose it
would cut a navigable channel through; but the canal started in an eddy from both ends, and,
of course, it only filled up with water on the rise without doing any execution in the way
of cutting.  Mr. Lincoln had navigated the Mississippi in his younger days and understood well
its tendency to change its channel, in places, from time to time.  He set much store accordingly
by this canal.  General McClernand had been, therefore, directed before I went to Young's Point
to push the work of widening and deepening this canal.  After my arrival the work was diligently
pushed with about 4,000 men--as many as could be used to advantage--until interrupted by a
sudden rise in the river that broke a dam at the upper end, which had been put there to keep
the water out until the excavation was completed.  This was on the 8th of March.

Even if the canal had proven a success, so far as to be navigable for steamers, it could not
have been of much advantage to us.  It runs in a direction almost perpendicular to the line
of bluffs on the opposite side, or east bank, of the river.  As soon as the enemy discovered
what we were doing he established a battery commanding the canal throughout its length.  This
battery soon drove out our dredges, two in number, which were doing the work of thousands of
men.  Had the canal been completed it might have proven of some use in running transports through,
under the cover of night, to use below; but they would yet have to run batteries, though for
a much shorter distance.

While this work was progressing we were busy in other directions, trying to find an available
landing on high ground on the east bank of the river, or to make water-ways to get below the
city, avoiding the batteries.

On the 30th of January, the day after my arrival at the front, I ordered General McPherson,
stationed with his corps at Lake Providence, to cut the levee at that point.  If successful
in opening a channel for navigation by this route, it would carry us to the Mississippi River
through the mouth of the Red River, just above Port Hudson and four hundred miles below Vicksburg
by the river.

Lake Providence is a part of the old bed of the Mississippi, about a mile from the present
channel.  It is six miles long and has its outlet through Bayou Baxter, Bayou Macon, and the
Tensas, Washita and Red Rivers.  The last three are navigable streams at all seasons.  Bayous
Baxter and Macon are narrow and tortuous, and the banks are covered with dense forests overhanging
the channel.  They were also filled with fallen timber, the accumulation of years.  The land
along the Mississippi River, from Memphis down, is in all instances highest next to the river,
except where the river washes the bluffs which form the boundary of the valley through which
it winds.  Bayou Baxter, as it reaches lower land, begins to spread out and disappears entirely
in a cypress swamp before it reaches the Macon.  There was about two feet of water in this
swamp at the time.  To get through it, even with vessels of the lightest draft, it was necessary
to clear off a belt of heavy timber wide enough to make a passage way.  As the trees would
have to be cut close to the bottom--under water--it was an undertaking of great magnitude.

On the 4th of February I visited General McPherson, and remained with him several days.  The
work had not progressed so far as to admit the water from the river into the lake, but the
troops had succeeded in drawing a small steamer, of probably not over thirty tons' capacity,
from the river into the lake.  With this we were able to explore the lake and bayou as far
as cleared.  I saw then that there was scarcely a chance of this ever becoming a practicable
route for moving troops through an enemy's country.  The distance from Lake Providence to the
point where vessels going by that route would enter the Mississippi again, is about four hundred
and seventy miles by the main river.  The distance would probably be greater by the tortuous
bayous through which this new route would carry us.  The enemy held Port Hudson, below where
the Red River debouches, and all the Mississippi above to Vicksburg. The Red River, Washita
and Tensas were, as has been said, all navigable streams, on which the enemy could throw small
bodies of men to obstruct our passage and pick off our troops with their sharpshooters.  I
let the work go on, believing employment was better than idleness for the men. Then, too, it
served as a cover for other efforts which gave a better prospect of success.  This work was
abandoned after the canal proved a failure.

Lieutenant-Colonel Wilson of my staff was sent to Helena, Arkansas, to examine and open a way
through Moon Lake and the Yazoo Pass if possible. Formerly there was a route by way of an inlet
from the Mississippi River into Moon Lake, a mile east of the river, thence east through Yazoo
Pass to Coldwater, along the latter to the Tallahatchie, which joins the Yallabusha about two
hundred and fifty miles below Moon Lake and forms the Yazoo River.  These were formerly navigated
by steamers trading with the rich plantations along their banks; but the State of Mississippi
had built a strong levee across the inlet some years before, leaving the only entrance for
vessels into this rich region the one by way of the mouth of the Yazoo several hundreds of
miles below.

On the 2d of February this dam, or levee, was cut.  The river being high the rush of water
through the cut was so great that in a very short time the entire obstruction was washed away.
The bayous were soon filled and much of the country was overflowed. This pass leaves the Mississippi
River but a few miles below Helena. On the 24th General Ross, with his brigade of about 4,500
men on transports, moved into this new water-way. The rebels had obstructed the navigation
of Yazoo Pass and the Coldwater by felling trees into them.  Much of the timber in this region
being of greater specific gravity than water, and being of great size, their removal was a
matter of great labor; but it was finally accomplished, and on the 11th of March Ross found
himself, accompanied by two gunboats under the command of Lieutenant-Commander Watson Smith,
confronting a fortification at Greenwood, where the Tallahatchie and Yallabusha unite and the
Yazoo begins.  The bends of the rivers are such at this point as to almost form an island,
scarcely above water at that stage of the river.  This island was fortified and manned.  It
was named Fort Pemberton after the commander at Vicksburg.  No land approach was accessible.
The troops, therefore, could render no assistance towards an assault further than to establish
a battery on a little piece of ground which was discovered above water.  The gunboats, however,
attacked on the 11th and again on the 13th of March.  Both efforts were failures and were not
renewed.  One gunboat was disabled and we lost six men killed and twenty-five wounded. The
loss of the enemy was less.

Fort Pemberton was so little above the water that it was thought that a rise of two feet would
drive the enemy out.  In hope of enlisting the elements on our side, which had been so much
against us up to this time, a second cut was made in the Mississippi levee, this time directly
opposite Helena, or six miles above the former cut.  It did not accomplish the desired result,
and Ross, with his fleet, started back. On the 22d he met Quinby with a brigade at Yazoo Pass.
Quinby was the senior of Ross, and assumed command.  He was not satisfied with returning to
his former position without seeing for himself whether anything could be accomplished.  Accordingly
Fort Pemberton was revisited by our troops; but an inspection was sufficient this time without
an attack.  Quinby, with his command, returned with but little delay.  In the meantime I was
much exercised for the safety of Ross, not knowing that Quinby had been able to join him. 
Reinforcements were of no use in a country covered with water, as they would have to remain
on board of their transports.  Relief had to come from another quarter.  So I determined to
get into the Yazoo below Fort Pemberton.

Steel's Bayou empties into the Yazoo River between Haines' Bluff and its mouth.  It is narrow,
very tortuous, and fringed with a very heavy growth of timber, but it is deep.  It approaches
to within one mile of the Mississippi at Eagle Bend, thirty miles above Young's Point. Steel's
Bayou connects with Black Bayou, Black Bayou with Deer Creek, Deer Creek with Rolling Fork,
Rolling Fork with the Big Sunflower River, and the Big Sunflower with the Yazoo River about
ten miles above Haines' Bluff in a right line but probably twenty or twenty-five miles by the
winding of the river.  All these waterways are of about the same nature so far as navigation
is concerned, until the Sunflower is reached; this affords free navigation.

Admiral Porter explored this waterway as far as Deer Creek on the 14th of March, and reported
it navigable.  On the next day he started with five gunboats and four mortar-boats.  I went
with him for some distance. The heavy overhanging timber retarded progress very much, as did
also the short turns in so narrow a stream.  The gunboats, however, ploughed their way through
without other damage than to their appearance.  The transports did not fare so well although
they followed behind. The road was somewhat cleared for them by the gunboats.  In the evening
I returned to headquarters to hurry up reinforcements. Sherman went in person on the 16th,
taking with him Stuart's division of the 15th corps. They took large river transports to Eagle
Bend on the Mississippi, where they debarked and marched across to Steel's Bayou, where they
re-embarked on the transports.  The river steamers, with their tall smokestacks and light guards
extending out, were so much impeded that the gunboats got far ahead.  Porter, with his fleet,
got within a few hundred yards of where the sailing would have been clear and free from the
obstructions caused by felling trees into the water, when he encountered rebel sharp-shooters,
and his progress was delayed by obstructions in his front.  He could do nothing with gunboats
against sharpshooters.  The rebels, learning his route, had sent in about 4,000 men--many more
than there were sailors in the fleet.

Sherman went back, at the request of the admiral, to clear out Black Bayou and to hurry up
reinforcements, which were far behind.  On the night of the 19th he received notice from the
admiral that he had been attacked by sharp-shooters and was in imminent peril.  Sherman at
once returned through Black Bayou in a canoe, and passed on until he met a steamer, with the
last of the reinforcements he had, coming up.  They tried to force their way through Black
Bayou with their steamer, but, finding it slow and tedious work, debarked and pushed forward
on foot. It was night when they landed, and intensely dark.  There was but a narrow strip of
land above water, and that was grown up with underbrush or cane.  The troops lighted their
way through this with candles carried in their hands for a mile and a half, when they came
to an open plantation.  Here the troops rested until morning.  They made twenty-one miles from
this resting-place by noon the next day, and were in time to rescue the fleet.  Porter had
fully made up his mind to blow up the gunboats rather than have them fall into the hands of
the enemy.  More welcome visitors he probably never met than the "boys in blue" on this occasion.
The vessels were backed out and returned to their rendezvous on the Mississippi; and thus ended
in failure the fourth attempt to get in rear of Vicksburg.

The original canal scheme was also abandoned on the 27th of March.  The effort to make a waterway
through Lake Providence and the connecting bayous was abandoned as wholly impracticable about
the same time.

At Milliken's Bend, and also at Young's Point, bayous or channels start, which connecting with
other bayous passing Richmond, Louisiana, enter the Mississippi at Carthage twenty-five or
thirty miles above Grand Gulf.  The Mississippi levee cuts the supply of water off from these
bayous or channels, but all the rainfall behind the levee, at these points, is carried through
these same channels to the river below.  In case of a crevasse in this vicinity, the water
escaping would find its outlet through the same channels.  The dredges and laborers from the
canal having been driven out by overflow and the enemy's batteries, I determined to open these
other channels, if possible.  If successful the effort would afford a route, away from the
enemy's batteries, for our transports.  There was a good road back of the levees, along these
bayous, to carry the troops, artillery and wagon trains over whenever the water receded a little,
and after a few days of dry weather. Accordingly, with the abandonment of all the other plans
for reaching a base heretofore described, this new one was undertaken.

As early as the 4th of February I had written to Halleck about this route, stating that I thought
it much more practicable than the other undertaking (the Lake Providence route), and that it
would have been accomplished with much less labor if commenced before the water had got all
over the country.

The upper end of these bayous being cut off from a water supply, further than the rainfall
back of the levees, was grown up with dense timber for a distance of several miles from their
source.  It was necessary, therefore, to clear this out before letting in the water from the
river. This work was continued until the waters of the river began to recede and the road to
Richmond, Louisiana, emerged from the water.  One small steamer and some barges were got through
this channel, but no further use could be made of it because of the fall in the river. Beyond
this it was no more successful than the other experiments with which the winter was whiled
away.  All these failures would have been very discouraging if I had expected much from the
efforts; but I had not.  From the first the most I hoped to accomplish was the passage of transports,
to be used below Vicksburg, without exposure to the long line of batteries defending that city.

This long, dreary and, for heavy and continuous rains and high water, unprecedented winter
was one of great hardship to all engaged about Vicksburg.  The river was higher than its natural
banks from December, 1862, to the following April.  The war had suspended peaceful pursuits
in the South, further than the production of army supplies, and in consequence the levees were
neglected and broken in many places and the whole country was covered with water.  Troops could
scarcely find dry ground on which to pitch their tents.  Malarial fevers broke out among the
men.  Measles and small-pox also attacked them.  The hospital arrangements and medical attendance
were so perfect, however, that the loss of life was much less than might have been expected.
Visitors to the camps went home with dismal stories to relate; Northern papers came back to
the soldiers with these stories exaggerated.  Because I would not divulge my ultimate plans
to visitors, they pronounced me idle, incompetent and unfit to command men in an emergency,
and clamored for my removal.  They were not to be satisfied, many of them, with my simple removal,
but named who my successor should be. McClernand, Fremont, Hunter and McClellan were all mentioned
in this connection.  I took no steps to answer these complaints, but continued to do my duty,
as I understood it, to the best of my ability.  Every one has his superstitions.  One of mine
is that in positions of great responsibility every one should do his duty to the best of his
ability where assigned by competent authority, without application or the use of influence
to change his position.  While at Cairo I had watched with very great interest the operations
of the Army of the Potomac, looking upon that as the main field of the war.  I had no idea,
myself, of ever having any large command, nor did I suppose that I was equal to one; but I
had the vanity to think that as a cavalry officer I might succeed very well in the command
of a brigade. On one occasion, in talking about this to my staff officers, all of whom were
civilians without any military education whatever, I said that I would give anything if I were
commanding a brigade of cavalry in the Army of the Potomac and I believed I could do some good.
Captain Hillyer spoke up and suggested that I make application to be transferred there to command
the cavalry. I then told him that I would cut my right arm off first, and mentioned this superstition.

In time of war the President, being by the Constitution Commander-in-chief of the Army and
Navy, is responsible for the selection of commanders.  He should not be embarrassed in making
his selections.  I having been selected, my responsibility ended with my doing the best I knew
how.  If I had sought the place, or obtained it through personal or political influence, my
belief is that I would have feared to undertake any plan of my own conception, and would probably
have awaited direct orders from my distant superiors.  Persons obtaining important commands
by application or political influence are apt to keep a written record of complaints and predictions
of defeat, which are shown in case of disaster.  Somebody must be responsible for their failures.

With all the pressure brought to bear upon them, both President Lincoln and General Halleck
stood by me to the end of the campaign.  I had never met Mr.  Lincoln, but his support was
constant.

At last the waters began to recede; the roads crossing the peninsula behind the levees of the
bayous, were emerging from the waters; the troops were all concentrated from distant points
at Milliken's Bend preparatory to a final move which was to crown the long, tedious and discouraging
labors with success.

I had had in contemplation the whole winter the movement by land to a point below Vicksburg
from which to operate, subject only to the possible but not expected success of some one of
the expedients resorted to for the purpose of giving us a different base.  This could not be
undertaken until the waters receded.  I did not therefore communicate this plan, even to an
officer of my staff, until it was necessary to make preparations for the start.  My recollection
is that Admiral Porter was the first one to whom I mentioned it.  The co-operation of the navy
was absolutely essential to the success (even to the contemplation) of such an enterprise.
I had no more authority to command Porter than he had to command me.  It was necessary to have
part of his fleet below Vicksburg if the troops went there.  Steamers to use as ferries were
also essential.  The navy was the only escort and protection for these steamers, all of which
in getting below had to run about fourteen miles of batteries. Porter fell into the plan at
once, and suggested that he had better superintend the preparation of the steamers selected
to run the batteries, as sailors would probably understand the work better than soldiers. 
I was glad to accept his proposition, not only because I admitted his argument, but because
it would enable me to keep from the enemy a little longer our designs. Porter's fleet was on
the east side of the river above the mouth of the Yazoo, entirely concealed from the enemy
by the dense forests that intervened.  Even spies could not get near him, on account of the
undergrowth and overflowed lands. Suspicions of some mysterious movements were aroused.  Our
river guards discovered one day a small skiff moving quietly and mysteriously up the river
near the east shore, from the direction of Vicksburg, towards the fleet.  On overhauling the
boat they found a small white flag, not much larger than a handkerchief, set up in the stern,
no doubt intended as a flag of truce in case of discovery.  The boat, crew and passengers were
brought ashore to me.  The chief personage aboard proved to be Jacob Thompson, Secretary of
the Interior under the administration of President Buchanan.  After a pleasant conversation
of half an hour or more I allowed the boat and crew, passengers and all, to return to Vicksburg,
without creating a suspicion that there was a doubt in my mind as to the good faith of Mr.
Thompson and his flag.

Admiral Porter proceeded with the preparation of the steamers for their hazardous passage of
the enemy's batteries.  The great essential was to protect the boilers from the enemy's shot,
and to conceal the fires under the boilers from view.  This he accomplished by loading the
steamers, between the guards and boilers on the boiler deck up to the deck above, with bales
of hay and cotton, and the deck in front of the boilers in the same way, adding sacks of grain.
The hay and grain would be wanted below, and could not be transported in sufficient quantity
by the muddy roads over which we expected to march.

Before this I had been collecting, from St. Louis and Chicago, yawls and barges to be used
as ferries when we got below.  By the 16th of April Porter was ready to start on his perilous
trip.  The advance, flagship Benton, Porter commanding, started at ten o'clock at night, followed
at intervals of a few minutes by the Lafayette with a captured steamer, the Price, lashed to
her side, the Louisville, Mound City, Pittsburgh and Carondelet--all of these being naval vessels.
Next came the transports --Forest Queen, Silver Wave and Henry Clay, each towing barges loaded
with coal to be used as fuel by the naval and transport steamers when below the batteries.
The gunboat Tuscumbia brought up the rear.  Soon after the start a battery between Vicksburg
and Warrenton opened fire across the intervening peninsula, followed by the upper batteries,
and then by batteries all along the line.  The gunboats ran up close under the bluffs, delivering
their fire in return at short distances, probably without much effect.  They were under fire
for more than two hours and every vessel was struck many times, but with little damage to the
gunboats.  The transports did not fare so well.  The Henry Clay was disabled and deserted by
her crew. Soon after a shell burst in the cotton packed about the boilers, set the vessel on
fire and burned her to the water's edge.  The burning mass, however, floated down to Carthage
before grounding, as did also one of the barges in tow.

The enemy were evidently expecting our fleet, for they were ready to light up the river by
means of bonfires on the east side and by firing houses on the point of land opposite the city
on the Louisiana side. The sight was magnificent, but terrible.  I witnessed it from the deck
of a river transport, run out into the middle of the river and as low down as it was prudent
to go.  My mind was much relieved when I learned that no one on the transports had been killed
and but few, if any, wounded.  During the running of the batteries men were stationed in the
holds of the transports to partially stop with cotton shot-holes that might be made in the
hulls.  All damage was afterwards soon repaired under the direction of Admiral Porter.

The experiment of passing batteries had been tried before this, however, during the war.  Admiral
Farragut had run the batteries at Port Hudson with the flagship Hartford and one iron-clad
and visited me from below Vicksburg.  The 13th of February Admiral Porter had sent the gunboat
Indianola, Lieutenant-Commander George Brown commanding, below.  She met Colonel Ellet of the
Marine brigade below Natchez on a captured steamer. Two of the Colonel's fleet had previously
run the batteries, producing the greatest consternation among the people along the Mississippi
from Vicksburg (*10) to the Red River.

The Indianola remained about the mouth of the Red River some days, and then started up the
Mississippi.  The Confederates soon raised the Queen of the West, (*11) and repaired her. 
With this vessel and the ram Webb, which they had had for some time in the Red River, and two
other steamers, they followed the Indianola. The latter was encumbered with barges of coal
in tow, and consequently could make but little speed against the rapid current of the Mississippi.
The Confederate fleet overtook her just above Grand Gulf, and attacked her after dark on the
24th of February.  The Indianola was superior to all the others in armament, and probably would
have destroyed them or driven them away, but for her encumbrance.  As it was she fought them
for an hour and a half, but, in the dark, was struck seven or eight times by the ram and other
vessels, and was finally disabled and reduced to a sinking condition.  The armament was thrown
overboard and the vessel run ashore. Officers and crew then surrendered.

I had started McClernand with his corps of four divisions on the 29th of March, by way of Richmond,
Louisiana, to New Carthage, hoping that he might capture Grand Gulf before the balance of the
troops could get there; but the roads were very bad, scarcely above water yet.  Some miles
from New Carthage the levee to Bayou Vidal was broken in several places, overflowing the roads
for the distance of two miles.  Boats were collected from the surrounding bayous, and some
constructed on the spot from such material as could be collected, to transport the troops across
the overflowed interval.  By the 6th of April McClernand had reached New Carthage with one
division and its artillery, the latter ferried through the woods by these boats.  On the 17th
I visited New Carthage in person, and saw that the process of getting troops through in the
way we were doing was so tedious that a better method must be devised.  The water was falling,
and in a few days there would not be depth enough to use boats; nor would the land be dry enough
to march over.  McClernand had already found a new route from Smith's plantation where the
crevasse occurred, to Perkins' plantation, eight to twelve miles below New Carthage.  This
increased the march from Milliken's Bend from twenty-seven to nearly forty miles.  Four bridges
had to be built across bayous, two of them each over six hundred feet long, making about two
thousand feet of bridging in all.  The river falling made the current in these bayous very
rapid, increasing the difficulty of building and permanently fastening these bridges; but the
ingenuity of the "Yankee soldier" was equal to any emergency.  The bridges were soon built
of such material as could be found near by, and so substantial were they that not a single
mishap occurred in crossing all the army with artillery, cavalry and wagon trains, except the
loss of one siege gun (a thirty-two pounder).  This, if my memory serves me correctly, broke
through the only pontoon bridge we had in all our march across the peninsula. These bridges
were all built by McClernand's command, under the supervision of Lieutenant Hains of the Engineer
Corps.

I returned to Milliken's Bend on the 18th or 19th, and on the 20th issued the following final
order for the movement of troops:

HEADQUARTERS DEPARTMENT OF THE TENNESSEE, MILLIKEN'S BEND, LOUISIANA, April 20, 1863.

Special Orders, No. 110. *         *         *         *         * * * VIII.  The following
orders are published for the information and guidance of the "Army in the Field," in its present
movement to obtain a foothold on the east bank of the Mississippi River, from which Vicksburg
can be approached by practicable roads.

First.--The Thirteenth army corps, Major-General John A. McClernand commanding, will constitute
the right wing.

Second.--The Fifteenth army corps, Major-General W. T. Sherman commanding, will constitute
the left wing.

Third.--The Seventeenth army corps, Major-General James B. McPherson commanding, will constitute
the centre.

Fourth.--The order of march to New Carthage will be from right to left.

Fifth.--Reserves will be formed by divisions from each army corps; or, an entire army corps
will be held as a reserve, as necessity may require.  When the reserve is formed by divisions,
each division will remain under the immediate command of its respective corps commander, unless
otherwise specially ordered for a particular emergency.

Sixth.--Troops will be required to bivouac, until proper facilities can be afforded for the
transportation of camp equipage.

Seventh.--In the present movement, one tent will be allowed to each company for the protection
of rations from rain; one wall tent for each regimental headquarters; one wall tent for each
brigade headquarters; and one wall tent for each division headquarters; corps commanders having
the books and blanks of their respective commands to provide for, are authorized to take such
tents as are absolutely necessary, but not to exceed the number allowed by General Orders No.
160, A. G. O., series of 1862.

Eighth.--All the teams of the three army corps, under the immediate charge of the quartermasters
bearing them on their returns, will constitute a train for carrying supplies and ordnance and
the authorized camp equipage of the army.

Ninth.--As fast as the Thirteenth army corps advances, the Seventeenth army corps will take
its place; and it, in turn, will be followed in like manner by the Fifteenth army corps.

Tenth.--Two regiments from each army corps will be detailed by corps commanders, to guard the
lines from Richmond to New Carthage.

Eleventh.--General hospitals will be established by the medical director between Duckport and
Milliken's Bend.  All sick and disabled soldiers will be left in these hospitals.  Surgeons
in charge of hospitals will report convalescents as fast as they become fit for duty.  Each
corps commander will detail an intelligent and good drill officer, to remain behind and take
charge of the convalescents of their respective corps; officers so detailed will organize the
men under their charge into squads and companies, without regard to the regiments they belong
to; and in the absence of convalescent commissioned officers to command them, will appoint
non-commissioned officers or privates.  The force so organized will constitute the guard of
the line from Duckport to Milliken's Bend.  They will furnish all the guards and details required
for general hospitals, and with the contrabands that may be about the camps, will furnish all
the details for loading and unloading boats.

Twelfth.--The movement of troops from Milliken's Bend to New Carthage will be so conducted
as to allow the transportation of ten days' supply of rations, and one-half the allowance of
ordnance, required by previous orders.

Thirteenth.--Commanders are authorized and enjoined to collect all the beef cattle, corn and
other necessary supplies on the line of march; but wanton destruction of property, taking of
articles useless for military purposes, insulting citizens, going into and searching houses
without proper orders from division commanders, are positively prohibited.  All such irregularities
must be summarily punished.

Fourteenth.--Brigadier-General J. C.  Sullivan is appointed to the command of all the forces
detailed for the protection of the line from here to New Carthage.  His particular attention
is called to General Orders, No. 69, from Adjutant-General's Office, Washington, of date March
20, 1863.

By order of MAJOR-GENERAL U. S.  GRANT.

McClernand was already below on the Mississippi.  Two of McPherson's divisions were put upon
the march immediately.  The third had not yet arrived from Lake Providence; it was on its way
to Milliken's Bend and was to follow on arrival.

Sherman was to follow McPherson.  Two of his divisions were at Duckport and Young's Point,
and the third under Steele was under orders to return from Greenville, Mississippi, where it
had been sent to expel a rebel battery that had been annoying our transports.

It had now become evident that the army could not be rationed by a wagon train over the single
narrow and almost impassable road between Milliken's Bend and Perkins' plantation.  Accordingly
six more steamers were protected as before, to run the batteries, and were loaded with supplies.
They took twelve barges in tow, loaded also with rations.  On the night of the 22d of April
they ran the batteries, five getting through more or less disabled while one was sunk.  About
half the barges got through with their needed freight.

When it was first proposed to run the blockade at Vicksburg with river steamers there were
but two captains or masters who were willing to accompany their vessels, and but one crew.
Volunteers were called for from the army, men who had had experience in any capacity in navigating
the western rivers. Captains, pilots, mates, engineers and deck-hands enough presented themselves
to take five times the number of vessels we were moving through this dangerous ordeal.  Most
of them were from Logan's division, composed generally of men from the southern part of Illinois
and from Missouri.  All but two of the steamers were commanded by volunteers from the army,
and all but one so manned.  In this instance, as in all others during the war, I found that
volunteers could be found in the ranks and among the commissioned officers to meet every call
for aid whether mechanical or professional.  Colonel W. S. Oliver was master of transportation
on this occasion by special detail.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

ATTACK ON GRAND GULF--OPERATIONS BELOW VICKSBURG.

On the 24th my headquarters were with the advance at Perkins' plantation.  Reconnoissances
were made in boats to ascertain whether there was high land on the east shore of the river
where we might land above Grand Gulf.  There was none practicable. Accordingly the troops were
set in motion for Hard Times, twenty-two miles farther down the river and nearly opposite Grand
Gulf.  The loss of two steamers and six barges reduced our transportation so that only 10,000
men could be moved by water. Some of the steamers that had got below were injured in their
machinery, so that they were only useful as barges towed by those less severely injured.  All
the troops, therefore, except what could be transported in one trip, had to march.  The road
lay west of Lake St. Joseph.  Three large bayous had to be crossed.  They were rapidly bridged
in the same manner as those previously encountered. (*12)

On the 27th McClernand's corps was all at Hard Times, and McPherson's was following closely.
I had determined to make the attempt to effect a landing on the east side of the river as soon
as possible.  Accordingly, on the morning of the 29th, McClernand was directed to embark all
the troops from his corps that our transports and barges could carry.  About 10,000 men were
so embarked.  The plan was to have the navy silence the guns at Grand Gulf, and to have as
many men as possible ready to debark in the shortest possible time under cover of the fire
of the navy and carry the works by storm.  The following order was issued:

PERKINS PLANTATION, LA., April 27,1863.

MAJOR-GENERAL J. A. MCCLERNAND, Commanding 13th A. C.

Commence immediately the embarkation of your corps, or so much of it as there is transportation
for.  Have put aboard the artillery and every article authorized in orders limiting baggage,
except the men, and hold them in readiness, with their places assigned, to be moved at a moment's
warning.

All the troops you may have, except those ordered to remain behind, send to a point nearly
opposite Grand Gulf, where you see, by special orders of this date, General McPherson is ordered
to send one division.

The plan of the attack will be for the navy to attack and silence all the batteries commanding
the river.  Your corps will be on the river, ready to run to and debark on the nearest eligible
land below the promontory first brought to view passing down the river.  Once on shore, have
each commander instructed beforehand to form his men the best the ground will admit of, and
take possession of the most commanding points, but avoid separating your command so that it
cannot support itself.  The first object is to get a foothold where our troops can maintain
themselves until such time as preparations can be made and troops collected for a forward movement.

Admiral Porter has proposed to place his boats in the position indicated to you a few days
ago, and to bring over with them such troops as may be below the city after the guns of the
enemy are silenced.

It may be that the enemy will occupy positions back from the city, out of range of the gunboats,
so as to make it desirable to run past Grand Gulf and land at Rodney.  In case this should
prove the plan, a signal will be arranged and you duly informed, when the transports are to
start with this view.  Or, it may be expedient for the boats to run past, but not the men.
In this case, then, the transports would have to be brought back to where the men could land
and move by forced marches to below Grand Gulf, re-embark rapidly and proceed to the latter
place. There will be required, then, three signals; one, to indicate that the transports can
run down and debark the troops at Grand Gulf; one, that the transports can run by without the
troops; and the last, that the transports can run by with the troops on board.

Should the men have to march, all baggage and artillery will be left to run the blockade.

If not already directed, require your men to keep three days' rations in their haversacks,
not to be touched until a movement commences.

U. S. GRANT, Major-General.

At 8 o'clock A.M., 29th, Porter made the attack with his entire strength present, eight gunboats.
For nearly five and a half hours the attack was kept up without silencing a single gun of the
enemy.  All this time McClernand's 10,000 men were huddled together on the transports in the
stream ready to attempt a landing if signalled.  I occupied a tug from which I could see the
effect of the battle on both sides, within range of the enemy's guns; but a small tug, without
armament, was not calculated to attract the fire of batteries while they were being assailed
themselves.  About half-past one the fleet withdrew, seeing their efforts were entirely unavailing.
The enemy ceased firing as soon as we withdrew.  I immediately signalled the Admiral and went
aboard his ship.  The navy lost in this engagement eighteen killed and fifty-six wounded. 
A large proportion of these were of the crew of the flagship, and most of those from a single
shell which penetrated the ship's side and exploded between decks where the men were working
their guns.  The sight of the mangled and dying men which met my eye as I boarded the ship
was sickening.

Grand Gulf is on a high bluff where the river runs at the very foot of it.  It is as defensible
upon its front as Vicksburg and, at that time, would have been just as impossible to capture
by a front attack.  I therefore requested Porter to run the batteries with his fleet that night,
and to take charge of the transports, all of which would be wanted below.

There is a long tongue of land from the Louisiana side extending towards Grand Gulf, made by
the river running nearly east from about three miles above and nearly in the opposite direction
from that point for about the same distance below.  The land was so low and wet that it would
not have been practicable to march an army across but for a levee.  I had had this explored
before, as well as the east bank below to ascertain if there was a possible point of debarkation
north of Rodney.  It was found that the top of the levee afforded a good road to march upon.

Porter, as was always the case with him, not only acquiesced in the plan, but volunteered to
use his entire fleet as transports.  I had intended to make this request, but he anticipated
me.  At dusk, when concealed from the view of the enemy at Grand Gulf, McClernand landed his
command on the west bank.  The navy and transports ran the batteries successfully. The troops
marched across the point of land under cover of night, unobserved.  By the time it was light
the enemy saw our whole fleet, ironclads, gunboats, river steamers and barges, quietly moving
down the river three miles below them, black, or rather blue, with National troops.

When the troops debarked, the evening of the 29th, it was expected that we would have to go
to Rodney, about nine miles below, to find a landing; but that night a colored man came in
who informed me that a good landing would be found at Bruinsburg, a few miles above Rodney,
from which point there was a good road leading to Port Gibson some twelve miles in the interior.
The information was found correct, and our landing was effected without opposition.

Sherman had not left his position above Vicksburg yet.  On the morning of the 27th I ordered
him to create a diversion by moving his corps up the Yazoo and threatening an attack on Haines'
Bluff.

My object was to compel Pemberton to keep as much force about Vicksburg as I could, until I
could secure a good footing on high land east of the river.  The move was eminently successful
and, as we afterwards learned, created great confusion about Vicksburg and doubts about our
real design.  Sherman moved the day of our attack on Grand Gulf, the 29th, with ten regiments
of his command and eight gunboats which Porter had left above Vicksburg.

He debarked his troops and apparently made every preparation to attack the enemy while the
navy bombarded the main forts at Haines' Bluff. This move was made without a single casualty
in either branch of the service.  On the first of May Sherman received orders from me (sent
from Hard Times the evening of the 29th of April) to withdraw from the front of Haines' Bluff
and follow McPherson with two divisions as fast as he could.

I had established a depot of supplies at Perkins' plantation. Now that all our gunboats were
below Grand Gulf it was possible that the enemy might fit out boats in the Big Black with improvised
armament and attempt to destroy these supplies. McPherson was at Hard Times with a portion
of his corps, and the depot was protected by a part of his command.  The night of the 29th
I directed him to arm one of the transports with artillery and send it up to Perkins' plantation
as a guard; and also to have the siege guns we had brought along moved there and put in position.

The embarkation below Grand Gulf took place at De Shroon's, Louisiana, six miles above Bruinsburg,
Mississippi.  Early on the morning of 30th of April McClernand's corps and one division of
McPherson's corps were speedily landed.

When this was effected I felt a degree of relief scarcely ever equalled since.  Vicksburg was
not yet taken it is true, nor were its defenders demoralized by any of our previous moves.
I was now in the enemy's country, with a vast river and the stronghold of Vicksburg between
me and my base of supplies.  But I was on dry ground on the same side of the river with the
enemy.  All the campaigns, labors, hardships and exposures from the month of December previous
to this time that had been made and endured, were for the accomplishment of this one object.

I had with me the 13th corps, General McClernand commanding, and two brigades of Logan's division
of the 17th corps, General McPherson commanding--in all not more than twenty thousand men to
commence the campaign with.  These were soon reinforced by the remaining brigade of Logan's
division and Crocker's division of the 17th corps.  On the 7th of May I was further reinforced
by Sherman with two divisions of his, the 15th corps.  My total force was then about thirty-three
thousand men.

The enemy occupied Grand Gulf, Haines' Bluff and Jackson with a force of nearly sixty thousand
men.  Jackson is fifty miles east of Vicksburg and is connected with it by a railroad.  My
first problem was to capture Grand Gulf to use as a base.

Bruinsburg is two miles from high ground.  The bottom at that point is higher than most of
the low land in the valley of the Mississippi, and a good road leads to the bluff.  It was
natural to expect the garrison from Grand Gulf to come out to meet us and prevent, if they
could, our reaching this solid base.  Bayou Pierre enters the Mississippi just above Bruinsburg
and, as it is a navigable stream and was high at the time, in order to intercept us they had
to go by Port Gibson, the nearest point where there was a bridge to cross upon.  This more
than doubled the distance from Grand Gulf to the high land back of Bruinsburg.  No time was
to be lost in securing this foothold. Our transportation was not sufficient to move all the
army across the river at one trip, or even two; but the landing of the 13th corps and one division
of the 17th was effected during the day, April 30th, and early evening.  McClernand was advanced
as soon as ammunition and two days' rations (to last five) could be issued to his men.  The
bluffs were reached an hour before sunset and McClernand was pushed on, hoping to reach Port
Gibson and save the bridge spanning the Bayou Pierre before the enemy could get there; for
crossing a stream in the presence of an enemy is always difficult.  Port Gibson, too, is the
starting point of roads to Grand Gulf, Vicksburg and Jackson.

McClernand's advance met the enemy about five miles west of Port Gibson at Thompson's plantation.
There was some firing during the night, but nothing rising to the dignity of a battle until
daylight.  The enemy had taken a strong natural position with most of the Grand Gulf garrison,
numbering about seven or eight thousand men, under General Bowen.  His hope was to hold me
in check until reinforcements under Loring could reach him from Vicksburg; but Loring did not
come in time to render much assistance south of Port Gibson.  Two brigades of McPherson's corps
followed McClernand as fast as rations and ammunition could be issued, and were ready to take
position upon the battlefield whenever the 13th corps could be got out of the way.

The country in this part of Mississippi stands on edge, as it were, the roads running along
the ridges except when they occasionally pass from one ridge to another.  Where there are no
clearings the sides of the hills are covered with a very heavy growth of timber and with undergrowth,
and the ravines are filled with vines and canebrakes, almost impenetrable.  This makes it easy
for an inferior force to delay, if not defeat, a far superior one.

Near the point selected by Bowen to defend, the road to Port Gibson divides, taking two ridges
which do not diverge more than a mile or two at the widest point.  These roads unite just outside
the town.  This made it necessary for McClernand to divide his force.  It was not only divided,
but it was separated by a deep ravine of the character above described.  One flank could not
reinforce the other except by marching back to the junction of the roads.  McClernand put the
divisions of Hovey, Carr and A. J. Smith upon the right-hand branch and Osterhaus on the left.
I was on the field by ten A.M., and inspected both flanks in person.  On the right the enemy,
if not being pressed back, was at least not repulsing our advance.  On the left, however, Osterhaus
was not faring so well.  He had been repulsed with some loss.  As soon as the road could be
cleared of McClernand's troops I ordered up McPherson, who was close upon the rear of the 13th
corps, with two brigades of Logan's division.  This was about noon.  I ordered him to send
one brigade (General John E. Smith's was selected) to support Osterhaus, and to move to the
left and flank the enemy out of his position.  This movement carried the brigade over a deep
ravine to a third ridge and, when Smith's troops were seen well through the ravine, Osterhaus
was directed to renew his front attack.  It was successful and unattended by heavy loss.  The
enemy was sent in full retreat on their right, and their left followed before sunset.  While
the movement to our left was going on, McClernand, who was with his right flank, sent me frequent
requests for reinforcements, although the force with him was not being pressed.  I had been
upon the ground and knew it did not admit of his engaging all the men he had.  We followed
up our victory until night overtook us about two miles from Port Gibson; then the troops went
into bivouac for the night.

We started next morning for Port Gibson as soon as it was light enough to see the road.  We
were soon in the town, and I was delighted to find that the enemy had not stopped to contest
our crossing further at the bridge, which he had burned.  The troops were set to work at once
to construct a bridge across the South Fork of the Bayou Pierre.  At this time the water was
high and the current rapid.  What might be called a raft-bridge was soon constructed from material
obtained from wooden buildings, stables, fences, etc., which sufficed for carrying the whole
army over safely.  Colonel J. H. Wilson, a member of my staff, planned and superintended the
construction of this bridge, going into the water and working as hard as any one engaged. 
Officers and men generally joined in this work.  When it was finished the army crossed and
marched eight miles beyond to the North Fork that day.  One brigade of Logan's division was
sent down the stream to occupy the attention of a rebel battery, which had been left behind
with infantry supports to prevent our repairing the burnt railroad bridge.  Two of his brigades
were sent up the bayou to find a crossing and reach the North Fork to repair the bridge there.
The enemy soon left when he found we were building a bridge elsewhere.  Before leaving Port
Gibson we were reinforced by Crocker's division, McPherson's corps, which had crossed the Mississippi
at Bruinsburg and come up without stopping except to get two days' rations.  McPherson still
had one division west of the Mississippi River, guarding the road from Milliken's Bend to the
river below until Sherman's command should relieve it.

On leaving Bruinsburg for the front I left my son Frederick, who had joined me a few weeks
before, on board one of the gunboats asleep, and hoped to get away without him until after
Grand Gulf should fall into our hands; but on waking up he learned that I had gone, and being
guided by the sound of the battle raging at Thompson's Hill--called the Battle of Port Gibson--found
his way to where I was.  He had no horse to ride at the time, and I had no facilities for even
preparing a meal.  He, therefore, foraged around the best he could until we reached Grand Gulf.
Mr. C. A. Dana, then an officer of the War Department, accompanied me on the Vicksburg campaign
and through a portion of the siege.  He was in the same situation as Fred so far as transportation
and mess arrangements were concerned.  The first time I call to mind seeing either of them,
after the battle, they were mounted on two enormous horses, grown white from age, each equipped
with dilapidated saddles and bridles.

Our trains arrived a few days later, after which we were all perfectly equipped.

My son accompanied me throughout the campaign and siege, and caused no anxiety either to me
or to his mother, who was at home.  He looked out for himself and was in every battle of the
campaign.  His age, then not quite thirteen, enabled him to take in all he saw, and to retain
a recollection of it that would not be possible in more mature years.

When the movement from Bruinsburg commenced we were without a wagon train.  The train still
west of the Mississippi was carried around with proper escort, by a circuitous route from Milliken's
Bend to Hard Times seventy or more miles below, and did not get up for some days after the
battle of Port Gibson. My own horses, headquarters' transportation, servants, mess chest, and
everything except what I had on, was with this train. General A. J. Smith happened to have
an extra horse at Bruinsburg which I borrowed, with a saddle-tree without upholstering further
than stirrups.  I had no other for nearly a week.

It was necessary to have transportation for ammunition. Provisions could be taken from the
country; but all the ammunition that can be carried on the person is soon exhausted when there
is much fighting.  I directed, therefore, immediately on landing that all the vehicles and
draft animals, whether horses, mules, or oxen, in the vicinity should be collected and loaded
to their capacity with ammunition.  Quite a train was collected during the 30th, and a motley
train it was.  In it could be found fine carriages, loaded nearly to the top with boxes of
cartridges that had been pitched in promiscuously, drawn by mules with plough, harness, straw
collars, rope-lines, etc.; long-coupled wagons, with racks for carrying cotton bales, drawn
by oxen, and everything that could be found in the way of transportation on a plantation, either
for use or pleasure.  The making out of provision returns was stopped for the time.  No formalities
were to retard our progress until a position was secured when the time could be spared to observe
them.

It was at Port Gibson I first heard through a Southern paper of the complete success of Colonel
Grierson, who was making a raid through central Mississippi.  He had started from La Grange
April 17th with three regiments of about 1,700 men.  On the 21st he had detached Colonel Hatch
with one regiment to destroy the railroad between Columbus and Macon and then return to La
Grange.  Hatch had a sharp fight with the enemy at Columbus and retreated along the railroad,
destroying it at Okalona and Tupelo, and arriving in La Grange April 26.  Grierson continued
his movement with about 1,000 men, breaking the Vicksburg and Meridian railroad and the New
Orleans and Jackson railroad, arriving at Baton Rouge May 2d.  This raid was of great importance,
for Grierson had attracted the attention of the enemy from the main movement against Vicksburg.

During the night of the 2d of May the bridge over the North Fork was repaired, and the troops
commenced crossing at five the next morning. Before the leading brigade was over it was fired
upon by the enemy from a commanding position; but they were soon driven off.  It was evident
that the enemy was covering a retreat from Grand Gulf to Vicksburg. Every commanding position
from this (Grindstone) crossing to Hankinson's ferry over the Big Black was occupied by the
retreating foe to delay our progress. McPherson, however, reached Hankinson's ferry before
night, seized the ferry boat, and sent a detachment of his command across and several miles
north on the road to Vicksburg.  When the junction of the road going to Vicksburg with the
road from Grand Gulf to Raymond and Jackson was reached, Logan with his division was turned
to the left towards Grand Gulf.  I went with him a short distance from this junction.  McPherson
had encountered the largest force yet met since the battle of Port Gibson and had a skirmish
nearly approaching a battle; but the road Logan had taken enabled him to come up on the enemy's
right flank, and they soon gave way.  McPherson was ordered to hold Hankinson's ferry and the
road back to Willow Springs with one division; McClernand, who was now in the rear, was to
join in this as well as to guard the line back down the bayou.  I did not want to take the
chances of having an enemy lurking in our rear.

On the way from the junction to Grand Gulf, where the road comes into the one from Vicksburg
to the same place six or seven miles out, I learned that the last of the enemy had retreated
past that place on their way to Vicksburg.  I left Logan to make the proper disposition of
his troops for the night, while I rode into the town with an escort of about twenty cavalry.
Admiral Porter had already arrived with his fleet.  The enemy had abandoned his heavy guns
and evacuated the place.

When I reached Grand Gulf May 3d I had not been with my baggage since the 27th of April and
consequently had had no change of underclothing, no meal except such as I could pick up sometimes
at other headquarters, and no tent to cover me.  The first thing I did was to get a bath, borrow
some fresh underclothing from one of the naval officers and get a good meal on the flag-ship.
Then I wrote letters to the general-in-chief informing him of our present position, dispatches
to be telegraphed from Cairo, orders to General Sullivan commanding above Vicksburg, and gave
orders to all my corps commanders.  About twelve o'clock at night I was through my work and
started for Hankinson's ferry, arriving there before daylight.  While at Grand Gulf I heard
from Banks, who was on the Red River, and who said that he could not be at Port Hudson before
the 10th of May and then with only 15,000 men.  Up to this time my intention had been to secure
Grand Gulf, as a base of supplies, detach McClernand's corps to Banks and co-operate with him
in the reduction of Port Hudson.

The news from Banks forced upon me a different plan of campaign from the one intended.  To
wait for his co-operation would have detained me at least a month.  The reinforcements would
not have reached ten thousand men after deducting casualties and necessary river guards at
all high points close to the river for over three hundred miles.  The enemy would have strengthened
his position and been reinforced by more men than Banks could have brought. I therefore determined
to move independently of Banks, cut loose from my base, destroy the rebel force in rear of
Vicksburg and invest or capture the city.

Grand Gulf was accordingly given up as a base and the authorities at Washington were notified.
I knew well that Halleck's caution would lead him to disapprove of this course; but it was
the only one that gave any chance of success.  The time it would take to communicate with Washington
and get a reply would be so great that I could not be interfered with until it was demonstrated
whether my plan was practicable.  Even Sherman, who afterwards ignored bases of supplies other
than what were afforded by the country while marching through four States of the Confederacy
with an army more than twice as large as mine at this time, wrote me from Hankinson's ferry,
advising me of the impossibility of supplying our army over a single road.  He urged me to
"stop all troops till your army is partially supplied with wagons, and then act as quick as
possible; for this road will be jammed, as sure as life."  To this I replied:  "I do not calculate
upon the possibility of supplying the army with full rations from Grand Gulf.  I know it will
be impossible without constructing additional roads.  What I do expect is to get up what rations
of hard bread, coffee and salt we can, and make the country furnish the balance."  We started
from Bruinsburg with an average of about two days' rations, and received no more from our own
supplies for some days; abundance was found in the mean time.  A delay would give the enemy
time to reinforce and fortify.

McClernand's and McPherson's commands were kept substantially as they were on the night of
the 2d, awaiting supplies sufficient to give them three days' rations in haversacks.  Beef,
mutton, poultry and forage were found in abundance.  Quite a quantity of bacon and molasses
was also secured from the country, but bread and coffee could not be obtained in quantity sufficient
for all the men.  Every plantation, however, had a run of stone, propelled by mule power, to
grind corn for the owners and their slaves.  All these were kept running while we were stopping,
day and night, and when we were marching, during the night, at all plantations covered by the
troops.  But the product was taken by the troops nearest by, so that the majority of the command
was destined to go without bread until a new base was established on the Yazoo above Vicksburg.

While the troops were awaiting the arrival of rations I ordered reconnoissances made by McClernand
and McPherson, with the view of leading the enemy to believe that we intended to cross the
Big Black and attack the city at once.

On the 6th Sherman arrived at Grand Gulf and crossed his command that night and the next day.
Three days' rations had been brought up from Grand Gulf for the advanced troops and were issued.
Orders were given for a forward movement the next day.  Sherman was directed to order up Blair,
who had been left behind to guard the road from Milliken's Bend to Hard Times with two brigades.

The quartermaster at Young's Point was ordered to send two hundred wagons with Blair, and the
commissary was to load them with hard bread, coffee, sugar, salt and one hundred thousand pounds
of salt meat.

On the 3d Hurlbut, who had been left at Memphis, was ordered to send four regiments from his
command to Milliken's Bend to relieve Blair's division, and on the 5th he was ordered to send
Lauman's division in addition, the latter to join the army in the field.  The four regiments
were to be taken from troops near the river so that there would be no delay.

During the night of the 6th McPherson drew in his troops north of the Big Black and was off
at an early hour on the road to Jackson, via Rocky Springs, Utica and Raymond.  That night
he and McClernand were both at Rocky Springs ten miles from Hankinson's ferry.  McPherson remained
there during the 8th, while McClernand moved to Big Sandy and Sherman marched from Grand Gulf
to Hankinson's ferry.  The 9th, McPherson moved to a point within a few miles west of Utica;
McClernand and Sherman remained where they were.  On the 10th McPherson moved to Utica, Sherman
to Big Sandy; McClernand was still at Big Sandy.  The 11th, McClernand was at Five Mile Creek;
Sherman at Auburn; McPherson five miles advanced from Utica. May 12th, McClernand was at Fourteen
Mile Creek; Sherman at Fourteen Mile Creek; McPherson at Raymond after a battle.

After McPherson crossed the Big Black at Hankinson's ferry Vicksburg could have been approached
and besieged by the south side.  It is not probable, however, that Pemberton would have permitted
a close besiegement.  The broken nature of the ground would have enabled him to hold a strong
defensible line from the river south of the city to the Big Black, retaining possession of
the railroad back to that point.  It was my plan, therefore, to get to the railroad east of
Vicksburg, and approach from that direction.  Accordingly, McPherson's troops that had crossed
the Big Black were withdrawn and the movement east to Jackson commenced.

As has been stated before, the country is very much broken and the roads generally confined
to the tops of the hills.  The troops were moved one (sometimes two) corps at a time to reach
designated points out parallel to the railroad and only from six to ten miles from it.  McClernand's
corps was kept with its left flank on the Big Black guarding all the crossings.  Fourteen Mile
Creek, a stream substantially parallel with the railroad, was reached and crossings effected
by McClernand and Sherman with slight loss.  McPherson was to the right of Sherman, extending
to Raymond.  The cavalry was used in this advance in reconnoitring to find the roads:  to cover
our advances and to find the most practicable routes from one command to another so they could
support each other in case of an attack.  In making this move I estimated Pemberton's movable
force at Vicksburg at about eighteen thousand men, with smaller forces at Haines' Bluff and
Jackson.  It would not be possible for Pemberton to attack me with all his troops at one place,
and I determined to throw my army between his and fight him in detail.  This was done with
success, but I found afterwards that I had entirely under-estimated Pemberton's strength.

Up to this point our movements had been made without serious opposition. My line was now nearly
parallel with the Jackson and Vicksburg railroad and about seven miles south of it.  The right
was at Raymond eighteen miles from Jackson, McPherson commanding; Sherman in the centre on
Fourteen Mile Creek, his advance thrown across; McClernand to the left, also on Fourteen Mile
Creek, advance across, and his pickets within two miles of Edward's station, where the enemy
had concentrated a considerable force and where they undoubtedly expected us to attack. McClernand's
left was on the Big Black.  In all our moves, up to this time, the left had hugged the Big
Black closely, and all the ferries had been guarded to prevent the enemy throwing a force on
our rear.

McPherson encountered the enemy, five thousand strong with two batteries under General Gregg,
about two miles out of Raymond. This was about two P.M.  Logan was in advance with one of his
brigades.  He deployed and moved up to engage the enemy. McPherson ordered the road in rear
to be cleared of wagons, and the balance of Logan's division, and Crocker's, which was still
farther in rear, to come forward with all dispatch.  The order was obeyed with alacrity.  Logan
got his division in position for assault before Crocker could get up, and attacked with vigor,
carrying the enemy's position easily, sending Gregg flying from the field not to appear against
our front again until we met at Jackson.

In this battle McPherson lost 66 killed, 339 wounded, and 37 missing --nearly or quite all
from Logan's division.  The enemy's loss was 100 killed, 305 wounded, besides 415 taken prisoners.

I regarded Logan and Crocker as being as competent division commanders as could be found in
or out of the army and both equal to a much higher command.  Crocker, however, was dying of
consumption when he volunteered.  His weak condition never put him on the sick report when
there was a battle in prospect, as long as he could keep on his feet. He died not long after
the close of the rebellion.

When the news reached me of McPherson's victory at Raymond about sundown my position was with
Sherman.  I decided at once to turn the whole column towards Jackson and capture that place
without delay.

Pemberton was now on my left, with, as I supposed, about 18,000 men; in fact, as I learned
afterwards, with nearly 50,000.  A force was also collecting on my right, at Jackson, the point
where all the railroads communicating with Vicksburg connect. All the enemy's supplies of men
and stores would come by that point.  As I hoped in the end to besiege Vicksburg I must first
destroy all possibility of aid.  I therefore determined to move swiftly towards Jackson, destroy
or drive any force in that direction and then turn upon Pemberton.  But by moving against Jackson,
I uncovered my own communication.  So I finally decided to have none--to cut loose altogether
from my base and move my whole force eastward.  I then had no fears for my communications,
and if I moved quickly enough could turn upon Pemberton before he could attack me in the rear.

Accordingly, all previous orders given during the day for movements on the 13th were annulled
by new ones.  McPherson was ordered at daylight to move on Clinton, ten miles from Jackson;
Sherman was notified of my determination to capture Jackson and work from there westward. 
He was ordered to start at four in the morning and march to Raymond. McClernand was ordered
to march with three divisions by Dillon's to Raymond.  One was left to guard the crossing of
the Big Black.

On the 10th I had received a letter from Banks, on the Red River, asking reinforcements.  Porter
had gone to his assistance with a part of his fleet on the 3d, and I now wrote to him describing
my position and declining to send any troops.  I looked upon side movements as long as the
enemy held Port Hudson and Vicksburg as a waste of time and material.

General Joseph E. Johnston arrived at Jackson in the night of the 13th from Tennessee, and
immediately assumed command of all the Confederate troops in Mississippi.  I knew he was expecting
reinforcements from the south and east. On the 6th I had written to General Halleck: "Information
from the other side leaves me to believe the enemy are bringing forces from Tullahoma."

Up to this time my troops had been kept in supporting distances of each other, as far as the
nature of the country would admit.  Reconnoissances were constantly made from each corps to
enable them to acquaint themselves with the most practicable routes from one to another in
case a union became necessary.

McPherson reached Clinton with the advance early on the 13th and immediately set to work destroying
the railroad.  Sherman's advance reached Raymond before the last of McPherson's command had
got out of the town.  McClernand withdrew from the front of the enemy, at Edward's station,
with much skill and without loss, and reached his position for the night in good order.  On
the night of the 13th, McPherson was ordered to march at early dawn upon Jackson, only fifteen
miles away. Sherman was given the same order; but he was to move by the direct road from Raymond
to Jackson, which is south of the road McPherson was on and does not approach within two miles
of it at the point where it crossed the line of intrenchments which, at that time, defended
the city. McClernand was ordered to move one division of his command to Clinton, one division
a few miles beyond Mississippi Springs following Sherman's line, and a third to Raymond.  He
was also directed to send his siege guns, four in number with the troops going by Mississippi
Springs. McClernand's position was an advantageous one in any event. With one division at Clinton
he was in position to reinforce McPherson, at Jackson, rapidly if it became necessary; the
division beyond Mississippi Springs was equally available to reinforce Sherman; the one at
Raymond could take either road. He still had two other divisions farther back now that Blair
had come up, available within a day at Jackson.  If this last command should not be wanted
at Jackson, they were already one day's march from there on their way to Vicksburg and on three
different roads leading to the latter city.  But the most important consideration in my mind
was to have a force confronting Pemberton if he should come out to attack my rear. This I expected
him to do; as shown further on, he was directed by Johnston to make this very move.

I notified General Halleck that I should attack the State capital on the 14th.  A courier carried
the dispatch to Grand Gulf through an unprotected country.

Sherman and McPherson communicated with each other during the night and arranged to reach Jackson
at about the same hour.  It rained in torrents during the night of the 13th and the fore part
of the day of the 14th. The roads were intolerable, and in some places on Sherman's line, where
the land was low, they were covered more than a foot deep with water. But the troops never
murmured.  By nine o'clock Crocker, of McPherson's corps, who was now in advance, came upon
the enemy's pickets and speedily drove them in upon the main body.  They were outside of the
intrenchments in a strong position, and proved to be the troops that had been driven out of
Raymond.  Johnston had been reinforced; during the night by Georgia and South Carolina regiments,
so that his force amounted to eleven thousand men, and he was expecting still more.

Sherman also came upon the rebel pickets some distance out from the town, but speedily drove
them in.  He was now on the south and south-west of Jackson confronting the Confederates behind
their breastworks, while McPherson's right was nearly two miles north, occupying a line running
north and south across the Vicksburg railroad. Artillery was brought up and reconnoissances
made preparatory to an assault. McPherson brought up Logan's division while he deployed Crocker's
for the assault.  Sherman made similar dispositions on the right.  By eleven A.M. both were
ready to attack.  Crocker moved his division forward, preceded by a strong skirmish line. 
These troops at once encountered the enemy's advance and drove it back on the main body, when
they returned to their proper regiment and the whole division charged, routing the enemy completely
and driving him into this main line.  This stand by the enemy was made more than two miles
outside of his main fortifications. McPherson followed up with his command until within range
of the guns of the enemy from their intrenchments, when he halted to bring his troops into
line and reconnoitre to determine the next move.  It was now about noon.

While this was going on Sherman was confronting a rebel battery which enfiladed the road on
which he was marching--the Mississippi Springs road--and commanded a bridge spanning a stream
over which he had to pass.  By detaching right and left the stream was forced and the enemy
flanked and speedily driven within the main line.  This brought our whole line in front of
the enemy's line of works, which was continuous on the north, west and south sides from the
Pearl River north of the city to the same river south.  I was with Sherman.  He was confronted
by a force sufficient to hold us back.  Appearances did not justify an assault where we were.
I had directed Sherman to send a force to the right, and to reconnoitre as far as to the Pearl
River.  This force, Tuttle's division, not returning I rode to the right with my staff, and
soon found that the enemy had left that part of the line.  Tuttle's movement or McPherson's
pressure had no doubt led Johnston to order a retreat, leaving only the men at the guns to
retard us while he was getting away.  Tuttle had seen this and, passing through the lines without
resistance, came up in the rear of the artillerists confronting Sherman and captured them with
ten pieces of artillery.  I rode immediately to the State House, where I was soon followed
by Sherman. About the same time McPherson discovered that the enemy was leaving his front,
and advanced Crocker, who was so close upon the enemy that they could not move their guns or
destroy them.  He captured seven guns and, moving on, hoisted the National flag over the rebel
capital of Mississippi.  Stevenson's brigade was sent to cut off the rebel retreat, but was
too late or not expeditious enough.

Our loss in this engagement was:  McPherson, 37 killed, 228 wounded; Sherman, 4 killed and
21 wounded and missing.  The enemy lost 845 killed, wounded and captured.  Seventeen guns fell
into our hands, and the enemy destroyed by fire their store-houses, containing a large amount
of commissary stores.

On this day Blair reached New Auburn and joined McClernand's 4th division.  He had with him
two hundred wagons loaded with rations, the only commissary supplies received during the entire
campaign.

I slept that night in the room that Johnston was said to have occupied the night before.

About four in the afternoon I sent for the corps commanders and directed the dispositions to
be made of their troops.  Sherman was to remain in Jackson until he destroyed that place as
a railroad centre, and manufacturing city of military supplies. He did the work most effectually.
Sherman and I went together into a manufactory which had not ceased work on account of the
battle nor for the entrance of Yankee troops.  Our presence did not seem to attract the attention
of either the manager or the operatives, most of whom were girls.  We looked on for a while
to see the tent cloth which they were making roll out of the looms, with "C. S. A."  woven
in each bolt.  There was an immense amount of cotton, in bales, stacked outside.  Finally I
told Sherman I thought they had done work enough.  The operatives were told they could leave
and take with them what cloth they could carry.  In a few minutes cotton and factory were in
a blaze. The proprietor visited Washington while I was President to get his pay for this property,
claiming that it was private.  He asked me to give him a statement of the fact that his property
had been destroyed by National troops, so that he might use it with Congress where he was pressing,
or proposed to press, his claim.  I declined.

On the night of the 13th Johnston sent the following dispatch to Pemberton at Edward's station:
"I have lately arrived, and learn that Major-General Sherman is between us with four divisions
at Clinton.  It is important to establish communication, that you may be reinforced.  If practicable,
come up in his rear at once.  To beat such a detachment would be of immense value.  All the
troops you can quickly assemble should be brought.  Time is all-important."  This dispatch
was sent in triplicate, by different messengers.  One of the messengers happened to be a loyal
man who had been expelled from Memphis some months before by Hurlbut for uttering disloyal
and threatening sentiments. There was a good deal of parade about his expulsion, ostensibly
as a warning to those who entertained the sentiments he expressed; but Hurlbut and the expelled
man understood each other.  He delivered his copy of Johnston's dispatch to McPherson who forwarded
it to me.

Receiving this dispatch on the 14th I ordered McPherson to move promptly in the morning back
to Bolton, the nearest point where Johnston could reach the road.  Bolton is about twenty miles
west of Jackson.  I also informed McClernand of the capture of Jackson and sent him the following
order:  "It is evidently the design of the enemy to get north of us and cross the Big Black,
and beat us into Vicksburg.  We must not allow them to do this.  Turn all your forces towards
Bolton station, and make all dispatch in getting there.  Move troops by the most direct road
from wherever they may be on the receipt of this order."

And to Blair I wrote:  "Their design is evidently to cross the Big Black and pass down the
peninsula between the Big Black and Yazoo rivers.  We must beat them.  Turn your troops immediately
to Bolton; take all the trains with you.  Smith's division, and any other troops now with you,
will go to the same place.  If practicable, take parallel roads, so as to divide your troops
and train."

Johnston stopped on the Canton road only six miles north of Jackson, the night of the 14th.
He sent from there to Pemberton dispatches announcing the loss of Jackson, and the following order:

"As soon as the reinforcements are all up, they must be united to the rest of the army.  I
am anxious to see a force assembled that may be able to inflict a heavy blow upon the enemy.
Can Grant supply himself from the Mississippi?  Can you not cut him off from it, and above
all, should he be compelled to fall back for want of supplies, beat him."

The concentration of my troops was easy, considering the character of the country.  McPherson
moved along the road parallel with and near the railroad.  McClernand's command was, one division
(Hovey's) on the road McPherson had to take, but with a start of four miles.  One (Osterhaus)
was at Raymond, on a converging road that intersected the other near Champion's Hill; one (Carr's)
had to pass over the same road with Osterhaus, but being back at Mississippi Springs, would
not be detained by it; the fourth (Smith's) with Blair's division, was near Auburn with a different
road to pass over.  McClernand faced about and moved promptly.  His cavalry from Raymond seized
Bolton by half-past nine in the morning, driving out the enemy's pickets and capturing several men.

The night of the 15th Hovey was at Bolton; Carr and Osterhaus were about three miles south,
but abreast, facing west; Smith was north of Raymond with Blair in his rear.

McPherson's command, with Logan in front, had marched at seven o'clock, and by four reached
Hovey and went into camp; Crocker bivouacked just in Hovey's rear on the Clinton road.  Sherman
with two divisions, was in Jackson, completing the destruction of roads, bridges and military
factories.  I rode in person out to Clinton.  On my arrival I ordered McClernand to move early
in the morning on Edward's station, cautioning him to watch for the enemy and not bring on
an engagement unless he felt very certain of success.

I naturally expected that Pemberton would endeavor to obey the orders of his superior, which
I have shown were to attack us at Clinton.  This, indeed, I knew he could not do; but I felt
sure he would make the attempt to reach that point.  It turned out, however, that he had decided
his superior's plans were impracticable, and consequently determined to move south from Edward's
station and get between me and my base.  I, however, had no base, having abandoned it more
than a week before.  On the 15th Pemberton had actually marched south from Edward's station,
but the rains had swollen Baker's Creek, which he had to cross so much that he could not ford
it, and the bridges were washed away. This brought him back to the Jackson road, on which there
was a good bridge over Baker's Creek.  Some of his troops were marching until midnight to get
there.  Receiving here early on the 16th a repetition of his order to join Johnston at Clinton,
he concluded to obey, and sent a dispatch to his chief, informing him of the route by which
he might be expected.

About five o'clock in the morning (16th) two men, who had been employed on the Jackson and
Vicksburg railroad, were brought to me.  They reported that they had passed through Pemberton's
army in the night, and that it was still marching east. They reported him to have eighty regiments
of infantry and ten batteries; in all, about twenty-five thousand men.

I had expected to leave Sherman at Jackson another day in order to complete his work; but getting
the above information I sent him orders to move with all dispatch to Bolton, and to put one
division with an ammunition train on the road at once, with directions to its commander to
march with all possible speed until he came up to our rear.  Within an hour after receiving
this order Steele's division was on the road. At the same time I dispatched to Blair, who was
near Auburn, to move with all speed to Edward's station.  McClernand was directed to embrace
Blair in his command for the present.  Blair's division was a part of the 15th army corps (Sherman's);
but as it was on its way to join its corps, it naturally struck our left first, now that we
had faced about and were moving west. The 15th corps, when it got up, would be on our extreme
right.  McPherson was directed to get his trains out of the way of the troops, and to follow
Hovey's division as closely as possible. McClernand had two roads about three miles apart,
converging at Edward's station, over which to march his troops.  Hovey's division of his corps
had the advance on a third road (the Clinton) still farther north. McClernand was directed
to move Blair's and A. J. Smith's divisions by the southernmost of these roads, and Osterhaus
and Carr by the middle road.  Orders were to move cautiously with skirmishers to the front
to feel for the enemy.

Smith's division on the most southern road was the first to encounter the enemy's pickets,
who were speedily driven in. Osterhaus, on the middle road, hearing the firing, pushed his
skirmishers forward, found the enemy's pickets and forced them back to the main line.  About
the same time Hovey encountered the enemy on the northern or direct wagon road from Jackson
to Vicksburg.  McPherson was hastening up to join Hovey, but was embarrassed by Hovey's trains
occupying the roads.  I was still back at Clinton.  McPherson sent me word of the situation,
and expressed the wish that I was up.  By half-past seven I was on the road and proceeded rapidly
to the front, ordering all trains that were in front of troops off the road.  When I arrived
Hovey's skirmishing amounted almost to a battle.

McClernand was in person on the middle road and had a shorter distance to march to reach the
enemy's position than McPherson.  I sent him word by a staff officer to push forward and attack.
These orders were repeated several times without apparently expediting McClernand's advance.

Champion's Hill, where Pemberton had chosen his position to receive us, whether taken by accident
or design, was well selected.  It is one of the highest points in that section, and commanded
all the ground in range.  On the east side of the ridge, which is quite precipitous, is a ravine
running first north, then westerly, terminating at Baker's Creek. It was grown up thickly with
large trees and undergrowth, making it difficult to penetrate with troops, even when not defended.
The ridge occupied by the enemy terminated abruptly where the ravine turns westerly.  The left
of the enemy occupied the north end of this ridge. The Bolton and Edward's station wagon-road
turns almost due south at this point and ascends the ridge, which it follows for about a mile;
then turning west, descends by a gentle declivity to Baker's Creek, nearly a mile away.  On
the west side the slope of the ridge is gradual and is cultivated from near the summit to the
creek.  There was, when we were there, a narrow belt of timber near the summit west of the road.

From Raymond there is a direct road to Edward's station, some three miles west of Champion's
Hill.  There is one also to Bolton.  From this latter road there is still another, leaving
it about three and a half miles before reaching Bolton and leads direct to the same station.
It was along these two roads that three divisions of McClernand's corps, and Blair of Sherman's,
temporarily under McClernand, were moving. Hovey of McClernand's command was with McPherson,
farther north on the road from Bolton direct to Edward's station.  The middle road comes into
the northern road at the point where the latter turns to the west and descends to Baker's Creek;
the southern road is still several miles south and does not intersect the others until it reaches
Edward's station.  Pemberton's lines covered all these roads, and faced east. Hovey's line,
when it first drove in the enemy's pickets, was formed parallel to that of the enemy and confronted
his left.

By eleven o'clock the skirmishing had grown into a hard-contested battle.  Hovey alone, before
other troops could be got to assist him, had captured a battery of the enemy.  But he was not
able to hold his position and had to abandon the artillery.  McPherson brought up his troops
as fast as possible, Logan in front, and posted them on the right of Hovey and across the flank
of the enemy.  Logan reinforced Hovey with one brigade from his division; with his other two
he moved farther west to make room for Crocker, who was coming up as rapidly as the roads would
admit.  Hovey was still being heavily pressed, and was calling on me for more reinforcements.
I ordered Crocker, who was now coming up, to send one brigade from his division. McPherson
ordered two batteries to be stationed where they nearly enfiladed the enemy's line, and they
did good execution.

From Logan's position now a direct forward movement carried him over open fields, in rear of
the enemy and in a line parallel with them.  He did make exactly this move, attacking, however,
the enemy through the belt of woods covering the west slope of the hill for a short distance.
Up to this time I had kept my position near Hovey where we were the most heavily pressed; but
about noon I moved with a part of my staff by our right around, until I came up with Logan
himself.  I found him near the road leading down to Baker's Creek.  He was actually in command
of the only road over which the enemy could retreat; Hovey, reinforced by two brigades from
McPherson's command, confronted the enemy's left; Crocker, with two brigades, covered their
left flank; McClernand two hours before, had been within two miles and a half of their centre
with two divisions, and the two divisions, Blair's and A. J. Smith's, were confronting the
rebel right; Ransom, with a brigade of McArthur's division of the 17th corps (McPherson's),
had crossed the river at Grand Gulf a few days before, and was coming up on their right flank.
Neither Logan nor I knew that we had cut off the retreat of the enemy.  Just at this juncture
a messenger came from Hovey, asking for more reinforcements.  There were none to spare.  I
then gave an order to move McPherson's command by the left flank around to Hovey. This uncovered
the rebel line of retreat, which was soon taken advantage of by the enemy.

During all this time, Hovey, reinforced as he was by a brigade from Logan and another from
Crocker, and by Crocker gallantly coming up with two other brigades on his right, had made
several assaults, the last one about the time the road was opened to the rear.  The enemy fled
precipitately.  This was between three and four o'clock.  I rode forward, or rather back, to
where the middle road intersects the north road, and found the skirmishers of Carr's division
just coming in. Osterhaus was farther south and soon after came up with skirmishers advanced
in like manner.  Hovey's division, and McPherson's two divisions with him, had marched and
fought from early dawn, and were not in the best condition to follow the retreating foe.  I
sent orders to Osterhaus to pursue the enemy, and to Carr, whom I saw personally, I explained
the situation and directed him to pursue vigorously as far as the Big Black, and to cross it
if he could; Osterhaus to follow him. The pursuit was continued until after dark.

The battle of Champion's Hill lasted about four hours, hard fighting, preceded by two or three
hours of skirmishing, some of which almost rose to the dignity of battle.  Every man of Hovey's
division and of McPherson's two divisions was engaged during the battle.  No other part of
my command was engaged at all, except that as described before. Osterhaus's and A. J. Smith's
divisions had encountered the rebel advanced pickets as early as half-past seven.  Their positions
were admirable for advancing upon the enemy's line.  McClernand, with two divisions, was within
a few miles of the battle-field long before noon and in easy hearing.  I sent him repeated
orders by staff officers fully competent to explain to him the situation.  These traversed
the wood separating us, without escort, and directed him to push forward; but he did not come.
It is true, in front of McClernand there was a small force of the enemy and posted in a good
position behind a ravine obstructing his advance; but if he had moved to the right by the road
my staff officers had followed the enemy must either have fallen back or been cut off.  Instead
of this he sent orders to Hovey, who belonged to his corps, to join on to his right flank.
Hovey was bearing the brunt of the battle at the time.  To obey the order he would have had
to pull out from the front of the enemy and march back as far as McClernand had to advance
to get into battle and substantially over the same ground. Of course I did not permit Hovey
to obey the order of his intermediate superior.

We had in this battle about 15,000 men absolutely engaged.  This excludes those that did not
get up, all of McClernand's command except Hovey.  Our loss was 410 killed, 1,844 wounded and
187 missing.  Hovey alone lost 1,200 killed, wounded and missing--more than one-third of his
division.

Had McClernand come up with reasonable promptness, or had I known the ground as I did afterwards,
I cannot see how Pemberton could have escaped with any organized force.  As it was he lost
over three thousand killed and wounded and about three thousand captured in battle and in pursuit.
Loring's division, which was the right of Pemberton's line, was cut off from the retreating
army and never got back into Vicksburg. Pemberton himself fell back that night to the Big Black
River.  His troops did not stop before midnight and many of them left before the general retreat
commenced, and no doubt a good part of them returned to their homes.  Logan alone captured
1,300 prisoners and eleven guns. Hovey captured 300 under fire and about 700 in all, exclusive
of 500 sick and wounded whom he paroled, thus making 1,200.

McPherson joined in the advance as soon as his men could fill their cartridge-boxes, leaving
one brigade to guard our wounded.  The pursuit was continued as long as it was light enough
to see the road.  The night of the 16th of May found McPherson's command bivouacked from two
to six miles west of the battlefield, along the line of the road to Vicksburg. Carr and Osterhaus
were at Edward's station, and Blair was about three miles south-east; Hovey remained on the
field where his troops had fought so bravely and bled so freely.  Much war material abandoned
by the enemy was picked up on the battle-field, among it thirty pieces of artillery.  I pushed
through the advancing column with my staff and kept in advance until after night. Finding ourselves
alone we stopped and took possession of a vacant house.  As no troops came up we moved back
a mile or more until we met the head of the column just going into bivouac on the road.  We
had no tents, so we occupied the porch of a house which had been taken for a rebel hospital
and which was filled with wounded and dying who had been brought from the battle-field we had
just left.

While a battle is raging one can see his enemy mowed down by the thousand, or the ten thousand,
with great composure; but after the battle these scenes are distressing, and one is naturally
disposed to do as much to alleviate the suffering of an enemy as a friend.

We were now assured of our position between Johnston and Pemberton, without a possibility of
a junction of their forces.  Pemberton might have made a night march to the Big Black, crossed
the bridge there and, by moving north on the west side, have eluded us and finally returned
to Johnston.  But this would have given us Vicksburg.  It would have been his proper move,
however, and the one Johnston would have made had he been in Pemberton's place.  In fact it
would have been in conformity with Johnston's orders to Pemberton.

Sherman left Jackson with the last of his troops about noon on the 16th and reached Bolton,
twenty miles west, before halting.  His rear guard did not get in until two A.M. the 17th,
but renewed their march by daylight.  He paroled his prisoners at Jackson, and was forced to
leave his own wounded in care of surgeons and attendants.  At Bolton he was informed of our
victory.  He was directed to commence the march early next day, and to diverge from the road
he was on to Bridgeport on the Big Black River, some eleven miles above the point where we
expected to find the enemy.  Blair was ordered to join him there with the pontoon train as
early as possible.

This movement brought Sherman's corps together, and at a point where I hoped a crossing of
the Big Black might be effected and Sherman's corps used to flank the enemy out of his position
in our front, thus opening a crossing for the remainder of the army.  I informed him that I
would endeavor to hold the enemy in my front while he crossed the river.

The advance division, Carr's (McClernand's corps), resumed the pursuit at half-past three A.M.
on the 17th, followed closely by Osterhaus, McPherson bringing up the rear with his corps.
As I expected, the enemy was found in position on the Big Black.  The point was only six miles
from that where my advance had rested for the night, and was reached at an early hour.  Here
the river makes a turn to the west, and has washed close up to the high land; the east side
is a low bottom, sometimes overflowed at very high water, but was cleared and in cultivation. The
United States, of course, had little interest in it, since it belonged to France, and since, east
of the river, there were millions of acres as yet unsettled; but when, in 1803, President Jefferson
purchased it of Napoleon Bonaparte for the sum of fifteen million dollars, all that was changed.
By that purchase, the area of the United States was more than doubled; but there were many
people at the time who opposed the purchase on the ground that the country east of the river would
never be thoroughly settled and that there would be no use whatever for the great territory west
of it. So mistaken, sometimes, is human foresight!

The President determined that this great addition to the Nation should be explored without
delay, and, securing from Congress the necessary powers, he appointed his private secretary,
Captain Meriwether Lewis, to head an expedition to the Pacific.

Lewis was at that time twenty-nine years of age. He seems to have been of an adventurous disposition
for, despite the fact that he inherited a fortune, he enlisted in the army as a private as soon
as he was of age. Five years later, he had risen to the rank of captain, and, attracting the
attention of President Jefferson, he was appointed his secretary. He proved to be so capable and
enterprising that the President selected him for this dangerous and arduous task of exploration.
With him was associated Lieutenant William Clark, a brother of that hardy adventurer, George
Rogers Clark.

William Clark, who was eighteen years younger than his famous brother, had joined him in Kentucky
in 1784, at the age of fourteen, and soon became acquainted with
the perils of Indian warfare.

He was appointed ensign in the army four years later, and rose to the rank of adjutant, but was
compelled to resign, from the service in 1796, on account of ill-health. He settled at the half-Spanish
town of St. Louis, and in March, 1804, was appointed by President Jefferson a second lieutenant
of artillery, with orders to join Captain Lewis in his journey to the Pacific. Clark was really
the military director of the expedition, and his knowledge of Indian life and character had much to
do with its success.

The party consisted of twenty-eight men, and in the spring of 1804,
started up the Missouri, following it until late in October, when
they camped for the winter near the present site of Bismarck, North.

Dakota. They resumed the journey early in the spring, and in May, caught their first glimpse
of the Rocky Mountains. Reaching the headwaters of the Columbia, at last, they floated down its
current, and on the morning of November 7, 1806, after a journey of a year and a half, full of
every sort of hardship and adventure, they saw ahead of them the blue expanse of the Pacific.
They spent the winter on the coast, and reached St. Louis again in September, 1807, having
traversed over nine thousand miles of unbroken wilderness where no white man had ever before set
foot. It was largely because of this expedition that our government was able, forty years
later, to claim and maintain a title to the state of Oregon.

Congress rewarded the members of the expedition with grants of land, and Lewis was appointed
governor of Missouri. But the strain of the expedition to the Pacific
had undermined his health; he became subject to fits of depression,
and on October 8, 1809, he put an end to his life in a lonely cabin
near Nashville, Tennessee, where he had stopped for a night's lodging.
Clark lived thirty years longer, serving as Indian agent, governor
of Missouri, and superintendent of Indian affairs.

While Lewis and
Clark were struggling across the continent, another young adventurer
was conducting some explorations farther to the east.

Sherman reached Bridgeport about noon of the 17th and found Blair with the pontoon train already
there.  A few of the enemy were intrenched on the west bank, but they made little resistance
and soon surrendered. Two divisions were crossed that night and the third the following morning.

On the 18th I moved along the Vicksburg road in advance of the troops and as soon as possible
joined Sherman.  My first anxiety was to secure a base of supplies on the Yazoo River above
Vicksburg.  Sherman's line of march led him to the very point on Walnut Hills occupied by the
enemy the December before when he was repulsed.  Sherman was equally anxious with myself. 
Our impatience led us to move in advance of the column and well up with the advanced skirmishers.
There were some detached works along the crest of the hill.  These were still occupied by the
enemy, or else the garrison from Haines' Bluff had not all got past on their way to Vicksburg.
At all events the bullets of the enemy whistled by thick and fast for a short time.  In a few
minutes Sherman had the pleasure of looking down from the spot coveted so much by him the December
before on the ground where his command had lain so helpless for offensive action. He turned
to me, saying that up to this minute he had felt no positive assurance of success.  This, however,
he said was the end of one of the greatest campaigns in history and I ought to make a report
of it at once.  Vicksburg was not yet captured, and there was no telling what might happen
before it was taken; but whether captured or not, this was a complete and successful campaign.
I do not claim to quote Sherman's language; but the substance only.  My reason for mentioning
this incident will appear further on.

McPherson, after crossing the Big Black, came into the Jackson and Vicksburg road which Sherman
was on, but to his rear.  He arrived at night near the lines of the enemy, and went into camp.
McClernand moved by the direct road near the railroad to Mount Albans, and then turned to the
left and put his troops on the road from Baldwin's ferry to Vicksburg.  This brought him south
of McPherson.  I now had my three corps up the works built for the defence of Vicksburg, on
three roads --one to the north, one to the east and one to the south-east of the city. By the
morning of the 19th the investment was as complete as my limited number of troops would allow.
Sherman was on the right, and covered the high ground from where it overlooked the Yazoo as
far south-east as his troops would extend.  McPherson joined on to his left, and occupied ground
on both sides of the Jackson road.  McClernand took up the ground to his left and extended
as far towards Warrenton as he could, keeping a continuous line.

On the 19th there was constant skirmishing with the enemy while we were getting into better
position.  The enemy had been much demoralized by his defeats at Champion's Hill and the Big
Black, and I believed he would not make much effort to hold Vicksburg. Accordingly, at two
o'clock I ordered an assault.  It resulted in securing more advanced positions for all our
troops where they were fully covered from the fire of the enemy.

The 20th and 21st were spent in strengthening our position and in making roads in rear of the
army, from Yazoo River or Chickasaw Bayou.  Most of the army had now been for three weeks with
only five days' rations issued by the commissary.  They had an abundance of food, however,
but began to feel the want of bread.  I remember that in passing around to the left of the
line on the 21st, a soldier, recognizing me, said in rather a low voice, but yet so that I
heard him, "Hard tack."  In a moment the cry was taken up all along the line, "Hard tack! Hard
tack!" I told the men nearest to me that we had been engaged ever since the arrival of the
troops in building a road over which to supply them with everything they needed.  The cry was
instantly changed to cheers.  By the night of the 21st all the troops had full rations issued
to them. The bread and coffee were highly appreciated.

I now determined on a second assault.  Johnston was in my rear, only fifty miles away, with
an army not much inferior in numbers to the one I had with me, and I knew he was being reinforced.
There was danger of his coming to the assistance of Pemberton, and after all he might defeat
my anticipations of capturing the garrison if, indeed, he did not prevent the capture of the
city.  The immediate capture of Vicksburg would save sending me the reinforcements which were
so much wanted elsewhere, and would set free the army under me to drive Johnston from the State.
But the first consideration of all was--the troops believed they could carry the works in their
front, and would not have worked so patiently in the trenches if they had not been allowed to try.

The attack was ordered to commence on all parts of the line at ten o'clock A.M. on the 22d
with a furious cannonade from every battery in position.  All the corps commanders set their
time by mine so that all might open the engagement at the same minute. The attack was gallant,
and portions of each of the three corps succeeded in getting up to the very parapets of the
enemy and in planting their battle flags upon them; but at no place were we able to enter.
General McClernand reported that he had gained the enemy's intrenchments at several points,
and wanted reinforcements.  I occupied a position from which I believed I could see as well
as he what took place in his front, and I did not see the success he reported.  But his request
for reinforcements being repeated I could not ignore it, and sent him Quinby's division of
the 17th corps. Sherman and McPherson were both ordered to renew their assaults as a diversion
in favor of McClernand.  This last attack only served to increase our casualties without giving
any benefit whatever.  As soon as it was dark our troops that had reached the enemy's line
and been obliged to remain there for security all day, were withdrawn; and thus ended the last
assault upon Vicksburg.

CHAPTER XXXVII

SIEGE OF VICKSBURG.

I now determined upon a regular siege--to "out-camp the enemy," as it were, and to incur no
more losses.  The experience of the 22d convinced officers and men that this was best, and
they went to work on the defences and approaches with a will.  With the navy holding the river,
the investment of Vicksburg was complete.  As long as we could hold our position the enemy
was limited in supplies of food, men and munitions of war to what they had on hand.  These
could not last always.

The crossing of troops at Bruinsburg commenced April 30th.  On the 18th of May the army was
in rear of Vicksburg.  On the 19th, just twenty days after the crossing, the city was completely
invested and an assault had been made:  five distinct battles (besides continuous skirmishing)
had been fought and won by the Union forces; the capital of the State had fallen and its arsenals,
military manufactories and everything useful for military purposes had been destroyed; an average
of about one hundred and eighty miles had been marched by the troops engaged; but five days'
rations had been issued, and no forage; over six thousand prisoners had been captured, and
as many more of the enemy had been killed or wounded; twenty-seven heavy cannon and sixty-one
field-pieces had fallen into our hands; and four hundred miles of the river, from Vicksburg
to Port Hudson, had become ours.  The Union force that had crossed the Mississippi River up
to this time was less than forty-three thousand men. One division of these, Blair's, only arrived
in time to take part in the battle of Champion's Hill, but was not engaged there; and one brigade,
Ransom's of McPherson's corps, reached the field after the battle.  The enemy had at Vicksburg,
Grand Gulf, Jackson, and on the roads between these places, over sixty thousand men.  They
were in their own country, where no rear guards were necessary.  The country is admirable for
defence, but difficult for the conduct of an offensive campaign.  All their troops had to be
met.  We were fortunate, to say the least, in meeting them in detail:  at Port Gibson seven
or eight thousand; at Raymond, five thousand; at Jackson, from eight to eleven thousand; at
Champion's Hill, twenty-five thousand; at the Big Black, four thousand.  A part of those met
at Jackson were all that was left of those encountered at Raymond.  They were beaten in detail
by a force smaller than their own, upon their own ground.  Our loss up to this time was:

                             KILLED  WOUNDED  MISSING

 Port Gibson.....              131     719      25
 South Fork Bayou Pierre.....   ..       1      ..
 Skirmishes, May 3 .....         1       9      ..
 Fourteen Mile Creek.....        6      24      ..
 Raymond...............         66     339      39
 Jackson.....                   42     251       7
 Champion's Hill.....          410   1,844     187
 Big Black.....                 39     237       3
 Bridgeport.....                ..       1      ..
 Total.....                    695   3,425     259

Of the wounded many were but slightly so, and continued on duty.  Not half of them were disabled
for any length of time.

After the unsuccessful assault of the 22d the work of the regular siege began.  Sherman occupied
the right starting from the river above Vicksburg, McPherson the centre (McArthur's division
now with him) and McClernand the left, holding the road south to Warrenton.  Lauman's division
arrived at this time and was placed on the extreme left of the line.

In the interval between the assaults of the 19th and 22d, roads had been completed from the
Yazoo River and Chickasaw Bayou, around the rear of the army, to enable us to bring up supplies
of food and ammunition; ground had been selected and cleared on which the troops were to be
encamped, and tents and cooking utensils were brought up.  The troops had been without these
from the time of crossing the Mississippi up to this time.  All was now ready for the pick
and spade.  Prentiss and Hurlbut were ordered to send forward every man that could be spared.
Cavalry especially was wanted to watch the fords along the Big Black, and to observe Johnston.
I knew that Johnston was receiving reinforcements from Bragg, who was confronting Rosecrans
in Tennessee. Vicksburg was so important to the enemy that I believed he would make the most
strenuous efforts to raise the siege, even at the risk of losing ground elsewhere.

My line was more than fifteen miles long, extending from Haines' Bluff to Vicksburg, thence
to Warrenton.  The line of the enemy was about seven.  In addition to this, having an enemy
at Canton and Jackson, in our rear, who was being constantly reinforced, we required a second
line of defence facing the other way.  I had not troops enough under my command to man these.
General Halleck appreciated the situation and, without being asked, forwarded reinforcements
with all possible dispatch.

The ground about Vicksburg is admirable for defence.  On the north it is about two hundred
feet above the Mississippi River at the highest point and very much cut up by the washing rains;
the ravines were grown up with cane and underbrush, while the sides and tops were covered with
a dense forest.  Farther south the ground flattens out somewhat, and was in cultivation.  But
here, too, it was cut up by ravines and small streams.  The enemy's line of defence followed
the crest of a ridge from the river north of the city eastward, then southerly around to the
Jackson road, full three miles back of the city; thence in a southwesterly direction to the
river.  Deep ravines of the description given lay in front of these defences.  As there is
a succession of gullies, cut out by rains along the side of the ridge, the line was necessarily
very irregular.  To follow each of these spurs with intrenchments, so as to command the slopes
on either side, would have lengthened their line very much. Generally therefore, or in many
places, their line would run from near the head of one gully nearly straight to the head of
another, and an outer work triangular in shape, generally open in the rear, was thrown up on
the point; with a few men in this outer work they commanded the approaches to the main line
completely.

The work to be done, to make our position as strong against the enemy as his was against us,
was very great.  The problem was also complicated by our wanting our line as near that of the
enemy as possible.  We had but four engineer officers with us. Captain Prime, of the Engineer
Corps, was the chief, and the work at the beginning was mainly directed by him. His health
soon gave out, when he was succeeded by Captain Comstock, also of the Engineer Corps.  To provide
assistants on such a long line I directed that all officers who had graduated at West Point,
where they had necessarily to study military engineering, should in addition to their other
duties assist in the work.

The chief quartermaster and the chief commissary were graduates.  The chief commissary, now
the Commissary-General of the Army, begged off, however, saying that there was nothing in engineering
that he was good for unless he would do for a sap-roller.  As soldiers require rations while
working in the ditches as well as when marching and fighting, and as we would be sure to lose
him if he was used as a sap-roller, I let him off.  The general is a large man; weighs two
hundred and twenty pounds, and is not tall.

We had no siege guns except six thirty-two pounders, and there were none at the West to draw
from.  Admiral Porter, however, supplied us with a battery of navy-guns of large calibre, and
with these, and the field artillery used in the campaign, the siege began.  The first thing
to do was to get the artillery in batteries where they would occupy commanding positions; then
establish the camps, under cover from the fire of the enemy but as near up as possible; and
then construct rifle-pits and covered ways, to connect the entire command by the shortest route.
The enemy did not harass us much while we were constructing our batteries. Probably their artillery
ammunition was short; and their infantry was kept down by our sharpshooters, who were always
on the alert and ready to fire at a head whenever it showed itself above the rebel works.

In no place were our lines more than six hundred yards from the enemy. It was necessary, therefore,
to cover our men by something more than the ordinary parapet.  To give additional protection
sand bags, bullet-proof, were placed along the tops of the parapets far enough apart to make
loop-holes for musketry.  On top of these, logs were put. By these means the men were enabled
to walk about erect when off duty, without fear of annoyance from sharpshooters.  The enemy
used in their defence explosive musket-balls, no doubt thinking that, bursting over our men
in the trenches, they would do some execution; but I do not remember a single case where a
man was injured by a piece of one of these shells. When they were hit and the ball exploded,
the wound was terrible.  In these cases a solid ball would have hit as well.  Their use is
barbarous, because they produce increased suffering without any corresponding advantage to
those using them.

The enemy could not resort to our method to protect their men, because we had an inexhaustible
supply of ammunition to draw upon and used it freely.  Splinters from the timber would have
made havoc among the men behind.

There were no mortars with the besiegers, except what the navy had in front of the city; but
wooden ones were made by taking logs of the toughest wood that could be found, boring them
out for six or twelve pound shells and binding them with strong iron bands.  These answered
as cochorns, and shells were successfully thrown from them into the trenches of the enemy.

The labor of building the batteries and intrenching was largely done by the pioneers, assisted
by negroes who came within our lines and who were paid for their work; but details from the
troops had often to be made. The work was pushed forward as rapidly as possible, and when an
advanced position was secured and covered from the fire of the enemy the batteries were advanced.
By the 30th of June there were two hundred and twenty guns in position, mostly light field-pieces,
besides a battery of heavy guns belonging to, manned and commanded by the navy.  We were now
as strong for defence against the garrison of Vicksburg as they were against us; but I knew
that Johnston was in our rear, and was receiving constant reinforcements from the east. He
had at this time a larger force than I had had at any time prior to the battle of Champion's Hill.

As soon as the news of the arrival of the Union army behind Vicksburg reached the North, floods
of visitors began to pour in.  Some came to gratify curiosity; some to see sons or brothers
who had passed through the terrible ordeal; members of the Christian and Sanitary Associations
came to minister to the wants of the sick and the wounded. In the judgment of all people our
divines have carried practical preaching and writing to the greatest perfection it ever arrived
to; which shews, that we may affirm in general, our clergy is excellent, although this or that
man be faulty. As if an army be constantly victorious, regular, &c. we may say, it is an excellent
victorious army: But Tindal; to disparage it, would say, such a serjeant
ran away; such an ensign hid himself in a ditch; nay, one colonel
turned his back, therefore, it is a corrupt, cowardly army, &c.

Page
224.

"They were as apprehensive of the works of Aristotle, as some men are of the works of a late
philosopher, which, they are afraid, will let too much light into the world." Yet just such, another;
only a commentator on Aristotle. People are likely to improve their understanding much with
Locke; It is not his "Human Understanding," but other works that people dislike, although in
that there are some dangerous tenets, as that of [no] innate ideas.

Page 226. "Could they, like the popish priests, add to this a restraint on the press, their business
would be done." So it ought: For example, to hinder his book, because it is written to justify
the vices and infidelity of the age. There can be no other design in it. For, is this a way
or manner to do good? Railing doth but provoke. The opinion of the whole parliament is, the clergy
are too poor.

Ibid.

"When some nations could be no longer kept from prying into learning, this miserable gibberish of
the schools was contrived." We have exploded schoolmen as much as he, and in some people's opinion
too much, since the liberty of embracing any opinion is allowed. They following Aristotle, who
is doubtless the greatest master of arguing in the world: But it hath been a fashion of late years
to explode Aristotle, and therefore this man hath fallen into it like others, for that reason,
without understanding him. Aristotle's poetry, rhetoric, and politics, are admirable, and
therefore, it is likely, so are his logics.

Page 230.

"In these freer countries, as the clergy have less power, so religion is better understood, and
more useful and excellent discourses are made on that subject, &c." Not generally. Holland not
very famous, Spain hath been, and France is. But it requireth more knowledge, than his, to
form general rules, which people strain (when ignorant) to false
deductions to make them out.

Page 232. Chap. VII. "That this hypothesis of an independent power
in any set of clergymen, makes all reformation unlawful, except where
those who have this power, do consent." The title of this chapter,
A Truism.

Page 234. "If God has not placed mankind in respect to
civil matters under an absolute power, but has permitted them in every
society to act as they judge best for their own safety, &c." A brigade of Blair's division and twelve hundred cavalry had already,
on Blair's return from the Yazoo, been sent to the same place with instructions to watch the
crossings of the Big Black River, to destroy the roads in his (Blair's) front, and to gather
or destroy all supplies.

On the 7th of June our little force of colored and white troops across the Mississippi, at
Milliken's Bend, were attacked by about 3,000 men from Richard Taylor's trans-Mississippi command.
With the aid of the gunboats they were speedily repelled.  I sent Mower's brigade over with
instructions to drive the enemy beyond the Tensas Bayou; and we had no further trouble in that
quarter during the siege.  This was the first important engagement of the war in which colored
troops were under fire. These men were very raw, having all been enlisted since the beginning
of the siege, but they behaved well.

On the 8th of June a full division arrived from Hurlbut's command, under General Sooy Smith.
It was sent immediately to Haines' Bluff, and General C. C. Washburn was assigned to the general
command at that point.

On the 11th a strong division arrived from the Department of the Missouri under General Herron,
which was placed on our left. This cut off the last possible chance of communication between
Pemberton and Johnston, as it enabled Lauman to close up on McClernand's left while Herron
intrenched from Lauman to the water's edge.  At this point the water recedes a few hundred
yards from the high land.  Through this opening no doubt the Confederate commanders had been
able to get messengers under cover of night.

On the 14th General Parke arrived with two divisions of Burnside's corps, and was immediately
dispatched to Haines' Bluff.  These latter troops--Herron's and Parke's--were the reinforcements
already spoken of sent by Halleck in anticipation of their being needed.  They arrived none
too soon.

I now had about seventy-one thousand men.  More than half were disposed across the peninsula,
between the Yazoo at Haines' Bluff and the Big Black, with the division of Osterhaus watching
the crossings of the latter river farther south and west from the crossing of the Jackson road
to Baldwin's ferry and below.

There were eight roads leading into Vicksburg, along which and their immediate sides, our work
was specially pushed and batteries advanced; but no commanding point within range of the enemy
was neglected.

On the 17th I received a letter from General Sherman and one on the 18th from General McPherson,
saying that their respective commands had complained to them of a fulsome, congratulatory order
published by General McClernand to the 13th corps, which did great injustice to the other troops
engaged in the campaign.  This order had been sent North and published, and now papers containing
it had reached our camps.  The order had not been heard of by me, and certainly not by troops
outside of McClernand's command until brought in this way.  I at once wrote to McClernand,
directing him to send me a copy of this order.  He did so, and I at once relieved him from
the command of the 13th army corps and ordered him back to Springfield, Illinois.  The publication
of his order in the press was in violation of War Department orders and also of mine.

On the 22d of June positive information was received that Johnston had crossed the Big Black
River for the purpose of attacking our rear, to raise the siege and release Pemberton. The
correspondence between Johnston and Pemberton shows that all expectation of holding Vicksburg
had by this time passed from Johnston's mind.  I immediately ordered Sherman to the command
of all the forces from Haines' Bluff to the Big Black River. This amounted now to quite half
the troops about Vicksburg. Besides these, Herron and A. J. Smith's divisions were ordered
to hold themselves in readiness to reinforce Sherman.  Haines' Bluff had been strongly fortified
on the land side, and on all commanding points from there to the Big Black at the railroad
crossing batteries had been constructed.  The work of connecting by rifle-pits where this was
not already done, was an easy task for the troops that were to defend them.

We were now looking west, besieging Pemberton, while we were also looking east to defend ourselves
against an expected siege by Johnston. But as against the garrison of Vicksburg we were as
substantially protected as they were against us.  Where we were looking east and north we were
strongly fortified, and on the defensive.  Johnston evidently took in the situation and wisely,
I think, abstained from making an assault on us because it would simply have inflicted loss
on both sides without accomplishing any result.  We were strong enough to have taken the offensive
against him; but I did not feel disposed to take any risk of losing our hold upon Pemberton's
army, while I would have rejoiced at the opportunity of defending ourselves against an attack
by Johnston.

From the 23d of May the work of fortifying and pushing forward our position nearer to the enemy
had been steadily progressing.  At three points on the Jackson road, in front of Leggett's
brigade, a sap was run up to the enemy's parapet, and by the 25th of June we had it undermined
and the mine charged. The enemy had countermined, but did not succeed in reaching our mine.
At this particular point the hill on which the rebel work stands rises abruptly.  Our sap ran
close up to the outside of the enemy's parapet.  In fact this parapet was also our protection.
The soldiers of the two sides occasionally conversed pleasantly across this barrier; sometimes
they exchanged the hard bread of the Union soldiers for the tobacco of the Confederates; at
other times the enemy threw over hand-grenades, and often our men, catching them in their hands,
returned them.

Our mine had been started some distance back down the hill; consequently when it had extended
as far as the parapet it was many feet below it. This caused the failure of the enemy in his
search to find and destroy it.  On the 25th of June at three o'clock, all being ready, the
mine was exploded.  A heavy artillery fire all along the line had been ordered to open with
the explosion.  The effect was to blow the top of the hill off and make a crater where it stood.
The breach was not sufficient to enable us to pass a column of attack through.  In fact, the
enemy having failed to reach our mine had thrown up a line farther back, where most of the
men guarding that point were placed.  There were a few men, however, left at the advance line,
and others working in the countermine, which was still being pushed to find ours.  All that
were there were thrown into the air, some of them coming down on our side, still alive.  I
remember one colored man, who had been under ground at work when the explosion took place,
who was thrown to our side.  He was not much hurt, but terribly frightened.  Some one asked
him how high he had gone up.  "Dun no, massa, but t'ink 'bout t'ree mile," was his reply. 
General Logan commanded at this point and took this colored man to his quarters, where he did
service to the end of the siege.

As soon as the explosion took place the crater was seized by two regiments of our troops who
were near by, under cover, where they had been placed for the express purpose.  The enemy made
a desperate effort to expel them, but failed, and soon retired behind the new line.  From here,
however, they threw hand-grenades, which did some execution.  The compliment was returned by
our men, but not with so much effect.  The enemy could lay their grenades on the parapet, which
alone divided the contestants, and roll them down upon us; while from our side they had to
be thrown over the parapet, which was at considerable elevation.  During the night we made
efforts to secure our position in the crater against the missiles of the enemy, so as to run
trenches along the outer base of their parapet, right and left; but the enemy continued throwing
their grenades, and brought boxes of field ammunition (shells), the fuses of which they would
light with portfires, and throw them by hand into our ranks.  We found it impossible to continue
this work.  Another mine was consequently started which was exploded on the 1st of July, destroying
an entire rebel redan, killing and wounding a considerable number of its occupants and leaving
an immense chasm where it stood.  No attempt to charge was made this time, the experience of
the 25th admonishing us. Our loss in the first affair was about thirty killed and wounded.
The enemy must have lost more in the two explosions than we did in the first.  We lost none
in the second.

From this time forward the work of mining and pushing our position nearer to the enemy was
prosecuted with vigor, and I determined to explode no more mines until we were ready to explode
a number at different points and assault immediately after.  We were up now at three different
points, one in front of each corps, to where only the parapet of the enemy divided us.

At this time an intercepted dispatch from Johnston to Pemberton informed me that Johnston intended
to make a determined attack upon us in order to relieve the garrison at Vicksburg.  I knew
the garrison would make no formidable effort to relieve itself.  The picket lines were so close
to each other--where there was space enough between the lines to post pickets--that the men
could converse.  On the 21st of June I was informed, through this means, that Pemberton was
preparing to escape, by crossing to the Louisiana side under cover of night; that he had employed
workmen in making boats for that purpose; that the men had been canvassed to ascertain if they
would make an assault on the "Yankees" to cut their way out; that they had refused, and almost
mutinied, because their commander would not surrender and relieve their sufferings, and had
only been pacified by the assurance that boats enough would be finished in a week to carry
them all over.  The rebel pickets also said that houses in the city had been pulled down to
get material to build these boats with.  Afterwards this story was verified:  on entering the
city we found a large number of very rudely constructed boats.

All necessary steps were at once taken to render such an attempt abortive.  Our pickets were
doubled; Admiral Porter was notified, so that the river might be more closely watched; material
was collected on the west bank of the river to be set on fire and light up the river if the
attempt was made; and batteries were established along the levee crossing the peninsula on
the Louisiana side.  Had the attempt been made the garrison of Vicksburg would have been drowned,
or made prisoners on the Louisiana side.  General Richard Taylor was expected on the west bank
to co-operate in this movement, I believe, but he did not come, nor could he have done so with
a force sufficient to be of service.  The Mississippi was now in our possession from its source
to its mouth, except in the immediate front of Vicksburg and of Port Hudson.  We had nearly
exhausted the country, along a line drawn from Lake Providence to opposite Bruinsburg.  The
roads west were not of a character to draw supplies over for any considerable force.

By the 1st of July our approaches had reached the enemy's ditch at a number of places.  At
ten points we could move under cover to within from five to one hundred yards of the enemy.
Orders were given to make all preparations for assault on the 6th of July.  The debouches were
ordered widened to afford easy egress, while the approaches were also to be widened to admit
the troops to pass through four abreast.  Plank, and bags filled with cotton packed in tightly,
were ordered prepared, to enable the troops to cross the ditches.

On the night of the 1st of July Johnston was between Brownsville and the Big Black, and wrote
Pemberton from there that about the 7th of the month an attempt would be made to create a diversion
to enable him to cut his way out.  Pemberton was a prisoner before this message reached him.

On July 1st Pemberton, seeing no hope of outside relief, addressed the following letter to
each of his four division commanders:

"Unless the siege of Vicksburg is raised, or supplies are thrown in, it will become necessary
very shortly to evacuate the place. Closely and curiously intertwined were the destinies of these
three men, Clay was born in 1777; Webster and Calhoun five years later. Calhoun and Clay were
Irishmen and hated England; Webster was a Scotchman, and Scotchmen were usually Tories.


Two of his generals suggested surrender, and the other two practically did the same.  They
expressed the opinion that an attempt to evacuate would fail.  Pemberton had previously got
a message to Johnston suggesting that he should try to negotiate with me for a release of the
garrison with their arms.  Johnston replied that it would be a confession of weakness for him
to do so; but he authorized Pemberton to use his name in making such an arrangement.

On the 3d about ten o'clock A.M. white flags appeared on a portion of the rebel works.  Hostilities
along that part of the line ceased at once.  Soon two persons were seen coming towards our
lines bearing a white flag.  They proved to be General Bowen, a division commander, and Colonel
Montgomery, aide-de-camp to Pemberton, bearing the following letter to me:

"I have the honor to propose an armistice for--hours, with the view to arranging terms for
the capitulation of Vicksburg.  To this end, if agreeable to you, I will appoint three commissioners,
to meet a like number to be named by yourself at such place and hour to-day as you may find
convenient.  I make this proposition to save the further effusion of blood, which must otherwise
be shed to a frightful extent, feeling myself fully able to maintain my position for a yet
indefinite period. This communication will be handed you under a flag of truce, by Major-General
John S. Bowen."

It was a glorious sight to officers and soldiers on the line where these white flags were visible,
and the news soon spread to all parts of the command.  The troops felt that their long and
weary marches, hard fighting, ceaseless watching by night and day, in a hot climate, exposure
to all sorts of weather, to diseases and, worst of all, to the gibes of many Northern papers
that came to them saying all their suffering was in vain, that Vicksburg would never be taken,
were at last at an end and the Union sure to be saved.

Bowen was received by General A. J. Smith, and asked to see me.  I had been a neighbor of Bowen's
in Missouri, and knew him well and favorably before the war; but his request was refused. 
He then suggested that I should meet Pemberton.  To this I sent a verbal message saying that,
if Pemberton desired it, I would meet him in front of McPherson's corps at three o'clock that
afternoon.  I also sent the following written reply to Pemberton's letter:

"Your note of this date is just received, proposing an armistice for several hours, for the
purpose of arranging terms of capitulation through commissioners, to be appointed, etc.  The
useless effusion of blood you propose stopping by this course can be ended at any time you
may choose, by the unconditional surrender of the city and garrison. Men who have shown so
much endurance and courage as those now in Vicksburg, will always challenge the respect of
an adversary, and I can assure you will be treated with all the respect due to prisoners of
war. I do not favor the proposition of appointing commissioners to arrange the terms of capitulation,
because I have no terms other than those indicated above."

At three o'clock Pemberton appeared at the point suggested in my verbal message, accompanied
by the same officers who had borne his letter of the morning.  Generals Ord, McPherson, Logan
and A. J. Smith, and several officers of my staff, accompanied me. Our place of meeting was
on a hillside within a few hundred feet of the rebel lines.  Near by stood a stunted oak-tree,
which was made historical by the event.  It was but a short time before the last vestige of
its body, root and limb had disappeared, the fragments taken as trophies.  Since then the same
tree has furnished as many cords of wood, in the shape of trophies, as "The True Cross."

Pemberton and I had served in the same division during part of the Mexican War.  I knew him
very well therefore, and greeted him as an old acquaintance. As we have said, it soon became apparent
that there was going to be a fight, and independent companies were formed all over Virginia,
and started industriously to drilling. Washington, by this time the most conspicuous man in the
colony, was chosen commander-in-chief; and when, at the gathering of the second Continental
Congress at Philadelphia, came news of the fight at Lexington and Concord, the army before Boston
was formally adopted by the Congress as an American army, and Washington was unanimously chosen
to command it. I wonder if any one foresaw that day, even in the dimmest fashion, what immortality
of fame was to come to that tall, quiet, dignified man?

That was on the 15th day of June, 1775, and Washington left immediately for Boston to take command
of the American forces. All along the route, the people turned out to welcome him and bid him Godspeed.
Delegations escorted him from one town to the next, and at last,
on the afternoon of July 2d, he rode into Cambridge, where, the next
day, in the shadow of a great elm on Cambridge Common, he took command
of his army, and began the six years' struggle which resulted in the
establishment of the independence of the United States of America.

His first task was to drive the British from Boston, and he had accomplished
it by the following March.

Then came a long period of reverses and disappointments, during which his little army, outnumbered,
but not outgeneraled, was driven from Long Island, from New York,
and finally across New Jersey, taking refuge on the south bank of
the Delaware.  Half the army was from eight to twelve miles off,
waiting for Johnston.  I informed them of the contents of Pemberton's letters, of my reply
and the substance of the interview, and that I was ready to hear any suggestion; but would
hold the power of deciding entirely in my own hands.  This was the nearest approach to a "council
of war" I ever held. Against the general, and almost unanimous judgment of the council I sent
the following letter:

"In conformity with agreement of this afternoon, I will submit the following proposition for
the surrender of the City of Vicksburg, public stores, etc.  On your accepting the terms proposed,
I will march in one division as a guard, and take possession at eight A.M. to-morrow.  As soon
as rolls can be made out, and paroles be signed by officers and men, you will be allowed to
march out of our lines, the officers taking with them their side-arms and clothing, and the
field, staff and cavalry officers one horse each.  The rank and file will be allowed all their
clothing, but no other property.  If these conditions are accepted, any amount of rations you
may deem necessary can be taken from the stores you now have, and also the necessary cooking
utensils for preparing them.  Thirty wagons also, counting two two-horse or mule teams as one,
will be allowed to transport such articles as cannot be carried along. The same conditions
will be allowed to all sick and wounded officers and soldiers as fast as they become able to
travel.  The paroles for these latter must be signed, however, whilst officers present are
authorized to sign the roll of prisoners."

By the terms of the cartel then in force, prisoners captured by either army were required to
be forwarded as soon as possible to either Aiken's landing below Dutch Gap on the James River,
or to Vicksburg, there to be exchanged, or paroled until they could be exchanged.  There was
a Confederate commissioner at Vicksburg, authorized to make the exchange. I did not propose
to take him a prisoner, but to leave him free to perform the functions of his office.  Had
I insisted upon an unconditional surrender there would have been over thirty thousand men to
transport to Cairo, very much to the inconvenience of the army on the Mississippi.  Thence
the prisoners would have had to be transported by rail to Washington or Baltimore; thence again
by steamer to Aiken's--all at very great expense.  At Aiken's they would have had to be paroled,
because the Confederates did not have Union prisoners to give in exchange.  Then again Pemberton's
army was largely composed of men whose homes were in the South-west; I knew many of them were
tired of the war and would get home just as soon as they could.  A large number of them had
voluntarily come into our lines during the siege, and requested to be sent north where they
could get employment until the war was over and they could go to their homes.

Late at night I received the following reply to my last letter:

"I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication of this date, proposing
terms of capitulation for this garrison and post. In the main your terms are accepted; but,
in justice both to the honor and spirit of my troops manifested in the defence of Vicksburg,
I have to submit the following amendments, which, if acceded to by you, will perfect the agreement
between us.  At ten o'clock A.M. to-morrow, I propose to evacuate the works in and around Vicksburg,
and to surrender the city and garrison under my command, by marching out with my colors and
arms, stacking them in front of my present lines.  After which you will take possession.  Officers
to retain their side-arms and personal property, and the rights and property of citizens to
be respected."

This was received after midnight.  My reply was as follows:

"I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication of 3d July.  The amendment
proposed by you cannot be acceded to in full.  It will be necessary to furnish every officer
and man with a parole signed by himself, which, with the completion of the roll of prisoners,
will necessarily take some time.  Again, I can make no stipulations with regard to the treatment
of citizens and their private property.  While I do not propose to cause them any undue annoyance
or loss, I cannot consent to leave myself under any restraint by stipulations. The property
which officers will be allowed to take with them will be as stated in my proposition of last
evening; that is, officers will be allowed their private baggage and side-arms, and mounted
officers one horse each.  If you mean by your proposition for each brigade to march to the
front of the lines now occupied by it, and stack arms at ten o'clock A.M., and then return
to the inside and there remain as prisoners until properly paroled, I will make no objection
to it. Should no notification be received of your acceptance of my terms by nine o'clock A.M.
I shall regard them as having been rejected, and shall act accordingly.  Should these terms
be accepted, white flags should be displayed along your lines to prevent such of my troops
as may not have been notified, from firing upon your men."

Pemberton promptly accepted these terms.

During the siege there had been a good deal of friendly sparring between the soldiers of the
two armies, on picket and where the lines were close together.  All rebels were known as "Johnnies,"
all Union troops as "Yanks."  Often "Johnny" would call:  "Well, Yank, when are you coming
into town?"  The reply was sometimes: "We propose to celebrate the 4th of July there."  Sometimes
it would be:  "We always treat our prisoners with kindness and do not want to hurt them;" or,
"We are holding you as prisoners of war while you are feeding yourselves."  The garrison, from
the commanding general down, undoubtedly expected an assault on the fourth.  They knew from
the temper of their men it would be successful when made; and that would be a greater humiliation
than to surrender. Besides it would be attended with severe loss to them.

The Vicksburg paper, which we received regularly through the courtesy of the rebel pickets,
said prior to the fourth, in speaking of the "Yankee" boast that they would take dinner in
Vicksburg that day, that the best receipt for cooking a rabbit was "First ketch your rabbit."
The paper at this time and for some time previous was printed on the plain side of wall paper.
The last number was issued on the fourth and announced that we had "caught our rabbit."

I have no doubt that Pemberton commenced his correspondence on the third with a two-fold purpose:
first, to avoid an assault, which he knew would be successful, and second, to prevent the capture
taking place on the great national holiday, the anniversary of the Declaration of American
Independence. Holding out for better terms as he did he defeated his aim in the latter particular.

At the appointed hour the garrison of Vicksburg marched out of their works and formed line
in front, stacked arms and marched back in good order.  Our whole army present witnessed this
scene without cheering. Logan's division, which had approached nearest the rebel works, was
the first to march in; and the flag of one of the regiments of his division was soon floating
over the court-house.  Our soldiers were no sooner inside the lines than the two armies began
to fraternize.  Our men had had full rations from the time the siege commenced, to the close.
The enemy had been suffering, particularly towards the last.  I myself saw our men taking bread
from their haversacks and giving it to the enemy they had so recently been engaged in starving
out.  It was accepted with avidity and with thanks.

Pemberton says in his report:

"If it should be asked why the 4th of July was selected as the day for surrender, the answer
is obvious.  I believed that upon that day I should obtain better terms.  Well aware of the
vanity of our foe, I knew they would attach vast importance to the entrance on the 4th of July
into the stronghold of the great river, and that, to gratify their national vanity, they would
yield then what could not be extorted from them at any other time."

This does not support my view of his reasons for selecting the day he did for surrendering.
But it must be recollected that his first letter asking terms was received about 10 o'clock
A.M., July 3d.  It then could hardly be expected that it would take twenty-four hours to effect
a surrender.  He knew that Johnston was in our rear for the purpose of raising the siege, and
he naturally would want to hold out as long as he could.  He knew his men would not resist
an assault, and one was expected on the fourth.  In our interview he told me he had rations
enough to hold out for some time--my recollection is two weeks.  It was this statement that
induced me to insert in the terms that he was to draw rations for his men from his own supplies.

On the 4th of July General Holmes, with an army of eight or nine thousand men belonging to
the trans-Mississippi department, made an attack upon Helena, Arkansas.  He was totally defeated
by General Prentiss, who was holding Helena with less than forty-two hundred soldiers.  Holmes
reported his loss at 1,636, of which 173 were killed; but as Prentiss buried 400, Holmes evidently
understated his losses. The Union loss was 57 killed, 127 wounded, and between 30 and 40 missing.
This was the last effort on the part of the Confederacy to raise the siege of Vicksburg.

On the third, as soon as negotiations were commenced, I notified Sherman and directed him to
be ready to take the offensive against Johnston, drive him out of the State and destroy his
army if he could.  Steele and Ord were directed at the same time to be in readiness to join
Sherman as soon as the surrender took place.  Of this Sherman was notified.

I rode into Vicksburg with the troops, and went to the river to exchange congratulations with
the navy upon our joint victory. At that time I found that many of the citizens had been living
under ground.  The ridges upon which Vicksburg is built, and those back to the Big Black, are
composed of a deep yellow clay of great tenacity.  Where roads and streets are cut through,
perpendicular banks are left and stand as well as if composed of stone.  The magazines of the
enemy were made by running passage-ways into this clay at places where there were deep cuts.
Many citizens secured places of safety for their families by carving out rooms in these embankments.
A door-way in these cases would be cut in a high bank, starting from the level of the road
or street, and after running in a few feet a room of the size required was carved out of the
clay, the dirt being removed by the door-way.  In some instances I saw where two rooms were
cut out, for a single family, with a door-way in the clay wall separating them.  Some of these
were carpeted and furnished with considerable elaboration.  In these the occupants were fully
secure from the shells of the navy, which were dropped into the city night and dav without
intermission.

I returned to my old headquarters outside in the afternoon, and did not move into the town
until the sixth.  On the afternoon of the fourth I sent Captain Wm. M. Dunn of my staff to
Cairo, the nearest point where the telegraph could be reached, with a dispatch to the general-in-chief.
It was as follows:

"The enemy surrendered this morning.  The only terms allowed is their parole as prisoners of
war.  This I regard as a great advantage to us at this moment.  It saves, probably, several
days in the capture, and leaves troops and transports ready for immediate service.  Sherman,
with a large force, moves immediately on Johnston, to drive him from the State.  I will send
troops to the relief of Banks, and return the 9th army corps to Burnside."

This news, with the victory at Gettysburg won the same day, lifted a great load of anxiety
from the minds of the President, his Cabinet and the loyal people all over the North.  The
fate of the Confederacy was sealed when Vicksburg fell. Jefferson is one of the few men whose
portrait, as preserved for us, shows us the man as we imagine him to be. No one can look at that
lofty and noble countenance, with its calm and wide-set eyes, its
firm yet tender mouth, its expression of complete serenity, without
realizing that here was a man placed above the weakness and pettiness
and meanness of the world, on a pinnacle of his own, strong in spirit,
wise in judgment, and almost prophetic in vision.

The presidency descended, by an overwhelming majority, to one of Jefferson's stanch friends
and supporters, for whom he had paved the way--James Madison, also a Virginian, who had been
his secretary of state for eight years, and who was himself to serve two terms, during which
the influence of the "Sage of Monticello" was paramount. The great crisis which Madison had to face
was the second war with England, a war brought on by British aggression on the high seas,
and bitterly opposed, especially in New England. The war, characterized by blunders on land
and brilliant successes on the ocean, really resulted without victory to either side, and,
indeed, was very nearly a defeat for America; but in the end, it enabled us to regain possession
of the posts which England had persisted in occupying along the western boundary, and banished
forever any fear that she might, at any time in the future, attempt
to reassert her sovereignty over the United States.

  Duplicates were also made for each
soldier and signed by each individually, one to be retained by the soldier signing and one
to be retained by us.  Several hundred refused to sign their paroles, preferring to be sent
to the North as prisoners to being sent back to fight again.  Others again kept out of the
way, hoping to escape either alternative.

Pemberton appealed to me in person to compel these men to sign their paroles, but I declined.
It also leaked out that many of the men who had signed their paroles, intended to desert and
go to their homes as soon as they got out of our lines.  Pemberton hearing this, again appealed
to me to assist him.  He wanted arms for a battalion, to act as guards in keeping his men together
while being marched to a camp of instruction, where he expected to keep them until exchanged.
This request was also declined.  It was precisely what I expected and hoped that they would
do.  I told him, however, that I would see that they marched beyond our lines in good order.
By the eleventh, just one week after the surrender, the paroles were completed and the Confederate
garrison marched out.  Many deserted, and fewer of them were ever returned to the ranks to
fight again than would have been the case had the surrender been unconditional and the prisoners
sent to the James River to be paroled.

As soon as our troops took possession of the city guards were established along the whole line
of parapet, from the river above to the river below.  The prisoners were allowed to occupy
their old camps behind the intrenchments.  No restraint was put upon them, except by their
own commanders.  They were rationed about as our own men, and from our supplies.  The men of
the two armies fraternized as if they had been fighting for the same cause.  When they passed
out of the works they had so long and so gallantly defended, between lines of their late antagonists,
not a cheer went up, not a remark was made that would give pain.  Really, I believe there was
a feeling of sadness just then in the breasts of most of the Union soldiers at seeing the dejection
of their late antagonists.

The day before the departure the following order was issued:

"Paroled prisoners will be sent out of here to-morrow.  They will be authorized to cross at
the railroad bridge, and move from there to Edward's Ferry, (*14) and on by way of Raymond.
Instruct the commands to be orderly and quiet as these prisoners pass, to make no offensive
remarks, and not to harbor any who fall out of ranks after they have passed."

The capture of Vicksburg, with its garrison, ordnance and ordnance stores, and the successful
battles fought in reaching them, gave new spirit to the loyal people of the North.  New hopes
for the final success of the cause of the Union were inspired.  The victory gained at Gettysburg,
upon the same day, added to their hopes.  Now the Mississippi River was entirely in the possession
of the National troops; for the fall of Vicksburg gave us Port Hudson at once.  The army of
northern Virginia was driven out of Pennsylvania and forced back to about the same ground it
occupied in 1861.  The Army of the Tennessee united with the Army of the Gulf, dividing the
Confederate States completely.

The first dispatch I received from the government after the fall of Vicksburg was in these words:

"I fear your paroling the prisoners at Vicksburg, without actual delivery to a proper agent
as required by the seventh article of the cartel, may be construed into an absolute release,
and that the men will immediately be placed in the ranks of the enemy. Such has been the case
elsewhere.  If these prisoners have not been allowed to depart, you will detain them until
further orders."

Halleck did not know that they had already been delivered into the hands of Major Watts, Confederate
commissioner for the exchange of prisoners.

At Vicksburg 31,600 prisoners were surrendered, together with 172 cannon about 60,000 muskets
and a large amount of ammunition.  The small-arms of the enemy were far superior to the bulk
of ours.  Up to this time our troops at the West had been limited to the old United States
flint-lock muskets changed into percussion, or the Belgian musket imported early in the war--almost
as dangerous to the person firing it as to the one aimed at--and a few new and improved arms.
These were of many different calibers, a fact that caused much trouble in distributing ammunition
during an engagement.  The enemy had generally new arms which had run the blockade and were
of uniform caliber.  After the surrender I authorized all colonels whose regiments were armed
with inferior muskets, to place them in the stack of captured arms and replace them with the
latter.  A large number of arms turned in to the Ordnance Department as captured, were thus
arms that had really been used by the Union army in the capture of Vicksburg.

In this narrative I have not made the mention I should like of officers, dead and alive, whose
services entitle them to special mention.  Neither have I made that mention of the navy which
its services deserve. Suffice it to say, the close of the siege of Vicksburg found us with
an army unsurpassed, in proportion to its numbers, taken as a whole of officers and men.  A
military education was acquired which no other school could have given. Men who thought a company
was quite enough for them to command properly at the beginning, would have made good regimental
or brigade commanders; most of the brigade commanders were equal to the command of a division,
and one, Ransom, would have been equal to the command of a corps at least. Logan and Crocker
ended the campaign fitted to command independent armies.

General F. P. Blair joined me at Milliken's Bend a full-fledged general, without having served
in a lower grade.  He commanded a division in the campaign.  I had known Blair in Missouri,
where I had voted against him in 1858 when he ran for Congress.  I knew him as a frank, positive
and generous man, true to his friends even to a fault, but always a leader. * * * * *

Meanwhile, just to the south of Rhode Island, a prosperous little settlement had been established,
which was soon to grow into the most commercially important on the continent. We have seen how
Henry Hudson, in 1609, in a vessel chartered by the Dutch West India Company, entered the Hudson
river and explored it for some hundred and fifty miles.

The Dutch claimed the region as the result of that voyage, and during the next few years, Dutch
traders visited it regularly and did a lively business in furs; but no attempt was made at colonization
until 1624, although small trading-posts had existed at various points along the river for
ten years previously.

All of this country was included in the patent granted the Virginia Company, and it was for the
mouth of the Hudson that the Pilgrims had sailed in the Mayflower. The charge has since been
made that their captain had been bribed by the thrifty Dutch to land them somewhere else, and
at any cost, to keep them away from the neighborhood of the Dutch trading-posts. From whatever
cause, this was certainly done, and many years were to elapse before
there came another English invasion.

In 1626, Peter Minuit, director for the Dutch West India Company, purchased Manhattan Island from
the Indians, giving for it trinkets and merchandise to the value of $24, and founding New Amsterdam
as the central trading depot. From the first, the settlement was a cosmopolitan one, just as
it is to-day, and in 1643, it was said that eighteen languages were
spoken there.

The most notable figure in this prosperous and growing
colony was that of Peter Stuyvesant, an altogether picturesque and
gallant personality. Born in Holland in 1602, he had entered the army
at an early age, and, as governor of Curaçao, lost a leg in battle.
In 1646, he was appointed director-general of New Netherlands, and
reached New Amsterdam in the spring of the following year. So much
powder was burned in firing salutes to welcome him that there was
scarcely any left.

Upon the surrender of the garrison of Vicksburg there were three things that required immediate
attention.  The first was to send a force to drive the enemy from our rear, and out of the
State.  The second was to send reinforcements to Banks near Port Hudson, if necessary, to complete
the triumph of opening the Mississippi from its source to its mouth to the free navigation
of vessels bearing the Stars and Stripes.  The third was to inform the authorities at Washington
and the North of the good news, to relieve their long suspense and strengthen their confidence
in the ultimate success of the cause they had so much at heart.

Soon after negotiations were opened with General Pemberton for the surrender of the city, I
notified Sherman, whose troops extended from Haines' Bluff on the left to the crossing of the
Vicksburg and Jackson road over the Big Black on the right, and directed him to hold his command
in readiness to advance and drive the enemy from the State as soon as Vicksburg surrendered.
Steele and Ord were directed to be in readiness to join Sherman in his move against General
Johnston, and Sherman was advised of this also.  Sherman moved promptly, crossing the Big Black
at three different points with as many columns, all concentrating at Bolton, twenty miles west
of Jackson.

Johnston heard of the surrender of Vicksburg almost as soon as it occurred, and immediately
fell back on Jackson.  On the 8th of July Sherman was within ten miles of Jackson and on the
11th was close up to the defences of the city and shelling the town.  The siege was kept up
until the morning of the 17th, when it was found that the enemy had evacuated during the night.
The weather was very hot, the roads dusty and the water bad. Johnston destroyed the roads as
he passed and had so much the start that pursuit was useless; but Sherman sent one division,
Steele's, to Brandon, fourteen miles east of Jackson.

The National loss in the second capture of Jackson was less than one thousand men, killed,
wounded and missing.  The Confederate loss was probably less, except in captured.  More than
this number fell into our hands as prisoners.

Medicines and food were left for the Confederate wounded and sick who had to be left behind.
A large amount of rations was issued to the families that remained in Jackson.  Medicine and
food were also sent to Raymond for the destitute families as well as the sick and wounded,
as I thought it only fair that we should return to these people some of the articles we had
taken while marching through the country.  I wrote to Sherman: "Impress upon the men the importance
of going through the State in an orderly manner, abstaining from taking anything not absolutely
necessary for their subsistence while travelling. They should try to create as favorable an
impression as possible upon the people." Provisions and forage, when called for by them, were
issued to all the people, from Bruinsburg to Jackson and back to Vicksburg, whose resources
had been taken for the supply of our army.  Very large quantities of groceries and provisions
were so issued.

Sherman was ordered back to Vicksburg, and his troops took much the same position they had
occupied before--from the Big Black to Haines' Bluff. Having cleaned up about Vicksburg and
captured or routed all regular Confederate forces for more than a hundred miles in all directions,
I felt that the troops that had done so much should be allowed to do more before the enemy
could recover from the blow he had received, and while important points might be captured without
bloodshed.  I suggested to the General-in-chief the idea of a campaign against Mobile, starting
from Lake Pontchartrain.  Halleck preferred another course.  The possession of the trans-Mississippi
by the Union forces seemed to possess more importance in his mind than almost any campaign
east of the Mississippi.  I am well aware that the President was very anxious to have a foothold
in Texas, to stop the clamor of some of the foreign governments which seemed to be seeking
a pretext to interfere in the war, at least so far as to recognize belligerent rights to the
Confederate States.  This, however, could have been easily done without wasting troops in western
Louisiana and eastern Texas, by sending a garrison at once to Brownsville on the Rio Grande.

Halleck disapproved of my proposition to go against Mobile, so that I was obliged to settle
down and see myself put again on the defensive as I had been a year before in west Tennessee.
It would have been an easy thing to capture Mobile at the time I proposed to go there.  Having
that as a base of operations, troops could have been thrown into the interior to operate against
General Bragg's army.  This would necessarily have compelled Bragg to detach in order to meet
this fire in his rear.  If he had not done this the troops from Mobile could have inflicted
inestimable damage upon much of the country from which his army and Lee's were yet receiving
their supplies.  I was so much impressed with this idea that I renewed my request later in
July and again about the 1st of August, and proposed sending all the troops necessary, asking
only the assistance of the navy to protect the debarkation of troops at or near Mobile.  I
also asked for a leave of absence to visit New Orleans, particularly if my suggestion to move
against Mobile should be approved. Both requests were refused.  So far as my experience with
General Halleck went it was very much easier for him to refuse a favor than to grant one. 
But I did not regard this as a favor. It was simply in line of duty, though out of my department.

The General-in-chief having decided against me, the depletion of an army, which had won a succession
of great victories, commenced, as had been the case the year before after the fall of Corinth
when the army was sent where it would do the least good.  By orders, I sent to Banks a force
of 4,000 men; returned the 9th corps to Kentucky and, when transportation had been collected,
started a division of 5,000 men to Schofield in Missouri where Price was raiding the State.
I also detached a brigade under Ransom to Natchez, to garrison that place permanently.  This
latter move was quite fortunate as to the time when Ransom arrived there.  The enemy happened
to have a large number, about 5,000 head, of beef cattle there on the way from Texas to feed
the Eastern armies, and also a large amount of munitions of war which had probably come through
Texas from the Rio Grande and which were on the way to Lee's and other armies in the East.

The troops that were left with me around Vicksburg were very busily and unpleasantly employed
in making expeditions against guerilla bands and small detachments of cavalry which infested
the interior, and in destroying mills, bridges and rolling stock on the railroads.  The guerillas
and cavalry were not there to fight but to annoy, and therefore disappeared on the first approach
of our troops.

The country back of Vicksburg was filled with deserters from Pemberton's army and, it was reported,
many from Johnston's also.  The men determined not to fight again while the war lasted.  Those
who lived beyond the reach of the Confederate army wanted to get to their homes. Those who
did not, wanted to get North where they could work for their support till the war was over.
Besides all this there was quite a peace feeling, for the time being, among the citizens of
that part of Mississippi, but this feeling soon subsided.  It is not probable that Pemberton
got off with over 4,000 of his army to the camp where he proposed taking them, and these were
in a demoralized condition.

On the 7th of August I further depleted my army by sending the 13th corps, General Ord commanding,
to Banks.  Besides this I received orders to co-operate with the latter general in movements
west of the Mississippi.  Having received this order I went to New Orleans to confer with Banks
about the proposed movement.  All these movements came to naught.

During this visit I reviewed Banks' army a short distance above Carrollton.  The horse I rode
was vicious and but little used, and on my return to New Orleans ran away and, shying at a
locomotive in the street, fell, probably on me.  I was rendered insensible, and when I regained
consciousness I found myself in a hotel near by with several doctors attending me.  My leg
was swollen from the knee to the thigh, and the swelling, almost to the point of bursting,
extended along the body up to the arm-pit.  The pain was almost beyond endurance.  I lay at
the hotel something over a week without being able to turn myself in bed.  I had a steamer
stop at the nearest point possible, and was carried to it on a litter.  I was then taken to
Vicksburg, where I remained unable to move for some time afterwards. 

At length the day broke, and the major retired with his party back to the camp, much chagrined at
the failure of the project.

In a few days, Lee received an anonymous letter from Champe's patron
and friend, informing him, that on the day preceding the night for
the execution of the plot, Arnold had removed his quarters to another
part of the town, to superintend the embarkation of troops preparing,
as was rumored, for an expedition, to be placed under his own direction.

 On the 15th he telegraphed again for all available forces to go to Rosecrans.
This was received on the 27th.  I was still confined to my bed, unable to rise from it without
assistance; but I at once ordered Sherman to send one division to Memphis as fast as transports
could be provided.  The division of McPherson's corps, which had got off and was on the way
to join Steele in Arkansas, was recalled and sent, likewise, to report to Hurlbut at Memphis.
Hurlbut was directed to forward these two divisions with two others from his own corps at once,
and also to send any other troops that might be returning there.  Halleck suggested that some
good man, like Sherman or McPherson, should be sent to Memphis to take charge of the troops
going east. On this I sent Sherman, as being, I thought, the most suitable person for an independent
command, and besides he was entitled to it if it had to be given to any one.  He was directed
to take with him another division of his corps.  This left one back, but having one of McPherson's
divisions he had still the equivalent.

Before the receipt by me of these orders the battle of Chickamauga had been fought and Rosecrans
forced back into Chattanooga. The administration as well as the General-in-chief was nearly
frantic at the situation of affairs there.  Mr. Charles A. Dana, an officer of the War Department,
was sent to Rosecrans' headquarters.  I do not know what his instructions were, but he was
still in Chattanooga when I arrived there at a later period.

It seems that Halleck suggested that I should go to Nashville as soon as able to move and take
general direction of the troops moving from the west. I received the following dispatch dated
October 3d:  "It is the wish of the Secretary of War that as soon as General Grant is able
he will come to Cairo and report by telegraph."  I was still very lame, but started without
delay.  Arriving at Columbus on the 16th I reported by telegraph:  "Your dispatch from Cairo
of the 3d directing me to report from Cairo was received at 11.30 on the 10th.  Left the same
day with staff and headquarters and am here en route for Cairo."

END OF VOLUME I.

