They anchored that night in a long and narrow inlet where the trembling reflection of the tug's
funnel lay beside the mirrored tops of pine trees that clung to the rocky shore.  Ahead and
behind was the open lake.  There was no sound but the twitter of sleepy birds and the honk
of a startled heron that winged its flight to solitudes still more remote.  Then Clark began
to fish, and, just as he landed a five pound bass, a girl's voice sounded clearly while a canoe
floated round a nearby point.  Elsie was in it and alone.

XVII.--THE GIRL IN THE CANOE

She stared at him with undisguised astonishment.  "Good evening," he laughed.  "Here I am!"

The girl grew rather pink.  "Isn't it wonderful that you really found us?"

"I didn't, the captain found you."

"It's hard to think of you as--well--just here."

"I came down for a day or two off.  For the first time in years, I've forgotten all about the
works."

"I'm glad, and do you--"

At that instant there came from between Clark's feet a mighty thump, and the big bass, curving
its spiney back, leaped clear of the boat and landed in the brown water with a splash.  A flip
of the broad tail and it vanished.

"You've lost your fish!" exclaimed Elsie, aghast.

"Perhaps you lost it, but it doesn't matter."

"Is that the way you feel, just slack and careless?"

"Just like that."

"I knew you had a mind above fish," she laughed.

"That's a distinction, because few fishermen have.  Now I'd like to thank you again for your
note of a few weeks ago."

"Do you really remember that?" she said earnestly.

He nodded, and over him came a slow conviction that there was an avenue of life he had never
traversed and which seemed to be, after all, more inviting than he had allowed himself to believe.
Elsie was years younger than Clark, but just now the latter felt strangely young.

"Do you recollect finding out that I had but a few personal friends?"

"Yes, of course."

"Well," he said thoughtfully, "I would like another."

"Oh!"  She stared at him, her startled eyes full of light.

"You don't mind, I hope?"

The canoe drifted like a leaf towards his heavy boat, but Elsie's paddle was motionless.

"It would make me very happy.  But could I really do anything for you? It has always seemed
that," she hesitated and her lips became tremulous, "that you didn't need any one."  Then she
added under her breath, "like me."

Clark's face was grave.  "And if I did?"

She looked at him with growing fascination.  Surrounded by the gigantic things of his own creation
he was impressive, but here in the solitudes he took on even more suggestive characteristics.
She stretched out a slim brown hand.

"You will find me very difficult sometimes, I warn you now."

"I like difficult things, they seem to come my way."

The languid hours sped by.  Clark swam, fished, paddled with the girl, entertained her party
in the tug's white painted saloon, and chatted with Mrs. Dibbott, the chaperon, about St. Marys.
But most of all he explored the mind of Elsie Worden.  It was like opening successive doors
to his own intelligence.  She startled him with her intuition, delighted him with her keen
sense of humor, and seemed to grasp the man's complex nature with superlative ease.  And, yielding
to her charms, Clark, for the first time in his life, felt that he must go slow.  It was a
new country to him.  Previous experience had left no landmarks here.

They were drifting lazily along the shore, miles from the others, when Elsie, after a long
pause, glanced at him curiously.

"Will you tell me just what you find in music?"

"But I don't know anything about it."

"Perhaps not, but you feel it, and that's what counts.  I've only heard you play twice."

"Once," he corrected.

"No, I was out on the bay one night, below the blockhouse, when you were playing."  Belding's
name was on the girl's lips but at the moment Belding did not fit and she went on evenly, "It
is something like the rapids."

"I'm glad you think that.  It's the response that one gets."

"That's what I feel.  You're an American, aren't you?"

"Yes."

"I thought so.  You see your people are more responsive than we are, and you don't seem so
ashamed of enthusiasm."

"We can't help it, but it's a little awkward sometimes," his eyes twinkled, "that is in Canada.
Now talk about yourself."

"There's so little to say.  I was asleep for years like every one else in St. Marys, till you
came and woke us all up.

"And then?"

"I realized that life was rather thin and that I wanted a lot of things I'll never get."

"Why never,--and what do you want?"

"To be part of something bigger than myself," said the girl very slowly.

Clark felt an answering throb.  That was what he had felt and wanted and achieved.

"To feel what the world feels and know something of what the world knows," she added intensely.
"I want to work."

"That sounds strenuous."

She flushed a little.  "Won't you take me seriously?"

"I beg your pardon.  As a matter of fact I've always taken you seriously."

"Have you, why?"

"Perhaps because I don't know anything about your sex," he answered teasingly.  "I never had
time,--they're sealed books to me."

"So this is your first exploring trip?"

"The very first,--and it's not at all what I expected."

A question moved in Elsie's eyes but she did not speak.  Clark, taking in the supple grace
of her figure and expanding to the candor of her spirit, wondered if now, at the apex of his
labors, the color of his future life was being evolved by this girl who was as free and untainted
as the winds of Superior.  He had at times attempted friendships of another kind and found
them unsatisfying and pondered whether this might not be the human solution of that loneliness
which he had admitted to her, months before, was only so far assuaged by driving himself to
the uttermost.  Then her voice came in again.

"It was so queer meeting you here, just as if the voice of the rapids had carried a hundred
miles.  I always associate you with the rapids."

"But they'll go on forever, and I won't."

"You're doing something better than that," she said swiftly.

He laid down his paddle.  "I'd like very much to know just what my new friend means."

"You're touching the hidden springs of things that will go on forever." Elsie's voice was vibrant
with feeling.  "That's the difference between you and other men I know.  You're in the secret."

Clark drew a long breath.  "When did you decide that, and why?"

"When I heard about your speech that first night.  I was only seventeen then but I felt almost
as if you'd told me the secret.  So I've followed all you've accomplished since, and I would
give anything to have done just the littlest part of it."

"So it's just a matter of recognizing one's destiny and following it?" he said curiously.

"Just that."  Complete conviction was in her tones.

"Then, for the first time in my life, I'm wondering what destiny has in store for the immediate
future," he said with a long stare of his gray eyes, and in them was that which set her heart
throbbing.

"You must go to-morrow?" she ventured.  Could such wonderful moments ever be repeated?

"Yes, at sunrise, and I'll be at the works at noon.  Do you know that you've done a lot for
me?  It's a selfish remark, but it's true, and may we have another talk when you get back?"

Her lips trembled, and Clark, gazing at her, felt an intense yearning. She was very beautiful
and very understanding.  Then again he hesitated.  There were things, many things, he had in
mind to arrange before he spoke.  A few weeks would make no difference, but only prolong those
delightful and undecipherable sensations to which he now yielded luxuriously.  If this was
love, he had never known love before.

The sun's red orb was thrusting up over the glassy lake when, next morning, the big tug with
a slow thudding of her propeller, moved from her anchorage.  At Clark's orders they passed
on down the channel, and just where the lake began to broaden was a cluster of white tents.
Two Indians were warming their fingers at a rekindled fire.  Clark stared hard, and lifted his hat.

One of the tent flaps had been opened, and a girl stood against a snowy background, her hair
hanging loose.  As the tug drew abreast she waved good-by, and, for another mile, till he swung
round the next point, he could see the slim figure and its farewell salutation.  There was
something mystical about it all.  The girl vanished abruptly behind a screen of trees, the
propeller revolved more rapidly, and the sharp swish of cleft water deepened at the high, straight
bow.

He stood for a long time immersed in profound thought, and oblivious of the keen air of early
morning.  Never before had he found it hard to go back to duty.

Six hours later the tug swept into the St. Marys River, and three miles ahead lay the works,
the vast square-topped buildings rising, it seemed, out of the placid waters of the bay.  He
drew a long breath and emerged from fairyland.  Had he created all this?  Yet it was not more
real than something he had just left and had also created.

XVIII.--MATTERS FINANCIAL

The young manager of the local bank through which Clark transacted his affairs sat late one
night in his office.  He had just returned from dinner at the big house, where he left his
host in an unusually genial and communicative mood.  It seemed that Clark's mind, tightened
with the continued strain of years, had wished to slacken itself in an hour or two of utter
candor, and Brewster had listened with full consciousness that this was an occasion which might
never be repeated. But in his small cubicle, walled in with opaque glass, Clark's magnetic
accents appeared to dwindle before the inexorable character of the statement Brewster now scrutinized.
It was the detailed and financial history of each successive company, a history in which birth
and bones and articulation were clearly set forth, and what struck the young man most forcibly
was the extraordinary way in which each was interlinked with the rest.  The combined capital
of all was, he noted, twenty-seven million dollars, and greater than that yet reached by the
Canadian Pacific Railway.  Brewster had known it before, but the bald and cumulative figures
in front of him made the fact the more momentous.

Probing still deeper, it became apparent that while the pulp mills made steady profits, these
were so adjusted as to form but one link in a chain.  In all there were some ten companies,
each drawing from the others its business and its surplus.  Clark had not been far wrong when
he reflected that he might be asking one dollar to do too much, and now the sharp brain of
the young manager was coming to the same conclusion. Behind his office building passed Clark's
steamships, for there was a transportation company, and into the wilderness Clark's trains
plunged with unfailing regularity.  Up at the works the blast furnaces were vomiting flame
and smoke, and the rail mill was nearly completed. Baudette was sending down train loads and
rafts of wood, and at the iron mine dynamite was lifting thousands of tons of ore.  The entire
aggregation of effort and expenditure had been so systematically interwoven that Brewster there
and then decided that if one link in the chain should part, the whole fabric of the thing would
dissolve.  It was true that he made no advances without authority from his headquarters, but
he had long been aware that Clark's was the largest commercial account in Canada and, he reflected
gravely, it all went through his own office.  Two days later he reached Toronto, and asked
audience of his general manager.

Now since this record is partly that of the relative standing of different individuals in the
development of a little known district, consider Brewster in consultation with Thorpe, the
general manager of his great bank.  Brewster was young, active, in close touch with Clark and
his enterprises, enthusiastic, yet touched with a certain power of quick and ruthless decision.
He had been interested and even thrilled by the doings at St. Marys, but he had never yielded
himself completely to Clark's mesmeric influence.  Thorpe, a much older man and of noted executive
ability, was one of those who by that noted address at the Board of Trade had been rooted out
of long standing indifference and imbued with surprised confidence, and this translation, so
rapid in its movements, still survived.  In consequence, he listened to the younger man with
a thinly veiled incredulity.

"I can't quite see it," he said thoughtfully, "even from your own account.  It's probably the
proportions of the thing that makes you anxious."

Brewster shook his head.  "No, it isn't that.  There's a big power house on the American side
and it didn't earn a cent for a year, something wrong with the foundations, though it's all
right now. There's the sulphur extraction plant that doesn't extract sulphur, and--"

"What?" interrupted Thorpe.  He, like others, had read of the new process with keen interest,
and was anxious to learn details.

"It worked in the laboratory but not on a commercial basis.  Belding, the chief engineer, is
all cut up about it.  Consequence is Clark is buying sulphur, and just now pulp prices are
so low he's not making anything out of it."

"Have you seen Wimperley lately?"

"He was up with Birch a week or so ago."

"Say anything particular?"

Brewster smiled reflectively.  "He didn't seem to want to talk."

"What are the obligations?" asked Thorpe after a little pause.

"Of all companies?"

"Of course."

"About two millions as nearly as I can get at them."

"And to us?"

Brewster handed over a slip of paper.  "This is a copy of what I forwarded yesterday."

The older man's brows cleared a little.  The combined overdraft was just over a hundred thousand,
against which the bank held Philadelphia acceptances which he knew would be met.  He glanced
over the statement again.

"You've looked after this extremely well.  Now what do you want me to do?"

Brewster drew a long breath.  "I don't want you to take my word for anything, but come up and
see for yourself.  Go into the woods and up to the mines and through the entire works--then
come to your own conclusions.  It may be I'm too near the thing to get the right perspective,
but I give it to you as I see it."

Thorpe nodded.  "I know you have and your branch has done extremely well."

"Thanks."  Brewster laughed.  "That's due to the man we're talking about."

"And supposing," put in Thorpe thoughtfully, "supposing the whole thing were to go smash! 
What would you say?"

The other man's eyes rounded a little.  "I'd say," he answered slowly, "that even in that case
the entire district would be in Clark's debt."

"Yes?"

"Because they know what's in the country now and how to get it out--and they never knew that
before."

"And the immediate future--what do you see that depends on?"

"Steel rails," said Brewster with conviction.  "Will you come up?"

Thorpe did go up, and Clark, who knew that Brewster had been in Toronto and conceived why,
met them both at the works with a genuine welcome. He felt, nevertheless, that his undertakings
were to be analyzed with cold deliberation.

At the end of two days Thorpe had seen them all--had peered into the gray black bowels of the
iron mine, watched Baudette denuding the slopes of a multitude of hills--seen the stamps in
the gold mill hammering out the precious particles that were caught by great quicksilver plates,--seen
booms and train loads of pulp on their way to St. Marys--seen the white spruce shaven of its
brown bark and ground and sheeted and loaded into the gaping holds of Clark's steamships--seen
the blast furnaces vomit their molten metal--seen the rhythmic pumps and dynamos send water
and light through every artery of the young city--seen the veneer mills ripping out flexible
miles of their satiny wood--seen the power house on the American side making carbide to the
low rumble of thousands of horsepower, and seen the electric railway that linked Ironville
with St. Marys.  And all the time Clark had put forward neither arguments in his own favor
nor any request for credit, but only allowed these things to speak for themselves, till, as
the aggregate became more and more rounded and the picture more complete, Thorpe perceived
that here was something which initiated by an extraordinary brain had now grown to such vast
proportions that it supplied its own momentum, and must of necessity move on to its appointed
and final result.

But Clark did not distinguish in either Thorpe or Brewster any determining factor of his future.
They would do what they were meant to do, and play the game as the master of the game decided.
They might modify, but they would never create.  His mind was pitched so far ahead that it
was beside the mark to attempt to influence men who, he conceived, were not themselves endowed
with any prophetic vision.  He had to deal with them and he dealt with them, and though he
wondered mutely at their abiding sense of the present and their apparent lack of faith in the
inevitable future, he descended from the heights of his own imagination and parleyed in the
bald and merciless language of strictly commercial affairs.

It was at the end of his visit that Thorpe asked about the sulphur plant.

Clark glanced at him curiously.  The sulphur plant was so small a fraction of the whole.

"There's a certain step in the process we have not perfected--that's all.  You don't believe
in economic waste, do you?"

"No, certainly not--if avoidable."

"Well, I'm satisfied that this is avoidable.  It is just as much a mistake to allow water to
run away when it might be grinding pulp, as it is to drive sulphur into the air instead of
catching and selling it. You pollute the air, you kill the trees, you spend a lot of money,
and you waste the sulphur.  Nature has a lot of processes up her sleeve we've not realized
as yet.  This is one of them."

"Then this plant is a mistake?"  Thorpe got it out with some hesitation.

Clark laughed.  "Some of it--so far.  I make plenty of mistakes, don't you?  It seems to me
it's the proportion his mistakes bear to the things that succeed which determines a man's usefulness.
I don't believe in the one who doesn't make them."

Thorpe grinned in spite of himself.  "Perhaps you're right--but I'll be glad to know as soon
as you're rolling rails.  When do you expect that?"

"In six months at the latest.  I'll send you a section of the first one."

The banker drove toward the station in unaccustomed silence.  Presently he turned to Brewster.
"You were right and, by George!  Clark is right too, but we must not get our mutual rectitude
mixed up.  He's got to go ahead, come what may, and we've got to help him all we reasonably
can, but with us our shareholders come before his.  That's the point.  He may turn out to be
a private liability, but in any case he's a national asset.  I want a bit of that first rail.
Good-by!"

And Clark, after waving farewell at the big gates of the works, had gone into the rail mill
and stood in the shadow in deep contemplation. He glanced at the massive flywheel, the great
dominant dynamo and the huge, inflexible rolls.  At one end were the heating furnaces, their
doors open, and gentle fires glowing softly within to slowly raise the temperature of newly
set brick.  Around him was the swing of work directed by skilled brains, and machinery moved
slowly into its appointed place of service.  It was a good mill, he reflected, for a second
hand mill.  For all of this the place was dead--awaiting the pulse of power and the unremitting
supply of incandescent metal. Glancing keenly about, he experienced again that strange sound
as though between his temples, and suddenly he felt tired.  The thing was good, very good.
But he too wanted to see the lambent metal spewed from between the shining rolls.

It was a notable day in St. Marys when the first rail was actually rolled, and symbolical to
many people of many different things. Infection spread from the words to the town, till all
morning there was a trickling stream of humanity that filed in at the big gates and moved on
toward the dull roar of the mill.  Even though the mass of folk in St. Marys still failed to
grasp the full significance of the event, they saw in it that which put their one time Arcadia
beside Pittsburg, and invested their own persons with a new sense of importance.

Clark, watching the fruition of a seven year dream, felt thrilled as never before.  Here, in
this heat and mechanical tumult, was being forged the last link in the chain into which he
had hammered his entire strength and spirit.  It was a good thing, he reflected, to make pulp
and ship it on his own steamships, but this was the biggest, deepest and most enduring thing
of all.  Some men at such a moment would have felt humble, but he recognized only the unfolding
of an elemental drama in which he played his own particular role.  A few weeks later he closed
a contract with a great railway company for a million dollars' worth of his new product, which
he unhesitatingly guaranteed would live up to the most exacting specifications.

The new plant had settled down to the steady drive of work when the mayor of St. Marys, walking
up the street in a mood of peculiar satisfaction, saw just ahead of him the bulky form of the
chief constable.  He stepped a little faster and laid a detaining hand on the broad shoulder.

"Arrest yourself for a minute," he chuckled.  "How's our town pessimist feeling this fine morning?"

Manson glanced sideways.  "I suppose you want to rub it in.  Well, I don't know that my opinions
have changed very much."

"Takes more than a few thousand tons of rails to move you, eh?  But isn't Mahomet going to
come to the mountain at last?"

Manson shook his head.

"If he doesn't the mountain will come to Mahomet--and crush him," continued Filmer gayly, then,
his mood changing, "but honestly, old man, why don't you drop your gloomy views?  You've an
excellent chance right now, and, besides, they're getting rather amusing."

"I've a right to my own opinions."

"Naturally, we all have, but you don't act up to them--at least you didn't."

Manson glowered at him with quick suspicion.  "What's that?"

"Your left hand knows what your right hand doeth--every time,--at least it's so in St. Marys.
You're too big to get under a bushel basket. Every one saw that you were dabbling in real estate
for years, and made a good clean up, but you seemed so darned ashamed of it that no one cared
to discuss it with you.  And all the time you were our prize package disbeliever.  What's the
use?  It's your own affair, but why don't you make a lightning change like the man in the circus
last week? Your friends would welcome it.  You're not the man we used to know."

"If it's my own affair," came back Manson with growing resentment, "why not leave it at that?
Did you never make any money out of a thing you didn't believe in?"

"Yes," said Filmer slowly, "I have, but after that I believed in it, and said so.  It was only
fair to the fellow behind it."

Manson went stolidly back to his square stone office, where he took out his broker's statement
for the previous month and stared at it silently.  Already he knew the figures by heart.  Another
two point rise in Consolidated stock and he would realize his net profit of one hundred thousand
dollars.  He ran over his own scribbled figures on the back of the statement, as he had gone
over them many times before. They were quite right.  For weeks past his selling order had been
in, been acknowledged, and now at any moment the thing might be done.  It might even have already
been done.  The blood rushed to his head at the thought.  How many other chief constables,
he wondered, had amassed fortunes from behind their forbidding gray stone walls?  Then he thought
of his wife and children, and his eyes softened, while the broker's statement in his big hand
trembled ever so slightly.  He smiled at that, and it came to his mind that perhaps statements
in other men's hands sometimes trembled at the thought of their wives and children and the
fortunes that--and here Manson felt vaguely uncomfortable and, getting up, slowly locked his desk.

Just at that moment, Filmer, who had returned to his office, was sitting staring at a half-section
of steel rail that lay in his hand. It was smooth and highly polished, a thin slice of the
very first product of Clark's last and greatest undertaking.  He experienced a quite extraordinary
sensation at feeling the thing, and it snatched his mind back seven years till again in the
Town Hall he heard a magnetic voice assuring the citizens that the town lacked just three essentials--experience,
money and imagination, and that the speaker would supply them all.  It was a far cry from that
evening to the deep drone of the rail mill, and Filmer, detaching himself from the picture
in which he formed a part, began now to perceive its dramatic vitality. Were Clark taken out
the whole thing seemed to fall to pieces.

And up at the See House, the bishop was examining just such another section of rail, while
the gold of his episcopal ring shone beside the gray of steel.  To him it meant many things,
but chiefly it was prophetic of that which would soon put an end to the detachment and loneliness
of the scattered communities to which he ministered. Holding the thing thus, his heart went
out to Clark, and he yearned with a great longing over the spirit of this man who so reveled
in the joy of creation.  His eyes wandered to the Evangeline.  She lay at anchor just off shore.
A thin film of smoke slid from her funnel, and he could see the Indian pilot swabbing down
her smooth teak decks. Then, in sudden impulse, he smiled and, laying the rail section on top
of a half finished sermon, wrote a short note, and, calling his man servant, instructed him
to wait for an answer.

A little later the note reached Clark in his office, where he sat motionless under the sway
of a slight reaction.  At the moment he did not want to work.  He was continuously conscious
of ribbons of red hot rails that streamed like fluted snakes from under the gigantic rolls,
and they seemed to be boring their way into his brain.  He had shipped thousands of tons to
the railway company and there were thousands more to go.  In a week or so he would get a formal
acceptance of his product, and then--  He stretched himself a little wearily and pressed his
eyes till a red and compelling blur brought its transient solace. And just then his secretary
came in with the bishop's note.

Dear Mr. Clark:

I am off this afternoon for a five day cruise of visits amongst the islands of Lake Huron.
Won't you come with me?  I know it would be good for me and think it might give you what I'm
sure is a much needed rest.  My Mercury, I mean the hired man, awaits your answer.

Yours faithfully,
  JAMES, ALGOMA.

P. S.  I never attempt to proselytize my guests.

For a moment he puzzled over the signature, and finally made out that it was the bishop's Christian
name followed by that of his diocese, for this was the first letter he had received from the
prelate.  Then he felt a sudden throb of impulse.  He had a natural liking for the bishop and
this, with his insatiable appetite for new experiences, prompted an acceptance.  He touched
the bell, and his secretary reappeared.

"I am going away for five days," he paused, adding with a smile--"on missionary work.  I haven't
any idea where we are going and don't want to be disturbed.  I'll be back before we receive
the results of the United Railway Company's tests.  That's all."

It was mid-afternoon when the Evangeline, gliding smoothly over the polished surface of the
bay, drew in towards the Consolidated dock, and Clark, watching from the shadow of a mountain
of bales of pulp assembled for shipment, saw the Indian pilot amidship at the wheel and the
bishop, in a big, coarse, straw hat, standing in the slim bow, a coil of rope in his hands
and a broad smile on his big sunburnt face.

"Catch!"  The bight of the rope whistled through the air and struck smartly at his guest's feet.

The latter laughed, picked it up and made fast.  It struck him suddenly that it was curious
the bishop should be throwing him a rope.  Then he reflected that it was the bishop and not
himself who needed help.

The former was very gay, his kindly face alight with amusement and anticipation.  Presently
came a throb from the engine room, and the Evangeline sheered off down the river, past the
new St. Marys where staring red brick buildings shouldered up out of the old time houses, past
the See Mouse, while a flag fluttered jerkily down from the tall mast at whose top it flew
when the bishop was at home, past the American side, where Clark's big power house stretched
its gray length at the edge of the river, and on till they came to the long point that closes
the upper reach, and just then both men turned and looked up stream at the vanishing bulk of
the huge structures beside the rapids, and the flat line of tremulous foam that marked the
rapids themselves. The voice of them was, at this distance, mute.

The yacht glided on and still neither spoke, Clark was full of the thought that, for the second
time in seven years, he had deliberately left his work.  Four hours ago the thing would have
seemed grotesque, but glancing at the bishop's broad back, he realized that here was a friendly
interceptor to whom he had been wise to yield.  The miles slid smoothly by, and still neither
talked.  Each was busy with the contented reflection that in the other he had found one who
possessed the gift of understanding silence.

The Evangeline rested that evening not far from where Clark had anchored so recently.  He sat
motionless, breathing in the welcome benison of the spot, till the Indian pilot put out port
and starboard lamps whose soft red and green shone steadily into the gathering dusk.

"Is there a mission here?" asked the visitor presently.

"No, but there's the best bass fishing in Lake Huron," grunted the bishop placidly, already
busy with rods and bait.  "The mission is ten miles on.  Now we're going to catch our breakfast--there's
an excellent spot just opposite that big cedar."

Clark had not fished much, but he loved it, like most men of intellect, and discovered that
he had been steered straight into the best fishing he had ever known.  They were small mouthed
bass, deep of belly and high of back, and they fought in the brown water over the twitching
minnows that dangled from the Evangeline bow and stern.

"I'm glad you came."  The bishop smoothed down the spines of a big three pounder ere he gripped it.

"Best thing I ever did.  Fishing is a clerical pursuit, isn't it?"

The bishop nodded without turning his head.  "Yes, but it's not always for money.  We have
to bait our hooks according to the season of men's minds.  By the way, some of my best friends
are in your country."

"Yes?"

"Had a church in Chicago for ten years,--there at the time of the great fire--it stopped a
few blocks from my house.  I had to marry a devoted couple a day or two later and the wedding
fee was a bunch of candles. Glad to get them; whole city in darkness and it seemed suitable
that the parson's house should reflect light.  You remind me of one of my friends at that time."

"Why and how?" said Clark.  He knew so little of himself as appearing in other people's minds.

"This man was a big Chicago importer--look out, you've got another bass--and he was in New
York at the time of the fire--heard his warehouses were threatened and bought trainloads of
stuff and rushed it through.  It arrived while the other stuff was still smoking, and he made
much more than he--  My dear sir, that's the best fish of the evening, let me look at him."

Clark laid the twitching body of a bass on the teak deck, while the big man came aft, trailing
his bait and slowly reeling up his line.  As the minnow glimmered in towards the yacht's black
side, there came a heavy plunge, the bishop's rod bent double, and the line sang off his reel.
He was a famous fisherman, and Clark watched him admiringly.  To every ounce of pliant bamboo
on his six ounce rod there was, down in the brown water, a pound of savagely fighting weight.
Deeper went the big fish and further, but ever the taut line yielded by fractions, and the
nearly doubled rod kept up a steady insidious strain.  As the bass dashed back, the bishop
recovered his nearly spent line while his lips pressed tight and the light of battle shone
in his large eyes.  For a quarter of an hour the fight lasted, till the great fish floundered
once or twice with heavy weariness on the surface, and the angler worked him toward the yacht.
Then a bare brown arm shot a landing net underneath his horny shoulder and, with a dexterous
twist, the Indian pilot landed him on the deck in a thumping tangle of line, leader and net.

"And that," said the bishop with a deep sigh of content, "will do. We've got supper and breakfast
as well."

The night deepened, and in the little saloon host and guest sat down to a supper of fried fish,
blueberries and cream.  The small, red curtains were drawn, and over the tiny fireplace a binnacle
lamp glowed softly. Forward in the bows, the Scotch engineer and the Indian pilot sat conversing
in deliberate monosyllables, and in the east a horned moon floated just clear of the ragged
tops of encircling pine trees.  Clark ate slowly and felt the burden slipping from his shoulders.
It was a strange sensation.  Across the narrow table towered the bishop, the genius of the
place.  He was still reminiscent of American experiences and talked as talks a man who is comfortably
sure of himself and his companion.

"I don't believe I have any very close personal friends," said Clark presently.  "I've moved
about too quickly to make them.  One meets people in the way of work, and so far as my own
employees are concerned, I see them chiefly through their work.  I can't let the personal element
intrude."

The bishop smiled, remembering something similar he had said himself. "Well, I must say I'm
particularly drawn to Americans.  Perhaps it's because they suit the Irish, but I seem to find
in them a certain intellectual generosity one recognizes at once and appreciates.  There aren't
so many fences to climb over.  And, besides, they appear to understand my cloth."

"Yes?"  Clark looked up, keenly interested.  He had not thought much about the clerical profession.

"It's quite true.  They realize that a parson is a man of like predilections and impulses and
weaknesses with themselves, and that a cassock does not stifle the natural and healthy ambitions
of the male mammal.  Nothing is more trying for the cleric than to be put aside as though he
were some emasculated ascetic who was unattracted by merely natural things."

"I hadn't thought of that."

"Very few people have, except the cleric; and he thinks of it a good deal.  There is even the
tendency to believe that the parson, because he is a spiritually minded man, is incapable of
horse sense in practical and public affairs.  By the way, don't you smoke?"

Clark smiled and shook his head.  "I've never wanted to."

"I did once," chuckled the prelate.  "It was a big, black cigar inside a hedge about three
miles out of Dublin.  I've never smoked since. Now, if I may go back to the clerical question,
you'll probably realize that a great many mistakes are made."

"I hadn't thought much about that either."

"Probably not, but it's without question that a good many parsons realize in a year or so that
they're not up to their job, especially if it's a city congregation.  The young and over enthusiastic
rector addressing a church full of shrewd, experienced men of affairs is often in a grievous
case.  I've sat in the chancel and listened and writhed myself.  There's many a poor parson
who would make a good engineer, and he knows it."

"Then why shouldn't he change over?"  Clark was getting new avenues opened for him in hitherto
unexplored directions.

"Because he's ashamed to, and the world has the habit of thinking that the man who has once
been a parson is not available for anything else. Suppose one of my missionaries came to you
for a job--what would happen?"

"I'd send him to you for a letter of recommendation and then put him to work."

"I believe you would, now, but not a month ago."

"That's quite possible."

"Well, you have no conception that envy may, and sometimes does, exist in a black coated breast."

"But why envy?"

"Because devotion to one cause does not stifle natural aspirations in another.  For instance
I've often longed for time to do some writing, on my own account.  One of my traveling preachers
has invented a railway switch and I know he dreams of it and makes sketches on the margin of
his sermons.  No, my dear sir, the public has doubtless classified us, and possibly correctly,
but we are still fanciful, and--" the bishop hesitated and broke off.

"Go on, please."  Clark's gray eyes were very penetrating and understanding.

"Possibly I've talked too much about the parson, but there's one thing that is often denied
him and he longs for it intensely--companionship with his fellow men.  The sacrifice of that
one thing hurts more than any other privation.  And now that this one-sided symposium on the
parson must have taxed your good nature, let's go to bed.  We lift anchor at seven-thirty,
and I go over the side at seven.  There's fifteen feet of water here and a sandy bottom, and
if you like we'll get a few more bass first.  Good night!  I think you'll find everything you
want in your cabin.  Sleep well."

A little later Clark stepped out on deck and breathed in the ineffable serenity of the scene.
A ray of moonlight lay along the inlet like a silver line.  As he went down to his cabin he
noticed that the other's door had swung open.  Inside the bishop was kneeling by his narrow
bunk, his face buried in his hands, his broad shoulders bent forward in prayer.  Clark's breath
came a little quickly at the strangeness of it all and, moving on tip toe, he turned the handle
softly.  In his own cabin, he lay for an hour staring out of the porthole at the dim world
beyond.  He tried to think of the works, but they receded mysteriously beyond the interlocking
branches of the neighboring pines.  They seemed, somehow, less imposing than formerly, and
Wimperley and Stoughton and the rest of them were a long way off.  There came to him the lullulant
lapping of water along the smooth black side of the Evangeline.  Presently he dropped into
the abyss of sleep, dreamless and profound.

XIX.--THE WEB OF LACHESIS

The sun was shining level through the tree-tops when they began to fish.  In fifteen minutes
the bishop called a halt, dipped a bucket of water and washed his hands.  Clark, still under
the spell of this new friendship, saw the great amethyst of the episcopal ring gleaming softly
amid the glint of fish scales, and dimly remembered the story of the Man and the Galilean fisher
folk whose catch was poor till He told them where to cast.  Presently the bishop stripped and
went overboard into the brown water with a clean schloop, where he was instantly followed by
his guest.

Here they played like schoolboys, shouting and blowing in utter physical abandonment, while
the copper colored pilot stared at them with expressionless eyes and wondered mutely why people
wanted to get so wet.

The bishop was like an otter, swimming under water a long way to reappear with a sharp whistle
in an unexpected place.  Soon the first flush of Clark's enjoyment passed.  He felt suddenly
tired and turned toward the Evangeline, where a small wooden ladder had been let down just
athwart the cabin cockpit.  And in that instant he felt a sharp and agonizing pain.

"Help!" he called.  "Help!!"  A deadly stiffness was stealing from foot to knee.

The bishop heard, rolled over on his back and, treading water, saw Clark's face.  The lips
were puffed out, the head bent back and he was splashing desperately.

"Hang on to it, I'm coming," roared the big man, and, laying his right shoulder forward; began
to tear through the water.  Like a tug he came, with a bubble of foam around his head, half
his face submerged, his powerful arms and legs working like pistons.  Such was the power in
him that at each stroke his great body seemed to lift and fling itself forward, and behind
him broadened a long, diamond shaped ripple that slid whispering to the shore.  The next moment
sounded a voice, as from a long way off:

"Put your arms straight out--rest your palms on my shoulders.  When I turn, trail your body
and don't try to do anything.  That's it."  The bishop was breathing hard, but not in any way
distressed.

They moved toward the yacht and Clark felt beneath his hands the working of big, flexible muscles,
and the buoyant surge of the practiced swimmer who glides with the minimum of effort and resistance.
In five minutes he was scarifying his skin with a rough towel and tingled with renewing circulation.

"You saved my life that time," he said earnestly.

The bishop pulled his shirt over his head.  "Well, that's my business, isn't it? and I fancy
it's about the only thing I can do for a man like you.  Let's have some breakfast.  I smell fish."

Clark, in spite of his late experience, ate as he seldom ate, for there were two things at
which Indian Joe was a master--pilotage and cooking. The visitor asked for more, silently deciding
that his Japanese must go, being no such artist as this.

"You're using royal silver," said his host presently with a grin.  "I bought this boat from
the agent of a certain august personage for whom she had grown too small, and I got everything
complete.  She has a bronze propeller and copper rivets.  I've got the royal burgee too, and
fly it only on special occasions."

The other man smiled and nodded.  It did not somehow seem strange to him to be using royal
silver in a remote bay on Lake Huron.  Something about the bishop made it appropriate.  Then
they lifted anchor and the Evangeline moved on under a climbing sun and over a laughing sea
for ten miles till she nosed into a creaking dock and made fast.  Just beyond was the settlement,
from which the parson came hurrying down, followed by others.  Clark looked at him, a lean,
overworked man, with rusty clothes and joy in his face, and remembered for the first time in
his life that here was one fashioned in all ways like unto himself.

"I'm off into the country to visit for a few hours," said the bishop, introducing him.  "You
can come if you like, but it's not a good road, and I would advise you to stay where you are.
Joe will take you fishing and there is plenty to read in the bookshelf.  I can recommend Henry
Drummond or Marcus Aurelius.  Good-by!"

He drove off in a rattling buckboard, and the woods swallowed him.  A little crowd had gathered
in the dock, glancing after the bishop and then down at the slender deck of the Evangeline.
The stranger looked up at them, nodded and disappeared.  Presently Joe stretched an awning
over the long boom of the main mast, and Clark sat in the shade listening to the silence and
surveying this isolated village.  What, he wondered, could keep people in so forgotten a community,
with its unpaved street, its straggling wooden houses, its background of unbroken bush.  There
was no water power, no big timber, and, from the look of the country, no mineral.  He put the
thought out of his mind with luxurious deliberation and tried to decipher why a man like the
bishop should waste his time here when, without doubt, he could be a shining light in a great
city.  After a little the reason became clear, and, smiling to himself, he reached up for Marcus
Aurelius.

They supped that night at the parsonage, where they yielded to the stark simplicity of new
surroundings.  The parson with his wife and children regarded the bishop with their eyes in
which love and reverence were clearly mingled.  At the stranger they looked a little insecurely,
for the bishop had, that afternoon, told who he was.  They had heard of him already, and in
this remote village his person had been invested with mysterious powers.  He was a force of
which they read, rather than a living, breathing man, so that however he might try to talk
affably and communicably, he found himself hedged about with a spiny growth of fame that the
others made but little attempt to penetrate.  His garment of authority and influence was too
great.  He was too big and didn't fit.

Later came service in the bare, wooden church, and for the second time he saw the prelate in
robes of office.  The sun was setting and its level beams filled the tiny edifice with a softened
glow.  Overhead the sky was like a benison, while the bishop spoke words of cheer and strength
that went straight to the hearts of his congregation.  He stood, as he always stood, in front
of the chancel, a great figure in white and scarlet, with a deep mellow voice that seemed to
dissolve in the hush of evening like a lingering caress.  Clark, in his corner, sat motionless,
touched as he had seldom been touched before.  He began to see why the bishop spent his life
in this wilderness.

Service done, the Evangeline moved out over a sea that was sheer, flat silver.  Indian Joe
sat motionless at the wheel, the spokes pressed lightly against his polished palm.  At the
engine room hatch a voiceless Scotchman smoked a contemplative pipe, and for the rest of it
there was only the muffled thud of the propeller, the subdued stroke of the engine and the
whisper of split water at the yacht's knifelike stem.  Clark did not speak.  It seemed as the
yacht slipped on, that he was exploring, a kingdom in which the population and their ways were
hitherto unknown to him; a domain that was pathetic rather than poor--and remote from his scheme
of things.  He had given this phase of life no thought till the bishop introduced him to it,
and was puzzled that both men and women could be so deprived of the salt of life and yet be
apparently content.  The bishop's voice broke his reverie.

"Did you ever consider how much those with imagination owe to those who have none?"

Clark started a little, then shook his head.  "No, I haven't."

"Isn't it true?"

"It may be--but I don't see what there is to create any obligation."

"Well, you're discharging it every day.  You create things primarily for yourself, but actually
what you do is to create opportunities for others less endowed with imaginative power.  And
whatever may be the ultimate scope or result of your work at St. Marys, that is the highest
service it will ever perform.  And, by the way, my friends seemed a little afraid of you at
supper, though I assured them you were perfectly harmless.  Do you mind telling me if you got
any impressions?"

"About the events of the day?"

"Partly.  I'm wondering just what people like these suggest to a man of your sort.  Is it all
very drab and uneventful?"

"Well," said Clark thoughtfully, "it is something like that, isn't it?"

"I thought so once, but that's just what I don't now admit, and urge that this is a case where
we should consider comparative values. Satisfaction is not, after all, so much a matter of
the size or quality of the thing that satisfies, as it is of the individual who is affected
and his circumstances.  Small joys go a long way on Manitoulin Island."

"But are people who live like this not conscious of any deprivation?"

"It's not so much that as it is wonder what it would be like to own certain things or comforts.
You don't find much envy in the bush country, but you do find a lot of self-respect.  I could
tell you things about some Indian friends of mine that would clear your mind, if you happen
to think that the only good Indian is a dead one.  It seems to me that life in the open, even
though a great part of it is spent in exposure and hardship, has certain spiritual compensations."

Clark nodded.  "Perhaps."

"Put it this way; you deal with many kinds of men, but do you not always feel better disposed
toward a simple soul, say like our friend Fisette, than toward some shrewd person who arms
himself at every conceivable point?"

"Yes, I do."

"Well, that's what I feel about my people.  Most of them are unarmed and they trust me, and
anything I can do seems small in comparison to that trust.  You've got a trust too, my friend."

Clark smiled.  "That's what my directors lose no opportunity of telling me."

"But who or what is your Director?" asked the bishop, leaning forward earnestly.  "You needn't
be anxious, I'm not going to sermonize.  Your Director is the same as mine, the great Force,
call it what you will. It drove me into the church and drove you to what you are, and our first
trust is to ourselves--you'll agree with me there--and with that undischarged nothing else
can be carried out.  Just at this moment I wish I were as competent for my job as you are for
yours."

"But, bishop, you're--"

The big man raised his hand.  "Not a word, for tonight I feel like Browning's Bishop Blougram
who 'rolled him out a mind long crumpled, till creased consciousness lay smooth.'  It does
me good to rub out the wrinkles occasionally.  Now tell me, looking back at the last few years
in St. Marys, do you appreciate what you've done?"

"I haven't had much time to look back," said Clark thoughtfully.  "The opportunity was there
and I took it, then I was fortunate enough to enlist the necessary support.  Since that time
the district seems to have responded to every conceivable need, and we have been able to fall
in step with a natural scheme for developing natural resources, that's all."

The bishop shook his head.  "Not quite: it's a great drama you're enacting up there, with the
rapids for a setting.  They run through it all, don't they?--the changeless, elemental background
before which man climbs up on the stage, makes his bow, enacts his part and gives place to
some one else.  You are sending out multitudes of influences that will never be determined
or traced to their result.  You once told me that it all began when you overheard a conversation
in a train."

"Yes," Clark paused, then added with a laugh, "an example of the importance of small things.
You've made your point, bishop."

"Thank you, but I've never been able to decide whether a thing is small or not.  Some of the
things that you and I prize very highly may actually be of small account."

For a while Clark did not answer.  Ever since coming on board the Evangeline he had been conscious
of a new atmosphere, tenanted by the spirit of her master, and of a new language which, though
its tones were familiar, seemed to be the vehicle of a novel wisdom and understanding.  He
was impressed with the utter candor of his host, but chiefly with his superlative sympathy
with all men.  The visitor fell under the influence of a benign nature which, intensely human
in all its attributes, proffered its solace to all alike.  It was, he concluded, the life function
of the bishop to give himself in royal abandonment.

He did not often put himself in the place of other men, but that night, after the Evangeline
had slid into a moon spilt harbor amongst the hills, and the bishop explained that he had come
here because poor people were apt to overtax themselves in entertaining, the visitor lay on
the cock pit cushions and stared long at the starry sky.  Nothing important was to be attached
to this trip, and yet he felt it to be momentous.  He knew he would always remember it, and
that the memory would hereafter assert itself in unexpected moments.  He admitted being influenced
by the bishop and yet felt equipped for all that he had to do without any such influence. 
But there crept over him the slow conception that life might unexpectedly change, and that
under hitherto unimagined conditions he might turn to these hours for the comfort of remembrance.

Three more days of missionary work and the Evangeline turned homeward, Clark took the wheel
for an hour, with the bishop beside him.

"I hope," said the latter, "that the trip has been a success for you?"

The amateur pilot gave an involuntary start.  The question pitched his mind forward to the
works, and he realized that for five days he had forgotten all about them.

"It has been a very great pleasure to me," went on the prelate quietly. "I'm apt to have too
much broadcloth and not enough gray tweed in my life.  Most of us are in the same case, and
one's love of one's work does not suffer by an interest in other things."

"My dear sir, I've benefited enormously.  I'm a new man and ready for anything--even the worst."
How little did he dream that at that very moment Lachesis was spinning her invisible web.

"Ah! that's what we must always be ready for--or the best, which is sometimes the same thing.
Keep her to port a little."

The yacht rounded a long point and came in sight of the works, while Clark experienced a throb
of thankfulness that his host had attempted no missionary work on him.  He was as good as his
word.  There had been no proselytizing.

As the vessel reached the dock, they said good-by, each ready to do his job over again, and
Clark, with his hand enveloped in the warm clasp, realized much of the secret of the prelate's
life, which was no secret at all but just the benignity of a great and tender soul.  He stepped
over the yacht's side and glanced at his secretary who advanced to meet him with a telegram
in his hand, noting that the young man's face was pale and his eyes unusually brilliant.

"This came an hour ago, sir."

With an impatient gesture he opened the folded sheet and read, his heart slowly contracting:

Regret unable to accept first cargo of rails being five thousand tons. These not up to your
guarantee and our specifications.  Full information this mail with the result of physical and
chemical tests.

UNITED RAILWAY COMPANY.

Involuntarily he raised his head.  The yacht was backing out, and the bishop, coiling a rope
in her bows, straightened up to wave farewell. Automatically Clark waved back, then, with the
telegram crumpled in his palm, turned and walked slowly toward his office.  Something the bishop
had said began to sing in his brain.  Could the best and the worst ever be the same thing?

XX.--THE CAR OF PROGRESS HALTS

The paralyzing news had lain in the faithful keeping of a confidential operator and the white
faced secretary who had guarded it jealously. The latter followed to the private office.  When
the door was closed in his face, he went to his own desk and sat blindly at his letters. Clark
stood at a big window that commanded the rapids.  Deep lines were furrowed suddenly on his
face, and his eyes were like sunken bits of cold, gray steel.  He felt the gentle vibration
of the mills, and through it pierced the words of the telegram like a thin sharp voice that
would not be denied.  It was fully an hour later that his call sounded for the secretary.

"The rail mill will be closed shortly for temporary alteration.  If you are asked anything
about it--and you will be--that is all you know. This means that the furnaces must be blown
down.  I don't anticipate any serious delay.  You will repeat this telegram to Philadelphia,
and add that I will report more fully in the next twenty-four hours. There's just one thing
more.  A good deal of importance will attach to your manner and attitude for the next few days.
That's all."

The young man nodded, finding it difficult to speak.  There was nothing unusual about his leader,
except that the eyes were a little more deep set, the voice a shade harder.

A few moments later, Clark stood in the rail mill watching the titanic rolls spew out ribbons
of glowing steel.  It came over him in a sickening flood that the whole giant undertaking was
useless, and instead of the supreme delight he experienced a few months before there was now
but a huge mechanical travesty that flouted the unremitting strain and effort of years.  He
was defacing the everlasting hills with dynamite to make something the commercial world did
not want.  A surge of protest overcame his spirit, followed by a cynical contempt for the futility
of the best efforts of man.  Impatiently he walked up to the superintendent of the mill.

The latter touched a grimy hat.  "We're on the last ten thousand tons for the United," he said
with a note of pride--"the mill's running fine."

"It may be," snapped Clark acidly, "but shut it down.  Your rails are no good."

The other man blinked at him.  "Eh?"

"Do what you're told," repeated Clark with the least shake in his dominant voice.  "The United
doesn't want these rails, though some one else will."

Over the superintendent's sooty face crept a look of blank amazement. "Shut down! why?" he
floundered helplessly.  "I can't, till this heat is through, and there's nothing the matter
with the rails."

"Other people say there is, so get the heat through and obey orders." Then, with sudden anger,
"Is the job too big for you?"

He turned away abruptly, passing the whirling flywheel, the ponderous cylinders, the glowing
ovens, while above him the traveling crane moved like a whining monster across the blackened
roof.  He hastened, desirous of getting out of the presence of these giants whom he had assembled
only in order that they might deride him with their massive proportions.

So on to the towering masses of the furnaces.  Here he saw poured a molten charge, and stood
fascinated, as always, by the smooth and deadly gleam of molten metal, till, curtly, the same
orders were issued.  No further charges should be fed in before orders to that effect.  Then
back to his office, where he cancelled shipments of coke, and sent to the iron mine a curt
word that stilled the boom of dynamite and silenced the sharp chatter of the drills.

Gradually through the works spread the chilling news.  A slowly thickening stream of Swedes,
Poles and Hungarians filed out of the big gates, and Ironville was, in mid-afternoon, populated
with a puzzled multitude that repaired automatically to the saloons.  Through pulp mills and
machine shops, through power and pumping stations, the story went, growing as rapidly as it
spread.  Time keepers heard it and office clerks, and the crews of tugs and steamships that
lay at the big dock below the works.  And while rumors were widening every minute, there was
a knock at Clark's door and, looking up, he saw the comptroller who stood quietly, with a check
for the week's payroll in his hand.

"How much?"  The voice was admirably impersonal.

"One hundred and ten thousand."  The comptroller was a short fat man, and at the moment quivering
with suppressed excitement.

The general manager scribbled his initials on the blue slip, handed it back without a word,
and did not even look up as the official went out. A few minutes later he walked slowly through
the pulp mill, stopping here and there to speak to superintendents and workmen.  The swishing
rasp of the great stones and the steady rumble of turbines brought him a sense of comfort.
He progressed deliberately, and with his usual keen interest, so that, although hundreds of
eyes followed him, not a man could assume that anything had gone seriously wrong.  It was an
hour in which he found and radiated confidence.  Here, at least, was the universal conclusion
that all was as it should be.  He was on the bank of the power canal when his secretary approached
again.

"What is it this time?"

"Hobbs is at the bank with the payroll check, and has just telephoned up.  I think you'd better
speak to him, sir."

Clark's lips pressed tight and his eyes opened a little.  Retracing his steps, he listened
to an agitated voice.

"Mr. Brewster states he has no authority to cash this check unless we cover our overdraft.
He would like to talk to you."

"Let him."

Again the receiver spoke, while Clark's face grew suddenly very grim. "I think you'd better
come up and see me," he said shortly.

Then he listened.  "Very well," he snapped.  His features were like a mask.  "I'm going down
to the bank," he went on dryly to the secretary, "for the first time in his life Mr. Brewster
is unable to leave his office and come up to mine when invited."

He drove into St. Marys followed by the glances of every man and woman who caught sight of
the erect figure.  The town was full of confused and conflicting rumors, but nothing had as
yet crystallized.  The appearance of Clark in mid afternoon at the door of the bank, thickened
the air.  It was known that people with whom he did business invariably went to him.  Not in
years had he been to Brewster.  But for all of that he seemed as cheerful as usual, and took
off his gray hat to Mrs. Worden with accustomed and somewhat formal urbanity.  Inside he found
Hobbs, his round, soft face looking unhealthily pallid, and Brewster with his jaw stuck out,
a determined expression on his young features.

"Well, what's the trouble?"

"Nothing very serious."  Brewster spoke with a pleasant accent, but he was confronting the
most difficult hour of his life.  "Just this check."

"What about it?"

"I can't make any further advances till your present acceptances are met in Philadelphia. 
We have half a million of them."

"That payroll has got to be disbursed."

"I'm sorry, but I can't cash that check."

The lines on the older man's face tightened and deepened.  "Mr. Brewster, we have spent some
fifteen millions of capital through your bank.  This amount is too small to discuss.  Do you
realize that, if you persist, the men will go unpaid for the first time in seven years?"

"I'm sorry, but I can't help that."  The young manager began to feel more fortified.

"Is this because there's a temporary interruption at the rail mill?" said Clark bitterly. 
"You're assuming a big responsibility."

"I regret that I can give no reasons, and am only doing what seems best in the interest of
the bank.  If the acceptances are met,--and the first falls due two weeks from to-day--our
head office will probably authorize a further advance, provided we are secured.  Under the
circumstances your Philadelphia office should take care of this matter."

"And this is your last word?" snapped Clark with emphasis.

But Brewster had by this time completely pulled himself together.  The most trying moment was
passed, and for once the mesmeric influence had failed.  He felt behind him the authority of
Thorpe and his own directors, and revolted at the thought of imperiling his own record.

"You understand," came in Clark's voice, "what happens when men are not paid--especially the
type of many of our employees.  The Swede and Hungarian are apt to be ugly.  Further--an unpaid
payroll has a bad effect on a company's securities, to say nothing of the effect on business
confidence in St. Marys.  You have, of course, weighed all this."

Brewster's eyes were very grave and his face flushed.  "I'm sorry, but I'm doing what I take
to be my duty," he said with a desperate effort.

The older man's mood changed as though in a flash.  "In that case I've nothing more to say."
He got up.  "Come on, Hobbs, Mr. Brewster seems immovable.  We'll have to wire Philadelphia
for the money."  With that he went briskly out.

The banker looked after him in wonderment.  The poignant instant was over, and he pondered
whether, after all, he had done right.  His cipher message sent to Toronto as soon as the news
from the works reached him, was still unanswered, but, he reflected, he had tried to act on
what he believed to be Thorpe's judgment as well as his own. Should the telegram for which
he waited not confirm his decision, there was time enough to apprise Clark of the fact that
night.  And just then the mayor entered the office and sat down, mopping his face.

"What about it?" he demanded presently.

"I don't know any more than you do--possibly not as much."

"Well," said Filmer absently, "there's a lot going round.  Some have it the works are seized
for debt, others that there's a mistake in the rails, others that the Philadelphia directors
have resigned.  Anyway half the thing seems to have stopped."

"Not half of it, just the iron and steel section."

"Yes, but that's the big end of the whole show.  It was expected to carry the burden."

"It's still there, isn't it?" said Brewster fretfully.

The mayor glanced at him quickly.  Something in the voice suggested that the bank was involved
and that the thing was getting on Brewster's nerves.  "I hope you're all right," he answered
evenly, "but I'm carrying more stuff than I like to think of just now."

He departed feeling quite obviously rather balked of his desire for inside information.  Just
outside he met Dibbott.

"I saw Mr. Clark just now," said the latter.  "He doesn't seem at all worried.  Of course you've
heard the news?"

Filmer nodded.  "Yes, and I've a feeling we're going to hear more before long.  Haven't got
any Consolidated stock have you?"

"Stock!  Never owned a share in my life, but I've a good mind to sell my place now while the
price is up.  Look at that, will you!"

The street cars coming down from the works were bulging with the population of Ironville, who
had inconsequently decided to take the holiday in St. Marys.  Hundreds of them were dressed
in Sunday best and bent on an outing; big Slovaks and Poles whose horny fists gripped the platform
rail while they smoked cheap cigars with gaudy labels and chattered volubly to each other.
It was good to be out of Ironville.

On the way down they passed Clark, and with boyish abandon waved their hats in greeting, Clark
smiled back and whirled on.  The sight of them provoked the question in his mind and brought
it closer.  What if these men were not paid next week, as they were promised?  Returning to
his office, he devoted himself to innumerable details affecting the iron works.  To shut them
down was not so simple a thing as he anticipated. They had acquired a momentum it was difficult
to arrest.  Then, wiring in code to Philadelphia for his requirements in cash, he went up to
the big house on the hill and shut himself from all intruders.

On the terrace, overlooking river and works, he walked ceaselessly up and down, irritated but
not alarmed.  Some foreign substance had got into the delicate wheels of progress, and the
machine was for the moment out of adjustment.  From where he stood the works were visible,
and while he missed the long illumination of the rail mill and the pyramidal flame of the converters,
there still sparkled the pulp mill with its long, lighted windows and the gleam of water in
the tail race. Twenty-four hours ago he was sitting on the deck of the Evangeline with the
genial bishop.  Now he was very much alone.  What would Wimperley and the rest do in such an
emergency?  He had never seen them in a corner.  His reverie was interrupted by a message that
Manson desired to see him.

"Riots?" said Clark to himself, then aloud, "Bring him here."

The big man came up, extending a friendly hand.  Clark had a curious dislike for physical,
personal contact, even of the slightest, but now overcame it with difficulty and motioned his
visitor to a chair.  The latter sat speechless.

"Well, Mr. Manson?" Clark asked when the silence became too perceptible.

"I came to ask you if there were any prospects of trouble at the works," said the latter presently.
He spoke jerkily, and in a note far removed from the deep boom of his usual voice.

"Why should you expect any trouble because pay day is postponed for a week?"

Manson lifted his heavy lids.  "Is it only for a week?"

Clark got up and paced the terrace, his head thrust forward, his hands behind his back.  There
was that in the visitor's manner which puzzled him.  The evident agitation and discomfort,
the anxious moving of the thick arms, the constant shifting of the feet, all pointed to something
that struck deeper than the possibility of a riot.  And Manson, he had reason to know, was
no coward.

"I anticipate that it will be less than a week.  How many men have you?"

"Thirty, and myself."

"We have twenty guards at the works, also, if need be, there's the local militia."

"Have you ever seen them?" said the chief constable contemptuously.

"No, but the law is behind them and a certain amount of discipline," then, his voice changing
abruptly, "Mr. Manson, are you afraid?"

The big man stared at him as though fascinated.  His dark face began to work convulsively in
an obvious attempt to voice that which disturbed him.  Clark watched it all.

"Well," he said with ill concealed impatience, "if it's not an imaginary riot that's troubling
you, I'll say good evening.  I'm rather busy at the moment."

At that Manson half lifted himself out of his chair and leaned forward. "It's the works," he
whispered huskily, "are they all going to hell?"

Clark stared at him in open astonishment.  It was an absurd thing that at this moment he should
be subjected to a visit from a man who had never believed in him, but who was now evidently
torn by anxiety at the thought of his failure.  There came a swift and silent suggestion, but
the thing was too remote.

"Mr. Manson," he said slowly, "you never took any stock in me or my efforts, so why worry?"

"But that's just what I did do," croaked the constable, reddening to his temples.  "I invested
all I could and," he added dully, "I've got it now."

"Ah! so that's it?"

"And I'd be grateful if you could tell me--"

"So you said one thing and did another!"  The tones were like a knife. "Well, that's your privilege,
and none of my affair, and," he concluded curtly, "I don't care to discuss it.  Good evening."

But Manson was on his feet, too desperate to be denied.  "It's not your affair what I may have
said or done?  I'm a shareholder--a large one. I've a right to come here and ask you a question.
It's nothing unreasonable--and you'll answer it."  He stood over the smaller man, dark and
threatening.

Clark laughed in his face, till, with that extraordinary perception which so frequently cleft
to the essential essence of things, he perceived that there was that which was more important
than the fact that Manson had been speculating and would certainly be bitten.  His attitude
in public was worth something--at any rate in St. Marys. Known universally as a critic and
pessimist, it would be notable if now, in the time of crisis, he became a supporter.  Manson
as a shareholder did not matter, but officially he did matter.  Very swiftly Clark ran over
this in his mind, while the big man waited, no longer a menace but only a straw borne by the
flood which was the creation of Clark's imagination.  There was no doubt in the latter's mind
as to the ultimate solution of present difficulties.  He still believed, as he always believed,
in himself, in the country and in his enterprise.  So, very deliberately, he began to talk.

"You have asked me a very extraordinary question--that is from you--but it appears," here the
voice was a little sardonic, "that you had more confidence in me than you admitted.  Now you
ask about the future.  I tell you that I never had more faith in the final outcome of affairs
than I have at this moment.  There have been difficulties of which the public knew nothing--and
this is the only one which has become common knowledge.  Do you expect any one to build up
a concern like this without anxious moments?  You know what St. Marys was seven years ago,
and I remember very distinctly your attitude toward myself.  It has taken seven years," here
once more the voice was full of contempt--"seven years and a crisis, to convert you.  Speculators
will doubtless take advantage of this interruption, but I am confident that long after you
and I have passed on, steel rails will still be rolled at the works.  Good evening."

Manson muttered something unintelligible, and moved off down the long hill that led to St.
Marys.  For the first time in his life he believed in Clark, believed in him in that hour when
the faith of thousands was being shaken.  He had no conception what a pigmy unit he himself
was in the multitude who followed their remarkable leader.  He had no grasp of the fundamentals
of which Clark confidently took hold in the time of stress.  He did not wonder who else was
in like case with himself.  He only knew that this man had thrown him the end of a rope, and
he grasped at it with all the strength of his soul, and had no intentions of loosening his hold.

Later that evening he went in to see Filmer, whose office lights were on, and here found Dibbott
and Worden.  The three were talking earnestly, and as the broad figure loomed in the doorway
Dibbott gave a dry laugh.

"Our pessimist's reputation is looking up.  Have you come to crow?"

Manson shook his head and told them very briefly of his visit.  There was no mention of his
own speculation.  "So after all, the thing is probably all right," he concluded.  "At any rate,
Clark doesn't seem worried, so why should we?"

Filmer gave vent to a low whistle.  "Hypnotized at last!"

"No," said Manson, flushing, and went on to promulgate the reasons for his hopes.  The others
said nothing, but he could see they were impressed.  Presently he went out on a midnight round
of inspection, and, as the door closed behind him, Worden nodded thoughtfully.

"For the first time in seven years he seems reasonable in this connection.  After all, if we
get off the handle it will be a mighty bad example.  How about it, Mr. Mayor?"

"Well," said Filmer, caressing his glossy whiskers, "I always believed in Clark and I guess
I do now.  If he were trying to make money for himself out of this thing we'd know it, but
he isn't.  Gentlemen, the judge is right--we've got to hold the town together."

On the corner they met Bowers, the Company's solicitor, who was walking slowly home smoking
a peaceful cigar.

"What's this?" he said, grinning.  "Looks like old times to see you three together."

Filmer had a sudden thought.  "Do any of you chaps remember what anniversary this is?"

The others searched their brains and gave it up.

"Seven years ago to-night there was a certain notable meeting in the town hall."

"And now there's one in the corner.  We've come down in the world," put in Dibbott.

"Possibly, but possibly not.  I was just thinking of all that has happened in seven years.
It should prevent us from getting rattled." The mayor turned to Bowers, "Seen Clark to-day?"

"Haven't seen or heard of him for three days," answered the lawyer shortly--then, because he
wanted to avoid being pumped, "good night--I'm for my blameless couch."

They looked after him and at each other.  "Seen Belding?" asked Dibbott of the judge.

"No, he's down in Chicago.  I think he's buying machinery.  Now it's late and if I don't go
home too, I'll get into trouble."  He turned towards the old house by the river, and halted
a few steps off.  "Good night, you fellows, I feel better."

Thus it came that while a brooding, gray eyed man paced his terrace with his eyes fixed on
the far white line of the rapids, whose call was indistinguishable at this distance, there
was spreading almost under the shadow of the works a novel spirit of confidence in himself
and his vast enterprise.  It was not till a sudden question arose, that St. Marys realized
the prodigious meaning of their new city and how lavishly all Clark's promises had been redeemed.
In the hour of anxiety they leaned on him more than ever before.  This new birth--this upholding
trust--was conceived at the very moment when Wimperley and the others were gathered in harassed
counsel, and through Philadelphia and the surrounding state was broadening a dark cloud of
rumor that carried swift fear to thousands of hearts.  But it was not fear that came to the
keen brain of Henry Marsham.

By eleven that night Clark had heard nothing from his head office.  The strain became too great,
and he went into a little room off the library where an extension of the private wire had been
carried up from the works.  There was once a time when he could send and receive in the Morse
code, so now he sat down and laid a somewhat uncertain finger on the tilting key.

"Phil -- Phil -- Phil."

Instantly and to his surprise, came the reply.

"Sma -- Sma -- Sma."

"Is -- Wimp -- there?"  The thing began to come a little easier.

"Yes."

"Tell -- Wimp -- I -- want -- answer -- funds -- for -- payroll."

Clark got this off laboriously, conscious that however clear might be the message, the wire
was a poor transmitter as compared to eye and voice.

"Wimp -- says -- meeting -- going -- on -- now -- cannot -- act -- before -- to-morrow -- 
Get that."

"Yes," flashed the plunging reply.

"Wimp -- waiting -- your -- report -- defect -- in -- rails."

Clark's brows wrinkled and he bent over the key.

"Cannot -- send -- report -- till -- several -- chemical -- anal -- anal -- "

"Yes -- analyses -- I -- get -- you -- are -- complete -- is -- that -- it."

"Yes."  Clark breathed a sigh of relief.  His brow was wet.

"When -- will -- that -- be -- Wimp -- asks."

"Three -- days."

"Wimp -- says -- hurry -- up -- things -- shaky -- here -- expect -- attack -- by -- bears
-- have tried -- to -- place -- rails -- elsewhere -- but -- not -- successful.  Wimp -- says
-- good night."

Clark's eyes sparkled with anger and he hammered the key.  There were other things he wanted
to say--and must say.  But for all his repeated calls there was only silence, till in an interval,
while he rubbed his throbbing fingers, the receiver began to tilt.

"Wimp -- says -- good night --" it announced with metallic finality.

He got up and stood staring at the thing for a moment, his face heavy with anger, the group
in Wimperley's office vividly before him.  He could see the cold features of Birch, sharpened
by the tenseness of the hour into a visage bloodless and inflexible, with thin tight lips and
narrow expressionless eyes.  He could see Stoughton, red with discomfort and resentment; Riggs'
excited and anxious little face, and Wimperley himself, cast with a new severity; all supremely
conscious of that which probably must be faced on the morrow.  And what about Marsham?  Tottering
was now their faith in the essential future of the works and the great cycle of their operations.
The wire had transmitted their decisions, but over its yellow filament had also trickled their
apprehension.  With a touch of cynicism he recalled the congratulatory messages--the very first
it had carried.

He went out on the terrace again, seeking the black bulk of the rail mill in the medley of
structures down at the works.  Presently he found and scrutinized it.  Somewhere in its gloom
lurked an error, or else in the great furnaces that shouldered nakedly into the moonlit air.
With a sudden sense of fatigue, he turned to his bedroom.

"At any rate the chief constable is with me," he soliloquized sardonically, "and that's something."

In five minutes he was sleeping profoundly.

XXI.--THE CRASH

Around the neck of every great industrial undertaking is hung a chain of unlovely parasites,
who fatten on the interruptions to its progress and the fluctuations in its success.  These
men create nothing--contribute nothing.  Playing on the fears and hopes and untempered weakness
of the public, they reap where they do not sow and feed the speculative appetite of millions.
To them it is negligible whether good men go down or honest effort is rewarded.  Predatory
by nature and unscrupulous in action, they prey upon their fellows, and, like the wolf, are
strangers to mercy and compassion.  Their wealth is not an asset to the world, because it represents
nothing they have originated, but only that which they have filched from others less shrewd
and unscrupulous.  They do not hesitate to magnify the false or to bring to ruin what they
find most profitably assailable.  They have respect for neither genius nor labor, but juggle
with the efforts of both in a fierce game for gold.

As the gong struck on the Philadelphia Exchange next morning, a well known operator associated
with Marsham's firm threw five thousand shares of Consolidated on the market.  It was taken
at forty-eight, a loss of two points, and in that first transaction the value of the entire
enterprise shrank by half a million.

A moment later, Wimperley knew of it and sent for Birch, but Birch, who had been just as speedily
informed, was already on his way.  He came in, a little paler than usual.  On his heels arrived
Stoughton and Riggs.

They were in the padded seclusion of the president's inner office, while two blocks away swelled
a storm, whose echoes only reached them in the sharp staccato of the ticker in the corner as
it vomited a strip of white paper.  Wimperley stood there, the strip slipping between his fingers,
while selling orders began to pour in to Philadelphia, and the price of Consolidated crumbled
like dust.  He could visualize the scene on the floor of the Exchange, the frenzy of men smitten
with sudden fear, and the deliberate cold-blooded action of others who lent their weight to
this downfall.  Marsham was very busy.  Greater grew the flood, with sales of so great quantities
of stock that they perceived the market was going boldly short.  Then came an avalanche of
small holdings, till the ticker announced that it had fallen behind the record of transactions
and that Consolidated was now offered at thirty-five with no bidders.  This was three-quarters
of an hour after the Exchange opened.

Stoughton and the others sat quite motionless.  The thing was too big for them to grasp at
once, but they had a dull sense that the foundation stones of their great pyramid were shifting,
that the gigantic structures at St. Marys were dissolving into something phantom-like and tenuous.
At this juncture a message was brought in from Clark.

Hear market is very weak.  Please buy five thousand for me by way of support.

Wimperley read and handed it silently to Riggs.  The little man swallowed a lump in his throat.
"By God!" he said unsteadily, "but he's got sand, no doubt about it."

"What's that?" Stoughton demanded dully, and, reaching out, glanced at the telegram.  "Why
throw Robert Fisher to the wolves?  They're doing well enough as it is," he grunted, and relapsed
into a brooding silence.

Then began to arrive inquiries from country banks and cancellations from country subscribers.
Wimperley read them out as they came in, and, well informed though he was of the wide distribution
of Consolidated stock, experienced a slow amazement at the broad range of his followers.  Their
messages were indignant, despairing, threatening and pathetic.  He began to wonder why he had
accepted a responsibility which was now for the first time unveiled in such startling proportions.
Yesterday the Consolidated was a name to conjure with.  To-day it was an epitome of human fear
and desperation.

Ten seconds before the noon gong struck on the Exchange, a frantic broker lifted a bull like
voice above the uproar.

"Sell five thousand consol at thirty-two, thirty-two!"  He bellowed it out raucously.  The
selling order had been flashed from Toronto.

"Taken at thirty-two," snapped Marsham's operator, who had opened the perilous game that morning,
and, smiling, jotted a note on his cuff.  He had made just eighty thousand dollars on that
one transaction.  The market strengthened a little in the afternoon on short covering, the
matter of investment being thrown to the winds.  Consolidated was now a gambling counter, and
the closing quotation stood at thirty-five.  Former values had shrunk by some eight millions.
Gone was that laborious upbuilding into which Clark and the rest had thrown their very souls;
overcast were the efforts of seven years.  It was, to most people, a question of what might
be made of what was left.  The works remained, but, the public concluded, the iron and steel
section, the heart of the thing, was unsound.  Such is the communicable essence of fear.

At ten minutes after three the directors met to face a situation which was, in all truth, serious
enough.  Philadelphia banks, smarting from loans made on Consolidated stock, had declined further
credit.  The first payment of a million dollars for steel rails was indefinitely deferred.
Creditors, galvanized by the events of the day, poured in ceaseless demands that their accounts
be liquidated, but moneys due the Consolidated for pulp had been realized and diverted into
the building of railways and the construction of the rail mill.  Birch, his face very grave,
ran over all this in a level monotone of a voice, while the rest wearily admitted its truth,
and in the middle of the rehearsal a message was brought in from Clark.

Greatly regret events of to-day but am unshakenly confident for the future, given sufficient
time to remedy defect in rails which should not take long.  Chemical analyses show too high
carbon and this can be rectified.  Now awaiting remittance for payroll.

Wimperley read it without a trace of accentuation, while Stoughton got up and stared, as once
before, at the sky line of Philadelphia.

"Well," drawled Birch dryly, "we've heard from our prophet."

"He's got more confidence in our future than we have in his past," put in Riggs.

Stoughton turned, "What about the payroll?"

"If you have a million or so to spare, we'll send it up.  There's more to be met than the payroll."
The voice was a trifle insulting, but Stoughton did not notice it, and Birch went on.  "There's
just one thing we can do, if we can't get money to run."

"Well?" jerked out Riggs, "say it."

"Shut down."

Wimperley's long fingers were drumming the table.  He did not fancy himself as the president
of a great company in whose works not a wheel was turning.

"I'd like to find some other way out of it.  There's going to be hell to pay here, but--"

"Perhaps the ingenious gentleman at St. Marys could help out," said Birch acidly.

At that came a little silence and there appeared the vision of Clark in his office, with his
achievements dissolving before his eyes.

"Robert Fisher is no financier," struck in Stoughton wearily.

Wimperley smiled in spite of himself.  "Perhaps not, but he mesmerized us into that office.
There's only one thing I can see--issue debentures secured by first mortgage."

"Who'll take 'em?  We used up all our arguments long ago.  Philadelphia doesn't want a mortgage
on Robert Fisher, and what about the Pennsylvania farmer?"

"What about him?" asked Wimperley pettishly.

"As I know him, he's a bad loser--he works too hard for it.  This is a case of new money from
outside, and I for one don't feel like doing any traveling."

"In other words we've demonstrated that whether or not by any fault of ours, we've made a mess
of it," said Stoughton with utter candor.

"Something remarkably like it."

"And when Clark told us, months ago, that he wouldn't draw any salary, and that a lot of others
were only drawing half salary to help out till the rail mill got going, we should have made
provision for possible mistakes, and seen as well that we were getting in over our ears."

"But Clark believed all he told us," piped Riggs with a flash of loyalty.

"Of course he did, and he still does, and because he is still only twenty years ahead of his
time he's all the more dangerous."

"Let's get back to this payroll," blurted Stoughton who was getting more and more uncomfortable.

"Fishing's pretty good up there, let him fish for it."  The voice of Birch was like ice.  He
was one of those who by nature are fitted for cold and ruthless action in time of stress. 
Most of his money had been made across the dissecting table of enterprises, and not at their
birth. He was a financial surgeon, but no midwife, and had only been magnetized into his past
support by the hypnotic personality of Clark.  He was grimly mindful that Marsham, after waiting
for years for his opening, had got more than even.  Birch's cold mind now wondered for the
first time whether, after all, the cut throat game he had once loved to play was worth the
candle.  Here was American credit and effort massacred by American ruthlessness and revenge.
Marsham had pounced upon a weak point in the Consolidated's armor and pierced deep into the
body corporate.  He had struck to kill.

"And would you shut down the pulp mill--market's good now?" persisted Stoughton.

"I'd rivet the whole thing tight.  The railway never paid,--at least directly--that we could
reckon.  It's costing more to ship pulp on our own boats than the rate at which we could ship
by contract--and if they are not going to bring back coke, why run them?  Gentlemen, this means
a smash--an interval of anxiety, discomfort, loss of prestige, and--"

"Go on, Elisha--" barked Riggs.  "Oh, please go on!"

"Prestige--and later reconstruction.  In the meantime, we don't spend a cent on running anything,
and find out exactly what we owe.  Then comes new money, and," he added cynically, "a new bunch
of directors."

"And who will arrange that?" Riggs demanded abruptly.

"One Robert Fisher Clark--if he has not lost all his power of magnetism."

"Aren't you guessing a little too fast?"

"No, it's quite possible.  His argument will be that we didn't back him to the necessary limit--that
another million would have done it--and," concluded Birch reflectively, "that may be perfectly
true.  But God knows we did what we could.  What's this one?"  He glanced at Wimperley, who
was reading a telegram just brought in.

Waiting your remittance for payroll, necessary that this be provided to-day, otherwise I anticipate
serious disturbance here.  It is advisable that I do not come to Philadelphia just yet as my
leaving here would be wrongly interpreted.

R.F.C.

There fell a moment's silence, instantly recognized by all four as the precursor of grave events.
Birch had spoken the thought that lurked in all their minds.  To continue running meant another
payroll to be met.

It now appeared suicidal to have stretched their resources to the limit of their credit, but
not one of them had remotely dreamed that a few thousand tons of steel rails were to drag the
whole structure to toppling destruction.  Birch, as usual, first pulled himself together.

"It's put up or shut up, and we've got to tell Clark right now."

Little Riggs sighed despondently.  This meeting would soon be over and the decision made, after
which he would have to face a totally unexpected set of conditions and a circle of friends
and investors who would regard him with close and uncomfortable interest.

"Well, I suppose it's shut up!" he hazarded unsteadily.

Birch looked inquiringly at the other two, who nodded without speaking, then began to write.
The rest did not even glance at each other, but found absorption in walls and windows and the
big map of poignant memory, while the long, waxen fingers moved inexorably on.

"What about this?"

"'Under existing conditions and the impossibility of making immediate financial arrangements
for current needs directors decide best to close down all work of every kind at once, giving
notice that this will be only temporary.  You will report here as soon as in your judgment
you can wisely come down.'  Is that all right?"

Stoughton bit at his thumbnail and nodded.  "I suppose so--and there'll be hell to pay in St.
Marys, eh, Wimperley?  Our friend the chief constable will be working over time.  Remember
the beggar?  The damn fool was right too."

"Yes, it's all right," said Wimperley, "and now I suppose there'll be writs and injunctions
enough to fill the tailrace.  We'd better get out and arrange some support for the market.
Birch, you compound a comforting statement for the papers.  We adjourn till tomorrow at nine-thirty."

They did adjourn, but lingered for an hour digging into the past seven years.  It was a talk
such as one might expect under the circumstances. Charged with an apprehension but thinly veiled
by manner and speech, events took on for them no perspective.  They were too close at hand.
All this was so intimately their own and Clark's responsibility that every other consideration
became instantly submerged, and it was a matter of living for the day, if not for the hour.
Had any one at this time told Wimperley or Stoughton that for a pace or two they had merely
fallen out of step in the march of progress, and that however depressing might be the present
aspect of affairs it did not really affect the preordained outcome, they would have flouted
the thought.  It is not given to many men to place themselves correctly in the general scheme
of the world, and to fairly estimate their own contribution.  Thus it was that Wimperley and
his associates read on the screen of the present only the word "failure," and were conscious
chiefly of a certain self contempt for the arduous part they had played.  At the last moment
success had been snatched from their grasp.

Stoughton walked slowly home.  He was thinking of Manson, the pessimist, who had been right.
And such is the interlinking chain of life.  Manson, at this moment, was sitting in his office,
while his mind harked aimlessly back to the first time he had met the men from Philadelphia.
He stared at a telegram that trembled between his thick fingers.  His broad face was gray and
ghastly.  He had been here motionless for some time, when a gentle knock sounded at the door
and his wife came timidly in.  One glance at his face, and her arms were round his neck.

"What is it, Peter?" she quavered.

He did not look up but held the message so that she might read it.

Sold you out to-day on stop loss order at thirty-two margin being exhausted.  Farthing.

She read it wonderingly.  "What does it mean; who is Farthing?"

"My Toronto broker--or at least he was," said Manson heavily.

"But I don't understand, dear."

"Ho, I didn't suppose you would; it means I lose my hundred thousand, that's all."

"Had you a hundred thousand?" she whispered.

"Very, very nearly, and now I haven't anything,--that is, I didn't make a cent."

She drew a long breath.  "Peter, tell me just how we stand."

"Exactly where we did the day a man named Clark came to St. Marys," he said dully, "with not
a cent more."

There followed a little silence, and the tears began to roll down her cheeks.  He put his arm
round her, and perceived, with astonishment, that they were tears of happiness.

"Peter dear," she said very softly, "you don't know how glad I am that it's all over."

"You mean the hundred thousand!"  He stared at her blankly.

"Yes, just that.  I know you won't understand, but things have never been the same for me since
you began to try and make it.  You were different--everything was different."

"But if I had made it you would have been glad."

"Perhaps--I don't know.  I'm rather afraid of a hundred thousand dollars," she began to smile
a little through her tears, "but now I feel ten years younger.  Is that what 'stop loss' means--you
don't actually lose anything?"

"Nothing more than I have sent him in this case."

"And you didn't send him my money--not that it's much."

"Good God, Mary, no!"

"Peter," she began gently, "you weren't happy all the time--I could tell that.  You were trying
to do something you weren't made for--I could see that too.  You are very strong--but it isn't
that kind of strength. People like us can't do that kind of thing--we feel too much.  We haven't
got much, but it represents a lot and our lives are in it, and this hundred thousand dollars
wouldn't have been that kind of money, would it?"

"No, I suppose not."  Manson felt the tumult in his breast subsiding.

"I know you did it for me and the children, but we don't want you to speculate for us.  We
just want you--as we used to have you.  We have enough of everything else, and we'll all be
very happy again.  Oh, my dear, big, faithful husband."  She slipped into his arms and put
her head on his great shoulder.

And Manson, holding her to him, felt new springs of emotion unseal themselves within him. 
The past few years had not been happy ones.  As his profits grew, he was conscious of the spectre
of anxiety at his elbow.  It had been a simple thing to make a thousand and then ten and then
twenty, till, as he marched ever faster toward the siren call, he perceived that he was no
longer in his own country, but one in which the landmarks were all changed.  Now, with the
throb of his wife's heart against his own, he acknowledged defeat, but perhaps it was defeat
of that which was not himself.

Presently the little woman stirred, brushed the tears from her cheeks, and, smiling, kissed
him tenderly.

"I'm happier than I've been for years.  Did you ever guess that people here thought you were
a rich man?"

"No."

"Well, they did, at least some of them, Mrs. Dibbott for one."

"Then you can put Mrs. Dibbott right."

"Will what has happened at the works make much difference here?"

"Probably a good deal.  I'm looking for trouble."

"Up at Ironville?" she said anxiously.

"But I'm good for it."  He stretched his great arms, feeling strangely free and fit for his duty.

"What about Mr. Clark?"

At this Manson grew suddenly thoughtful.  Caught up in his own anxiety, he had never considered
Clark.  The figure of the latter began to take on strange proportions.  What, he wondered,
had Clark lost?  Within twenty hours of the time he maintained his unaltered belief, the bottom
had dropped out.  Or, he queried, had Clark merely said this to prevent him from throwing his
stock on the market?  He pondered over this, and decided that five thousand shares were negligible
amongst millions.  Then he felt his wife's inquiring glance.

"I'm sorry for Clark, but I guess he's wise enough to take care of himself."

"I hope so.  I've only spoken to him once, but I like him."

She disappeared presently, leaving him busy with special instructions to the police--in case
of disturbance.  She did not worry about that, being chiefly conscious that a load was gone
from her spirit.  Singing softly to herself, she went out with gladness in her eyes, and halfway
to Filmer's store encountered Mrs. Bowers.  The latter looked pale and tired.  Bowers, for
the past twenty-four hours, had been a much tried man--and his wife reflected it.

"Good evening," said the latter, "you look very fresh.  How do you manage it?"

Mrs. Manson, suddenly recalled to earth, smiled gently.  "I'm rather happy to-day.  I hope
Mr. Bowers is not very anxious."

"It's no use saying he isn't, but he doesn't talk about it.  How's your husband?"

"Splendid."

"Well, you're the only untroubled pair I've heard of to-day.  My husband's in a frightful temper
because he didn't sell our land six months ago.  He says we'll never sell it now, but I'm just
as glad.  Is the whole thing going to break up?"  Mrs. Bowers swung her parasol toward the rapids.

"I--I don't really know anything about it," said the little woman with a touch of nervousness
from which she recovered instantly, then, smiling, "perhaps I'll come over to-morrow."

"Do, there's a heap to talk about, and smile like that just as long as you can--the town needs it."

She walked on, her mind very busy.  Without question something excellent had happened to the
Mansons--and in a time like this!  Manson was said to be in the way of making a fortune, and
now, she concluded, he had made it.  There was no other explanation for an expression like
his wife's when such grim rumors were abroad.  A little later she told Mrs. Worden, and both
the judge and Bowers heard of it, and next day the story reached a dozen houses in St. Marys.
The constable, it was said, for all his pessimism, had been sharper than Clark himself.

But Manson was only a leaf picked up by the edge of the storm in which Clark sat, its unapproachable
center.  The telegram compiled by Birch and signed by Wimperley, as president, was on his desk,
just as the secretary had laid it before he went silently out, unable to meet the mystifying
glance of those gray eyes.  Clark had never moved nor looked up, nor did he till half an hour
later, when he dictated a notice to be posted throughout the works.  "All operations will temporarily
cease this night at six o'clock.  Employees will be notified when to apply for their wages,
which will shortly be paid in full.  The accounting staff will remain at duty."  His voice
was level and absolutely expressionless. Then he went out, and, taking the broad trail to the
rapids, seated himself a few minutes later in a well remembered place.

The moments lengthened into hours and still he did not move.  The sun showed its red disc through
the lattice girders of the great bridge, and touched the flashing waters into gold.  It was
seven years since he had sat here first, and he looked expectantly about for the crested kingfisher.
The voice of the river seemed unusually loud, and there was no drone from the works.  He began
to go over it all, but, desisting from sheer inability, pitched his attention on the rapids.
Here, at least, was that which had no shadow of turning.  Distinguishing the multitude of notes
that lifted their booming uproar, he yielded to the sensation that he was in the midst of them,
being carried to the sea.

To-night they seemed relentless, but that again was the reflection of his mood.  If he was
going down, Wimperley and the rest were going with him. Finally he was able, at some command
from this tumult, to disassociate himself from the present and go back to the beginning.  Retracing
each step, he decided that, were a parallel occasion to arise, he would do the same again.
He had listened to the voice of the hills and woods and water, rather than to the voice of
Philadelphia, and this, he ultimately concluded, was right.  There was no time to brood or
forecast the future. What his soul craved was to be persuaded that it was justified up to this
hour.  Only thus could he find strength for that which was yet to come.

Carrying his solitary reverie still further, he was assured that it would be for him and him
alone to find the way out.  Wimperley and the others were able men as far as they went, but
just as they had always loitered behind his imagination, so now would they be slow in deciphering
the riddle in store.  He had brought them in, and it would be left for him to bring others
in also.  Very easily he visualized what had taken place in Philadelphia, and the group in
Wimperley's office stood out quite clearly.  He felt no particular sympathy for them, nor did
it appear that the responsibility was primarily his own because it was his brain that conceived
the whole gigantic machine.  They had acted according to their final judgment, so had he. 
With small and genuine investors the case was different, but Clark was well aware that Consolidated
stock had been a favorite Pennsylvania gamble for years.  As to his own employees, he knew
that the works must ultimately go on and could not go on without them. This left only himself
to be considered, and at the thought this extraordinary man smiled confidently.  He was stranger
to that fear which is based on uncertainty of one's own resources.

An hour after sundown he went home and, sending for Bowers, the two sat talking earnestly.
For Bowers it had been a day of vicissitude which he was only partially competent to face.
Rooted out of a small practice in a small village, and caught up in the sweep of irresistible
progress, he had never had to fight for his point.  The weight and momentum Clark put before
him were too great for that.  But now every angle of the Consolidated Company seemed to offer
itself for frontal attack.  He put this to his chief in justification of his own anxiety.

"It's been a matter of writs and injunctions all day.  There are enough in my office now to
paper the rail mill."

"Well, why should you worry?"

Bowers glanced up with surprise.  "Eh?"

"You're doing your duty, you can't do anything more.  But perhaps you feel chagrined at being
associated with me in the present difficulty. You needn't expostulate,--I can quite understand it."

The lawyer turned a brick red.  It was quite true.  He had begun to look on this calamity as
one for which he and Clark were both partly responsible.

"If you worry--and it's quite absurd that you should--your value automatically decreases. 
Has it occurred to you that, from now on, the importance of your position is vastly increased?
We shall look to you more than ever.  I dare not worry--there's too much to be done.  You were
our advisor, now you are our protector against unfair attack--and there'll be lots of it. 
What's more, Bowers, you are the only one who is sure of his money."

Bowers nodded.  He began to feel more comfortable.

"What's going on in St. Marys?"

"Nothing much yet--they don't know what to get ready for.  Filmer and the rest are sending
out accounts they hope to collect, a good deal of property is on offer without any takers,
but, at the bottom, I don't think the town is rattled.  There's a sort of feeling that the
works are too big to be wiped out."

Clark smiled gravely.  He was aware that to the townsfolk the works had become part of the
landscape, and, imaginatively, not much more.  But just as they could not contemplate the obliteration
of part of the landscape, so it was difficult to conceive permanent idleness at the works.
It was a case of the immobility of the non-speculative mind, which is lethargic in hours of
exaltation but comfortably steadfast in times of stress.

"Listen," he said earnestly.  "There's an element in Ironville which may soon have to be controlled
by force; but as to St. Marys what you've got to do is to spread the feeling that there's nothing
like confidence to maintain business.  Can't you see that if your office were knee deep in
writs it doesn't affect you?  You've got to remain the efficient, smoothly working, impersonal
machine.  So have I--and so has every one who takes the responsibility for the actions of those
of lesser intelligence.  Leaving out first and second causes--we're all doing just what we're
meant to do, and it doesn't matter who or what meant it. Wimperley and the others will be up
here soon, and regard me as a crazy idealist who inveigled them into building a house of cards.
The heads of departments--at least some of them--will look at me and wonder how it was that
I gave them any confidence in the future.  Hundreds of creditors will consider me personally
responsible because they have to wait for their money, and about two thousand Poles and Hungarians
will want to kill me to gratify their sense of personal injury.  On top of that, ninety-nine
men out of a hundred will forget all about my seven years' work, and that I started with nothing,
and will point to the Consolidated as an excellent example of misdirected energy.  For a little
while little men will smile with commiseration and say 'He did the best he could,' but," and
here Clark's voice deepened, "only for a little while.  Now, friend Bowers, where do I stand
with you?"

Bowers got up and paced the terrace irresolutely, glancing now and then at the motionless,
gray clad figure in the wicker chair.  He was suddenly and profoundly moved.  In the past he
had seen but one side of Clark, and this sudden depth of feeling was startling.  He knew that
if he still took his chief as the crowd took him, Clark would not apparently be affected in
any degree, but would only classify and finally put him away with his own kind.

"Don't think for a moment I'm making any appeal," went on the steady voice.  "It really doesn't
matter whether you believe in me or not. There's just one thing supremely important at the
present time, which is my belief in myself.  That's my anchorage--it always has been and will
be.  I don't consider that we owe each other anything, but just the same I would like to know
where you place me."

Bowers had a swift vision of what he was seven years ago, and set it against what he was now.
Then, with full consciousness of the complete confidence that was placed in him by Clark, he
turned and held out his hand.

"I place you," he said a little jerkily, "just where you want to be placed."

Clark merely touched the extended fingers, but his face brightened and a smile crept into his eyes.

"I thought you did, but--" he added quizzically, "I had to work to find it out, didn't I?"

Bowers nodded.  He felt like a field that had been plowed so deep that it would yield better
than ever before.  He reflected, too, that the experience gained in years of success should
serve well in times of adversity.

"What's on the program?" he asked.

"The men will begin to drift in from the mines and lumber camps.  Then it's a matter of sitting
tight till they're paid off."

Bowers thrust out his lips.  He had seen men come in from the woods with their pockets full
of money, and that was bad enough, but without money--!

"I've had a talk with Manson who seems good for it, and the works will be under heavy guard.
That's all we can do in the meantime.  I'm going to Philadelphia as soon as possible."

"But not at once?"

Clark smiled.  "No, not at once."

XXII.--THE MASTER MIND AT WORK

Bowers went thoughtfully home and; next morning, flung himself into his work with renewed courage.
He had need of it--they all had need of it. There were now thousands who waited for their pay,
and daily these ranks were swelled by others who drifted in from the woods.  Hundreds of merchants
began to refuse credit, though Filmer valiantly used all his resources.  St. Marys was, in
truth, stupefied, and when the first shock began to smooth itself out, the reality of the thing
became grimly apparent, and then arose the first rumor of trouble in Ironville, that straggling
settlement of shacks where dwelt the bone and muscle of the works.

To the Swede and Polander there was no suggestion of achievement in the vast buildings in which
they labored.  It was only the place where they earned their living.  They worked amongst giant
mechanisms beside which they were puny, but theirs was a life of force and strength which took
from them the fear of anything that was merely human.  Thus surprise changed to resentment,
and resentment began to resolve itself into a slow and consuming anger.  The works were dead,
but in the main office the accounting staff was bending desperately over statements imperatively
demanded by Philadelphia.  The black browed Hungarians saw the lights at night, and felt that
they were being played with by those more powerful than themselves.  If a furnace man was discharged,
why keep on these scribblers?

Outside St. Marys the news ran apace.  Toronto papers dwelt on it, and the Board of Trade read
it with regret mingled with thankfulness that Clark had embarked on no financial campaigns
in their own city.  Thorpe went carefully over the Philadelphia acceptances in his vault, and
wondered what they were worth.  To St. Marys set out a stream of representatives of various
creditor companies, that filled the local hotels and journeyed out to the works and came back
unsatisfied. Philadelphia dispatches were devoured, and the word "reorganization" was one to
charm with.  One by one, the Company's steamers slid up to the long docks, made fast and drew
their fires, till it seemed that the works, like a great octopus, was withdrawing every arm
and filament it ever had radiated, and was coiling them endlessly at its cold and clammy side.
Yet, for all of this, it did not seem possible that the whole structure was tumbling, the structure
on which so many years of labor--so much genius and enthusiasm--so many millions--had been
lavished, until one afternoon a drunken Swede threw a stone into a butcher's window in Ironville
and, putting forth a horny hand, seized a side of bacon and set forth, reeling, down the street.
Two hours later the startled chief accountant, from a window in his office, saw a swarm of
a thousand men surge through the big gates of the works and, trampling the guard, flow irregularly
forward.

The mob spilt on, a river of big strong men, unaware of its own strength.  They were not bent
on willful destruction, but the whole mass was animated by an inchoate desire to find out something
for itself.  At the door of the rail mill stood the superintendent and his firemen, with drawn
revolvers.  The rioters liked these men because they worked with and understood them.  They
were not associated with the present trouble.  So on to the administration building, where
the office staff looked out, petrified with fear.  Here, the mob decided, was another breed,
so there commenced a hammering on the big oaken door and stones showered through the windows.

At this, Hobbs, stricken with mortal terror, and oblivious of the girls who gathered around
him, lost his head.  There was no escape downstairs, but opposite his desk was a grated iron
window that led on to an adjoining roof.  Noting it desperately, he heaved up his soft body
and made a plunge for safety.  But such was his bulk that, though head, arms and shoulders
went through, he stuck there, anchored in an iron grip.

"Help!" he called chokingly, "Help!"

The mob looked up and stared, when from the rear ranks came a bull-like roar of laughter. 
Then another burst out and another, till from the ground spouted a fountain of jeers, hoots
and ridicule that reached the fat man as he hung suspended, with purple face and gesticulating
arms.

Clark, in his office, waiting coolly for what might come, caught the change in the note of
riot and, stepping into the next room, saw the legs of his comptroller brandished in the air.
The rest of him was invisible, and still in the square outside rocked the booming shouts of
Slavic and Scandinavian mirth.  A moment later Hobbs was dragged back, with torn clothing,
swollen neck and scratched body.  Clark glanced at him contemptuously and went out.  Then the
doors opened, and he was on the front steps.

The mob saw him and held its breath.  Few of them had ever been so near him before.  He stood
with a quiet smile on his face and a light in his keen eyes, and, in the momentary hush, began
to speak.  There was no fear in voice or attitude.  The wind, blowing from the rapids, brought
the echo of their clamor to the upper windows so that the accounting staff heard not a word,
but the mob heard, and presently the big Pole laughed, just as he had laughed at Hobbs' distorted
face suspended above him.  It was contagious, and Clark, playing upon the mood of the moment,
drove home his point.

The money was coming, and he himself would stay there till it came.  In the meantime, the money
would be slower to arrive if there was trouble, and that was all he had to say.

There followed a little hesitation, then an indefinite movement, and the crowd began to shuffle
toward the shattered gates.  As it dwindled Clark glanced over his shoulder and saw a man within
twenty feet, both hands thrust eloquently into his bulging coat pockets.

"Thanks very much, Belding, I'm glad it wasn't necessary," he said crisply, and vanished inside
the big doors.

The engineer knew better than to follow, but was bitterly disappointed. He had hoped for some
word of comfort, but to not a single employee had Clark said anything of explanation.  It was
not his habit, and he looked to the intelligence of each man to carry him through.  And this
was typical of his invariable attitude toward those with whom he came in contact.  He gauged
them by the degree to which they contributed to the work on hand, and just now the only work
on hand was that which none but himself could carry out.  In personalities Clark was not interested,
but identified them only by some very definite achievement he was able to hang round their
necks like a label.

Belding saw to it that his own offices were guarded and walked to the head of the rapids. 
He felt numbed.  If Clark had conceived the works, he himself had built them, and, as they
grew under his hand, he felt that something of his own existence went forth with every stroke
of a drill, and that a fragment of his brain lay in every course of masonry. Like all true
engineers, he delighted in the physical expression of his ability, and here had been such an
opportunity as few engineers ever realized.  He felt not so much dejected as dumbfounded that
so much skill and labor could be brought to a full stop just as it reached its permanent stride.
In his eyes the figure of Clark had long achieved titanic proportions.  Innumerable things
had been demonstrated to be possible, and to be chief engineer of such an enterprise had been,
thought Belding, all that any man could ask.  It was true that in the fatigue of work he had
often imagined that Clark was going too fast, but always the thing had been done.  Now it seemed
the ironical jest of the gods that a shade too much carbon in a steel rail should wreck the
whole endeavor.

And there was Elsie.  He had never been able to give her up.  Against the glamour of his chief's
personality he had nothing to put forward except a whole souled worship, and Elsie, it appeared,
preferred the invitation of the older man's romantic career.  Subconsciously, Belding decided
that the thing was wrong and against nature, for he was marked by a certain simple belief in
the general fairness of life.  He clung to the doctrine of compensation, and held himself trustingly
open to whatever good influences might reach him.  Elsie was the highest influence of all.
In Clark he had found a stimulus that nerved his brain to great accomplishments.  But Elsie
and Clark had together wounded his very spirit.

Clark, in the quiet of his private office, was thinking not of Belding or Elsie, but of the
mob that had trailed so uncertainly out of the big gates.  He had played for time and he had
won--but that was all. Sooner or later, driven by the impossibility of living without pay,
the mob would return, and in a less placable mood.  He turned to the telephone.  "I want Mr.
Filmer."  In a moment he was speaking to the mayor.

"What happened up here to-day is but a taste of what's coming.  You'd better get out the militia,
if Manson can't handle it.  Bowers tells me I can do very little from a point of law, and we
look to you for protection."

"The militia won't help you much."  Filmer's voice was a little shaky. His son was in the militia,
but he himself had never taken that body very seriously.  It was a matter of uniform, a band
and a field day or two in the year--that was all.

"Well, Bowers tells me that if we kill any one in protecting the place we'll have a nasty time
of it, so it's up to you.  If the local militia are no good, get some up from Toronto.  I warn
you they'll be needed. Ask Belding if you like, he saw it all."

He leaned back and began a cold blooded survey of the situation.  He was not in any way desperate,
but he turned involuntarily to the resources of his own brain for some solution.  It was certain
that no immediate help could be expected from Philadelphia.  He was left quite officially and
deliberately to stem the tide as best he could, and, in spite of the gravity of the moment,
smiled at the thought that his directors leaned on him in their extremity.  They did not know
what to do, therefore he must know.  Then suddenly his mind reverted to Semple, and he spent
the next few moments in profound thought.  "Get hold of Mr. Semple," he said to his secretary,
"and bring him here."

In half an hour Semple appeared, flustered and a little pale.  A visit to the works just now
filled him with apprehension.  It seemed like smoking in a magazine.

"What's the matter?" said Clark, smiling at his agitation.

Semple drew a long breath and, noting the thickness of the office walls, felt a little safer.

"That's what I was going to ask you."

"Only a slight difficulty that you will help to put right."

Semple stared with astonishment.  The bottom had apparently fallen out of the works, but Clark
was as cool as ever.

"Help?" he demanded, puzzled.  Clark evidently did not stand to lose much in the smash.  "You're
holding these fellows, aren't you?"

"Yes, for the immediate present, but we'll have to do more.  That's where you come in."

The member for Algoma was at sea, and said so.

"You represent the Government here," went on Clark, "and we've spent seventeen million dollars
in these works.  Do you see the conclusion?"

"No, I don't."

"Your government must help us over the stile.  Just so long as those men remain unpaid, life
won't be very safe in St. Marys."

Semple looked round apprehensively.  "But my government doesn't live here.  What have I got
to do with it?"

"I don't know, but, by virtue of pressure you will exert, the Government must help.  What's
the Liberal majority in Ontario?"

"One.  I'm it."

"Then you keep the Premier in power, and he's hanging on to power like grim death."

"But I don't see--"

"It's simple enough.  If you settle this affair to the satisfaction of local people, you'll
secure Algoma to the Liberal party, so long as that party wants it."

"By God!" said Semple, startled.

Clark apparently did not hear him.  "There's another thing--to set those works in motion again
will be the biggest advertisement any government in Canada ever had.  It will swing the labor
vote--it will secure the merchants' support."  He paused, then leant forward and poured into
Semple the full pressure--the accumulated effort of mind and spirit.  "Ample security is available.
I will make repayment the first obligation of the Company--it will forestall bonds and everything
else.  What I want, and what you will find for me, is only a fraction of the sum that has been
put straight into this Province; and it's not much more than we have already paid in mineral
and lumber dues and taxes."

"How much?" said Semple in a fascinated whisper.

"Two million dollars."

"But--"

"There aren't any buts."

"Do you owe that in wages?"  Semple was aghast.

"Wages are only a small part of what must be paid at once."

"Where does Philadelphia come in?"

"Philadelphia," smiled Clark, "has left the entire matter to me in the meantime.  They are
making arrangements which may not be consummated for some months.  We can thank a prominent
American speculator for most of this.  But the Province of Ontario owes us something.  Doesn't
it occur to you," he added slowly, "how your personal reputation will be affected?"

Semple blinked several times and very rapidly.  "I'll wire at once," he said, with a long breath.

"You'll do nothing of the kind.  You'll go down yourself this afternoon.  You know your man,
and I know him; and he knows the works. He's been here several times.  Put the matter straight,--tell
him that we are dealing with forces that can only be met in one way.  It's either this, or
destruction and bloodshed.  I've asked Filmer to wire for troops.  Mr. Semple, what you are
about to make is a new move on the chessboard.  Your man is shrewd enough to see it, and it's
the new moves that win.  This is not so much politics as economics--tell him that.  I'd go
with you--but I must not leave St. Marys just now.  Wire me as soon as possible--you've just
time to catch your train."

The color climbed into Semple's cheeks, and he went quickly out with his head up.  Clark glanced
after him and his lips twisted into a smile.

"I give him forty-eight hours.  If it doesn't come by that--we'll ring down the curtain," he
said to himself thoughtfully.

He went out and walked, for hours, through the deserted buildings. They were full of hollow
mockery.  Watchmen, posted by Belding at strategic points, glanced after him curiously.  He
seemed lonely and diminutive in this mechanical wilderness of his own creation.  They wondered
how a man felt in such a position as his at a time like this. He dared not go to the rapids,
lest he read in their uproar some new and menacing note.  He thought lingeringly of Elsie.
She seemed far from this crisis, and at the same time curiously a part of it.  Never did he
feel more certain of the girl's affection than now, and it came to him what a refuge a woman's
breast might be for a man in such case as himself.  In the moment his forceful brain protested
at the thought of refuge.

He tramped on with a slow wonder at the magnitude of his own activities.  Here and there, individual
buildings stimulated poignant memories of the occasion that brought them forth.  The sulphur
plant assumed an aspect of derision.  Beneath the huge dimensions of the head-race he seemed
to discern the obliterated canal over which St. Marys came to grief.  Was he himself to be
brought down by its titanic successor?  He stared up the lake, comparing himself with the voyageur
who had once floated out of this wide immensity to trade at St. Marys. He, too, had been trading
at St. Marys.  "Big magic!" old Shingwauk had said, when his dark eyes beheld the works.  Was
it, after all, barely possible they were nothing but magic?

XXIII.--CONCERNING THE RIOT

Next morning came a rap at his office door and Baudette entered, treading very lightly.  Clark
looked up and shook his head.

"I haven't got any money yet."

"I don't want any money."

The gray eyes softened a little.  "You're the only man I've met who doesn't.  What is it?"

Baudette pointed out of the window.

Clark got up and glanced at the open space in front of the administration building.  There
lounged some fifty men, the pick of Baudette's crew, big and broad shouldered, in light colored
woollen jackets, shoepacks and blazing shirts.  Each toyed with an ax handle that swung lightly
between strong, brown fingers.  They were a loose-jointed lot, active as cats, and moved with
the superlative ease of the skilled woodsman.  Clark's jaw thrust out and he glanced grimly
at his visitor.

"If they think they can get it that way, they're mistaken."

"You don't understand," came the even voice.  "These are my friends, and yours.  St. Marys
is full of people who are after you.  They are hungry for money, and they're coming for it.
This crowd reckons their money is all right and will help you talk back."

Clark drew a long breath and caught the clear blue of Baudette's eyes. Then he nodded and began
to smile.

"Thank you, friend," he said with a catch in his breath.  "I might have known it."

Hours dragged by.  That night there was looting in Ironville, and the local grocers suffered
a sudden depletion of stock.  Morning broke, gray and threatening, while through shack and
cabin an ugly temper spread steadily.  Clark perceived that the real thing was coming now.
Once or twice he thought of Semple, who must already be closeted with the Premier.

Just before midday a howling mob gathered swiftly outside the big gates, when instantly Baudette
and his fifty axemen ran up and joined the guards.  The crowd increased, and there went out
an imperative summons to Manson who, with his thirty police, ranged himself half a mile away
on the road to St. Marys.  But for this the town was utterly unprotected.  Came the pad pad
of flying feet, and Fisette dashed up, swinging a prospecting pick.  He grinned at the big
constable.

"By Gar!" he panted, "I guess we catch hell now."

Followed a little pause, broken only by the deep threatening note of the crowd.  Then Belding
felt a touch on his shoulder.

"Open the gates," said Clark evenly, "I want to speak to them."

The engineer stared at the set face.  His chief's eyes were like polished steel, and his jaw
thrust out.  There was no fear here.

"Stay inside, sir.  They'll kill you."

The front rank caught sight of the erect figure.  Then silence fell over them and spread slowly
through the dark-browed multitude, Clark raised an imperative finger.  The gates opened a fraction,
and in front of them stood the man in whom the rioters perceived the head of their present world.

"I want to tell you that your money is coming, and that I stay here till you are paid," rang
the clear voice.

For an instant there came no answer, but presently from the rear ranks rose again a bull-like roar.

"You tell us that last week."

Followed a murmur that ran through the packed mass of broad shoulders.

"I tell you again--and it's true!"

For reply, a short iron bolt came hurtling through the air.  It took Clark on the cheek.  He
seemed not to feel it, but stood undaunted, while a trickle of blood crept down his smooth
face.  The sight of it seemed to rouse some latent fury in the mob, and a deep growl sounded
ominously.  He felt himself jerked suddenly back, and Belding and Baudette jumped in front
of him.  The woodsman balanced a great shining axe, and the engineer's automatic gleamed dully.

"Get inside, sir, quick!"

For the first time in his life, Clark felt himself passed from hand to hand, and landed, fuming,
on the other side of the big gates.  The voice of the mob lifted to an infuriated howl.  Simultaneously
the rear ranks pressed forward.

Fighting began the next instant.  Belding's revolver barked viciously, while he shot low at
legs and feet.  Three men went down to be engulfed in the oncoming tide.  Baudette was standing
firm, his cold blue eyes alight with the fire of battle.  His broad axe was cutting swift circles
around him, while he dodged a shower of missiles.  To right and left of him fifty axe handles
rose and fell like flails, and behind them was all the skill and sinew of those who dwell amongst
big timber. Then a jagged fragment of iron casting took Baudette on the knee, and he went down.

The battle grew, while the faithful ranks thinned visibly.  Just through the big gates lay
the battlemented works, and toward them pressed the mob, now drunk with the hunger to destroy.
At the moment when it seemed that the living barrier must collapse, the rioters wheeled to
meet a new attack.  With the sound of fighting, Manson pushed on and now struck hard.  His
thirty constables set their batons going, and there came the heavy crack of loaded wood on
thick skulls. Fisette, his eyes gleaming, was tapping like a deadly woodpecker with his pick,
and the impetus of this onslaught drove a formidable wedge into the surging mass.  Manson's
great voice bellowed unspeakable things in the lust of combat, his dark visage distorted, his
mighty body gathered into a great, human battering ram.

Presently the constable too went down with a shattered arm, and the line of police shortened
and curved.  Fisette found himself throttled by a muscular arm which shot round his neck, and
two minutes later they were surrounded and fighting for their lives.

The battle surged and palpitated.  What remained of Baudette's axemen were behind the big gates,
where Belding had dragged the prostrate foreman.  Clark stood in absolute calmness, though
he knew that presently this barrier would be battered down.

Belding drew a long breath and shot a fascinated glance at his chief. It flashed into his mind
that Clark was getting punishment now, not only in the eyes of the world, but also in the eyes
of the man from whom he had taken that which was dearest and best.  But his leader's gaze was
as clear as ever.

"It can't last much longer, sir," he shouted through the uproar.  His automatic was empty,
and he could only watch the front rank of rioters pick up a great baulk of timber and balance
it opposite the gates. Then a sudden chill struck to his very soul.  What would happen in St.
Marys?

Clark, staring at him, just as suddenly perceived what was in his mind.

"Take my launch," he called into his ear.  "You can land at the house. Hurry!  Don't mind about
me."

Belding hung for a moment in frantic uncertainty, and shook his head. He was next in command
here, but a short mile away was his heart's desire, defenseless, save for what resistance could
be hastily organized in the town.  It was questionable what that was worth, and his whole soul
commanded him to go to her.  For an instant he felt sick, then over him flooded the cold conviction
that, even though he saved Clark for Elsie, he must stay and see this thing through.

Suddenly from far down the road came a sharp rattle, that pierced the uproar and brought a
grim, inflexible message.  Clark heard it, and over his face stole an expression of relief.
The mob heard it, and through their surging ranks ran that which sobered and cooled their fury.
Manson, prostrate and bloody, heard it, and Fisette, and all the others who had fought, it
seemed, their last fight.  The rioters began to dissipate like blown leaves in autumn, and
a rippling line of infantry in open formation moved rhythmically up the road from St. Marys.

Clark drew a long breath and looked curiously at his engineer.

"You saved my life, Belding."  He hesitated a moment, and added thoughtfully, "Now, why should
you want to do that?"

Belding stared and a lump rose in his throat.  He had lost and yet he had won,--been defeated
and yet had risen to something bigger than he had ever achieved before.  He could face the
future now, even though it were written that he should face it alone.  He tried to speak, then
turned on his heel and walked towards the dock, where Clark's fast launch lay glinting in the sun.

The gray eyes followed him in profound contemplation.  Presently Clark smiled, it seemed a
little sadly, and advanced to the officer commanding the troops.  Baudette was sitting up.
Manson, his face gray with pain, was nursing a dangling arm, and round them the derelicts of
battle were strewn grotesquely.  But it was Fisette who spoke first.

"By Gar!" he said with flashing teeth, "she's one big fight, eh!"

Silence spread again over the works.  An armed picket was left at the big gates, while the
rest of the troops patrolled suddenly deserted streets in Ironville.  In the accounting office
there began again the clicking of typewriters, and Clark, at his desk, dictated a dispatch
to Philadelphia.  This done, he fell into a mood of strange abstraction. The car of destiny
was traveling fast.

Just then the telephone rang, and he took up the receiver automatically.  As in a dream Elsie's
voice came in, tremulous but very clear.  He smiled wearily as he listened.

"Thank you very much," he said in answer.  "There is really no serious damage done, except
to a few foolish heads; and," he added, "please thank Mr. Belding again for me,--yes, he'll
understand."

A hush fell in the office again, and he felt inexpressibly alone.  He was not in any sense
hopeless, being assured that in the vast machine of his own creation were inherent qualities
of life that could never be extinguished.  He was strong, since for himself he desired nothing.
In this hour of uncertainty his imagination traveled far, but again and again it was captured
by the remembrance of his days with the bishop. This had nothing to do with works, and yet
in a way they were intimately connected.  The bishop had demonstrated the operation of high
and subtle forces to which he himself had not given much thought. The bishop had saved his
life, just as Belding had saved it, and he still seemed to feel the working of big muscles
under his twitching palms.  There flashed back what the prelate had said about being prepared
for the worst, which after all was sometimes the best, and, with half closed eyes, he wondered
whether this was the occasion. There sounded a knock at the door, and the bishop himself came in.

Clark, getting up hastily, advanced to meet him.  There were only three people in the world
he would have cared to see at that moment, and here was one of them.

"Come in and sit down, sir.  This is very good of you."

"It took me two hours to get here," said the big man, breathing a little hard.  "It's rather
difficult traveling to-day."

Clark stared at him.  He had always thought of the bishop as an exemplar of peace, but he had
arrived almost on the tail of the riot.

"I only reached town a short time ago," the visitor was smiling cheerfully, "and heard about
the trouble.  Now that I'm safely here, I'll only stay a minute."

Clark shook his head.  "You are very welcome, sir."

The bishop nodded contentedly.  "I just wanted to express my sympathy with your present anxiety,
and my belief that everything will come all right."

"You do believe that?"

"Unquestionably.  Such efforts as yours are not foredoomed.  I see you, too, are of my opinion."

"I have to be," said Clark reflectively.

"I'm not at all surprised, since you can turn to the physical evidence of your own efforts
to support you.  It gives you an advantage over myself."

"Does it?"

The visitor pointed to the mass of buildings close at hand.  "You have all that, and there
is no doubt that inanimate things possess a peculiar influence, either strengthening or otherwise.
But still I can quite imagine what it means to you to sit here and listen to silence with so
many reminders about you.  It is one of the things that the servants of humanity must occasionally
face."

"Servants?" said Clark curiously.

"Is not a leader also a servant.  Has he anything left for himself, and is it not just a different
term for the same thing?"

The other man experienced a strange sensation that he had discovered this a long time ago.
The bishop had also discovered it, but had not forgotten.

"I have it in my mind that there is another reason why you should not be depressed," went on
the prelate assuringly.  "You have always demanded too much of yourself; and while you are
many kinds of a man you cannot be all kinds."

This was also true.  "Go on, sir."

"I have developed no commercial ability, but admit a strong commercial interest, and sometimes
think I could have been a good business man myself.  I roughly divide them into two classes,--one
very large and the other very small."

"Successful and unsuccessful, I assume?"

The bishop's face was very thoughtful.  "That depends on what you mean by 'success.'  Wealth,
for instance, does not necessarily stand for success.  You, if I may say so, are a practical
idealist, for you have faith in your dream.  You have achieved a vision revealed to few men's
eyes and--"

A gentle knock at the door cut him short.  The secretary came in with a telegram, and something
in the face of the latter made Clark's heart leap within him.  A few seconds later he placed
the yellow slip in the bishop's hands, and gazed at him with twinkling eyes.

Ontario government advances two million on offered security and has notified your bank.

SEMPLE.

The bishop read it over slowly.  "How can I congratulate you?  What splendid news!"

"You have congratulated me."

"Eh!  When?"

"You said I had faith in my dream.  Now I beg of you not to move, but just see how things work."

In the course of the next ten minutes, the prelate saw Clark in swift action.  Automatically
the clear brain marshaled all the pressing duties of the moment and discharged them in quick
succession.  Messages to Filmer, to the military authorities, to various impatient creditors,
were dispatched, for in this masterful hand was gathered every filament through which a vitalizing
energy would again permeate the works.  The flexible intellect of the man worked with a precision
that was impressive.  Presently the bishop rose to go.  He stood, an imposing figure, animated
with benign understanding and good will.

"Good-by, till we meet again.  I rejoice with you in what has just taken place, but you are
a prophet and all prophets are on a precarious pedestal.  Had you been in the pursuit of wealth
I could not have talked as I have to-day."

Clark did not answer, and in the hush the voice of the rapids lifted a melodious chorus.

"But after all does it matter how deep the water through which any man passes if the community
at large benefits?"

"I don't know what they would say to that in Philadelphia."

"Possibly, but in an economic sense what has happened is that some of the wealth of Philadelphia
has been transferred here.  This will be a few weeks' sensation--and then will follow a fresh
one.  That is of the nature of things.  But long after you and I have moved on, the forests
and mines of this district will be adding to the strength of the country.  Those men who have
backed you have contributed with you and made it possible.  Mr. Clark, I have no fear for the
future of the works or of yourself."

Clark's lips curved into a rare smile.  "Neither have I, sir."

His visitor departed, and he got on to the Philadelphia wire with the curt information that
two million dollars had been secured from the Ontario government, and asked permission to continue
work. Simultaneously the news spread like a forest fire.  The militia found there was nothing
to contend with.  Merchants surveyed their looted stores and swore vengeance, but in a modern
Arcadia one cannot arrest two thousand foreigners.  There were blocks of buildings with fronts
smashed in; dangling knots of wires; prostrate electric light poles; scattered stones and bolts
and shivered fences, but the rioters, to a man, were back, dandling their babies and waiting
for the morrow.  It was as though a hurricane had blown fiercely through the town, and then
died over the encircling hills.  And in the bank office Brewster was thoughtfully reading two
telegrams from Thorpe, one commending his attitude for the past few weeks, the other authorizing
him to credit the Consolidated account with two million dollars.

A few days later Wimperley and Birch arrived.  It was their answer to Clark's suggestion that
work be continued without delay and, as usual, he quite correctly interpreted the manner of
their reply.  His energy had saved the situation which it had created, but, in spite of this,
there was a new spirit in the financial circles of Philadelphia.  He was dubbed a dangerous
man.  He was, they considered, too swift as well as too hypnotic.  To continue to identify
themselves with his undertakings was deliberately boarding a runaway train.  Added to this,
the interlinking of companies which had been presumed to be a factor of strength was now shown
as an element of weakness.  When one lost money, all lost it.

When Wimperley, unfolding his mind steadily and without interruption, told Clark that the old
régime was at an end, the latter, at first, was not much impressed.  But gradually the case
became clearer.

"I don't say we don't trust you," he said, "but candidly, we're afraid of you.  Just two things
are needed to secure the operation of the works,--new money and new management; and it's possible
the new crowd won't want you.  Philadelphia has been sucked dry so far as concerns us."

"Any suggestions?" put in Clark quietly.

"Not yet.  We're in correspondence with London people, and they'll probably come out.  When
they do," continued Wimperley, eying the other man meaningly, "we'll turn them over to you."

"Is that it?"  The voice had a profundity of meaning.

Wimperley nodded.  "I thought you'd understand.  You got us in, and now you've got to pull us out."

"And pull myself out too," said Clark dryly.  "Thanks."

"Would you prefer that the works stay idle with you or get busy without you?" interjected Birch
pointedly.

"When it comes to that--if it does--I'll let you know.  In the meantime--?"

"Don't turn a wheel except for town utilities, and now we'd like to see Bowers.  You probably
don't realize what we've been through in Philadelphia.  Consolidated isn't what you'd call
gilt edged just now, and the corners are knocked off our reputation as business men.  I just
mention this in case you feel aggrieved."

Clark grinned suddenly.  "I'm not worrying either about my stock or my business reputation.
Your difficulty is that you don't see why any one else should pull through where we didn't."

Wimperley nodded.  "There's something in that.  What we've got now is the job of making Consolidated
stock worth something--by earnings.  It means cutting out the dead wood--our own dead wood,
and I don't fancy the contract.  It hurts to chop down the tree you helped to plant--but it's
the only way out of it.  There will probably be months before this machine will start up again,
and move toward permanent success."

A day or two afterwards the two directors went back to Philadelphia, where they reported to
Stoughton and Riggs that the screws were on tight.  Save only the pumps and generators, not
a wheel turned in the Consolidated.  Birch's conclusion was that millions more were needed.
Consolidated stock settled down to a nominal value that fluctuated with conflicting reports
of new capital having been found, but the whole affair was flat--indescribably flat.  And meantime
Birch--with the unprofitable burden on his shoulders--made pilgrimages to test the financial
pulse, and for months returned empty handed.

In St. Marys it seemed that Arcadia might be reborn,--not the old time Arcadia with its sleepy
village atmosphere, but a modern one in which folk made up their minds to live on the profits
of past years.  The car service was reduced, and half the street lamps removed.  There were
empty houses in the new streets, and the property which once passed through Manson's hands
could have been re-bought at the original price. Filmer and the rest reduced their stock, while
the whole overbuilt, overgrown town settled down to wait till, after a weary interval, Clark
got off the train with two strangers and drove up to the big house on the hill.  In half an
hour Bowers, who was expecting them, completed the quartet.

It was an unusual group that gathered that night in the dining room. Ardswell and Weatherby
had spent a week in Philadelphia before Wimperley telegraphed Clark to come down.  The story
was plain enough. The two Englishmen had come from London to hear it,--and it was told well.
But Wimperley and Birch shared the belief that Clark, in the meantime, should be kept in the
background, lest his hypnosis should envelop them as of old.  They held him, as it were, a
reserve store of influence to be used at the proper time, and it was not till the financial
aspect of the affair was thoroughly digested that he was called in to play his appointed part.

Ardswell and Weatherby wanted to see whether the machine could be made to run commercially.
That it was not so running was obviously the fault of those in charge, and Clark at once determined
not to attempt to make former mistakes less glaring.  The more obvious they were allowed to
remain, the more easy their rectification.  He was too much in love with the works to dodge
this sacrifice, and yet could not conceive their continuing without him.

Assuming this onerous duty, he was perfectly aware that he dealt with minds of a new complexion.
Instead of responsive Americans, he confronted two cool-blooded Britishers, to whom any show
of spontaneity was out of place.  They were on guard, and Clark knew it, and of all his achievements
none stands out more prominently than his attitude on the three days that followed.  He became
a Britisher himself.  He assumed, quite correctly, that nothing would be accepted without proof.

Tramping about the works, they were accompanied by the superintendents of the various departments,
to whom he referred the pointed questions that came so frequently in high-pitched, well modulated
English voices. What Clark said himself was very curt and to the point.  The works, he decided,
could talk for themselves.  Coming last to the pulp mill, Ardswell ran an admiring eye down
the long rank of machinery, ranged like sleeping giants in a dwindling perspective.

"I say," he remarked involuntarily, "I'd like to see the thing turn over.  Could it be arranged?--at
our expense of course," he added.

Clark nodded to the superintendent, who was close behind, and presently the day watchmen were
twisting at the turbine gate wheels.  A soft tremor ran through the building, growing steadily
to a deep, hoarse rumble as the massive grindstones revolved faster.  The floor vibrated in
a quick rhythm, and in a few seconds came the full drone of work--that profound and elemental
note of nature when she toils at the behest of man.

The faintest flicker of light stirred in the blue English eyes. Ardswell had been walking from
turbine to turbine.  "Ripping!" he said. "You might shut down now."

The titans dropped one by one into slumber.  When the last vibration was stilled, he looked
up with a new respect.  "We might go ahead if you don't mind."

"Take a quarter of an hour first, and follow me."

They struck southward, and the Englishmen heard the boom of the rapids deepen till they came
to the edge of the river at Clark's observation point.  There was a strong easterly wind, and
it caught at the snowy crests of the bigger waves, spinning them out like silver manes of leaping
horses.  These flashed in the sunlight, till, over the central ridge of water, the air was
full of a fine, misty spray that hung palpitating and luminous.  Here was a torrential life--born
of the endless and icy leagues of Lake Superior.

The two strangers stared fascinated, and as Clark watched them he perceived that once more
the ageless voice of the rapids was speaking to human ears, just as it had spoken to his own
so many times--and years before.  He waited patiently, while the river lifted its elemental
message, and saw the color rise in English cheeks and the cold, blue English eyes begin to
sparkle again.  What were the drab records of Birch's ledgers, or even the monumental pile
of nearby buildings, compared to this impetuous slogan?  He stood silently, plunged in the
psychology of the moment.

"How much power--total I mean?" said Ardswell presently, pointing to the ripping flood.

"Two hundred and forty thousand horsepower, at a minimum."

"By George!"

Silence fell again, till Weatherby, shaking the spray from his rough tweed coat, got up a little
stiffly.

"I begin to understand a little better now," he said slowly with an eloquent glance.

The car was waiting for them by the little lock--and here at the block house the visitors displayed
marked animation, Clark told them the story very simply as they rolled off up the hill for lunch.

"There's one man, the chief engineer, Belding--you met him at the head gates--that I would
like to be remembered should we do business," he concluded very thoughtfully.  "Belding was
my first employee.  I picked him up in St. Marys and he has stuck to it nobly.  I probably
gave him far too much to do, but he never squealed; and there are other reasons."

Weatherby looked up.  "That's the big, fair haired chap we saw go off in the canoe?"

"Yes."

"Well," put in Ardswell tersely, "it will probably all depend on yourself."

XXIV.--DESTINY

Up in the big bay that lies next the head of the rapids, Belding was drifting aimlessly.  He
was still obsessed with a sense of the hideous uselessness of effort, and wanted to be alone.
At one time Elsie used to be here in the bow of the canoe, but now it seemed that Elsie had
little thought for him.  And yet he could have sworn that, two years ago, she loved him.

He began to paddle, with a sharp and growing resentment, and found a deep satisfaction in the
thrust of his broad blade.  Soon he was nearly half way across the river, and a mile down stream
lifted the fabric of the great bridge.  Slacking speed, he caught the pull of the current,
and with it came a reckless impulse.  No man had shot the middle of the rapids and escaped
with his life.  It was true that the Indians maneuvered their long canoes down close to the
opposite shore with venturous tourists, but it was only a film of water that wound, bubbling,
near the land.  With the deep-throated rumble only half a mile away, Belding felt his pulse
falter for a second, then pound viciously on.  And in that second, with the bravado of early
manhood, he threw discretion overboard, and set the slim bow of his Peterboro' for the middle
span.  Twenty seconds, later he knew that he was about to run the rapids--whether he would or not.

Settling himself amidship, he gripped the thwart tight between calf and thigh and, resting
the paddle across the gunwale, peered anxiously forward.  His lips were a little dry, but he
felt no fear.  Being close to the water, he could not see the rapids themselves but only the
first great, green curve, and below it the white tops of a multitude of waves.  Then the middle
span swept back overhead, he heard the river, split by the sharp piers, hissing along their
rough sides and the canoe sailed like a leaf into the first smooth dip.  Came the vision of
a distant shore sliding by, and the lower reach with a ferry steamer halfway across, and Belding
felt the canoe lift and quiver, while a green wave flung its white crest in his face.  He came
through rather than over it, and just below caught a glimpse of one of those dreaded cellars
that hid themselves in this tumult.  Here, at all costs, he must keep straight.

The canoe, with no way on, swooped giddily into the great, emerald pit. There was a fleeting
sensation of smooth, glittering, watery walls, till he was flung on and up into the backward
foaming crest, and with a desperate effort wrenched the slim bow so that it took the rise head
on.  An instant followed in which the sky was blotted out, while on each side rose pyramids
of bubbling foam that seemed to meet over his head, but between which he could see light and
distance.  The canoe, half full of water, was plucked onward, while Belding drew a long breath
and searched the chaos in front of him.

Fifty yards down, opened a lane of green that curved beside and between two cellars, each deeper
than the last.  He knew instantly that he could not survive these, and, with every ounce of
his strength, drove across the broken river to the head of the chute.  Making it in the nick
of time, he plunged in, with the water sucking at his thighs, and the sinews in his arms burning
like fire.  There followed a swift descent through cellars of dwindling depth, till he floated
into the long, spume-flecked swells at the foot of the decline, where the canoe drifted sluggishly,
full nearly to the gunwale.  And here Belding leaned forward with his hands on her curved thwart,
and pumped great gulps of air into his empty lungs.  Presently he stared around.  He was below
the works of which he had seen nothing, and just opposite Clark's big house, whose roof lifted
on the hill side a mile away.  He had dared the rapids and come through safely, but Clark,
he reflected, was engulfed.

Luncheon that day at the big house had been a silent affair, after which the three men went
out on the terrace and examined the panorama that spread to the south.  It was suggestive and
inspiring.  They had been voiceless for some time, when Clark moved restlessly.

"Shall we talk here, or go back to the office?"

"This is good enough for me," said Ardswell; "are you ready for business?"

"Certainly."

"And may I ask two questions first,--one is a trifle personal?"

"Please ask them, if you wish; I have no personal secrets."

"That's very decent of you.  What I'd like to know is, first, what you found here when you
arrived seven years ago, and, second, what your resources were at the time?  You will not,
of course, answer the last unless you wish."

Clark laughed almost boyishly.  "Why I found only the rapids, and--I had no resources,--that
is, except myself."

"I thought so, and"--here the speaker glanced at Weatherby--"we would like to congratulate
you, I had an idea that this was the case.  Now as to the present business, we have decided
to make a proposal to your board."

"I am glad of that," said Clark briefly.  He knew that the moment had come.

"We hope it will meet with your support," Ardswell hesitated perceptibly and went on, pitching
his voice a little higher, "and you will not misunderstand my putting it rather baldly.  The
matter depends on two things: the reduction of the Consolidated capital from twenty-seven million
to something about ten million and the wiping out of all common stock, and," here he paused
again while the blood crept slowly to his temples--"the other is a change in the executive.
These being satisfactorily arranged, we will go ahead.  That's about it, eh?"

"Yes," put in the other, "but of course we could not go ahead, under any circumstances, without
Mr. Clark's temporary assistance.  I think in fairness to him we should make the case a little
clearer."

"It's fairly clear as it is," said Clark without a trace of emotion.

"We've never seen anything quite like this in any part of the world," volunteered Weatherby,
"and it is a remarkable thing for any one man to have imagined and accomplished.  Whether or
not we take the matter up, it will always seem a catastrophe that your work and the work of
your directors should have been interrupted by a speculator.  That's one thing that strikes
us both about American business--you have your lions, and plenty of them, but you have too
many wolves.  Now, coming back to St. Marys, I beg that you won't misunderstand me when I say
that the originator of great things is very seldom a suitable executive for permanent administration.
It is too much to expect.  In case we take this up it would be necessary for us to have the
administration in our own hands.  You understand, of course, that an originator of big things
is a much rarer person than a good executive, and it is largely on account of non-imaginative
qualities that the latter is the safer man.  I would like to assure you," he concluded with
evident respect, "that we have never experienced more difficulty in making a suggestion. The
case is extraordinary--we realize that."

"What Weatherby has in his head," added Ardswell, "is that you have done what neither of us
could ever have done, and he thinks it a waste of valuable material to try and make an executive
out--"

"Out of me," interrupted Clark.  "You may be quite right."  He had expected to feel alone,
but the direct simplicity of these men appealed to him.  It was not always, he reflected, that
he was given an unprejudiced opinion, and he felt the safer since now he got it.

"We believe that we are right," it was Weatherby who spoke, "and are prepared to assume that
responsibility.  Like you, we have shareholders to think of, and we feel that yours will not
get any better offer.  We know the financial world fairly well."

Clark listened tensely.  He was aware that the interests represented by these two were of enormous
influence and wealth.  He realized, also, that instead of all this discussion, Wimperley might
simply have notified him that he was discharged, and that the new interests would now take
over.  But Wimperley had done nothing of the kind.

"One week in Philadelphia taught us much, but we have learned a great deal more up here," continued
Weatherby, "and it depended really on the past three days whether we would make a proposal
or not.  From what we have seen and what you have told us, we are satisfied.  I might say that
your directors have already agreed to the reduction of capital, provided the matter of management
is settled.  So the future lies entirely with you.  Your holdings in common stock are so large
that it is essential you give your formal assent."

Clark drew a long breath.  He had come to the fork in the road.  The labors of seven years
rolled suddenly over his brain and engulfed it. Here were two men who drank his wine, then
asked him to leave his very soul to others.

"Gentlemen," he said slowly, "thank you for what you have said--but I can't give you an answer
at once."

"There's no hurry," replied Ardswell.  "It's not a case for a snap decision."

Through Clark's mind ran a quizzical idea that these two understood each other admirably, and
he wondered how things would have turned out had he himself been one of a pair that did such
team work.

"Then later, to-night."

The two nodded and moved off, talking earnestly, while Clark experienced a strange breathlessness.
His soul was in tumult, and he reacted from the strain of the past few days.  He perceived
that with men like himself and his visitors lay the great economic forces of the world.  And
yet he was expected to make way.

Passing slowly through the big gates, towards which he had walked automatically, he moved on
beyond the pulp mills towards the rapids, as though drawn by their insistent call.  It was
the call he had heard for years, even in his very dreams.  And there, on the great boulder
where he had once found her before, sat Elsie.

She had been there for an hour, gazing at the tumbled mass of foam and trying desperately to
disentangle her thoughts.  But even as she gazed, Clark's face seemed to come in between; keen,
strong, undefeated and suggestive.  It was not till now that she admitted to her own soul that
he had dominated her imagination for months past.  His achievements, his peculiar independence,
his swift versatility had captured her crescent ambition, the ambition which he himself had
unwittingly stimulated.  She did not question whether this was love, she only knew that in
this season, when his work seemed to be tottering over his head, she was ready to come to him
and help rebuild it into something stronger and even greater.

She did not start, but looked at him with a strange satisfaction, as though it were meant from
the first that they should meet at this time and place.  Her eyes were very grave, and in them
was that which made Clark's pulse beat faster.  Something whispered that each of them had been
saved over for this moment.

"I haven't seen much of you for the past few months," he said presently.

"I know that, but I know why.  Are things better now?"

He nodded.  "They may be very shortly."

"I'm so glad.  You can't imagine how anxious I've been,--the riots and your escape--and--"

"But I was anxious for you."

"You shouldn't have been," she said gently.  "Mr. Belding told me that you wanted him to come
to the house when things were at their worst, but he didn't like leaving you.  Now tell me,
are the works starting up again?"

Clark drew a long breath.  "I'll know very soon."

"Then you'll settle down just like before, and it will be all a bad dream?"

"Perhaps I will."   His voice lifted a little.

"You're not going away?"

That was what he had come here to decide, and there flashed into his mind a curious conception
that was both fanciful and reassuring.

"Forget about the works for a moment; I want to ask you something."

"But do I know?"  She smiled doubtfully.

"Yes, you'll know without any question whatever.  It's the case of a man who worked very hard,
and he didn't work for money or glory, or anything of that kind, but just because he loved
it and couldn't help it."

"That sounds very like yourself."

"There are many men like that, more than most people imagine," he said quietly; "and after
this one had, so to speak, built the foundations and walls, he had not money enough to put
on the roof, and another man came along and offered to do it.  Of course, he would get the
credit for the whole building.  It was a very important one, and it affected the lives and
comfort of a great many people who would suffer if it were not completed."

The girl glanced at him strangely.  "Is that all?"

"Yes, except that the people who lived there would naturally forget all about the man who laid
the foundations and built the walls, and would even blame him and think only of the one who
made the place habitable for them."

"But does that matter?" she asked quickly, looking at him.

Clark took a long look at the animated face.  "That he should be forgotten or blamed?"

"Yes.  You said he worked for the love of it.  He didn't ask for thanks or appreciation, and
from what you tell me he wasn't that kind."  She turned swiftly: "It is yourself."

"And if it were, that would not alter your judgment, would it?"

"Is it fair to ask?"  Her eyes were full of a touching appeal.

"A frank opinion is the fairest thing to me," he said quietly.  "I know how you would look
at it.  There's only one answer you could give.  If it were otherwise it wouldn't be you: the
first man has no alternative, has he?"

"No," she whispered.  Her face was pitiful, as though she had been secretly and cruelly hurt.

"Then it is the works I'm considering," he continued slowly.  "You're the only one I can tell
just now, but if they go on, it must be without me."

"But they're your works.  You dreamed them and then built them."

"I've had many dreams, Elsie."

Her heart beat rapturously.  It was the first time he had called her Elsie, and her spontaneous
spirit went out to this man who stood facing so great and sacrificial a decision.  She longed
to spend herself upon him.  Involuntarily she glanced up with profound pity and, turning, caught
a glimpse of a canoe that whipped down stream under the middle span of the great bridge.

"Oh, look! he's going to be drowned."  She clutched Clark's arm in sudden terror.

The latter stared, while something rose in his throat.  The canoe was familiar.  He had seen
it a few hours before on the upper bay, and now his keen sight made out the figure of Belding.
Instantly he grasped the cause of this foolhardy deed.  A glance at Elsie told him she was
unaware who it was that thus played with death.

"Look, look!" she cried again.

The canoe pitched into the first cellar, and in the mound of silver foam they could discern
only the slim and tossing bow.  Presently it emerged and reeled on into the fury below.  Elsie
covered her eyes, and Clark stood as though fascinated.  What part had he played in this perilous
drama?

Vividly his mind flashed back to those first days, the beginning of the engineer's unswerving
loyalty.  Year after year he had never faltered, and at the end of it all, even though apparently
robbed by his chief of his heart's desire, had thrust himself between Clark and the hoarse
hatred of the mob.  Came now an overwhelming sense of unworthiness, and Clark asked of himself
who was he to demand such sacrifice.  Then, as though a cloud had revealed the sun, the way
became quite clear.

"Elsie," he said, "the canoe is all right, look!"

Down in the long, smooth swell at the foot of the rapids, it lay sluggishly.  The man dipped
his paddle and began to move almost imperceptibly towards shore.  The girl drew a long breath.

"He's safe."

"Yes," said Clark earnestly, "he's very safe.  Now I want to talk to you."

She brightened at once.  "Do."

"I've wanted to talk to you for months.  Do you remember what we spoke of last?"

"Destiny," she said softly.

He nodded.  "I see it plainly to-day, more plainly than ever before. Sometimes when a man is
in deep water his sight gets keener.  What I have been through in the last seven years is only
a phase, it's not an epoch.  I was meant to do it, and I did it with all my heart.  Now I'm
going to do something else, in order that the works may prosper.  You have helped me to make
that decision."

"I?" she whispered faintly.

He put a hand on her arm--it was his only caress.

"Yes, Elsie, you.  It is as though I had caught sight of a road which was very beautiful and
tender, and I was tempted to take it.  But it is not my road.  What the future has left for
me I don't know, but it is not here and I must meet it alone."

He paused for a moment, and the girl's brown eyes filled with tears. Presently the steady voice
continued.

"Destiny is calling, and one cannot take a girl into a battlefield, for that is what it is
going to be.  I'm a poor man again, Elsie, just as I was seven years ago.  That does not matter,
for I will be rich in memories."

"Don't," she said brokenly, "don't!"

"Youth will go to youth, Elsie."

"You mean--"

"I mean that the man you really love, is the man you saw run the rapids."

"Jim!"  Her eyes were round with terror.

"Yes, Jim, the best friend but one I found in St. Marys.  Jim, full of loyalty and courage
and energy; Jim who wanted to give his life for mine, though he thought he'd lost you.  He
had never really lost you, Elsie.  The road that led to you seemed so attractive that I hesitated,
till now I see that it was Jim's road.  It always was."

In the silence that followed she lifted her exquisite face.  Her lips were parted, and in her
gaze was a light that came as through dissolving mist.  And then into their very souls crept
the voice of the rapids.  Clark caught it, and perceived that the call was not for him alone
but for thousands yet unborn, and there began to creep over him the ineffable unction of labor.
He realized how large was the world, and how much work yet remained to be done.  His spirit
was not solitary, but linked forever with eternal realities, and through the cloud that obscured
the present he could see his star of destiny shining undimmed.

And Elsie!  Elsie sat, her whole being shaken with overwhelming emotion.  Never had she so
longed to be everything to this man as now when, with prophetic power, his vibrant voice told
her that he must journey on alone.  In his accents she recognized the note of fate, and the
ground shifted under her feet.  She saw her dream dissolving.  She perceived that against his
lofty spirit she herself must oppose nothing small and selfish, however poignant the moment.
Summoning all her fortitude, she stretched out her hand.

He stood for a moment, and she felt the pressure of his grasp.  It was warm and confident.
When she looked up she was alone.

It was hours afterwards that Ardswell and Weatherby lounged at their windows, overhanging the
terrace.  They were in dressing gowns and smoking contemplative pipes.  Down below was seated
a motionless gray clad figure, clearly outlined in the moonlight.  Ardswell saw him.

"Poor devil!" he said under his breath.

XXV.--THE UNCONQUERABLE SPIRIT

Two years later, Belding and Elsie were returning from Chicago, where the former had been purchasing
machinery for the new company, of which he was chief engineer.  Time had done well for them
and for St. Marys. The six months' physical inactivity of the works were spent wisely, if ruthlessly,
in weeding out unfertile growths and concentrating resources on those which were sound and
promising.  There was a sharp distinction between this deliberate policy and the restless activity
that preceded it.

St. Marys, too, had caught its breath and taken on permanency.  There were no more surprises.
The works became a factory, instead of a Pandora's box, full of the unexpected.  Property was
stable, if lower than the high water mark, while Filmer and the rest settled down to steady
business, somewhat forgetful of the man to whom were due the first tendrils of the tree of
progress.

But Belding, growing constantly in mental stature, could never forget. His own position--his
development--his authority, had come of the abiding faith bestowed on him nine years ago by
one whom he had then seen but for ten minutes.  And as often as he saw the works the realization
came over him.  How many others, he wondered, felt as he did?

They were approaching St. Marys, and, coming out of the dining car with Elsie, he steadied
her to their seat.  Night was drawing on, but the car remained unlighted, and simultaneously
they noticed a man sitting across the aisle, staring intently out of the window.  Something
familiar in the figure caught their attention.

"It's Mr. Clark," he whispered to his wife.

She glanced across, and her fingers tightened on his arm.

"Don't speak to him, Jim."

"Why?"

"Look at him, can't you see?"

Belding looked, Clark was absolutely motionless, and had not changed a fraction in two years.
The train moved on, till it halted for a few moments on the great bridge.  The air was cool
and full of the deep roar of the rapids, and the car vibrated delicately with the huge steel
girders on which it rested.  Two hundred feet away came the first, smooth dip that Belding
would always remember.  Immediately beneath, he had slid into the chaos further on.

The two young people did not stir, but watched the silent observer. Against the window they
caught the dominant nose, the clean cut, powerful chin, the aggressive contour of head and
shoulders.  Clark was leaning forward, his gaze exploring the well remembered scene.

"Don't disturb him," whispered Elsie again.

Her husband pressed her hand, and they waited, wondering what thoughts were passing through
that marvelous brain.  He was staring at the works.  It was all his--this dream come true;
this vision portrayed in steel and stone.  Out of nothing but water and wood and his own superb
faith he had created it, only to see this exemplification of himself slip from his own hands
into those of others, who had sponsored neither its birth nor its magnificent development.
What portion of his leader, pondered the engineer, had been incorporated in those vast foundations--and
what had life left in store to replace them for him?

The train was moving on, when Clark, turning suddenly, smiled and held out his hand.

"Glad to see you both, if only for a minute.  I'm on my way back to Russia, where I'm carrying
out large improvements for the government--been there for the last year.  By the way, Belding,
did you notice that old, crooked birch beside the rapids?  A big, fat kingfisher used to live
there--we knew each other well."

CONCLUSION

The sumac leaves, which through the summer months tapped delicately at my study window, have
turned a vivid scarlet, and one by one have fluttered to the ground.  Here, by the mysterious
process of nature, they will be incorporated with the rich soil, to nourish some other life
that will later climb sunward.  But in that life no one shall recognize a sumac leaf.

So it seems are the efforts of men.  A few years of growth and aspiration--then the fiery bourgeoning
to a climax, and, after that, incorporation in the soil of a forgetfulness that seems indifferent
alike to their exertions and their ambitions.  But the end is not here. Somewhere, and most
certainly in some other form, the effort achieves immortality and reasserts itself, indestructible
and eternal.  For such are the myriad filaments of existence, and so indissolubly are men linked
with each other by invisible chains, that it is but seldom that impulse can be traced back
to its birth, or courage to its starting point.

Who then shall determine what is success and what is failure?  Does the grandeur of the reward
establish the value of the service, or is it not true that, in the mysterious cycle of time,
the richest field is not seldom sown by hands that have been without honor or recognition in
their season?  Does wealth or authority spell success, or is it the meed of those who have
given rather than taken, who have toiled on the mountain side rather than sought the peaks
of publicity?  Clark came to St. Marys a poor man, and he left it no whit the richer.  What
he made, he spent.  And when the day of his departure dawned, he went as one who had attempted
and failed, carrying with him the resentment of those who lost, and few thanks from those who
profited.

But did Clark actually fail?

To-day the mines of Algoma are supplying steel rails for Asiatic railways; the forests about
St. Marys are yielding pulp for Australia, and the great power house is sending carbide to
the mines of India. This and much more is the fruit of vision.  What matter that Philadelphia
stormed, and that the reins of government were snatched from those masterful hands?  The dream
has come true.

Consider for a moment this man, who is stranger to most.  He desired neither wealth nor ease,
being filled with a vast hunger for creation, and to forest, mountain and river he turned with
confidence and abiding courage.  It was as though nature herself had whispered misty secrets
in his ear.  Being a prophet, he suffered like a prophet, but the years, rolling on, have enabled
him to look back on the later flower of his earlier days, for it was written that he should
plow and others reap.  And of necessity it was so.  Like the prospector who finds gold in the
wilderness and straightway shoulders his pack to seek for further treasure, his unwearying
soul drove him on in steadfast pursuit of that which lay just over the hill.  It was not the
thing that lay at his feet which fascinated, but the promise of the morrow, whose dawn already
gilded the horizon of his spirit.

Clark, with his impetuous energy, is typical of a country in which few achievements are impossible.
He provided his own motive power and used his hypnotic influence only in one direction--that
of progress.  Ever faithful to his destiny, he was too busy to have time to suffer, too occupied
to waste himself in regrets.  Like the rapids themselves, his work moves on, and in its deep
rumble may be distinguished the confused note of humanity, striving and ever striving.

THE END