 Courtenay to accept half in cash and half in shares
of the exploiting company.

Hence, there was no need for Courtenay to decline a new career in the magnificent service which
Mr. Boyle once sniffed at, and Elsie became a prominent figure in that very select circle which
clusters around the ports mostly favored by his Majesty's ships.

It was not unreasonable that Gray should go back to Chile to take charge of Elsie's mine, nor
that Mr. Boyle should become captain and Walker chief engineer, of the Kansas, but there was
one wholly unexpected development which fairly took Elsie's breath away when she heard of it.

She was with her husband in London.  While passing the National Gallery one day, she remembered
the picture by Claude which deals with the embarkation of Saint Ursula and her Eleven Thousand
Virgins.  A painter herself, Elsie had an artist's appreciation of the vanity which led Turner
to bequeath his finest canvasses to the nation with the proviso that they should be placed
cheek by jowl with those of his great rival, the Lorrainer.  So a fat fox-terrier was given
in charge of a catalogue seller, and they passed up the steps.

It was a students' day, and the galleries were crowded with embryonic geniuses.  Courtenay
waxed sarcastic anent the rig of Claude's ships; he was laughing at the careless grace with
which several of the Baozan maidens were standing in a boat just putting off from a wharf,
when a lady cried sharply:

"George, how careless of you!  You are sitting on my mahl-stick."

"Sorry, my dear," said a tall thin man, rising from a camp-stool.

"Good gracious, it's Mr. Tollemache," whispered Elsie.

"Gad, so it is.  Let's hail him."

Tollemache's solemn face brightened when he heard the hail.  He introduced his wife, an eminently
artistic being who answered to the name of Jennie.  She at once enlisted Elsie in an argument
as to atmospheres, but Tollemache drew Courtenay aside.

"Got married when I reached home that trip," he explained.  "The wife comes here every Thursday,
an' I have to carry the kit.  Rather rot, isn't it?"

"It is certainly a change from stoking the donkey-boiler, and bowling over Alaculofs like nine-pius."

"That's what I tell her, but she says the Indians were Boeotian, and the landscape, as I describe
it, had the crude coloring of the Newlyn school, which she abominates.  She thinks Turner might
approve of Suarez in his black and white stripes, but the Guanaco crater reminds her of Gustave
Doré, who always exaggerated his tone values.  I learn that sort of gabble by heart.  Jennie's
a good sort, yet sometimes she talks rot--"

"George," said Mrs. Tollemache, "pack up my portfolio.  We are going to lunch with your friends.
Mrs. Courtenay and I have so much to talk about.  We find we think alike on many points.  I
am delighted to have met your wife, Captain Courtenay.  My husband raves about her."

"So do I, ma'am," cried Courtenay, gallantly, yet with a subtle glance at Elsie which told
her he meant what he said.

THE END