A distant trampling was at length heard, and the glance of spears was seen to shine through
the trees above the village. The sounds increased, and became more thick, one close continuous
rushing sound, in which the tread of hoofs was mingled with the ringing of armour. The horsemen
soon appeared at the principal entrance which leads into the irregular square or market-place
which forms the centre of the village. They entered two by two, slowly, and in the greatest
order. The van continued to move on, riding round the open spaoe, until they had attained the
utmost point, and then turning their horses' heads to the street, stood fast; their companions
followed in the same order, until the whole market-place was closely surrounded with soldiers;
and the files who followed, making the same manoeuvre, formed an inner line within those who
had first arrived, until the place was begirt with a quadruple file of horsemen closely drawn
up. There was now a pause, of which the Abbot availed himself, by commanding the brotherhood
to raise the solemn chant De profundis clamavi. He looked around the armed ranks, to see what
impression the solemn sounds made on them. All were silent, but the brows of some had an expression
of contempt, and almost all the rest bore a look of indifference; their course had been too
long decided to permit past feelings of enthusiasm to be anew awakened by a procession or by
a hymn.

"Their hearts are hardened," said the Abbot to himself in dejection, but not in despair; "it
remains to see whether those of their leaders are equally obdurate."

The leaders, in the meanwhile, were advancing slowly, and Murray, with Morton, rode in deep
conversation before a chosen band of their most distinguished followers, amongst whom came
Halbert Glendinning. But the preacher Henry Warden, who, upon leaving the Monastery, had instantly
joined them, was the only person admitted to their conference.

"You are determined, then," said Morton to Murray, "to give the heiress of Avenel, with all
her pretensions, to this nameless and obscure young man?"

"Hath not Warden told you," said Murray, "that they have been bred together, and are lovers
from their youth upward?"

"And that they are both," said Warden, "by means which may be almost termed miraculous, rescued
from the delusions of Rome, and brought within the pale of the true church. My residence at
Glendearg hath made me well acquainted with these things. Ill would it beseem my habit and
my calling, to thrust myself into match-making and giving in marriage, but worse were it in
me to see your lordships do needless wrong to the feelings which are proper to our nature,
and which, being indulged honestly and under the restraints of religion, become a pledge of
domestic quiet here, and future happiness in a better world. I say, that you will do ill to
rend those ties asunder, and to give this maiden to the kinsman of Lord Morton, though Lord
Morton's kinsman he be."

"These are fair reasons, my Lord of Murray," said Morton, "why you should refuse me so simple
a boon as to bestow this silly damsel upon young Bennygask. Speak out plainly, my lord; say
you would rather see the Castle of Avenel in the hands of one who owes his name and existence
solely to your favour, than in the power of a Douglas, and of my kinsman."

"My Lord of Morton," said Murray, "I have done nothing in this matter which should aggrieve
you. This young man Glendinning has done me good service, and may do me more. My promise was
in some degree passed to him, and that while Julian Avenel was alive, when aught beside the
maiden's lily hand would have been hard to come by; whereas, you never thought of such an alliance
for your kinsman, till you saw Julian lie dead yonder on the field, and knew his land to be
a waif free to the first who could seize it. Come, come, my lord, you do less than justice
to your gallant kinsman, in wishing him a bride bred up under the milk-pail; for this girl
is a peasant wench in all but the accident of birth. I thought you had more deep respect for
the honour of the Douglasses."

"The honour of the Douglasses is safe in my keeping," answered Morton, haughtily; "that of
other ancient families may suffer as well as the name of Avenel, if rustics are to be matched
with the blood of our ancient barons."

"This is but idle talking," answered Lord Murray; "in times like these, we must look to men
and not to pedigrees. Hay was but a rustic before the battle of Loncarty--the bloody yoke actually
dragged the plough ere it was emblazoned on a crest by the herald. Times of action make princes
into peasants, and boors into barons. All families have sprung from one mean man; and it is
well if they have never degenerated from his virtue who raised them first from obscurity."

"My Lord of Murray will please to except the house of Douglas," said Morton, haughtily; "men
have seen it in the tree, but never in the sapling--have seen it in the stream, but never in
the fountain.

[Footnote: The late excellent and laborious antiquary, Mr. George Chalmers, has rebuked the
vaunt of the House of Douglas, or rather of Hume of Godscroft, their historian, but with less
than his wonted accuracy. In the first volume of his Caledonia, he quotes the passage in Godscroft
for the purpose of confuting it.

The historian (of the Douglasses) cries out, "We do not know them in the fountain, but in the
stream; not in the root, but in the stem; for we know not which is the mean man that did rise
above the vulgar." This assumption Mr. Chalmers conceives ill-timed, and alleges, that if the
historian had attended more to research than to declamation, he might easily have seen the
first mean man of this renowned family. This he alleges to have been one Theobaldus Flammaticus,
or Theobald the Fleming, to whom Arnold, Abbot of Kelso, between the year 1147 and 1160, granted
certain lands on Douglas water, by a deed which Mr. Chalmers conceives to be the first link
of the chain of title-deeds to Douglasdale. Hence, he says, the family must renounce their
family domain, or acknowledge this obscure Fleming as their ancestor. Theobald the Fleming,
it is acknowledged, did not himself assume the name of Douglas; "but," says the antiquary,
"his son William, who inherited his estate, called himself, and was named by others, De Duglas;"
and he refers to the deeds in which he is so designed. Mr. Chalmers' full argument may be found
in the first volume of his Caledonia, p. 579.

This proposition is one which a Scotsman will admit unwillingly, and only upon undeniable testimony:
and as it is liable to strong grounds of challenge, the present author, with all the respect
to Mr. Chalmers which his zealous and effectual researches merit, is not unwilling to take
this opportunity to state some plausible grounds for doubting that Theobaldus Flammaticus was
either the father of the first William de Douglas, or in the slightest degree connected with
the Douglas family.

It must first be observed, that there is no reason whatever for concluding Theobaldus Flammaticus
to be the father of William de Douglas, except that they both held lands upon the small river
of Douglas; and that there are two strong presumptions to the contrary. For, first, the father
being named Fleming, there seems no good reason why the son should have assumed a different
designation: secondly, there does not occur a single instance of the name of Theobald during
the long line of the Douglas pedigree, an omission very unlikely to take place had the original
father of the race been so called. These are secondary considerations indeed; but they are
important, in so far as they exclude any support of Mr. Chalmers' system, except from the point
which he has rather assumed than proved, namely, that the lands granted to Theobald the Fleming
were the same which were granted to William de Douglas, and which constituted the original
domain of which we find this powerful family lords.

Now, it happens, singularly enough, that the lands granted by the Abbot of Kelso to Theobaldus
Flammaticus are not the same of which William de Douglas was in possession. Nay, it would appear,
from comparing the charter granted to Theobaldus Flammaticus, that, though situated on the
water of Douglas, they never made a part of the barony of that name, and therefore cannot be
the same with those held by William de Douglas in the succeeding generation. But if William
de Douglas did not succeed Theobaldus Flammaticus, there is no more reason for holding these
two persons to be father and son than if they had lived in different provinces; and we are
still as far from having discovered the first mean man of the Douglas family as Hume of Godscroft
was in the 16th century. We leave the question to antiquaries and genealogists.]

In the earliest of our Scottish annals, the Black Douglas was powerful and distinguished as now."

"I bend to the honours of the house of Douglas," said Murray, somewhat ironically; "I am conscious
we of the Royal House have little right to compete with them in dignity--What though we have
worn crowns and carried sceptres for a few generations, if our genealogy moves no farther back
than to the humble Alanus Dapifer!"

[Footnote: To atone to the memory of the learned and indefatigable Chalmers for having ventured
to impeach his genealogical proposition concerning the descent of the Douglasses, we are bound
to render him our grateful thanks for the felicitous light which he has thrown on that of the
House of Stewart, still more important to Scottish history.

The acute pen of Lord Hailes, which, like the spear of Ithuriel, conjured so many shadows from
Scottish history, had dismissed among the rest those of Banquo and Fleance, the rejection of
which fables left the illustrious family of Stewart without an ancestor beyond Walter the son
of Allan, who is alluded to in the text. The researches of our late learned antiquary detected
in this Walter, the descendant of Allan, the son of Flaald, who obtained from William the Conqueror
the Castle of Oswestry in Shropshire, and was the father of an illustrious line of English
nobles, by his first son, William, and by his second son, Walter, the progenitor of the royal
family of Stewart.]

Morton's cheek reddened as he was about to reply; but Henry Warden availed himself of the liberty
which the Protestant clergy long possessed, and exerted it to interrupt a discussion which
was becoming too eager and personal to be friendly.

"My lords," he said, "I must be bold in discharging the duty of my Master. It is a shame and
scandal to hear two nobles, whose hands have been so forward in the work of reformation, fall
into discord about such vain follies as now occupy your thoughts. Bethink you how long you
have thought with one mind, seen with one eye, heard with one ear, confirmed by your union
the congregation of the Church, appalled by your joint authority the congregation of Anti-Christ;
and will you now fall into discord, about an old decayed castle and a few barren hills, about
the loves and likings of an humble spearman, and a damsel bred in the same obscurity, or about
the still vainer questions of idle genealogy?"

"The good man hath spoken right, noble Douglas," said Murray, reaching him his hand, "our union
is too essential to the good cause to be broken off upon such idle terms of dissension. I am
fixed to gratify Glendinning in this matter--my promise is passed. The wars, in which I have
had my share, have made many a family miserable; I will at least try if I may not make one
happy. There are maids and manors enow in Scotland.--I promise you, my noble ally, that young
Bennygask shall be richly wived."

"My lord," said Warden, "you speak nobly, and like a Christian. Alas! this is a land of hatred
and bloodshed--let us not chase from thence the few traces that remain of gentle and domestic
love.--And be not too eager for wealth to thy noble kinsman, my Lord of Morton, seeing contentment
in the marriage state no way depends on it."

"If you allude to my family misfortune," said Morton, whose Countess, wedded by him for her
estate and honours, was insane in her mind, "the habit you wear, and the liberty, or rather
license, of your profession, protect you from my resentment."

"Alas! my lord," replied Warden, "how quick and sensitive is our self-love! When pressing forward
in our high calling, we point out the errors of the Sovereign, who praises our boldness more
than the noble Morton?  But touch we upon his own sore, which most needs lancing, and he shrinks
from the faithful chirurgeon in fear and impatient anger!"

"Enough of this, good and reverend sir," said Murray; "you transgress the prudence yourself
recommended even now.--We are now close upon the village, and the proud Abbot is come forth
at the head of his hive. Thou hast pleaded well for him, Warden, otherwise I had taken this
occasion to pull down the nest, and chase away the rooks."

"Nay, but do not so," said Warden; "this William Allan, whom they call the Abbot Eustatius,
is a man whose misfortunes would more prejudice our cause than his prosperity. You cannot inflict
more than he will endure; and the more that he is made to bear, the higher will be the influence
of his talents and his courage. In his conventual throne he will be but coldly looked on--disliked,
it may be, and envied. But turn his crucifix of gold into a crucifix of wood--let him travel
through the land, an oppressed and impoverished man, and his patience, his eloquence, and learning,
will win more hearts from the good cause, than all the mitred abbots of Scotland have been
able to make prey of during the last hundred years."

"Tush! tush! man," said Morton, "the revenues of the Halidome will bring more men, spears,
and horses, into the field in one day, than his preaching in a whole lifetime. These are not
the days of Peter the Hermit, when monks could march armies from England to Jerusalem; but
gold and good deeds will still do as much or more than ever. Had Julian Avenel had but a score
or two more men this morning, Sir John Foster had not missed a worse welcome. I say, confiscating
the monk's revenues is drawing his fang-teeth."

"We will surely lay him under contribution," said Murray; "and, moreover, if he desires to
remain in his Abbey, he will do well to produce Piercie Shafton."

As he thus spoke, they entered the market-place, distinguished by their complete armour and
their lofty plumes, as well as by the number of followers bearing their colours and badges.
Both these powerful nobles, but more especially Murray, so nearly allied to the crown, had
at that time a retinue and household not much inferior to that of Scottish royalty. As they
advanced into the market-place, a pursuivant, pressing forward from their train, addressed
the monks in these words:--"The Abbot of Saint Mary's is commanded to appear before the Earl
of Murray."

"The Abbot of Saint Mary's," said Eustace, "is, in the patrimony of his Convent, superior to
every temporal lord. Let the Earl of Murray, if he seeks him, come himself to his presence."

On receiving this answer, Murray smiled scornfully, and, dismounting from his lofty saddle,
he advanced, accompanied by Morton, and followed by others, to the body of monks assembled
around the cross. There was an appearance of shrinking among them at the approach of the heretic
lord, so dreaded and so powerful. But the Abbot, casting on them a glance of rebuke and encouragement,
stepped forth from their ranks like a courageous leader, when he sees that his personal valour
must be displayed to revive the drooping courage of his followers. "Lord James Stewart," he
said, "or Earl of Murray, if that be thy title, I, Eustatius, Abbot of Saint Mary's, demand
by what right you have filled our peaceful village, and surrounded our brethren, with these
bands of armed men? If hospitality is sought, we have never refused it to courteous asking--if
violence be meant against peaceful churchmen, let us know at once the pretext and the object?"

"Sir Abbot," said Murray, "your language would better have become another age, and a presence
inferior to ours. We come not here to reply to your interrogations, but to demand of you why
you have broken the peace, collecting your vassals in arms, and convocating the Queen's lieges,
whereby many men have been slain, and much trouble, perchance breach of amity with England,
is likely to arise?"

"Lupus in fabula," answered the Abbot, scornfully. "The wolf accused the sheep of muddying
the stream when he drank in it above her--but it served as a pretext for devouring her. Convocate
the Queen's lieges! I did so to defend the Queen's land against foreigners. I did but my duty;
and I regret I had not the means to do it more effectually."

"And was it also a part of your duty to receive and harbour the Queen of England's rebel and
traitor; and to inflame a war betwixt England and Scotland?" said Murray.

"In my younger days, my lord," answered the Abbot, with the same intrepidity, "a war with England
was no such dreaded matter; and not merely a mitred abbot, bound by his rule to show hospitality
and afford sanctuary to all, but the poorest Scottish peasant, would have been ashamed to have
pleaded fear of England as the reason for shutting his door against a persecuted exile. But
in those olden days, the English seldom saw the face of a Scottish nobleman, save through the
bars of his visor."

"Monk!" said the Earl of Morton, sternly, "this insolence will little avail thee; the days
are gone by when Rome's priests were permitted to brave noblemen with impunity. Give us up
this Piercie Shafton, or by my father's crest I will set thy Abbey in a bright flame!"

"And if thou dost, Lord of Morton, its ruins will tumble above the tombs of thine own ancestors.
Be the issue as God wills, the Abbot of Saint Mary's gives up no one whom he hath promised
to protect."

"Abbot!" said Murray, "bethink thee ere we are driven to deal roughly --the hands of these
men," he said, pointing to the soldiers, "will make wild work among shrines and cells, if we
are compelled to undertake a search for this Englishman."

"Ye shall not need," said a voice from the crowd; and, advancing gracefully before the Earls,
the Euphuist flung from him the mantle in which he was muffled. "Via the cloud that shadowed
Shafton!" said he; "behold, my lords, the Knight of Wilverton, who spares you the guilt of
violence and sacrilege."

"I protest before God and man against any infraction of the privileges of this house," said
the Abbot, "by an attempt to impose violent hands upon the person of this noble knight. If
there be yet spirit in a Scottish Parliament, we will make you hear of this elsewhere, my lords!"

"Spare your threats," said Murray; "it may be, my purpose with Sir Piercie Shafton is not such
as thou dost suppose--Attach him, pursuivant, as our prisoner, rescue or no rescue."

"I yield myself," said the Euphuist, "reserving my right to defy my Lord of Murray and my Lord
of Morton to single duel, even as one gentleman may demand satisfaction of another."

"You shall not want those who will answer your challenge, Sir Knight," replied Morton, "without
aspiring to men above thine own degree."

"And where am I to find these superlative champions," said the English knight, "whose blood
runs more pure than that of Piercie Shafton?"

"Here is a flight for you, my lord!" said Murray.

"As ever was flown by a wild-goose," said Stawarth Bolton, who had now approached to the front
of the party.

"Who dared to say that word?" said the Euphuist, his face crimson with rage.

"Tut! man," said Bolton, "make the best of it, thy mother's father was but a tailor, old Overstitch
of Holderness--Why, what! because thou art a misproud bird, and despiseth thine own natural
lineage, and rufflest in unpaid silks and velvets, and keepest company with gallants and cutters,
must we lose our memory for that? Thy mother, Moll Overstitch, was the prettiest wench in those
parts--she was wedded by wild Shafton of Wilverton, who men say, was akin to the Piercie on
the wrong side of the blanket."

"Help the knight to some strong waters," said Morton; "he hath fallen from such a height, that
he is stunned with the tumble."

In fact, Sir Piercie Shafton looked like a man stricken by a thunderbolt, while, notwithstanding
the seriousness of the scene hitherto, no one of those present, not even the Abbot himself,
could refrain from laughing at the rueful and mortified expression of his face.

"Laugh on," he said at length, "laugh on, my masters," shrugging his shoulders; "it is not
for me to be offended--yet would I know full fain from that squire who is laughing with the
loudest, how he had discovered this unhappy blot in an otherwise spotless lineage, and for
what purpose he hath made it known?"

"I make it known?" said Halbert Glendinning, in astonishment,--for to him this pathetic appeal
was made,--"I never heard the thing till this moment."

[Footnote: The contrivance of provoking the irritable vanity of Sir Piercie Shafton, by presenting
him with a bodkin, indicative of his descent from a tailor, is borrowed from a German romance,
by the celebrated Tieck, called Das Peter Manchem, i. e. The Dwarf Peter. The being who gives
name to the tale, is the Burg-geist, or castle spectre, of a German family, whom he aids with
his counsel, as he defends their castle by his supernatural power. But the Dwarf Peter is so
unfortunate an adviser, that all his counsels, though producing success in the immediate results,
are in the issue attended with mishap and with guilt. The youthful baron, the owner of the
haunted castle, falls in love with a maiden, the daughter of a neighbouring count, a man of
great pride, who refuses him the hand of the young lady, on account of his own superiority
of descent. The lover, repulsed and affronted, returns to take counsel with the Dwarf Peter,
how he may silence the count, and obtain the victory in the argument, the next time they enter
on the topic of pedigree.  The dwarf gives his patron or pupil a horse-shoe, instructing him
to give it to the count when he is next giving himself superior airs on the subject of his
family. It has the effect accordingly. The count, understanding it as an allusion to a misalliance
of one of his ancestors with the daughter of a blacksmith, is thrown into a dreadful passion
with the young lover, the consequences of which are the seduction of the young lady, and the
slaughter of her father.

If we suppose the dwarf to represent the corrupt part of human nature,--that "law in our members
which wars against the law of our minds,"--the work forms an ingenious allegory.]

"Why, did not that old rude soldier learn it from thee?" said the knight, in increasing amazement.

"Not I, by Heaven!" said Bolton; "I never saw the youth in my life before."

"But you have seen him ere now, my worthy master," said Dame Glendinning, bursting in her turn
from the crowd. "My son, this is Stawarth Bolton, he to whom we owe life, and the means of
preserving it--if he be a prisoner, as seems most likely, use thine interest with these noble
lords to be kind to the widow's friend."

"What, my Dame of the Glen!" said Bolton, "thy brow is more withered, as well as mine, since
we met last, but thy tongue holds the touch better than my arm. This boy of thine gave me the
foil sorely this morning.  The Brown Varlet has turned as stout a trooper as I prophesied;
and where is White Head?"

"Alas!" said the mother, looking down, "Edward has taken orders, and become a monk of this Abbey."

"A monk and a soldier!--Evil trades both, my good dame. Better have made one a good master
fashioner, like old Overstitch, of Holderness. I sighed when I envied you the two bonny children,
but I sigh not now to call either the monk or the soldier mine own. The soldier dies in the
field, the monk scarce lives in the cloister."

"My dearest mother," said Halbert, "where is Edward--can I not speak with him?"

"He has just left us for the present," said Father Philip, "upon a message from the Lord Abbot."

"And Mary, my dearest mother?" said Halbert.--Mary Avenel was not far distant, and the three
were soon withdrawn from the crowd, to hear and relate their various chances of fortune.

While the subordinate personages thus disposed of themselves, the Abbot held serious discussion
with the two Earls, and, partly yielding to their demands, partly defending himself with skill
and eloquence, was enabled to make a composition for his Convent, which left it provisionally
in no worse situation than before. The Earls were the more reluctant to drive matters to extremity,
since he protested, that if urged beyond what his conscience would comply with, he would throw
the whole lands of the Monastery into the Queen of Scotland's hands, to be disposed of at her
pleasure. This would not have answered the views of the Earls, who were contented, for the
time, with a moderate sacrifice of money and lands.  Matters being so far settled, the Abbot
became anxious for the fate of Sir Piercie Shafton, and implored mercy in his behalf.

"He is a coxcomb," he said, "my lords, but he is a generous, though a vain fool; and it is
my firm belief you have this day done him more pain than if you had run a poniard into him."

"Run a needle into him you mean, Abbot," said the Earl of Morton; "by mine honour, I thought
this grandson of a fashioner of doublets was descended from a crowned head at least!"

"I hold with the Abbot," said Murray; "there were little honour in surrendering him to Elizabeth,
but he shall be sent where he can do her no injury. Our pursuivant and Bolton shall escort
him to Dunbar, and ship him off for Flanders.--But soft, here he comes, and leading a female,
as I think."

"Lords and others," said the English knight with great solemnity, "make way for the Lady of
Piercie Shafton--a secret which I listed not to make known, till fate, which hath betrayed
what I vainly strove to conceal, makes me less desirous to hide that which I now announce to you."

"It is Mysie Happer, the Miller's daughter, on my life!" said Tibb Tacket. "I thought the pride
of these Piercies would have a fa'."

"It is indeed the lovely Mysinda," said the knight, "whose merits towards her devoted servant
deserved higher rank than he had to bestow."

"I suspect, though," said Murray, "that we should not have heard of the Miller's daughter being
made a lady, had not the knight proved to be the grandson of a tailor."

"My lord," said Piercie Shafton, "it is poor valour to strike him that cannot smite again;
and I hope you will consider what is due to a prisoner by the law of arms, and say nothing
more on this odious subject. When I am once more mine own man, I will find a new road to dignity."

"Shape one, I presume," said the Earl of Morton.

"Nay, Douglas, you will drive him mad,"--said Murray; "besides, we have other matter in hand--I
must see Warden wed Glendinning with Mary Avenel, and put him in possession of his wife's castle
without delay. It will be best done ere our forces leave these parts."

"And I," said the Miller, "have the like grist to grind; for I hope some one of the good fathers
will wed my wench with her gay bridegroom."

"It needs not," said Shafton; "the ceremonial hath been solemnly performed."

"It will not be the worse of another bolting," said the Miller; "it is always best to be sure,
as I say when I chance to take multure twice from the same meal-sack."

"Stave the miller off him," said Murray, "or he will worry him dead. The Abbot, my lord, offers
us the hospitality of the Convent; I move we should repair hither, Sir Piercie and all of us.
I must learn to know the Maid of Avenel--to-morrow I must act as her father--All Scotland shall
see how Murray can reward a faithful servant."

Mary Avenel and her lover avoided meeting the Abbot, and took up their temporary abode in a
house of the village, where next day their hands were united by the Protestant preacher in
presence of the two Earls. On the same day Piercie Shafton and his bride departed, under an
escort which was to conduct him to the sea-side, and see him embark for the Low Countries.
Early on the following morning the bands of the Earls were under march to the Castle of Avenel,
to invest the young bridegroom with the property of his wife, which was surrendered to them
without opposition.

But not without those omens which seemed to mark every remarkable event which befell the fated
family, did Mary take possession of the ancient castle of her forefathers. The same warlike
form which had appeared more than once at Glendearg, was seen by Tibb Tacket and Martin, who
returned with their young mistress to partake her altered fortunes. It glided before the cavalcade
as they advanced upon the long causeway, paused at each drawbridge, and flourished its hand,
as in triumph, as it disappeared under the gloomy archway, which was surmounted by the insignia
of the house of Avenel. The two trusty servants made their vision only known to Dame Glendinning,
who, with much pride of heart, had accompanied her son to see him take his rank among the barons
of the land. "Oh, my dear bairn!" she exclaimed, when she heard the tale, "the castle is a
grand place to be sure, but I wish ye dinna a' desire to be back in the quiet braes of Glendearg
before the play be played out." But this natural reflection, springing from maternal anxiety,
was soon forgotten amid the busy and pleasing task of examining and admiring the new habitation
of her son.

While these affairs were passing, Edward had hidden himself and his sorrows in the paternal
Tower of Glendearg, where every object was full of matter for bitter reflection. The Abbot's
kindness had despatched him thither upon pretence of placing some papers belonging to the Abbey
in safety and secrecy; but in reality to prevent his witnessing the triumph of his brother.
Through the deserted apartments, the scene of so many bitter reflections, the unhappy youth
stalked like a discontented ghost, conjuring up around him at every step new subjects for sorrow
and for self-torment.  Impatient, at length, of the state of irritation and agonized recollection
in which he found himself, he rushed out and walked hastily up the glen, as if to shake off
the load which hung upon his mind. The sun was setting when he reached the entrance of Corri-nan-shian,
and the recollection of what he had seen when he last visited that haunted ravine, burst on
his mind. He was in a humour, however, rather to seek out danger than to avoid it.

"I will face this mystic being," he said; "she foretold the fate which has wrapt me in this
dress,--I will know whether she has aught else to tell me of a life which cannot but be miserable."

He failed not to see the White Spirit seated by her accustomed haunt, and singing in her usual
low and sweet tone. While she sung, she seemed to look with sorrow on her golden zone, which
was now diminished to the fineness of a silken thread.

  "Fare thee well, thou Holly green,
  Thou shall seldom now be seen,
  With all thy glittering garlands bending,
  As to greet my slow descending,
  Startling the bewilder'd hind.
  Who sees thee wave without a wind.

  "Farewell, Fountain! now not long
  Shalt thou murmur to my song,
  While thy crystal bubbles glancing,
  Keep the time in mystic dancing,
  Rise and swell, are burst and lost,
  Like mortal schemes by fortune crost.

  "The knot of fate at length is tied,
  The Churl is Lord, the Maid is bride.
  Vainly did my magic sleight
  Send the lover from her sight;
  Wither bush, and perish well,
  Fall'n is lofty Avenel!"

The vision seemed to weep while she sung; and the words impressed on Edward a melancholy belief,
that the alliance of Mary with his brother might be fatal to them both.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here terminates the First Part of the Benedictine's Manuscript. I have in vain endeavoured
to ascertain the precise period of the story, as the dates cannot be exactly reconciled with
those of the most accredited histories.  But it is astonishing how careless the writers of
Utopia are upon these important subjects. I observe that the learned Mr. Laurence Templeton,
in his late publication entitled IVANHOE, has not only blessed the bed of Edward the Confessor
with an offspring unknown to history, with sundry other solecisms of the same kind, but has
inverted the order of nature, and feasted his swine with acorns in the midst of summer. All
that can be alleged by the warmest admirer of this author amounts to this,--that the circumstances
objected to are just as true as the rest of the story; which appears to me (more especially
in the matter of the acorns) to be a very imperfect defence, and that the author will do well
to profit by Captain Absolute's advice to his servant, and never tell him more lies than are
indispensably necessary.

                End of THE MONASTERY.