The household of the Princess of Savoy being completed, the members of it were sent to the
Pont Beauvosin to meet their young mistress.  She arrived early on the 16th of October, slept
at the Pont Beauvosin that night, and on the morrow parted with her Italian attendants without
shedding a single tear.  On the 4th of November she arrived at Montargis, and was received
by the King, Monseigneur, and Monsieur.  The King handed her down from her coach, and conducted
her to the apartment he had prepared for her.  Her respectful and flattering manners pleased
him highly.  Her cajoleries, too, soon bewitched Madame de Maintenon, whom she never addressed
except as "Aunt;" whom she treated with a respect, and yet with a freedom, that ravished everybody.
She became the doll of Madame de Maintenon and the King, pleased them infinitely by her insinuating
spirit, and took greater liberties with them than the children of the King had ever dared to
attempt.

CHAPTER X

Meanwhile our campaign upon the Rhine proceeded, and the enemy, having had all their grand
projects of victory defeated by the firmness and the capacity of the Marechal de Choiseul,
retired into winter-quarters, and we prepared to do the same.  The month of October was almost
over when Madame de Saint-Simon lost M. Fremont, father of the Marechal de Lorges. She had
happily given birth to a daughter on the 8th of September.  I was desirous accordingly to go
to Paris, and having obtained permission from the Marechal de Choiseul, who had treated me
throughout the campaign with much politeness and attention, I set out. Upon arriving at Paris
I found the Court at Fontainebleau.  I had arrived from the army a little before the rest,
and did not wish that the King should know it without seeing me, lest he might think I had
returned in secret.  I hastened at once therefore to Fontainebleau, where the King received
me with his usual goodness,-saying, nevertheless, that I had returned a little too early, but
that it was of no consequence.

I had not long left his presence when I learned a report that made my face burn again.  It
was affirmed that when the King remarked upon my arriving a little early, I had replied that
I preferred arriving at once to see him, as my sole mistress, than to remain some days in Paris,
as did the other young men with their mistresses.  I went at once to the King, who had a numerous
company around him; and I openly denied what had been reported, offering a reward for the discovery
of the knave who had thus calumniated me, in order that I might give him a sound thrashing.
All day I sought to discover the scoundrel.  My speech to the King and my choler were the topic
of the day, and I was blamed for having spoken so loudly and in such terms.  But of two evils
I had chosen the least,--a reprimand from the King, or a few days in the Bastille; and I had
avoided the greatest, which was to allow myself to be believed an infamous libeller of our
young men, in order to basely and miserably curry favour at the Court.  The course I took succeeded.
The King said nothing of the matter, and I went upon a little journey I wished particularly
to take, for reasons I will now relate.

I had, as I have already mentioned, conceived a strong attachment and admiration for M. de
La Trappe.  I wished to secure a portrait of him, but such was his modesty and humility that
I feared to ask him to allow himself to be painted.  I went therefore to Rigault, then the
first portrait-painter in Europe.  In consideration of a sum of a thousand crowns, and all
his expenses paid, he agreed to accompany me to La Trappe, and to make a portrait of him from
memory.  The whole affair was to be kept a profound secret, and only one copy of the picture
was to be made, and that for the artist himself.

My plan being fully arranged, I and Rigault set out.  As soon as we arrived at our journey's
end, I sought M. de La Trappe, and begged to be allowed to introduce to him a friend of mine,
an officer, who much wished to see him: I added, that my friend was a stammerer, and that therefore
he would be importuned merely with looks and not words.  M. de La Trappe smiled with goodness,
thought the officer curious about little, and consented to see him.  The interview took place.
Rigault excusing himself on the ground of his infirmity, did little during three-quarters of
an hour but keep his eyes upon M. de La Trappe, and at the end went into a room where materials
were already provided for him, and covered his canvas with the images and the ideas he had
filled himself with. On the morrow the same thing was repeated, although M. de La Trappe, thinking
that a man whom he knew not, and who could take no part in conversation, had sufficiently seen
him, agreed to the interview only out of complaisance to me.  Another sitting was needed in
order to finish the work; but it was with great difficulty M. de La Trappe could be persuaded
to consent to it.  When the third and last interview was at an end, M. de La Trappe testified
to me his surprise at having been so much and so long looked at by a species of mute.  I made
the best excuses I could, and hastened to turn the conversation.

The portrait was at length finished, and was a most perfect likeness of my venerable friend.
Rigault admitted to me that he had worked so hard to produce it from memory, that for several
months afterwards he had been unable to do anything to his other portraits.  Notwithstanding
the thousand crowns I had paid him, he broke the engagement he had made by showing the portrait
before giving it up to me.  Then, solicited for copies, he made several, gaining thereby, according
to his own admission, more than twenty-five thousand francs, and thus gave publicity to the affair.

I was very much annoyed at this, and with the noise it made in the world; and I wrote to M.
de La Trappe, relating the deception I had practised upon him, and sued for pardon.  He was
pained to excess, hurt, and afflicted; nevertheless he showed no anger.  He wrote in return
to me, and said, I was not ignorant that a Roman Emperor had said, "I love treason but not
traitors;" but that, as for himself, he felt on the contrary that he loved the traitor but
could only hate his treason. I made presents of three copies of the picture to the monastery
of La Trappe.  On the back of the original I described the circumstance under which the portrait
had been taken, in order to show that M. de La Trappe had not consented to it, and I pointed
out that for some years he had been unable to use his right hand, to acknowledge thus the error
which had been made in representing him as writing.

The King, about this time, set on foot negotiations for peace in Holland, sending there two
plenipotentiaries, Courtin and Harlay, and acknowledging one of his agents, Caillieres, who
had been for some little time secretly in that country.

