When I was a small boy, Lem Hackett was drowned--on a Sunday. He fell out of an empty flat-boat,
where he was playing. Being loaded with sin, he went to the bottom like an anvil. He was the
only boy in the village who slept that night. We others all lay awake, repenting. It is not even
necessary to discuss that in all its details. Morgan's first eight (properly five) stages are:

I. Promiscuous Intercourse.

II. Intermarriage or Cohabitation of
Brothers and Sisters.

III. The Communal Family (First stage of the
Family). The winds blew, the windows rattled, the rain swept along the
roof in pelting sheets, and at the briefest of intervals the inky blackness of the night vanished,
the houses over the way glared out white and blinding for a quivering instant, then the solid
darkness shut down again and a splitting peal of thunder followed, which seemed to rend everything
in the neighborhood to shreds and splinters. I sat up in bed quaking and shuddering, waiting
for the destruction of the world, and expecting it.  To me there was nothing strange or incongruous
in heaven's making such an uproar about Lem Hackett. Apparently it was the right and proper
thing to do. Not a doubt entered my mind that all the angels were grouped together, discussing
this boy's case and observing the awful bombardment of our beggarly little village with satisfaction
and approval. There was one thing which disturbed me in the most serious way; that was the
thought that this centering of the celestial interest on our village could not fail to attract
the attention of the observers to people among us who might otherwise have escaped notice for
years. I felt that I was not only one of those people, but the very one most likely to be discovered.
That discovery could have but one result: I should be in the fire with Lem before the chill
of the river had been fairly warmed out of him.  I knew that this would be only just and fair.
I was increasing the chances against myself all the time, by feeling a secret bitterness against
Lem for having attracted this fatal attention to me, but I could not help it--this sinful thought
persisted in infesting my breast in spite of me. Every time the lightning glared I caught my
breath, and judged I was gone. In my terror and misery, I meanly began to suggest other boys,
and mention acts of theirs which were wickeder than mine, and peculiarly needed punishment--and
I tried to pretend to myself that I was simply doing this in a casual way, and without intent
to divert the heavenly attention to them for the purpose of getting rid of it myself. I must
really go to sleep as it is striking the seventh hour of the night, and I have already written
to the Prior of the Augustines, to my father-in-law, to Mistress Dietrich, and to my wife, and
they are all downright whole sheets full.
  And although Tom Holmes says more bad words than any other boy in the
village, he probably intends to repent--though he has never said he would. And whilst it is
a fact that John Jones did fish a little on Sunday, once, he didn't really catch anything but
only just one small useless mud-cat; and maybe that wouldn't have been so awful if he had thrown
it back--as he says he did, but he didn't. Pity but they would repent of these dreadful things--and
maybe they will yet.'

But while I was shamefully trying to draw attention to these poor chaps --who were doubtless
directing the celestial attention to me at the same moment, though I never once suspected that--I
had heedlessly left my candle burning. It was not a time to neglect even trifling precautions.
There was no occasion to add anything to the facilities for attracting notice to me--so I put
the light out.

