Jameson arrived in the presence of the Boers.  They--according to precedent--were not visible.
It was a country of ridges, depressions, rocks, ditches, moraines of mining-tailings--not even
as favorable for cavalry work as Laing's Nek had been in the former disastrous days. Jameson
shot at the ridges and rocks with his artillery, just as General Colley had done at the Nek;
and did them no damage and persuaded no Boer to show himself.  Then about a hundred of his
men formed up to charge the ridge-according to the 58th's precedent at the Nek; but as they
dashed forward they opened out in a long line, which was a considerable improvement on the
58th's tactics; when they had gotten to within 200 yards of the ridge the concealed Boers opened
out on them and emptied 20 saddles.  The unwounded dismounted and fired at the rocks over the
backs of their horses; but the return-fire was too hot, and they mounted again, "and galloped
back or crawled away into a clump of reeds for cover, where they were shortly afterward taken
prisoners as they lay among the reeds. Some thirty prisoners were so taken, and during the
night which followed the Boers carried away another thirty killed and wounded--the wounded
to Krugersdorp hospital."  Sixty per cent. of the assaulted force disposed of--according to
Mr. Garrett's estimate.

It was according to Amajuba precedent, where the British loss was 226 out of about 400 engaged.

Also, in Jameson's camp, that night, "there lay about 30 wounded or otherwise disabled" men.
Also during the night "some 30 or 40 young fellows got separated from the command and straggled
through into Johannesburg."  Altogether a possible 150 men gone, out of his 530.  His lads
had fought valorously, but had not been able to get near enough to a Boer to kick him around
the Transvaal.

At dawn the next morning the column of something short of 400 whites resumed its march.  Jameson's
grit was stubbornly good; indeed, it was always that.  He still had hopes.  There was a long
and tedious zigzagging march through broken ground, with constant harassment from the Boers;
and at last the column "walked into a sort of trap," and the Boers "closed in upon it."  "Men
and horses dropped on all sides.  In the column the feeling grew that unless it could burst
through the Boer lines at this point it was done for.  The Maxims were fired until they grew
too hot, and, water failing for the cool jacket, five of them jammed and went out of action.
The 7-pounder was fired until only half an hour's ammunition was left to fire with.  One last
rush was made, and failed, and then the Staats Artillery came up on the left flank, and the
game was up."

Jameson hoisted a white flag and surrendered.

There is a story, which may not be true, about an ignorant Boer farmer there who thought that
this white flag was the national flag of England. He had been at Bronkhorst, and Laing's Nek,
and Ingogo and Amajuba, and supposed that the English did not run up their flag excepting at
the end of a fight.

The following is (as I understand it) Mr. Garrett's estimate of Jameson's total loss in killed
and wounded for the two days:

"When they gave in they were minus some 20 per cent. of combatants. There were 76 casualties.
There were 30 men hurt or sick in the wagons. There were 27 killed on the spot or mortally
wounded."

Total, 133, out of the original 530.  It is just 25 per cent.--[However, I judge that the total
was really 150; for the number of wounded carried to Krugersdorp hospital was 53; not 30, as
Mr. Garrett reports it.  The lady whose guest I was in Krugerdorp gave me the figures.  She
was head nurse from the beginning of hostilities (Jan. 1) until the professional nurses arrived,
Jan. 8th.  Of the 53, "Three or four were Boers"; I quote her words.]--This is a large improvement
upon the precedents established at Bronkhorst, Laing's Nek, Ingogo, and Amajuba, and seems
to indicate that Boer marksmanship is not so good now as it was in those days.  But there is
one detail in which the Raid-episode exactly repeats history. By surrender at Bronkhorst, the
whole British force disappeared from the theater of war; this was the case with Jameson's force.

In the Boer loss, also, historical precedent is followed with sufficient fidelity.  In the
4 battles named above, the Boer loss, so far as known, was an average of 6 men per battle,
to the British average loss of 175. In Jameson's battles, as per Boer official report, the
Boer loss in killed was 4.  Two of these were killed by the Boers themselves, by accident,
the other by Jameson's army--one of them intentionally, the other by a pathetic mischance.
"A young Boer named Jacobz was moving forward to give a drink to one of the wounded troopers
(Jameson's) after the first charge, when another wounded man, mistaking his intention; shot
him."  There were three or four wounded Boers in the Krugersdorp hospital, and apparently no
others have been reported.  Mr. Garrett, "on a balance of probabilities, fully accepts the
official version, and thanks Heaven the killed was not larger."

As a military man, I wish to point out what seems to me to be military errors in the conduct
of the campaign which we have just been considering.  I have seen active service in the field,
and it was in the actualities of war that I acquired my training and my right to speak. I served
two weeks in the beginning of our Civil War, and during all that tune commanded a battery of
infantry composed of twelve men.  General Grant knew the history of my campaign, for I told
it him.  I also told him the principle upon which I had conducted it; which was, to tire the
enemy.  I tired out and disqualified many battalions, yet never had a casualty myself nor lost
a man.  General Grant was not given to paying compliments, yet he said frankly that if I had
conducted the whole war much bloodshed would have been spared, and that what the army might
have lost through the inspiriting results of collision in the field would have been amply made
up by the liberalizing influences of travel.  Further endorsement does not seem to me to be
necessary.

Let us now examine history, and see what it teaches.  In the 4 battles fought in 1881 and the
two fought by Jameson, the British loss in killed, wounded, and prisoners, was substantially
1,300 men; the Boer loss, as far as is ascertainable, eras about 30 men.  These figures show
that there was a defect somewhere.  It was not in the absence of courage.  I think it lay in
the absence of discretion.  The Briton should have done one thing or the other: discarded British
methods and fought the Boer with Boer methods, or augmented his own force until--using British
methods--it should be large enough to equalize results with the Boer.

To retain the British method requires certain things, determinable by arithmetic.  If, for
argument's sake, we allow that the aggregate of 1,716 British soldiers engaged in the 4 early
battles was opposed by the same aggregate of Boers, we have this result: the British loss of
700 and the Boer loss of 23 argues that in order to equalize results in future battles you
must make the British force thirty times as strong as the Boer force.  Mr. Garrett shows that
the Boer force immediately opposed to Jameson was 2,000, and that there were 6,000 more on
hand by the evening of the second day.  Arithmetic shows that in order to make himself the
equal of the 8,000 Boers, Jameson should have had 240,000 men, whereas he merely had 530 boys.
From a military point of view, backed by the facts of history, I conceive that Jameson's military
judgment was at fault.

Another thing.--Jameson was encumbered by artillery, ammunition, and rifles.  The facts of
the battle show that he should have had none of those things along.  They were heavy, they
were in his way, they impeded his march.  There was nothing to shoot at but rocks--he knew
quite well that there would be nothing to shoot at but rocks--and he knew that artillery and
rifles have no effect upon rocks.  He was badly overloaded with unessentials.  He had 8 Maxims--a
Maxim is a kind of Gatling, I believe, and shoots about 500 bullets per minute; he had one
12 1/2-pounder cannon and two 7-pounders; also, 145,000 rounds of ammunition. He worked the
Maxims so hard upon the rocks that five of them became disabled--five of the Maxims, not the
rocks.  It is believed that upwards of 100,000 rounds of ammunition of the various kinds were
fired during the 21 hours that the battles lasted.  One man killed.  He must have been much
mutilated.  It was a pity to bring those futile Maxims along. Jameson should have furnished
himself with a battery of Pudd'nhead Wilson maxims instead, They are much more deadly than
those others, and they are easily carried, because they have no weight.

Mr. Garrett--not very carefully concealing a smile--excuses the presence of the Maxims by saying
that they were of very substantial use because their sputtering disordered the aim of the Boers,
and in that way saved lives.

Three cannon, eight Maxims, and five hundred rifles yielded a result which emphasized a fact
which had already been established--that the British system of standing out in the open to
fight Boers who are behind rocks is not wise, not excusable, and ought to be abandoned for
something more efficacious.  For the purpose of war is to kill, not merely to waste ammunition.

If I could get the management of one of those campaigns, I would know what to do, for I have
studied the Boer.  He values the Bible above every other thing.  The most delicious edible
in South Africa is "biltong." You will have seen it mentioned in Olive Schreiner's books. 
It is what our plainsmen call "jerked beef."  It is the Boer's main standby.  He has a passion
for it, and he is right.

If I had the command of the campaign I would go with rifles only, no cumbersome Maxims and
cannon to spoil good rocks with.  I would move surreptitiously by night to a point about a
quarter of a mile from the Boer camp, and there I would build up a pyramid of biltong and Bibles
fifty feet high, and then conceal my men all about.  In the morning the Boers would send out
spies, and then the rest would come with a rush. I would surround them, and they would have
to fight my men on equal terms, in the open.  There wouldn't be any Amajuba results.

--[Just as I am finishing this book an unfortunate dispute has sprung up between Dr. Jameson
and his officers, on the one hand, and Colonel Rhodes on the other, concerning the wording
of a note which Colonel Rhodes sent from Johannesburg by a cyclist to Jameson just before hostilities
began on the memorable New Year's Day.  Some of the fragments of this note were found on the
battlefield after the fight, and these have been pieced together; the dispute is as to what
words the lacking fragments contained.  Jameson says the note promised him a reinforcement
of 300 men from Johannesburg.  Colonel Rhodes denies this, and says he merely promised to send
out "some" men "to meet you."]

