As the people had loved Nero, so did the aristocracy love Marcus Aurelius; his foster-father
Antonin excepted, he was the only gentleman that had sat on the throne. No wonder they loved
him; and seeing this early edition of the prince in the fairy tale emerge from the bogs of
Germany, his fair face haloed by the glisten and gold of his hair, hearts went out to him;
the wish of his putative father was ratified, and the son of a gladiator was emperor of Rome.

Lampridus--or Spartian was it? The title-page bears Lampridus' name, but there is some doubt
as to the authorship. However, whoever made the abridgment of the life of Commodus which appears
among the chronicles of the Scriptores Historiae Augustae, says that before his birth Faustine
dreamed she had engendered a serpent. It is not impossible that Faustine had been reading Ctzias,
and had stumbled over his account of the Martichoras, a serpent with a woman's face and the
talons of a bird of prey. For it was that she conceived.

It would have been interesting to have seen that young man, the mask removed, frightening the
senate into calling Rome Commodia, and then in a linen robe promenading in the attributes of
a priest of Anubis through a seraglio of six hundred girls and mignons embracing as he passed.
There was a spectacle, which Nero had not imagined. But Nero was vieux jeu. Commodus outdid
him, first in debauchery, then in the arena. Nero had died while in training to kill a lion;
Commodus did not take the trouble to train. It was the lions that were trained, not he. A skin
on his shoulders, a club in his hand, he descended naked into the ring, and there felled beasts
and men. Then, acclaimed as Hercules, he returned to the pulvina, and a mignon on one side,
a mistress on the other, ordered the guard to massacre the spectators and set fire to Rome.
After entering the arena six or seven hundred times, and there vanquishing men whose eyes had
been put out and whose legs were tied, the colossal statue which Nero had made after his own
image was altered; to the top came the bust of Commodus, to the base this legend: THE VICTOR
OF TEN THOUSAND GLADIATORS, COMMODUS-HERCULES, IMPERATOR.

Meanwhile conspirators were at work. Like Nero, Commodus could have sought in vain for a friend.
His life was attempted again and again; he escaped, but never the plotters; only when they
had gone there were more. He knew he was doomed. There was the usual comet; the statue of Hercules
had perspired visibly; an owl had been caught above his bedroom, and once he had wiped in his
hair the hand which he had plunged in the warm wound of a gladiator, dead at his feet. These
omens could mean but one thing. None the less, if he were doomed, so were others. One day one
of those miserable children that the emperors kept about them found a tablet. It was as good
as anything else to play with; and, as the child tossed it through the hall, the one woman
that had loved Commodus caught it and read on it that she and all the household were to die.
Within an hour Commodus was killed.

There is a page in Lampridus, which he quotes as coming from the lost chronicles of Marius
Maximus, and which contains the joy of the senate at the news. It is too long for transcription,
but as a bit of realism it is unique. There is a shiver in every line. You hear the voices
of hundreds, drunk with fury, frenzied with delight; the fierce welcome that greeted Pertinax--a
slave's grandson, who was emperor for a minute--the joy of hate assuaged.

