The servant showed him into a small garden separated by a low wall from the cemetery.  He found
the Abbe Pernot seated on a stone bench, sheltered by a trellised vine.  He was occupied in
cutting up pieces of hazel-nuts to make traps for small birds.

"Good-evening, Claudet!"  said the cure, without moving from his work; "you find me busy preparing
my nets; if you will permit me, I will continue, for I should like to have my two hundred traps
finished by this evening.  The season is advancing, you know!  The birds will begin their migrations,
and I should be greatly provoked if I were not equipped in time for the opportune moment. 
And how is Monsieur de Buxieres?  I trust he will not be less good-natured than his deceased
cousin, and that he will allow me to spread my snares on the border hedge of his woods. But,"
added he, as he noticed the flurried, impatient countenance of his visitor, "I forgot to ask
you, my dear young fellow, to what happy chance I owe your visit?  Excuse my neglect!"

"Don't mention it, Monsieur le Cure.  You have guessed rightly.  It is a very happy circumstance
which brings me.  I am about to marry."

"Aha!"  laughed the Abbe, "I congratulate you, my dear young friend. This is really delightful
news.  It is not good for man to be alone, and I am glad to know you must give up the perilous
life of a bachelor. Well, tell me quickly the name of your betrothed.  Do I know her?"

"Of course you do, Monsieur le Cure; there are few you know so well.  It is Mademoiselle Vincart."

"Reine?"

The Abbe flung away the pruning-knife and branch that he was cutting, and gazed at Claudet
with a stupefied air.  At the same time, his jovial face became shadowed, and his mouth assumed
an expression of consternation.

"Yes, indeed, Reine Vincart," repeated Claudet, somewhat vexed at the startled manner of his
reverence; "are you surprised at my choice?"

"Excuse me-and-is it all settled?"  stammered the Abbe, with bewilderment, "and--and do you
really love each other?"

"Certainly; we agree on that point; and I have come here to arrange with you about having the
banns published."

"What!  already?"  murmured the cure, buttoning and unbuttoning the top of his coat in his
agitation, "you seem to be in a great hurry to go to work.  The union of the man and the woman--ahem--is
a serious matter, which ought not to be undertaken without due consideration.  That is the
reason why the Church has instituted the sacrament of marriage.  Hast thou well considered,
my son?"

"Why, certainly, I have reflected," exclaimed Claudet with some irritation, "and my mind is
quite made up.  Once more, I ask you, Monsieur le Cure, are you displeased with my choice,
or have you anything to say against Mademoiselle Vincart?"

"I?  no, absolutely nothing.  Reine is an exceedingly good girl."

"Well, then?"

"Well, my friend, I will go over to-morrow and see your fiancee, and we will talk matters over.
I shall act for the best, in the interests of both of you, be assured of that.  In the meantime,
you will both be united this evening in my prayers; but, for to-day, we shall have to stop
where we are.  Good-evening, Claudet!  I will see you again."

With these enigmatic words, he dismissed the young lover, who returned to the chateau, vexed
and disturbed by his strange reception.

The moment the door of the presbytery had closed behind Claudet, the Abbe Pernot, flinging
to one side all his preparations, began to pace nervously up and down the principal garden-walk.
He appeared completely unhinged.  His features were drawn, through an unusual tension of ideas
forced upon him.  He had hurriedly caught his skullcap from his head, as if he feared the heat
of his meditation might cause a rush of blood to the head.  He quickened his steps, then stopped
suddenly, folded his arms with great energy, then opened them again abruptly to thrust his
hands into the pockets of his gown, searching through them with feverish anxiety, as if he
expected to find something which might solve obscure and embarrassing questions.

"Good Lord!  Good Lord!  What a dreadful piece of business; and right in the bird season, too!
But I can say nothing to Claudet.  It is a secret that does not belong to me.  How can I get
out of it?  Tutt! tutt! tutt!"

These monosyllabic ejaculations broke forth like the vexed clucking of a frightened blackbird;
after which relief, the Abbe resumed his fitful striding up and down the box-bordered alley.
This lasted until the hour of twilight, when Augustine, the servant, as soon as the Angelus
had sounded, went to inform her master that they were waiting prayers for him in the church.
He obeyed the summons, although in a somewhat absent mood, and hurried over the services in
a manner which did not contribute to the edification of the assistants.  As soon as he got
home, he ate his Supper without appetite, mumbled his prayers, and shut himself up in the room
he used as a study and workshop.  He remained there until the night was far advanced, searching
through his scanty library to find two dusty volumes treating of "cases of conscience," which
he looked eagerly over by the feeble light of his study lamp.  During this laborious search
he emitted frequent sighs, and only left off reading occasionally in order to dose himself
plentifully with snuff.  At last, as he felt that his eyes were becoming inflamed, his ideas
conflicting in his brain, and as his lamp was getting low, he decided to go to bed.  But he
slept badly, turned over at least twenty times, and was up with the first streak of day to
say his mass in the chapel.  He officiated with more dignity and piety than was his wont; and
after reading the second gospel he remained for a long while kneeling on one of the steps of
the altar.  After he had returned to the sacristy, he divested himself quickly of his sacerdotal
robes, reached his room by a passage of communication, breakfasted hurriedly, and putting on
his three-cornered hat, and seizing his knotty, cherry-wood cane, he shot out of doors as if
he had been summoned to a fire.

Augustine, amazed at his precipitate departure, went up to the attic, and, from behind the
shelter of the skylight, perceived her master striding rapidly along the road to Planche-au-Vacher.
There she lost sight of him--the underwood was too thick.  But, after a few minutes, the gaze
of the inquisitive woman was rewarded by the appearance of a dark object emerging from the
copse, and defining itself on the bright pasture land beyond.  "Monsieur le Cure is going to
La Thuiliere," thought she, and with this half-satisfaction she descended to her daily occupations.

It was true, the Abbe Pernot was walking, as fast as he could, to the Vincart farm, as unmindful
of the dew that tarnished his shoe-buckles as of the thorns which attacked his calves.  He
had that within him which spurred him on, and rendered him unconscious of the accidents on
his path.  Never, during his twenty-five years of priestly office, had a more difficult question
embarrassed his conscience.  The case was a grave one, and moreover, so urgent that the Abbe
was quite at a loss how to proceed. How was it that he never had foreseen that such a combination
of circumstances might occur?  A priest of a more fervent spirit, who had the salvation of
his flock more at heart, could not have been taken so unprepared.  Yes; that was surely the
cause!  The profane occupations in which he had allowed himself to take so much enjoyment,
had distracted his watchfulness and obscured his perspicacity.  Providence was now punishing
him for his lukewarmness, by interposing across his path this stumbling-block, which was probably
sent to him as a salutary warning, but which he saw no way of getting over.

While he was thus meditating and reproaching himself, the thrushes were calling to one another
from the branches of their favorite trees; whole flights of yellowhammers burst forth from
the hedges red with haws; but he took no heed of them and did not even give a single thought
to his neglected nests and snares.

He went straight on, stumbling over the juniper bushes, and wondering what he should say when
he reached the farm, and how he should begin. Sometimes he addressed himself, thus: "Have I
the right to speak?  What a revelation!  And to a young girl!  Oh, Lord, lead me in the straight
way of thy truth, and instruct me in the right path!"

As he continued piously repeating this verse of the Psalmist, in order to gain spiritual strength,
the gray roofs of La Thuiliere rose before him; he could hear the crowing of the cocks and
the lowing of the cows in the stable.  Five minutes after, he had pushed open the door of the
kitchen where La Guite was arranging the bowls for breakfast.

"Good-morning, Guitiote," said he, in a choking voice; "is Mademoiselle Vincart up?"

"Holy Virgin!  Monsieur le Cure!  Why, certainly Mademoiselle is up. She was on foot before
any of us, and now she is trotting around the orchard.  I will go fetch her."

"No, do not stir.  I know the way, and I will go and find her myself."

She was in the orchard, was she?  The Abbe preferred it should be so; he thought the interview
would be less painful, and that the surrounding trees would give him ideas.  He walked across
the kitchen, descended the steps leading from the ground floor to the garden, and ascended
the slope in search of Reine, whom he soon perceived in the midst of a bower formed by clustering
filbert-trees.

At sight of the cure, Reine turned pale; he had doubtless come to tell her the result of his
interview with Claudet, and what day had been definitely chosen for the nuptial celebration.
She had been troubled all night by the reflection that her fate would soon be irrevocably scaled;
she had wept, and her eyes betrayed it.  Only the day before, she had looked upon this project
of marriage, which she had entertained in a moment of anger and injured feeling, as a vague
thing, a vaporous eventuality of which the realization was doubtful; now, all was arranged,
settled, cruelly certain; there was no way of escaping from a promise which Claudet, alas!
was bound to consider a serious one.  These thoughts traversed her mind, while the cure was
slowly approaching the filbert-trees; she felt her heart throb, and her eyes again filled with
tears.  Yet her pride would not allow that the Abbe should witness her irresolution and weeping;
she made an effort, overcame the momentary weakness, and addressed the priest in an almost
cheerful voice:

"Monsieur le Cure, I am sorry that they have made you come up this hill to find me.  Let us
go back to the farm, and I will offer you a cup of coffee."

"No, my child," replied the Abbe, motioning with his hand that she should stay where she was,
"no, thank you!  I will not take anything.  Remain where you are.

"I wish to talk to you, and we shall be less liable to be disturbed here."

There were two rustic seats under the nut-trees; the cure took one and asked Reine to take
the other, opposite to him.  There they were, under the thick, verdant branches, hidden from
indiscreet passers-by, surrounded by silence, installed as in a confessional.

The morning quiet, the solitude, the half light, all invited meditation and confidence; nevertheless
the young girl and the priest sat motionless; both agitated and embarrassed and watching each
other without uttering a sound.  It was Reine who first broke the silence.

"You have seen Claudet, Monsieur le Cure?"

"Yes, yes!"  replied the Abbe, sighing deeply.

"He--spoke to you of our-plans," continued the young girl, in a quavering voice, "and you fixed
the day?"

"No, my child, we settled nothing.  I wanted to see you first, and converse with you about
something very important."

The Abbe hesitated, rubbed a spot of mud off his soutane, raised his shoulders like a man lifting
a heavy burden, then gave a deep cough.

"My dear child," continued he at length, prudently dropping his voice a tone lower, "I will
begin by repeating to you what I said yesterday to Claudet Sejournant: the marriage, that is
to say, the indissoluble union, of man and woman before God, is one of the most solemn and
serious acts of life.  The Church has constituted it a sacrament, which she administers only
on certain formal conditions.  Before entering into this bond, one ought, as we are taught
by Holy Writ, to sound the heart, subject the very inmost of the soul to searching examinations.
I beg of you, therefore, answer my questions freely, without false shame, just as if you were
at the tribunal of repentance.  Do you love Claudet?"

Reine trembled.  This appeal to her sincerity renewed all her perplexities and scruples.  She
raised her full, glistening eyes to the cure, and replied, after a slight hesitation:

"I have a sincere affection for Claudet-and-much esteem."

"I understand that," replied the priest, compressing his lips, "but-- excuse me if I press
the matter--has the engagement you have made with him been determined simply by considerations
of affection and suitableness, or by more interior and deeper feelings?"

"Pardon, Monsieur le Cure," returned Reine, coloring, "it seems to me that a sentiment of friendship,
joined to a firm determination to prove a faithful and devoted wife, should be, in your eyes
as they are in mine, a sufficient assurance that--"

"Certainly, certainly, my dear child; and many husbands would be contented with less.  However,
it is not only a question of Claudet's happiness, but of yours also.  Come now!  let me ask
you: is your affection for young Sejournant so powerful that in the event of any unforeseen
circumstance happening, to break off the marriage, you would be forever unhappy?"

"Ah!"  replied Reine, more embarrassed than ever, "you ask too grave a question, Monsieur le
Cure!  If it were broken off without my having to reproach myself for it, it is probable that
I should find consolation in time."

"Very good!  Consequently, you do not love Claudet, if I may take the word love in the sense
understood by people of the world.  You only like, you do not love him?  Tell me.  Answer frankly."

"Frankly, Monsieur le Cure, no!"

"Thanks be to God!  We are saved!"  exclaimed the Abbe, drawing a long breath, while Reine,
amazed, gazed at him with wondering eves.

"I do not understand you," faltered she; "what is it?"

"It is this: the marriage can not take place."

"Can not? why?"

"It is impossible, both in the eyes of the Church and in those of the world."

The young girl looked at him with increasing amazement.

"You alarm me!" cried she.  "What has happened?  What reasons hinder me from marrying Claudet?"

"Very powerful reasons, my dear child.  I do not feel at liberty to reveal them to you, but
you must know that I am not speaking without authority, and that you may rely on the statement
I have made."

Reine remained thoughtful, her brows knit, her countenance troubled.

"I have every confidence in you, Monsieur le Cure, but--"

"But you hesitate about believing me," interrupted the Abbe, piqued at not finding in one of
his flock the blind obedience on which he had reckoned.  "You must know, nevertheless, that
your pastor has no interest in deceiving you, and that when he seeks to influence you, he has
in view only your well-being in this world and in the next."

"I do not doubt your good intentions," replied Reine, with firmness, "but a promise can not
be annulled without sufficient cause.  I have given my word to Claudet, and I am too loyal
at heart to break faith with him without letting him know the reason."

"You will find some pretext."

"And supposing that Claudet would be content with such a pretext, my own conscience would not
be," objected the young girl, raising her clear, honest glance toward the priest; "your words
have entered my soul, they are troubling me now, and it will be worse when I begin to think
this matter over again.  I can not bear uncertainty.  I must see my way clearly before me.
I entreat you then, Monsieur le Cure, not to do things by halves.  You have thought it your
duty to tell me I can not wed with Claudet; now tell me why not?"

"Why not?  why not?"  repeated the Abbe, angrily.  "I distress myself in telling you that I
am not authorized to satisfy your unwise curiosity! You must humble your intelligence and believe
without arguing."

"In matters of faith, that may be possible," urged Reine, obstinately, "but my marriage has
nothing to do with discussing the truths of our holy religion.  I therefore respectfully ask
to be enlightened, Monsieur le Cure; otherwise--"

"Otherwise?"  repeated the Abby Pernot, inquiringly, rolling his eyes uneasily.

"Otherwise, I shall keep my word respectably, and I shall marry Claudet."

"You will not do that?"  said he, imploringly, joining his hands as if in supplication; "after
being openly warned by me, you dare not burden your soul with such a terrible responsibility.
Come, my child, does not the possibility of committing a mortal sin alarm your conscience as
a Christian?"

"I can not sin if I am in ignorance, and as to my conscience, Monsieur le Cure, do you think
it is acting like a Christian to alarm without enlightening?"

"Is that your last word?"  inquired the Abbe, completely aghast.

"It is my last word," she replied, vehemently, moved both by a feeling of self-respect, and
a desire to force the hand of her interlocutor.

"You are a proud, obstinate girl!"  exclaimed the Abbe, rising abruptly, "you wish to compel
me to reveal this secret!  Well, have your way! I will tell you.  May the harm which may result
from it fall lightly upon you, and do not hereafter reproach me for the pain I am about to
inflict upon you."

He checked himself for a moment, again joined his hands, and raising his eyes toward heaven
ejaculated fervently, as if repeating his devotions in the oratory: "O Lord, thou knowest I
would have spared her this bitter cup, but, between two evils, I have avoided the greater.
If I forfeit my solemn promise, consider, O Lord, I pray thee, that I do it to avoid disgrace
and exposure for her, and deign to forgive thy servant!"

He seated himself again, placed one of his hands before his eyes, and began, in a hollow voice,
Reine, all the while gazing nervously at him:

"My child, you are forcing me to violate a secret which has been solemnly confided to me. 
It concerns a matter not usually talked about before young girls, but you are, I believe, already
a woman in heart and understanding, and you will hear resignedly what I have to tell you, however
much the recital may trouble you.  I have already informed you that your marriage with Claudet
is impossible.  I now declare that it would be criminal, for the reason that incest is an abomination."

"Incest!"  repeated Reine, pale and trembling, "what do you mean?"

"I mean," sighed the cure, "that you are Claudet's sister, not having the same mother, but
the same father: Claude-Odouart de Buxieres."

"Oh! you are mistaken! that cannot be!"

"I am stating facts.  It grieves me to the heart, my dear child, that in speaking of your deceased
mother, I should have to reveal an error over which she lamented, like David, with tears of
blood.  She confessed her sin, not to the priest, but to a friend, a few days before her death.
In justice to her memory, I ought to add that, like most of the unfortunates seduced by this
untamable de Buxieres, she succumbed to his wily misrepresentations.  She was a victim rather
than an accomplice. The man himself acknowledged as much in a note entrusted to my care, which
I have here."

And the Abbe' drew from his pocket an old, worn letter, the writing yellow with age, and placed
it before Reine.  In this letter, written in Claude de Buxieres's coarse, sprawling hand, doubtless
in reply to a reproachful appeal from his mistress, he endeavored to offer some kind of honorable
amends for the violence he had used, and to calm Madame Vincart's remorse by promising, as
was his custom, to watch over the future of the child which should be born to her.

"That child was yourself, my poor girl," continued the Abbe, picking up the letter which Reine
had thrown down, after reading it, with a gesture of sickened disgust.

She appeared not to hear him.  She had buried her face in her hands, to hide the flushing of
her cheeks, and sat motionless, altogether crushed beneath the shameful revelation; convulsive
sobs and tremblings occasionally agitating her frame.

"You can now understand," continued the priest, "how the announcement of this projected marriage
stunned and terrified me.  I could not confide to Claudet the reason for my stupefaction, and
I should have been thankful if you could have understood so that I could have spared you this
cruel mortification, but you would not take any intimation from me.  And now, forgive me for
inflicting this cross upon you, and bear it with courage, with Christian fortitude."

"You have acted as was your duty," murmured Reine, sadly, "and I thank you, Monsieur le Cure!"

"And will you promise me to dismiss Claudet at once--today?"

"I promise you."

The Abbe Pernot advanced to take her hand, and administer some words of consolation; but she
evaded, with a stern gesture, the good man's pious sympathy, and escaped toward the dwelling.

The spacious kitchen was empty when she entered.  The shutters had been closed against the
sun, and it had become cool and pleasant.  Here and there, among the copper utensils, and wherever
a chance ray made a gleam of light, the magpie was hopping about, uttering short, piercing
cries. In the recess of the niche containing the colored prints, sat the old man Vincart, dozing,
in his usual supine attitude, his hands spread out, his eyelids drooping, his mouth half open.
At the sound of the door, his eyes opened wide.  He rather guessed at, than saw, the entrance
of the young girl, and his pallid lips began their accustomed refrain: "Reine! Rei-eine!"

Reine flew impetuously toward the paralytic old man, threw herself on her knees before him,
sobbing bitterly, and covered his hands with kisses. Her caresses were given in a more respectful,
humble, contrite manner than ever before.

"Oh!  father--father!"  faltered she; "I loved you always, I shall love you now with all my
heart and soul!"

CHAPTER VIII

LOVE'S SAD ENDING

The kitchen was bright with sunshine, and the industrious bees were buzzing around the flowers
on the window-sills, while Reine was listlessly attending to culinary duties, and preparing
her father's meal. The humiliating disclosures made by the Abbe Pernot weighed heavily upon
her mind.  She foresaw that Claudet would shortly be at La Thuiliere in order to hear the result
of the cure's visit; but she did not feel sufficiently mistress of herself to have a decisive
interview with him at such short notice, and resolved to gain at least one day by absenting
herself from the farm.  It seemed to her necessary that she should have that length of time
to arrange her ideas, and evolve some way of separating Claudet and herself without his suspecting
the real motive of rupture.  So, telling La Guite to say that unexpected business had called
her away, she set out for the woods of Maigrefontaine.

Whenever she had felt the need of taking counsel with herself before deciding on any important
matter, the forest had been her refuge and her inspiration.  The refreshing solitude of the
valleys, watered by living streams, acted as a strengthening balm to her irresolute will; her
soul inhaled the profound peace of these leafy retreats.  By the time she had reached the inmost
shade of the forest her mind had become calmer, and better able to unravel the confusion of
thoughts that surged like troubled waters through her brain.  The dominant idea was, that her
self- respect had been wounded; the shock to her maidenly modesty, and the shame attendant
upon the fact, affected her physically, as if she had been belittled and degraded by a personal
stain; and this downfall caused her deep humiliation.  By slow degrees, however, and notwithstanding
this state of abject despair, she felt, cropping up somewhere in her heart, a faint germ of
gladness, and, by close examination, discovered its origin: she was now loosed from her obligations
toward Claudet, and the prospect of being once more free afforded her immediate consolation.

She had so much regretted, during the last few weeks, the feeling of outraged pride which had
incited her to consent to this marriage; her loyal, sincere nature had revolted at the constraint
she had imposed upon herself; her nerves had been so severely taxed by having to receive her
fiance with sufficient warmth to satisfy his expectations, and yet not afford any encouragement
to his demonstrative tendencies, that the certainty of her newly acquired freedom created a
sensation of relief and well-being.  But, hardly had she analyzed and acknowledged this sensation
when she reproached herself for harboring it when she was about to cause Claudet such affliction.

Poor Claudet!  what a cruel blow was in store for him!  He was so guilelessly in love, and
had such unbounded confidence in the success of his projects!  Reine was overcome by tender
reminiscences.  She had always experienced, as if divining by instinct the natural bonds which
united them, a sisterly affection for Claudet.  Since their earliest infancy, at the age when
they learned their catechism under the church porch, they had been united in a bond of friendly
fellowship.  With Reine, this tender feeling had always remained one of friendship, but, with
Claudet, it had ripened into love; and now, after allowing the poor young fellow to believe
that his love was reciprocated, she was forced to disabuse him.  It was useless for her to
try to find some way of softening the blow; there was none.  Claudet was too much in love to
remain satisfied with empty words; he would require solid reasons; and the only conclusive
one which would convince him, without wounding his self-love, was exactly the one which the
young girl could not give him. She was, therefore, doomed to send Claudet away with the impression
that he had been jilted by a heartless and unprincipled coquette.  And yet something must be
done.  The grand chasserot had been too long already in the toils; there was something barbarously
cruel in not freeing him from his illusions.

In this troubled state of mind, Reine gazed appealingly at the silent witnesses of her distress.
She heard a voice within her saying to the tall, vaulted ash, "Inspire me!"  to the little
rose-colored centaurea of the wayside, "Teach me a charm to cure the harm I have done!"  But
the woods, which in former days had been her advisers and instructors, remained deaf to her
invocation.  For the first time, she felt herself isolated and abandoned to her own resources,
even in the midst of her beloved forest.

It is when we experience these violent mental crises, that we become suddenly conscious of
Nature's cold indifference to our sufferings.  She really is nothing more than the reflex of
our own sensations, and can only give us back what we lend her.  Beautiful but selfish, she
allows herself to be courted by novices, but presents a freezing, emotionless aspect to those
who have outlived their illusions.

Reine did not reach home until the day had begun to wane.  La Guite informed her that Claudet
had waited for her during part of the afternoon, and that he would come again the next day
at nine o'clock. Notwithstanding her bodily fatigue, she slept uneasily, and her sleep was
troubled by feverish dreams.  Every time she closed her eyes, she fancied herself conversing
with Claudet, and woke with a start at the sound of his angry voice.

She arose at dawn, descended at once to the lower floor, to get through her morning tasks,
and as soon as the big kitchen clock struck nine, she left the house and took the path by which
Claudet would come.  A feeling of delicate consideration toward her lover had impelled her
to choose for her explanation any other place than the one where she had first received his
declaration of love, and consented to the marriage.  Very soon he came in sight, his stalwart
figure outlined against the gray landscape. He was walking rapidly; her heart smote her, her
hands became like ice, but she summoned all her fortitude, and went bravely forward to meet him.

When he came within forty or fifty feet, he recognized Reine, and took a short cut across the
stubble studded with cobwebs glistening with dew.

"Aha! my Reine, my queen, good-morning!"  cried he, joyously, "it is sweet of you to come to
meet me!"

"Good-morning, Claudet.  I came to meet you because I wish to speak with you on matters of
importance, and I preferred not to have the conversation take place in our house.  Shall we
walk as far as the Planche-au-Vacher?"

He stopped short, astonished at the proposal and also at the sad and resolute attitude of his
betrothed.  He examined her more closely, noticed her deep-set eyes, her cheeks, whiter than usual.

"Why, what is the matter, Reine?"  he inquired; "you are not yourself; do you not feel well?"

"Yes, and no.  I have passed a bad night, thinking over matters that are troubling me, and
I think that has produced some fever."

"What matters?  Any that concern us?"

"Yes;" replied she, laconically.

Claudet opened his eyes.  The young girl's continued gravity began to alarm him; but, seeing
that she walked quickly forward, with an absent air, her face lowered, her brows bent, her
mouth compressed, he lost courage and refrained from asking her any questions.  They walked
on thus in silence, until they came to the open level covered with juniper- bushes, from which
solitary place, surrounded by hawthorn hedges, they could trace the narrow defile leading to
Vivey, and the faint mist beyond.

"Let us stop here," said Reine, seating herself on a flat, mossy stone, "we can talk here without
fear of being disturbed."

"No fear of that," remarked Claudet, with a forced smile, "with the exception of the shepherd
of Vivey, who comes here sometimes with his cattle, we shall not see many passers-by.  It must
be a secret that you have to tell me, Reine?"  he added.

"No;" she returned, "but I foresee that my words will give you pain, my poor Claudet, and I
prefer you should hear them without being annoyed by the farm-people passing to and fro."

"Explain yourself!"  he exclaimed, impetuously.  "For heaven's sake, don't keep me in suspense!"

"Listen, Claudet.  When you asked my hand in marriage, I answered yes, without taking time
to reflect.  But, since I have been thinking over our plans, I have had scruples.  My father
is becoming every day more of an invalid, and in his present state I really have no right to
live for any one but him.  One would think he was aware of our intentions, for since you have
been visiting at the farm, he is more agitated and suffers more. I think that any change in
his way of living would bring on a stroke, and I never should forgive myself if I thought I
had shortened his life. That is the reason why, as long as I have him with me, I do not see
that it will be possible for me to dispose of myself.  On the other hand, I do not wish to
abuse your patience.  I therefore ask you to take back your liberty and give me back my promise."

"That is to say, you won't have me!"  he exclaimed.

"No; my poor friend, it means only that I shall not marry so long as my father is living, and
that I can not ask you to wait until I am perfectly free.  Forgive me for having entered into
the engagement too carelessly, and do not on that account take your friendship from me."

"Reine," interrupted Claudet, angrily, "don't turn your brain inside out to make me believe
that night is broad day.  I am not a child, and I see very well that your father's health is
only a pretext.  You don't want me, that's all, and, with all due respect, you have changed
your mind very quickly!  Only the day before yesterday you authorized me to arrange about the
day for the ceremony with the Abbe Pernot.  Now that you have had a visit from the cure, you
want to put the affair off until the week when two Sundays come together!  I am a little curious
to know what that confounded old abbe has been babbling about me, to turn you inside out like
a glove in such a short time."

Claudet's conscience reminded him of several rare frolics, chance love- affairs, meetings in
the woods, and so on, and he feared the priest might have told Reine some unfavorable stories
about him.  "Ah!"  he continued, clenching his fists, "if this old poacher in a cassock has
done me an ill turn with you, he will not have much of a chance for paradise!"

"Undeceive yourself," said Reine, quickly, "Monsieur le Cure is your friend, like myself; he
esteems you highly, and never has said anything but good of you."

"Oh, indeed!"  sneered the young man, "as you are both so fond of me, how does it happen that
you have given me my dismissal the very day after your interview with the cure?"

Reine, knowing Claudet's violent disposition, and wishing to avoid trouble for the cure, thought
it advisable to have recourse to evasion.

"Monsieur le Cure," said she, "has had no part in my decision.  He has not spoken against you,
and deserves no reproaches from you."

"In that case, why do you send me away?"

"I repeat again, the comfort and peace of my father are paramount with me, and I do not intend
to marry so long as he may have need of me."

"Well," said Claudet, persistently, "I love you, and I will wait."

"It can not be."

"Why?"

"Because," replied she, sharply, "because it would be kind neither to you, nor to my father,
nor to me.  Because marriages that drag along in that way are never good for anything!"

"Those are bad reasons!"  he muttered, gloomily.

"Good or bad," replied the young girl, "they appear valid to me, and I hold to them."

"Reine," said he, drawing near to her and looking straight into her eyes, "can you swear, by
the head of your father, that you have given me the true reason for your rejecting me?"

She became embarrassed, and remained silent.

"See!"  he exclaimed, "you dare not take the oath!"

"My word should suffice," she faltered.

"No; it does not suffice.  But your silence says a great deal, I tell you!  You are too frank,
Reine, and you don't know how to lie.  I read it in your eyes, I do.  The true reason is that
you do not love me."

She shrugged her shoulders and turned away her head.

"No, you do not love me.  If you had any love for me, instead of discouraging me, you would
hold out some hope to me, and advise me to have patience.  You never have loved me, confess now!"

By dint of this persistence, Reine by degrees lost her self-confidence. She could realize how
much Claudet was suffering, and she reproached herself for the torture she was inflicting upon
him.  Driven into a corner, and recognizing that the avowal he was asking for was the only
one that would drive him away, she hesitated no longer.

"Alas!"  she murmured, lowering her eyes, "since you force me to tell you some truths that
I would rather have kept from you, I confess you have guessed.  I have a sincere friendship
for you, but that is all.  I have concluded that to marry a person one ought to love him differently,
more than everything else in the world, and I feel that my heart is not turned altogether toward
you."

"No," said Claudet, bitterly, "it is turned elsewhere."

"What do you mean?  I do not understand you."

"I mean that you love some one else."

"That is not true," she protested.

"You are blushing--a proof that I have hit the nail!"

"Enough of this!"  cried she, imperiously.

"You are right.  Now that you have said you don't want me any longer, I have no right to ask
anything further.  Adieu!"

He turned quickly on his heel.  Reine was conscious of having been too hard with him, and not
wishing him to go away with such a grief in his heart, she sought to retain him by placing
her hand upon his arm.

"Come, Claudet," said she, entreatingly, "do not let us part in anger. It pains me to see you
suffer, and I am sorry if I have said anything unkind to you.  Give me your hand in good fellowship,
will you?"

But Claudet drew back with a fierce gesture, and glancing angrily at Reine, he replied, rudely:

"Thanks for your regrets and your pity; I have no use for them."  She understood that he was
deeply hurt; gave up entreating, and turned away with eyes full of tears.

He remained motionless, his arms crossed, in the middle of the road. After some minutes, he
turned his head.  Reine was already nothing more than a dark speck against the gray of the
increasing fog.  Then he went off, haphazard, across the pasture-lands.  The fog was rising
slowly, and the sun, shorn of its beams, showed its pale face faintly through it.  To the right
and the left, the woods were half hidden by moving white billows, and Claudet walked between
fluid walls of vapor.  This hidden sky, these veiled surroundings, harmonized with his mental
condition.  It was easier for him to hide his chagrin.  "Some one else!  Yes; that's it. She
loves some other fellow!  how was it I did not find that out the very first day?"  Then he
recalled how Reine shrank from him when he solicited a caress; how she insisted on their betrothal
being kept secret, and how many times she had postponed the date of the wedding.  It was evident
that she had received him only in self-defence, and on the pleading of Julien de Buxieres.
Julien! the name threw a gleam of light across his brain, hitherto as foggy as the country
around him.  Might not Julien be the fortunate rival on whom Reine's affections were so obstinately
set? Still, if she had always loved Monsieur de Buxieres, in what spirit of perversity or thoughtlessness
had she suffered the advances of another suitor?

