Vaudreuil now made Montcalm, who was under his orders, withdraw the men from the Levis Heights,
and thus abandon the whole of the south shore in front of Quebec. (Preparing to leave the Court.)
Good bye. You may hear from me and from my friends!

Judge (following him to the door). Nay, stay! See us--we kneel to
you. (To audience.) Kneel, friends, kneel! (Everybody obeys the direction.)
One last appeal! So he now had three camps, not divided, but
joined together, by the St Lawrence, where the fleet could move about between them in spite
of anything the French could do. He then marched up the Montmorency to the fords, to try the
French strength there, and to find out if he could cross the river, march down the open ground
behind Montcalm, and attack him from the rear. But he was repulsed at the first attempt, and
saw that he could do no better at a second. Meanwhile his Levis batteries began a bombardment
which lasted two months and reduced Quebec to ruins.

Yet he seemed as far off as ever from capturing the city. Battering down the houses of Quebec
brought him no nearer to his object, while Montcalm's main body still stood securely in its
entrenchments down at Beauport. Wolfe now felt he must try something decisive, even if desperate;
and he planned an attack by land and water on the French left. Both French and British were
hard at work on July 31. In the morning Wolfe sent one regiment marching up the Montmorency,
as if to try the fords again, and another, also in full view of the French, up along the St
Lawrence from the Levis batteries, as if it was to be taken over by the ships to the north
shore above Quebec. Meanwhile Monckton's brigade was starting from the Point of Levy in row-boats,
the Centurion was sailing down to the mouth of the Montmorency, two armed transports were being
purposely run ashore on the beach at the top of the tide, and the Pembroke, Trent, Lowestoff,
and Racehorse were taking up positions to cover the boats. The men-of-war and Wolfe's batteries
at Montmorency then opened fire on the point he wished to attack; and both of them kept it
up for eight hours, from ten till six. All this time the Levis batteries were doing their utmost
against Quebec. But Montcalm was not to be deceived. He saw that Wolfe intended to storm the
entrenchments at the point at which the cannon were firing, and he kept the best of his army
ready to defend it.

Wolfe and the Louisbourg Grenadiers were in the two armed transports when they grounded at
ten o'clock. To his disgust and to Captain Cook's surprise both vessels stuck fast in the mud
nearly half a mile from shore. This made the grenadiers' muskets useless against the advanced
French redoubt, which stood at high-water mark, and which overmatched the transports, because
both of these had grounded in such a way that they could not bring their guns to bear in reply.
The stranded vessels soon became a death-trap. Wolfe's cane was knocked out of his hand by
a cannon ball. But when a remedy is demanded that shall restore the pristine form, functions,
and energy of the disorganized globules, man arrogates to himself supernal attributes whereby
it becomes possible not only to save and renew, but to create life; and we can scarce expect
science or even accident (as some expect) to even rival Nature and set at defiance her most
secret and subtle laws. Such, however, is the natural outcropping of an ignorant teaching and vulgar
prejudice that feeds and clothes the charlatan and ascribes to savage and uncultured races
an occult familiarity with pathological, physiological, and remedial effect unattainable by
the most advanced sciences; and whereby the Negro, Malay, Hindoo, South Sea Islander, and red man
are granted an innate knowledge of poisons and their antidotes more than miraculous. A reward
of more than a quarter of a century's standing, and amounting to several thousand pounds, is
offered by the East India Government for the discovery of a specific for the bite of the cobra,
and for which no claims have ever been advanced; and the "snake charmers"
or jugglers in whom this superior knowledge is supposed to center
are so well aware of the futility of specifics, and the risk to which
they are subjected, that few venture to ply their calling without
a broad-bladed, keen-edged knife concealed about the person as a means
of instant amputation in case of accident.

Medical and scientific associations of various classes, in Europe, Australia, America, even Africa,
and the East and West Indies, have repeatedly held out the most tempting lures, and indulged in
exhaustive and costly experimentation in search of specifics for the wounds of vipers, cobras, rattlesnakes,
and the general horde of venomous reptiles; and all in vain. Even the saliva of man, as well as
certain other secretions, is at times so modified by anger as to rival the venom of the serpent
in fatality, and it has no specific; and a careful analysis of the pathological relations
of such poison proves that further experimentation and expectation is as irrational as the pursuit
of the "philosopher's stone."

It is an indisputable fact, however, that there are individuals whose natural or acquired idiosyncrasies
permit them to be inoculated by the most venomous of reptiles without
deleterious or unpleasant results, and Colonel Matthews Taylor[7]
knew several persons of this character in India, and who regarded
the bite of the cobra or tic paloonga with nearly as much indifference
as the sting of a gnat or mosquito.

 As they reached it, amid a storm of musket balls
and grape-shot, the heavens joined in with a terrific storm of their own. The rain burst in
a perfect deluge; and the hill became almost impossible to climb, even if there had been no
enemy pouring death-showers of fire from the top. When Wolfe saw what was happening he immediately
sent officers running after the grenadiers to make them come back from the redoubt, and these
officers now passed the word to retire at once. This time the grenadiers, all that were left
of them, obeyed. Their two mad rushes had not lasted a quarter of an hour. Yet nearly half
of the thousand men they started with were lying dead or wounded on that fatal ground.

Wolfe now saw that he was hopelessly beaten and that there was not a minute to lose in getting
away. The boats could take only Monckton's men; and the rising tide would soon cut off Townshend's
and Murray's from their camp beyond the mouth of the Montmorency. The two stranded transports,
from which he had hoped so much that morning, were set on fire; and, under cover of their smoke
and of the curtain of torrential rain, Monckton's crestfallen men got into their boats once
more. Townshend's and Murray's brigades, enraged at not being brought into action, turned to
march back by the way they had come so eagerly only an hour before. They moved off in perfect
order; but, as they left the battlefield, they waved their hats in defiance at the jeering
Frenchmen, challenging them to come down and fight it out with bayonets hand to hand.

Many gallant deeds were done that afternoon; but none more gallant than those of Captain Ochterloney
and Lieutenant Peyton, both grenadier officers in the Royal Americans. Ochterloney had just
been wounded in a duel; but he said his country's honour came before his own, and, sick and
wounded as he was, he spent those panting hours in the boats without a murmur and did all he
could to form his men up under fire. In the second charge he fell, shot through the lungs,
with Peyton beside him, shot through the leg. When Wolfe called the grenadiers back a rescue
party wanted to carry off both officers, to save them from the scalping-knife. But Ochterloney
said he would never leave the field after such a defeat; and Peyton said he would never leave
his captain. Presently a Canadian regular came up with two Indians, grabbed Ochterloney's watch,
sword and money, and left the Indians to finish him. One of these savages clubbed him with
a musket, while the other shot him in the chest and dashed in with a scalping-knife. In the
meantime, Peyton crawled on his hands and knees to a double-barrelled musket and shot one Indian
dead, but missed the other. This savage now left Ochterloney, picked up a bayonet and rushed
at Peyton, who drew his dagger. A terrible life-and-death fight followed; but Peyton at last
got a good point well driven home, straight through the Indian's heart. A whole scalping party
now appeared. Ochterloney was apparently dead, and Peyton was too exhausted to fight any more.
But, at this very moment, another British party came back for the rest of the wounded and carried
Peyton off to the boats.

Then the Indians came back to scalp Ochterloney. By this time, however, some French regulars
had come down, and one of them, finding Ochterloney still alive, drove off the Indians at the
point of the bayonet, secured help, and carried him up the hill. Montcalm had him carefully
taken into the General Hospital, where he was tenderly nursed by the nuns. Two days after he
had been rescued, a French officer came out for his clothes and other effects. Wolfe then sent
in twenty guineas for his rescuer, with a promise that, in return for the kindness shown to
Ochterloney, the General Hospital would be specially protected if the British took Quebec.
Towards the end of August Ochterloney died; and both sides ceased firing while a French captain
came out to report his death and return his effects.

This was by no means the only time the two enemies treated each other like friends. A party
of French ladies were among the prisoners brought in to Wolfe one day; and they certainly had
no cause to complain of him. He gave them a dinner, at which he charmed them all by telling
them about his visit to Paris. The next morning he sent them into Quebec with his aide-de-camp
under a flag of truce. Another time the French officers sent him a kind of wine which was not
to be had in the British camp, and he sent them some not to be had in their own.

But the stern work of war went on and on, though the weary month of August did not seem to
bring victory any closer than disastrous July. Wolfe knew that September was to be the end
of the campaign, the now-or-never of his whole career. And, knowing this, he set to work--head
and heart and soul--on making the plan that brought him victory, death, and everlasting fame.

CHAPTER VII

THE PLAINS OF ABRAHAM September 13, 1759

On August 19 an aide-de-camp came out of the farmhouse at Montmorency which served as the headquarters
of the British army to say that Wolfe was too ill to rise from his bed. The bad news spread
like wildfire through the camp and fleet, and soon became known among the French. A week passed;
but Wolfe was no better. Tossing about on his bed in a fever, he thought bitterly of his double
defeat, of the critical month of September, of the grim strength of Quebec, formed by nature
for a stronghold, and then--worse still--of his own weak body, which made him most helpless
just when he should have been most fit for his duty.

Feeling that he could no longer lead in person, he dictated
a letter to the brigadiers, sent them the secret instructions
he had received from Pitt and the king, and asked them
to think over his three new plans for attacking Montcalm
at Beauport. They wrote back to say they thought the
defeats at the upper fords of the Montmorency and at the
heights facing the St Lawrence showed that the French
could not be beaten by attacking the Beauport lines again,
no matter from what side the attack was made. They then
gave him a plan of their own, which was, to convey the
army up the St Lawrence and fight their way ashore
somewhere between Cap Rouge, nine miles above Quebec,
and Pointe-aux-Trembles, twenty-two miles above. They
argued that, by making a landing there, the British could
cut off Montcalm's communications with Three Rivers and
Montreal, from which his army drew its supplies. Wolfe's
letter was dictated from his bed of sickness on the 26th. Old
Song, illustrated by SIDNEY COOPER, R.A.

No. 250. "Ticklish Times; or, the First Small and Early in
the Ear." "She sat, half-mesmerised, thinking to herself,
'Shall I have many dances this season?' 'You've got a ball in
   hand,' whispered small and early Eros Minimus.
   'Ah,' she returned, dreamily, 'a bawl in the hand is indeed
   worth a whisper in the ear.'"

From the Greek of Akephalos. W. ADOLPHE BOUGUEREAU.

No. 272. The
Flying Farini Family. Nothing like bringing 'em up to the acrobatic
business quite young. He had asked the doctors to 'patch him up,'
saying that if they could make him fit for duty for only the next few days they need not trouble
about what might happen to him afterwards. Their 'patching up' certainly cleared his fevered
brain, for this letter was a masterly account of the whole siege and the plans just laid to
bring it to an end. The style was so good, indeed, that Charles Townshend said his brother
George must have been the real author, and that Wolfe, whom he dubbed 'a fiery-headed fellow,
only fit for fighting,' could not have done any more than sign his name. But when George Townshend's
own official letter about the battle in which Wolfe fell was also published, and was found
to be much less effective than Wolfe's, Selwyn went up to Charles Townshend and said: 'Look
here, Charles, if your brother wrote Wolfe's letter, who the devil wrote your brother's?'

Wolfe did not try to hide anything from Pitt. He told him plainly about the two defeats and
the terrible difficulties in the way of winning any victory. The whole letter is too long for
quotation, and odd scraps from it give no idea of Wolfe's lucid style. But here are a few which
tell the gist of the story:

   I found myself so ill, and am still so weak, that I
   begged the generals to consult together. The admiral will readily join
   in any measure for the public service. You may be sure
   that the small part of the campaign which remains
   shall be employed, as far as I am able, for the honour
   of His Majesty and the interest of the nation. For instance,
   the writer and his father are equally proof against
   the contagion and inoculation of vaccination and variola,
   in spite of repeated attempts to secure both, while
   their respective mothers suffered terribly with smallpox at periods
subsequent to the birth of their children; and it is well understood
that there are striking analogies between the poisons of certain contagious
fevers and those of venomous serpents, inasmuch as one attack conveys
exemption from future ones of like character.

 Wolfe tried to tempt Montcalm to attack him. But Montcalm knew better; and
half suspected that Wolfe himself might make another attack on the Beauport lines. When everything
was ready, all the men at the Point of Levy who could be spared put off in boats and rowed
over towards Beauport, just as Monckton's men had done on the disastrous last day of July.
At the same time the main division of the fleet, under Saunders, made as if to support these
boats, while the Levis batteries thundered against Quebec. Carleton gave the signal from the
beach at Montmorency when the tide was high; and the whole five thousand infantry marched down
the hill, got into their boats, and rowed over to where the other boats were waiting. The French
now prepared to defend themselves at once. But as the two divisions of boats came together,
they both rowed off through the gaps between the men-of-war. Wolfe's army had broken camp and
got safely away, right under the noses of the French, without the loss of a single man.

